



Painting, Arrangement in Black, No. 3: Sir Henry Irving as Philip II
of Spain (1876-1885), by James McNeill Whistler (1834-1903), reproduced
as frontispiece in Henry Irving, The Drama: Addresses (London, 1893)

[On November 24, 1883, Henry Irving closed his first engagement in New
York.  William Winter’s review appeared next morning in the Tribune,
It is reprinted in his book, “Henry Irving,” published by G. J.
Coombes, New York, 1889.  Mr. Winter said:  “Mr. Irving has
impersonated here nine different men, each one distinct from all the
others.  Yet in so doing he has never ceased to exert one and the same
personal charm, the charm of genialised intellect.  The soul that is
within the man has suffused his art and made it victorious.  The same
forms of expression, lacking this spirit, would have lacked the
triumph.  All of them, indeed, are not equally fine.  Mr. Irving’s
’Mathias’ and ’Louis XI,’ are higher performances than his ’Shylock’
and ’Dorincourt,’ higher in imaginative tone and in adequacy of
feeling and treatment.  But, throughout all these forms, the drift of
his spirit, setting boldly away from conventions and formalities, has
been manifested with delightful results.  He has always seemed to be
alive with the specific vitality of the person represented.  He has
never seemed a wooden puppet of the stage, bound in by formality and
straining after a vague scholastic ideal of technical correctness.”
Mr. Irving’s addresses, “The Drama,” copyright by the United States
Book Company, New York, were published in 1892.  They furnish the
pages now presented,–abounding on self-revelation,–ED.)
To boast of being able to appreciate Shakespeare more in reading him
than in seeing him acted used to be a common method of affecting
special intellectuality.  I hope this delusion–a gross and pitiful
one to most of us–has almost absolutely died out.  It certainly
conferred a very cheap badge of superiority on those who entertained
it.  It seemed to each of them an inexpensive opportunity of
worshipping himself on a pedestal.  But what did it amount to?  It was
little more than a conceited and feather-headed assumption that an
unprepared reader, whose mind is usually full of far other things,
will see on the instant all that has been developed in hundreds of
years by the members of a studious and enthusiastic profession.  My
own conviction is that there are few characters or passages of our
great dramatists which will not repay original study.  But at least we
must recognise the vast advantages with which a practised actor,
impregnated by the associations of his life, and by study–with all
the practical and critical skill of his profession up to the date at
which he appears, whether he adopts or rejects tradition–addresses
himself to the interpretation of any great character, even if he have
no originality whatever.  There is something still more than this,
however, in acting.  Every one who has the smallest histrionic gift
has a natural dramatic fertility; so that as soon as he knows the
author’s text, and obtains self-possession, and feels at home in a
part without being too familiar with it, the mere automatic action of
rehearsing and playing it at once begins to place the author in new
lights, and to give the personage being played an individuality partly
independent of, and yet consistent with, and rendering more powerfully
visible, the dramatist’s conception.  It is the vast power a good
actor has in this way which has led the French to speak of creating a
part when they mean its first being played, and French authors are as
conscious of the extent and value of this cooperation of actors with
them, that they have never objected to the phrase, but, on the
contrary, are uniformly lavish in their homage to the artists who have
created on the boards the parts which they themselves have created on
paper.
It is often supposed that great actors trust to the inspiration of the
moment.  Nothing can be more erroneous.  There will, of course, be
such moments, when an actor at a white heat illumines some passage
with a flash of imagination (and this mental condition, by the way, is
impossible to the student sitting in his armchair); but the great
actor’s surprises are generally well weighed, studied, and balanced.
We know that Edmund Kean constantly practised before a mirror effects
which startled his audience by their apparent spontaneity.  It is the
accumulation of such effects which enables an actor, after many years,
to present many great characters with remarkable completeness.
I do not want to overstate the case, or to appeal to anything that is
not within common experience, so I can confidently ask you whether a
scene in a great play has not been at some time vividly impressed on
your minds by the delivery of a single line, or even of one forcible
word.  Has not this made the passage far more real and human to you
than all the thought you have devoted to it?  An accomplished critic
has said that Shakespeare himself might have been surprised had he
heard the “Fool, fool, fool!” of Edmund Kean.  And though all actors
are not Keans, they have in varying degree this power of making a
dramatic character step out of the page, and come nearer to our hearts
and our understandings.
After all, the best and most convincing exposition of the whole art of
acting is given by Shakespeare himself:  “To hold, as ’twere, the
mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own
image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure."
Thus the poet recognised the actor’s art as a most potent ally in the
representations of human life.  He believed that to hold the mirror up
to nature was one of the worthiest functions in the sphere of labour,
and actors are content to point to his definition of their work as the
charter of their privileges.
The practice of the art of acting is a subject difficult to treat with
the necessary brevity.  Beginners are naturally anxious to know what
course they should pursue.  In common with other actors, I receive
letters from young people many of whom are very earnest in their
ambition to adopt the dramatic calling, but not sufficiently alive to
the fact that success does not depend on a few lessons in declamation.
When I was a boy I had a habit which I think would be useful to all
young students.  Before going to see a play of Shakespeare’s I used to
form–in a very juvenile way–a theory as to the working out of the
whole drama, so as to correct my conceptions by those of the actors;
and though I was, as a rule, absurdly wrong, there can be no doubt
that any method of independent study is of enormous importance, not
only to youngsters, but also to students of a larger growth.  Without
it the mind is apt to take its stamp from the first forcible
impression it receives, and to fall into a servile dependence upon
traditions, which, robbed of the spirit that created them, are apt to
be purely mischievous.  What was natural to the creator is often
unnatural and lifeless in the imitator.  No two people form the same
conceptions of character, and therefore it is always advantageous to
see an independent and courageous exposition of an original ideal.
There can be no objection to the kind of training that imparts a
knowledge of manners and customs, and the teaching which pertains to
simple deportment on the stage is necessary and most useful; but you
cannot possibly be taught any tradition of character, for that has no
permanence.  Nothing is more fleeting than any traditional method or
impersonation.  You may learn where a particular personage used to
stand on the stage, or down which trap the ghost of Hamlet’s father
vanished; but the soul of interpretation is lost, and it is this soul
which the actor has to re-create for himself.  It is not mere attitude
or tone that has to be studied; you must be moved by the impulse of
being; you must impersonate and not recite.
It is necessary to warn you against the theory expounded with
brilliant ingenuity by Diderot that the actor never feels.  When
Macready played Virginius, after burying his beloved daughter, he
confessed that his real experience gave a new force to his acting in
the most pathetic situations of the play.  Are we to suppose that this
was a delusion, or that the sensibility of the man was a genuine aid
to the actor?  Bannister said of John Kemble that he was never
pathetic because he had no children.  Talma says that when deeply
moved he found himself making a rapid and fugitive observation on the
alternation of his voice, and on a certain spasmodic vibration which
it contracted in tears.  Has not the actor who can thus make his
feelings a part of his art an advantage over the actor who never
feels, but who makes his observations solely from the feelings of
others?  It is necessary to this art that the mind should have, as it
were, a double consciousness, in which all the emotions proper to the
occasion may have full swing, while the actor is all the time on the
alert for every detail of his method.  It may be that his playing will
be more spirited one night than another.  But the actor who combines
the electric force of a strong personality with a mastery of the
resources of his art must have a greater power over his audiences than
the passionless actor who gives a most artistic simulation of the
emotions he never experiences.
With regard to gesture, Shakespeare’s advice is all-embracing.  “Suit
the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special
observance that you overstep not the modesty of nature.”  And here
comes the consideration of a very material part of the actor’s
business–by-play.  This is of the very essence of true art.  It is
more than anything else significant of the extent to which the actor
has identified himself with the character he represents.  Recall the
scenes between Iago and Othello, and consider how the whole interest
of the situation depends on the skill with which the gradual effect of
the poisonous suspicion instilled into the Moor’s mind is depicted in
look and tone, slight of themselves, but all contributing to the
intensity of the situation.  One of the greatest tests of an actor is
his capacity for listening.  By-play must be unobtrusive; the student
should remember that the most minute expression attracts attention,
that nothing is lost, that by-play is as mischievous when it is
injudicious as it is effective when rightly conceived, and that while
trifles make perfection, perfection is no trifle.  This lesson was
enjoined on me when I was a very young man by that remarkable actress,
Charlotte Cushman.  I remember that when she played Meg Merrilies I
was cast for Henry Bertram, on the principle, seemingly, that an actor
with no singing voice is admirably fitted for a singing part.  It was
my duty to give Meg Merrilies a piece of money, and I did it after the
traditional fashion by handing her a large purse full of the coin of
the realm, in the shape of broken crockery, which was generally used
in financial transactions on the stage, because when the virtuous maid
rejected with scorn the advances of the lordly libertine, and threw
his pernicious bribe upon the ground, the clatter of the broken
crockery suggested fabulous wealth.  But after the play Miss Cushman,
in the course of some kindly advice, said to me:  “Instead of giving
me that purse, don’t you think it would have been much more natural if
you had taken a number of coins from your pocket, and given me the
smallest?  That is the way one gives alms to a beggar, and it would
have added to the realism of the scene.”  I have never forgotten that
lesson, for simple as it was, it contained many elements of dramatic
truth.  It is most important that an actor should learn that he is a
figure in a picture, and that the least exaggeration destroys the
harmony of the composition.  All the members of the company should
work toward a common end, with the nicest subordination of their
individuality to the general purpose.  Without this method a play when
acted is at best a disjoined and incoherent piece of work, instead of
being a harmonious whole like the fine performance of an orchestral
symphony.
Continue...

This full text of 
Library of Little Masterpieces: 19th Century Actor Autobiographies, edited by George Iles,
is in the public domain.


Also see: Acting: The First Six Lessons.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
You: On A Diet: The Owner's Manual for Waist ManagementBy Mehmet C. OzAt Amazon
