



Ellen Terry as Lady Macbeth
John Singer Sargent – American painter
1889
Tate Gallery, London
Oil on canvas
221 x 114.3 cm
[In the autumn of 1883, during Henry Irving’s fist engagement in New
York, Ellen Terry played a round of characters as his leading lady.
In the Tribune, Mr. William Winter said:  “Miss Ellen Terry’s Portia
is delicious.  Her voice is perfect music.  Her clear, bell-like
elocution is more than a refreshment, it is a luxury.  Her simple
manner, always large and adequate, is a great beauty of the art which
it so deftly conceals.  Her embodiment of a woman’s loveliness, such
as, in Portia, should he at once stately and fascinating and inspire
at once respect and passion, was felicitous beyond the reach of
descriptive phrases.”  Then, on her appearance in “Much Ado About
Nothing:” “She permeates the raillery of Beatrice with an
indescribable charm of mischievous sweetness.  The silver arrows of
her pungent wit have no barb, for evidently she does not mean that
they shall really wound.  Her appearance and carriage are beautiful,
and her tones melt into music.  There is no hint of the virago here,
and even the tone of sarcasm is superficial.  It is archness playing
over kindness that is presented here.”  On her Ophelia, Mr. Winter
remarks: “Ophelia is an image, or personification of innocent,
delirious, feminine youth and beauty, and she passes before us in the
two stages of sanity and delirium.  The embodiment is fully within
Miss Terry’s reach, and is one of the few unmistakably perfect
creations with which dramatic art has illumined literature and adorned
the stage.”
By permission the following pages have been taken from “Ellen Terry’s
Memoirs,” copyright by the S. S. McClure Company, 1908.  All rights
reserved.  ED.)
When I went with Coghlan to see Henry Irving’s Philip I was no
stranger to his acting.  I had been present with Tom Taylor, then
dramatic critic of the Times, at the famous first night at the
Lyceum, in 1874, when Henry put his fortune–counted, not in gold, but
in years of scorned delights and laborious days, years of constant
study and reflection, of Spartan self-denial and deep melancholy–when
he put it all to the touch “to win or lose it all.”  This is no
exaggeration.  Hamlet was by far the greatest part that he had ever
played or ever was to play.  If he had failed–but why pursue it?  He
could not fail.
Yet, the success on the first night at the Lyceum, in 1874, was not of
that electrical, almost hysterical splendour which has greeted the
momentous achievements of some actors.  The first two acts were
received with indifference.  The people could not see how packed they
were with superb acting–perhaps because the new Hamlet was so simple,
so quiet, so free from the exhibition of actors’ artifices which used
to bring down the house in “Louis XI” and in “Richelieu,” but which
were really the easy things in acting, and in “Richelieu” (in my
opinion) not especially well done.  In “Hamlet” Henry Irving did not
go to the audience; he made them come to him.  Slowly, but surely,
attention gave place to admiration, admiration to enthusiasm,
enthusiasm to triumphant acclaim.
I have seen many Hamlets,–Fechter, Charles Kean, Rossi, Friedrich
Haase, Forbes-Robertson, and my own son, Gordon Craig, among
them,–but they were not in the same hemisphere!  I refuse to go and
see Hamlets now.  I want to keep Henry Irving’s fresh and clear in my
memory until I die.
When he engaged me to play Ophelia in 1878, he asked me to go down to
Birmingham to see the play, and that night I saw what I shall always
consider the perfection of acting.  It had been wonderful in 1874; in
1878 it was far more wonderful.  It has been said that when he had the
“advantage” of my Ophelia his Hamlet “improved.”  I don’t think so; he
was always quite independent of the people with whom he acted.
The Birmingham night he knew I was there.  He played–I say it without
vanity–for me.  We players are not above that weakness, if it be a
weakness.  If ever anything inspires us to do our best, it is the
presence in the audience of some fellow-artist who must, in the nature
of things, know more completely than any one what we intend, what we
do, what we feel.  The response from such a member of the audience
flies across the footlights to us like a flame.  I felt it once when I
played Olivia before Eleonora Duse.  I felt that she felt it once when
she played Marguerite Gautier for me.
When I read “Hamlet” now, everything that Henry did in it seems to me
more absolutely right even than I thought at the time.  I would give
much to be able to record it all in detail, but–it may be my
fault–writing is not the medium in which this can be done.  Sometimes
I have thought of giving readings of “Hamlet,” for I can remember
every tone of Henry’s voice, every emphasis, every shade of meaning
that he saw in the lines and made manifest to the discerning.  Yes, I
think I could give some pale idea of what his Hamlet was if I read the
play!
“Words, words, words!”  What is it to say, for instance, that the
cardinal qualities of his Prince of Denmark were strength, delicacy,
distinction?  There was never a touch of commonness.  Whatever he did
or said, blood and breeding pervaded it.
His “make-up” was very pale, and this made his face beautiful when one
was close to him, but at a distance it gave him a haggard look.  Some
said he looked twice his age.
He kept three things going at the same time–the antic madness, the
sanity, the sense of the theatre.  The last was to all that he
imagined and thought what, in the New Testament, charity is said to be
to all other virtues.
He was never cross or moody–only melancholy.  His melancholy was as
simple as it was profound.  It was touching, too, rather than defiant.
You never thought that he was wantonly sad and enjoying his own
misery.
He neglected no coup de theatre [theatrical artifice] to assist him,
but who notices the servants when the host is present?
For instance, his first entrance as Hamlet was what we call, in
theatrical parlance, very much “worked up.”  He was always a
tremendous believer in processions, and rightly.  It is through such
means that royalty keeps its hold on the feeling of the public and
makes its mark as a figure and a symbol.  Henry Irving understood
this.  Therefore, to music so apt that it was not remarkable in
itself, but a contribution to the general excited anticipation, the
court of Denmark came on to the stage.  I understood later on, at the
Lyceum, what days of patient work had gone to the making of that
procession.
At its tail, when the excitement was at fever-heat, came the solitary
figure of Hamlet, looking extraordinarily tall and thin, The lights
were turned down–another stage trick–to help the effect that the
figure was spirit rather than man.
He was weary; his cloak trailed on the ground.  He did not wear the
miniature of his father obtrusively round his neck!  His attitude was
one which I have seen in a common little illustration to the
“Reciter,” compiled by Dr. Pinch, Henry Irving’s old schoolmaster.
Yet, how right to have taken it, to have been indifferent to its
humble origin!  Nothing could have been better when translated into
life by Irving’s genius.
The hair looked blue-black, like the plumage of a crow; the eyes
burning–two fires veiled, as yet, by melancholy.  But the appearance
of the man was not single, straight, or obvious, as it is when I
describe it, any more than his passions throughout the play were.  I
only remember one moment when his intensity concentrated itself in a
straightforward unmistakable emotion, without side-current or back
water.  It was when he said:
The play’s the thing
Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the King
and, as the curtain came down, was seen to be writing madly on his
tablets against one of the pillars.
“0 God, that I were a writer!”  I paraphrase Beatrice with all my
heart.  Surely a writer could not string words together about Henry
Irving’s Hamlet and say nothing, nothing.
“We must start this play a living thing,” he used to say at
rehearsals, and he worked until the skin grew tight over his face,
until he became livid with fatigue, yet still beautiful, to get the
opening lines said with individuality, suggestiveness, speed, and
power:
Bernardo:    Who’s there?
Francisco:   Nay, answer me:  stand, and unfold yourself.
Bernardo:    Long live the king!
Francisco:   Bernardo?
Bernardo:    He.
Francisco:   You come most carefully upon your hour.
Bernardo:    ’Tis now struck twelve: get thee to bed, Francisco.
Francisco:   For this relief much thanks: ’t is bitter cold.
And all that he tried to make others do with these lines he himself
did with every line of his own part.  Every word lived.
Some said: “Oh, Irving only makes ’Hamlet’ a love poem!”  They said
that, I suppose, because in the nunnery scene with Ophelia he was the
lover above the prince and the poet.  With what passionate longing his
hands hovered over Ophelia at her words, “Rich gifts wax poor when
givers prove unkind!”
His advice to the players was not advice.  He did not speak it as an
actor.  Nearly all Hamlets in that scene give away the fact that they
are actors and not dilettanti of royal blood.  Henry defined the way
he would have the players speak as an order, an instruction of the
merit of which he was regally sure.  There was no patronising flavour
in his acting here, not a touch of “I’11 teach you how to do it.”  He
was swift, swift and simple–pausing for the right word now and again,
as in the phrase “to hold as ’t were the mirror up to nature.”  His
slight pause and eloquent gesture, as the all embracing word “nature"
came in answer to his call, were exactly repeated unconsciously, years
later, by the Queen of Roumania (Carmen Sylva).  She was telling us
the story of a play that she had written.  The words rushed out
swiftly, but occasionally she would wait for the one that expressed
her meaning most comprehensively and exactly, and, as she got it, up
went her hand in triumph over her head–"Like yours in Hamlet,” I told
Henry at the time.
The first letter that I ever received from Henry Irving was written on
the 20th of July, 1878, from 15A Grafton Street, the house in which he
lived during the entire period of his Lyceum management.
DEAR MISS TERRY:  I look forward to the pleasure of calling upon you
on Tuesday next at two o’clock,
With every good wish, believe me, Yours sincerely,
HENRY IRVING.
The call was in reference to my engagement as Ophelia.  Strangely
characteristic I see it now to have been of Henry that he was content
to take my powers as an actress more or less on trust.  A mutual
friend, Lady Pollock, had told him that I was the very person for him;
that “All London” (a vile but convenient phrase) was talking of my
Olivia; that I had acted well in Shakespeare with the Bancrofts; that
I should bring to the Lyceum Theatre what players call “a personal
following.”  Henry chose his friends as carefully as he chose his
company and his staff.  He believed in Lady Pollock implicitly, and he
did not–it is possible that he could not–come and see my Olivia for
himself.
I was living in Longridge Road when Henry Irving came to see me.  Not
a word of our conversation about the engagement can I remember.  I did
notice, however, the great change that had taken place in the man
since I had last met him in 1867.  Then he was really very
ordinary-looking–with a moustache, an unwrinkled face, and a sloping
forehead.  The only wonderful thing about him was his melancholy.
When I was playing the piano, once, in the green room at the Queen’s
Theatre, he came in and listened.  I remember being made aware of his
presence by his sigh–the deepest, profoundest, sincerest sigh I ever
heard from any human being.  He asked me if I would not play the piece
again.  The incident impressed itself on my mind, inseparably
associated with a picture of him as he looked at thirty–a picture by
no means pleasing.  He looked conceited, and almost savagely proud of
the isolation in which he lived.  There was a touch of exaggeration in
his appearance, a dash of Werther, with a few flourishes of Jingle!
Nervously sensitive to ridicule, self-conscious, suffering deeply from
his inability to express himself through his art, Henry Irving in 1867
was a very different person from the Henry Irving who called on me at
Longridge Road in 1878.  In ten years he had found himself, and so
lost himself–lost, I mean, much of that stiff, ugly
self-consciousness which had encased him as the shell encases the
lobster.  His forehead had become more massive, and the very outline
of his features had altered.  He was a man of the world, whose
strenuous fighting now was to be done as a general–not, as hitherto,
in the ranks.  His manner was very quiet and gentle.  “In quietness
and confidence shall be your strength,” says the psalmist.  That was
always like Henry Irving.
And here, perhaps, is the place to say that I, of all people, can
perhaps appreciate Henry Irving least justly, although I was his
associate on the stage for a quarter of a century, and was on terms of
the closest friendship with him for almost as long a time.  He had
precisely the qualities that I never find likable.
He was an egotist, an egotist of the great type, never “a mean
egotist,” as he was once slanderously described; and all his faults
sprang from egotism, which is, after all, only another name for
greatness.  So much absorbed was he in his own achievement that he was
unable or unwilling to appreciate the achievements of others.  I never
heard him speak in high terms of the great foreign actors and
actresses who from time to time visited England.  It would be easy to
attribute this to jealousy, but the easy explanation is not the true
one.  He simply would not give himself up to appreciation.  Perhaps
appreciation is a wasting though a generous quality of the mind and
heart, and best left to lookers-on who have plenty of time to develop
it.
I was with him when he saw Sarah Bernhardt act for the first time.
The play was “Ruy Blas,” and it was one of Sarah’s bad days.  She was
walking through the part listlessly, and I was angry that there should
be any ground for Henry’s indifference.  The same thing happened years
later when I took him to see Eleonora Duse.  The play was
“Locandiera,” to which she was eminently unsuited, I think.  He was
surprised at my enthusiasm.  There was an element of justice in his
attitude toward the performance which infuriated me, but I doubt if he
would have shown more enthusiasm if he had seen her at her best.
As the years went on he grew very much attached to Sarah Bernhardt,
and admired her as a colleague whose managerial work in the theatre
was as dignified as his own; but of her superb powers as an actress I
don’t believe he ever had a glimmering notion!
Perhaps it is not true, but, as I believe it to be true, I may as well
state it: It was never any pleasure to him to see the acting of other
actors and actresses.  Salvini’s Othello I know he thought
magnificent, but he would not speak of it.
How dangerous it is to write things that may not be understood!  What
I have written I have written merely to indicate the qualities in
Henry Irving’s nature which were unintelligible to me, perhaps because
I have always been more woman than artist.  He always put the theatre
first.  He lived in it, he died in it.  He had none of my bourgeois
qualities–the love of being in love, the love of a home, the dislike
of solitude.  I have always thought it hard to find my inferiors.  He
was sure of his high place.  In some ways he was far simpler than I.
He would talk, for instance, in such an ignorant way to painters and
musicians that I blushed for him.  But was not my blush far more
unworthy than his freedom from all pretentiousness in matters of art?
He never pretended.  One of his biographers had said that he posed as
being a French scholar.  Such a thing, and all things like it, were
impossible to his nature.  If it were necessary, in one of his plays,
to say a few French words, he took infinite pains to learn them, and
said them beautifully.
Henry once told me that in the early part of his career, before I knew
him, he had been hooted because of his thin legs.  The first service I
did him was to tell him that they were beautiful, and to make him give
up padding them.
“What do you want with fat, podgy, prize-fighter legs!” I
expostulated.
I brought help, too, in pictorial matters.  Henry Irving had had
little training in such matters; I had had a great deal.  Judgment
about colours, clothes, and lighting must be trained.  I had learned
from Mr. Watts, from Mr. Goodwin, and from other artists, until a
sense of decorative effect had become second nature to me.
Praise to some people at certain stages of their career is more
developing than blame.  I admired the very things in Henry for which
other people criticised him.  I hope this helped him a little.
Continue...

This full text of 
Library of Little Masterpieces: 19th Century Actor Autobiographies, edited by George Iles,
is in the public domain.


Also see: Acting: The First Six Lessons.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
You: On A Diet: The Owner's Manual for Waist ManagementBy Mehmet C. OzAt Amazon
