



[Charlotte Cushman, a native of Boston, died in that city in 1876.  No
actress ever excelled her as Meg Merrilies, Queen Katherine, and Lady
Macbeth.  On the morning following her death, Mr. William Winter wrote
in the New York Tribune:–
...  Charlotte Cushman was not a great actress merely, but she was a
great woman.  She did not possess the dramatic faculty apart from
other faculties and conquer by that alone: but having that faculty in
almost unlimited fulness, she poured forth through its channel such
resources of character, intellect, moral strength, soul, and personal
magnetism as marked her for a genius of the first order, while they
made her an irresistible force in art.  When she came upon the stage
she filled it with the brilliant vitality of her presence.  Every
movement that she made was winningly characteristic.  Her least
gesture was eloquence, Her voice, which was soft or silvery, or deep
or mellow, according as emotion affected it, used now and then to
tremble, and partly to break, with tones that were pathetic beyond
description.  These were denotements of the fiery soul that smouldered
beneath her grave exterior, and gave iridescence to every form of art
that she embodied.  Sometimes her whole being seemed to become
petrified in a silent suspense more thrilling than any action, as if
her imagination were suddenly inthralled by the tumult and awe of its
own vast perceptions.”
Her frlend, Emma Stebbins, the sculptor, edited a memorial volume,
“Charlotte Cushman:  Her Letters and Memories of Her Life,” published
in 1878.  By permission of the publishers and owners of the copyright,
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., Boston, the pages that follow are
offered.–ED.]
On one occasion [wrote Miss Cushman] when Henry Ware, pastor of the
old Boston Meeting House, was taking tea with my mother, he sat at
table talking, with his chin resting in his two hands, and his elbows
on the table.  I was suddenly startled by my mother exclaiming,
“Charlotte, take your elbows off the table and your chin out of your
hands; it is not a pretty position for a young lady!”  I was sitting
in exact imitation of the parson, even assuming the expression of his
face.
Besides singing everything, I exercised my imitative powers in all
directions, and often found myself instinctively mimicking the tones,
movement, and expression of those about me.  I’m afraid I was what the
French call un enfant terrible–in the vernacular, an awful child!
full of irresistible life and impulsive will; living fully in the
present, looking neither before nor after; as ready to execute as to
conceive; full of imagination–a faculty too often thwarted and warped
by the fears of parents and friends that it means insincerity and
falsehood, when it is in reality but the spontaneous exercise of
faculties as yet unknown even to the possessor, and misunderstood by
those so-called trainers of infancy.
This imitative faculty in especial I inherited from my grandmother
Babbit, born Mary Saunders, of Gloucester, Cape Ann.  Her faculty of
imitation was very remarkable.  I remember sitting at her feet on a
little stool and hearing her sing a song of the period, in which she
delighted me by the most perfect imitation of every creature belonging
to the farmyard.
My uncle, Augustus Babbit, who led a seafaring life and was lost at
sea, took great interest in me; he offered me prizes for proficiency
in my studies, especially music and writing.  He first took me to the
theatre on one of his return voyages, which was always a holiday time
for me.  My first play was “Coriolanus,” with Macready, and my second
“The Gamester,” with Cooper and Mrs. Powell as Mr. and Mrs. Beverley.
All the English actors and actresses of that time were of the Siddons
and Kemble school, and I cannot but think these early impressions must
have been powerful toward the formation of a style of acting afterward
slowly eliminated through the various stages of my artistic career.
My uncle had great taste and love for the dramatic profession, and
became acquainted with Mr. and Mrs. William Pelby, for whom the
original Tremont Theatre was built.  My uncle being one of the
stockholders, through him my mother became acquainted with these
people, and thus we had many opportunities of seeing and knowing
something of the fraternity.
About this time I became noted in school as a reader, where before I
had only been remarkable for my arithmetic, the medal for which could
never be taken from me.  I remember on one occasion reading a scene
from Howard Payne’s tragedy of “Brutus,” in which Brutus speaks, and
the immediate result was my elevation to the head of the class to the
evident disgust of my competitors, who grumbled out, “No wonder she
can read, she goes to the theatre!”  I had been before this very shy
and reserved, not to say stupid, about reading in school, afraid of
the sound of my own voice, and very unwilling to trust it; but the
greater familiarity with the theatre seemed suddenly to unloose my
tongue, and give birth as it were to a faculty which has been the
ruling passion ever since.
With the Maeders I went [in 1836, when twenty years of age] to New
Orleans, and sang until, owing perhaps to my youth, to change of
climate, or to a too great strain upon the upper register of my voice,
which, as his wife’s voice was a contralto, it was more to Mr.
Maeder’s interest to use, than the lower one, I found my voice
suddenly failing me.  In my unhappiness I went to ask counsel and
advice of Mr. Caldwell, the manager of the chief New Orleans theatre,
He at once said to me, “You ought to be an actress, and not a singer."
He advised me to study some parts, and presented me to Mr. Barton, the
tragedian of the theatre, whom he asked to hear me, and to take an
interest in me.
He was very kind, as indeed they both were; and Mr. Barton, after a
short time, was sufficiently impressed with my powers to propose to
Mr. Caldwell that I should act Lady Macbeth to his Macbeth, on the
occasion of his (Barton’s) benefit.  Upon this is was decided that I
should give up singing and take to acting.  My contract with Mr.
Maeder was annulled, it being the end of the season.  So enraptured
was I with the idea of acting this part, and so fearful of anything
preventing me, that I did not tell the manager I had no dresses, until
it was too late for me to be prevented from acting it; and the day
before the performance, after rehearsal, I told him.  He immediately
sat down and wrote a note of introduction for me to the tragedienne of
the French Theatre, which then employed some of the best among French
artists for its company.  This note was to ask her to help me to
costumes for the role of Lady Macbeth, I was a tall, thin, lanky girl
at that time, about five feet six inches in height.  The Frenchwoman,
Madame Closel, was a short, fat person of not more than four feet ten
inches, her waist full twice the size of mine, with a very large bust;
but her shape did not prevent her being a very great actress.  The
ludicrousness of her clothes being made to fit me struck her at once.
She roared with laughter; but she was very good-natured, saw my
distress, and set to work to see to how she could help it.  By dint of
piecing out the skirt of one dress it was made to answer for an
underskirt, and then another dress was taken in in every direction to
do duty as an overdress, and so make up the costume.  And thus I
essayed for the first time the part of Lady Macbeth, fortunately to
the satisfaction of the audience, the manager, and all the members of
the company.
...  I should advise you to get to work; all ideal study of acting,
without the trial or opportunity of trying our efforts and conceivings
upon others, is, in my mind, lost time.  Study while you act.  Your
conception of character can be formed while you read your part, and
only practice can tell you whether you are right.  You would, after a
year of study in your own room, come out unbenefited, save in as far
as self-communion ever must make us better and stronger; but this is
not what you want just now.  Action is needed.  Your vitality must in
some measure work itself off.  You must suffer, labour, and wait,
before you will be able to grasp the true and the beautiful.  You
dream of it now; the intensity of life that is in you, the spirit of
poetry which makes itself heard by you in indistinct language, needs
work to relieve itself and be made clear.  I feel diffident about
giving advice to you, for you know your own nature better than any one
else can, but I should say to you, get to work in the best way you
can.
All your country work will be wretched; you will faint by the way; but
you must rouse your great strength and struggle on, bearing patiently
your cross on the way to your crown!  God bless you and prosper your
undertakings.  I know the country theatres well enough to know how
utterly alone you will be in such companies; but keep up a good heart;
we have only to do well what is given us to do, to find heaven.
I think if you have to wait for a while it will do you no harm.  You
seem to me quite frantic for immediate work; but teach yourself quiet
and repose in the time you are waiting.  With half your strength I
could bear to wait and labour with myself to conquer fretting.  The
greatest power in the world is shown in conquest over self.  More life
will be worked out of you by fretting than all the stage-playing in
the world.  God bless you, my poor child.  You have indeed troubles
enough; but you have a strong and earnest spirit, and you have the
true religion of labour in your heart.  Therefore I have no fears for
you, let what will come.  Let me hear from you at your leisure, and be
sure you have no warmer friend than I am and wish to be,...
I was exceedingly pleased to hear such an account of your first
appearance.  You were quite right in all that was done, and I am
rejoiced at your success.  Go on; persevere.  You will be sure to do
what is right, for your heart is in the right place, your head is
sound, your reading has been good.  Your mind is so much better and
stronger than any other person’s whom I have known enter the
profession, that your career is plain before you.
But I will advise you to remain in your own native town for a season,
or at least the winter.  You say you are afraid of remaining among
people who know you.  Don’t have this feeling at all.  You will have
to be more particular in what you do, and the very feeling that you
cannot be indifferent to your audience will make you take more pains.
Beside this, you will be at home, which is much better for a time; for
then at first you do not have to contend with a strange home as well
as with a strange profession.  I could talk to you a volume upon this
matter, but it is difficult to write.  At all events I hope you will
take my counsel and remain at home this winter.  It is the most
wretched thing imaginable to go from home a novice into such a theatre
as any of those in the principal towns.
Only go on and work hard, and you will be sure to make a good
position.  With regard to your faults, what shall I say?  Why, that
you will try hard to overcome them.  I don’t think they would be
perceived save by those who perhaps imagine that your attachment for
me has induced you to join the profession.  I have no mannerisms, I
hope; therefore any imitation of me can only be in the earnest desire
to do what you can do, as well as you can.  Write to me often; ask of
me what you will; my counsel is worth little, but you shall command it
if you need it.
[FROM A LETTER]
...  All that you say about your finding your own best expression in
and through the little life which is confided to you is good and true,
and I am so happy to see how you feel on the subject.  I think a
mother who devotes herself to her child, in watching its culture and
keeping it from baleful influences, is educating and cultivating
herself at the same time.  No artist work is so high, so noble, so
grand, so enduring, so important for all time, as the making of
character in a child, You have your own work to do, the largest
possible expression.  No statue, no painting, no acting, can reach it,
and it embodies each and all the arts, Clay of God’s fashioning is
given into your hands to mould to perfectness.  Is this not something
grand to think of?  No matter about yourself–only make yourself
worthy of God’s sacred trust, and you will be doing His work–and that
is all that human beings ought to care to live for.  Am I right?
[FROM A LETTER TO A FRIEND]
There was a time, in my life of girlhood, when I thought I had been
called upon to bear the very hardest thing that can come to a Woman.
A very short time served to show me, in the harder battle of life
Which was before me, that this had been but a spring storm, which was
simply to help me to a clearer, better, richer, and more productive
summer.  If I had been spared this early trial, I should never have
been so earnest and faithful in my art; I should have still been
casting about for the “counterpart,” and not given my entire self to
my work, wherein and alone I have reached any excellence I have ever
attained, and through which alone I have received my reward.  God
helped me in my art isolation, and rewarded me for recognising him and
helping myself.  This passed on; and this happened at a period in my
life when most women (or children, rather) are looking to but one end
in life–an end no doubt wisest and best for the largest number, but
which would not have been wisest and best for my work, and so for
God’s work, for I know he does not fail to set me his work to do, and
helps me to do it, and helps others to help me.  (Do you see this
tracing back, and then forward, to an eternity of good, and do you see
how better and better one can become in recognising one’s self as a
minister of the Almighty to faithfully carry out our part of His great
plan according to our strength and ability?)  0 believe we cannot live
one moment for ourselves, one moment of selfish repining, and not be
failing him at that moment, hiding the God-spark in us, letting the
flesh conquer the spirit, the evil dominate the good.
Then after this first spring storm and hurricane of young
disappointment came a lull–during which I actively pursued what
became a passion,–my art.  Then I lost my younger brother, upon whom
I had begun to build most hopefully, as I had reason.  He was by far
the cleverest of my mother’s children.  He had been born into greater
poverty than the others; he received his young impressions through a
different atmosphere; he was keener, more artistic, more impulsive,
more generous, more full of genius.  I lost him by a cruel accident,
and again the world seem to liquefy beneath my feet, and the waters
went over my soul.  It became necessary that I should suffer bodily to
cure my heart-bleed.  I placed myself professionally where I found and
knew all my mortifications in my profession, which seemed for the time
to strew ashes over the loss of my child-brother (for he was my child,
and loved me best in all the world), thus conquering my art, which,
God knows, has never failed me–never failed to bring me rich
reward–never failed to bring me comfort.  I conquered my grief and
myself.  Labour saved me then and always, and so I proved the eternal
goodness of God.  I digress too much; but you will see how, in looking
back to my own early disappointments, I can recognise all the good
which came out of them, and can ask you to lay away all repinings with
our darling, and hope (as we must) in God’s wisdom and goodness, and
ask him to help us to a clearer vision and truer knowledge of his
dealings with us; to teach us to believe that we are lifted up to him
better through our losses than our gains.  May it not be that heaven
is nearer, the passage from earth less hard, and life less seductive
to us, in consequence of the painless passing of this cherub to its
true home, lent us but for a moment, to show how pure must be our
lives to fit us for such companionship?  And thus, although in one
sense it would be well for us to put away the sadness of this thought
if it would be likely to enervate us, in another sense, if we consider
it rightly, if we look upon it worthily, we have an angel in God’s
house to help us to higher and purer thinkings, to nobler aspirations,
to more sublime sacrifices than we have ever known before.
[In 1874 Miss Cushman bade farewell to New York at Booth’s Theatre,
after a performance as Lady Macbeth.  William Cullen Bryant presented
an ode in her honour.  In the course of her response Miss Cushman
said:]
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks, but I thank you.
Gentlemen, the heart has no speech; its only language is a tear or a
pressure of the hand, and words very feebly convey or interpret its
emotions.  Yet I would beg you to believe that in the three little
words I now speak, ’I thank you,’ there are heart depths which I
should fail to express better, though I should use a thousand other
words.  I thank you, gentlemen, for the great honour you have offered
me.  I thank you, not only for myself, but for my whole profession, to
which, through and by me, you have paid this very grateful compliment.
If the few words I am about to say savour of egotism or vainglory, you
will, I am sure, pardon me, inasmuch as I am here only to speak of
myself.  You would seem to compliment me upon an honourable life.  As
I look back upon that life, it seems to me that it would have been
impossible for me to have led any other.  In this I have, perhaps,
been mercifully helped more than are many of my more beautiful sisters
in art.  I was, by a press of circumstances, thrown at an early age
into a profession for which I had received no special education or
training; but I had already, though so young, been brought face to
face with necessity.  I found life sadly real and intensely earnest,
and in my ignorance of other ways of study, I resolved to take
therefrom my text and my watchword.  To be thoroughly in earnest,
intensely in earnest in all my thoughts and in all my actions, whether
in my profession or out of it, became my one single idea.  And I
honestly believe herein lies the secret of my success in life.  I do
not believe that any great success in any art can he achieved without
it....
Continue...

This full text of 
Library of Little Masterpieces: 19th Century Actor Autobiographies, edited by George Iles,
is in the public domain.


Also see: Acting: The First Six Lessons.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
You: On A Diet: The Owner's Manual for Waist ManagementBy Mehmet C. OzAt Amazon
