



[Richard Mansfield, one of the great actors of his time, was born in
Heligoland, then a British Possession, in 1857.  He prepared himself
for the East Indian civil service, then studied art, and opened a
studio in Boston.  He was soon attracted to the stage, and began
playing minor parts in comic opera, displaying marked ability from the
first.  His versatility took him all the way from the role of Koko in
the “Mikado,” to Beau Brummel and Richard III.  His success soon
enabled him to assemble a company of his own; as its manager he
produced with memorable effect “Cyrano de Bergerac,” “Henry V.,” and
“Julius Caesar.”  He died in 1907, a few weeks after a striking
creation of “Peer Gynt.”  A biography of Mr. Mansfield by Mr. Paul
Wilstach is published by C. Scribner’s Sons, New York.
Mr. Mansfield’s article on “Man and the Actor,” which appeared in the
Atlantic Monthly, May, 1906, copyright by Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
Boston, is here given almost in full by the kind permission of the
publishers and of Mrs. Richard Mansfield.  It is in effect an
autobiographical revelation of the artist and the man.–ED.]
Shakespeare does not say “may” play a part, or “can” play a part, but
he says must play a part; and he has expressed the conviction of
every intelligent student of humanity then and thereafter, now and
hereafter.  The stage cannot be held in contempt by mankind; because
all mankind is acting, and every human being is playing a part.  The
better a man plays his part, the better he succeeds.  The more a man
knows of the art of acting, the greater the man; for, from the king on
his throne to the beggar in the street, every man is acting.  There is
no greater comedian or tragedian in the world than a great king.  The
knowledge of the art of acting is indispensable to a knowledge of
mankind, and when you are able to pierce the disguise in which every
man arrays himself, or to read the character which every man assumes,
you achieve an intimate knowledge of your fellow men, and you are able
to cope with the man, either as he is, or as he pretends to be.  It
was necessary for Shakespeare to be an actor in order to know men.
Without his knowledge of the stage, Shakespeare could never have been
the reader of men that he was.  And yet we are asked, “Is the stage
worth while?”
Napoleon and Alexander were both great actors–Napoleon perhaps the
greatest actor the world has ever seen.  Whether on the bridge of
Lodi, or in his camp at Tilsit; whether addressing his soldiers in the
plains of Egypt; whether throwing open his old gray coat and saying,
“Children, will you fire on your general?” whether bidding farewell to
them at Fontainebleau; whether standing on the deck of the
Bellerophon, or on the rocks of St. Helena–he was always an actor.
Napoleon had studied the art of acting, and he knew its value.  If the
power of the eye, the power of the voice, the power of that
all-commanding gesture of the hand, failed him when he faced the
regiment of veterans on his return from Elba, he was lost.  But he had
proved and compelled his audience too often for his art to fail him
then.  The leveled guns fell.  The audience was his.  Another crown
had fallen!  By what?  A trick of the stage!  Was he willing to die
then? to be shot by his old guard?  Not he!  Did he doubt for one
moment his ability as an actor.  Not he!  If he had, he would have
been lost.  And that power to control, that power to command, once it
is possessed by a man, means that that man can play his part anywhere,
and under all circumstances and conditions.  Unconsciously or
consciously, every great man, every man who has played a great part,
has been an actor.  Each man, every man, who has made his mark has
chosen his character, the character best adapted to himself, and has
played it, and clung to it, and made his impress with it.  I have but
to conjure up the figure of Daniel Webster, who never lost an
opportunity to act; or General Grant, who chose for his model William
of Orange, surnamed the Silent.  You will find every one of your most
admired heroes choosing early in life some admired hero of his own to
copy.  Who can doubt that Napoleon had selected Julius Caesar?  For,
once he had founded an empire, everything about him was modelled after
the Caesarean regime.  Look at his coronation robes, the women’s
gowns–the very furniture!  Actors, painters, musicians, politicians,
society men and women, and kings and queens, all play their parts, and
all build themselves after some favourite model.  In this woman of
society you trace the influence of the Princess Metternich.  In
another we see her admiration (and a very proper one) for Her
Britannic Majesty.  In another we behold George Eliot, or Queen Louise
of Prussia, or the influence of some modern society leader.  But no
matter who it is, from the lowest to the highest, the actor is
dominant in the human being, and this trait exhibits itself early in
the youngest child.  Everywhere you see stage-craft in one form or
another.  If men loved not costumes and scenery, would the king be
escorted by the lifeguards, arrayed in shining helmets and
breastplates, which we know are perfectly useless in these days when a
bullet will go through fifty of them with ease?  The first thing a man
thinks of when he has to face any ordeal, be it a coronation or an
execution, is, how am I going to look? how am I to behave? what manner
shall I assume? shall I appear calm and dignified, or happy and
pleased? shall I wear a portentous frown or a beaming smile? how shall
I walk? shall I take short steps or long ones? shall I stoop as if
bowed with care, or walk erect with courage and pride? shall I gaze
fearlessly on all about me, or shall I drop my eyes modestly to the
ground?  If man were not always acting, he would not think of these
things at all, he would not bother his head about them, but would walk
to his coronation or his execution according to his nature.  In the
last event this would have to be, in some cases, on all fours.
I stretch my eyes over the wide world, and the people in it, and I can
see no one who is not playing a part; therefore respect the art of
which you are all devotees, and, if you must act, learn to play your
parts well.  Study the acting of others, so that you may discover what
part is being played by others.
It is, therefore, not amazing that everybody is interested in the art
of acting, and it is not amazing that every one thinks he can act.
You have only to suggest private theatricals, when a house party is
assembled at some country house, to verify the truth of the statement.
Immediately commences a lively rivalry as to who shall play this part
or that.  Each one considers herself or himself best suited, and I
have known private theatricals to lead to lifelong enmities.
It is surprising to discover how very differently people who have
played parts all their lives deport themselves before the footlights.
I was acquainted with a lady in London who had been the wife of a peer
of the realm, who had been ambassadress at foreign courts, who at one
time had been a reigning beauty, and who came to me, longing for a new
experience, and implored me to give her an opportunity to appear upon
the stage.  In a weak moment I consented, and as I was producing a
play, I cast her for a part which I thought she would admirably
suit-that of a society woman.  What that woman did and did not do on
the stage passes all belief.  She became entangled in her train, she
could neither sit down nor stand up, she shouted, she could not be
persuaded to remain at a respectful distance, but insisted upon
shrieking into the actor’s ears, and she committed all the gaucheries
you would expect from an untrained country wench.  But because
everybody is acting in private life, every one thinks he can act upon
the stage, and there is no profession that has so many critics.  Every
individual in the audience is a critic, and knows all about the art of
acting.  But acting is a gift.  It cannot be taught.  You can teach
people how to act acting–but you can’t teach them to act.  Acting is
as much an inspiration as the making of great poetry and great
pictures.  What is commonly called acting is acting acting.  This is
what is generally accepted as acting.  A man speaks lines, moves his
arms, wags his head, and does various other things; he may even shout
and rant; some pull down their cuffs and inspect their finger nails;
they work hard and perspire, and their skin acts.  This is all easily
comprehended by the masses, and passes for acting, and is applauded,
but the man who is actually the embodiment of the character he is
creating will often be misunderstood, be disliked, and fail to
attract.  Mediocrity rouses no opposition, but strong individualities
and forcible opinions make enemies.  It is here that danger lies.
Many an actor has set out with an ideal, but, failing to gain general
favour, has abandoned it for the easier method of winning popular
acclaim.  Inspiration only comes to those who permit themselves to be
inspired.  It is a form of hypnotism.  Allow yourself to be convinced
by the character you are portraying that you are the character.  If
you are to play Napoleon, and you are sincere and determined to be
Napoleon, Napoleon will not permit you to be any one but Napoleon, or
Richard III. Richard III., or Nero Nero, and so on.  He would be a
poor, miserable pretence of an actor who in the representation of any
historical personage were otherwise than firmly convinced, after
getting into the man’s skin (which means the exhaustive study of all
that was ever known about him), that he is living that very man for a
few brief hours.  And so it is, in another form, with the creation or
realisation of the author’s, the poet’s, fancy.  In this latter case
the actor, the poet actor, sees and creates in the air before him the
being he delineates; he makes him, he builds him during the day, in
the long hours of the night; the character gradually takes being; he
is the actor’s genius; the slave of the ring, who comes when he calls
him, stands beside him, and envelops him in his ghostly arms; the
actor’s personality disappears; he is the character.  You, you, and
you, and all of you, have the right to object to the actor’s creation;
you may say this is not your conception of Hamlet or Macbeth or Iago
or Richard or Nero or Shylock–but respect his.  And who can tell
whether he is right or you are right?  He has created them with much
loving care; therefore don’t sneer at them–don’t jeer at them–it
hurts!  If you have reared a rosebush in your garden, and seen it bud
and bloom, are you pleased to have some ruthless vandal tear the
flowers from their stem and trample them in the mud?  And it is not
always our most beautiful children we love the best.  The parent’s
heart will surely warm toward its feeblest child.
It is very evident that any man, be he an actor or no actor, can, with
money and with good taste, make what is technically termed a
production.  There is, as an absolute matter of fact, no particular
credit to be attached to the making of a production.  The real work of
the stage, of the actor, does not lie there.  It is easy for us to
busy ourselves, to pass pleasantly our time, designing lovely scenes,
charming costumes, and all the paraphernalia and pomp of mimic
grandeur, whether of landscape or of architecture, the panoply of war,
or the luxury of royal courts.  That is fun–pleasure and amusement.
No; the real work of the stage lies in the creation of a character.  A
great character will live forever, when paint and canvas and silks and
satins and gold foil and tinsel shall have gone the way of all rags.
But the long, lone hours with our heads in our hands, the toil, the
patient study, the rough carving of the outlines, the dainty, delicate
finishing touches, the growing into the soul of the being we
delineate, the picture of his outward semblance, his voice, his gait,
his speech, all amount to a labour of such stress and strain, of such
loving anxiety and care, that they can be compared in my mind only to
a mother’s pains.  And when the child is born it must grow in a few
hours to completion, and be exhibited and coldly criticised.  How
often, how often, have those long months of infinite toil been in
vain!  How often has the actor led the child of his imagination to the
footlights, only to realise that he has brought into the world a
weakling or a deformity which may not live!  And how often he has sat
through the long night brooding over the corpse of this dear figment
of his fancy!  It has lately become customary with many actor-managers
to avoid these pangs of childbirth.  They have determinedly declined
the responsibility they owe to the poet and the public, and have
instead dazzled the eye with a succession of such splendid pictures
that the beholder forgets in a surfeit of the sight the feast that
should feed the soul.  This is what I am pleased to term talk versus
acting.  The representative actors in London are much inclined in this
direction.
The student may well ask, “What are we to copy, and whom are we to
copy?”  Don’t copy any one; don’t copy any individual actor, or his
methods.  The methods of one actor–the means by which he
arrives–cannot always be successfully employed by another.  The
methods and personality of one actor are no more becoming or suitable
or adapted to another than certain gowns worn by women of fashion
simply because these gowns are the fashion.  In the art of acting,
like the art of painting, we must study life–copy life!  You will
have before you the work of great masters, and you will learn very
much from them–quite as much what to avoid as what to follow.  No
painting is perfect, and no acting is perfect.  No actor ever played a
part to absolute perfection.  It is just as impossible for an actor to
simulate nature completely upon the stage as it is impossible for the
painter to portray on canvas the waves of the ocean, the raging storm
clouds, or the horrors of conflagration.
The nearer the artist gets to nature, the greater he is.  We may
admire Rubens and Rembrandt and Vandyke and Gainsborough and Turner,
but who will dare to say that any one of their pictures is faultless?
We shall learn much from them all, but quite as much what to avoid as
what to emulate.  But when you discover their faults, do not forget
their virtues.  Look, and realise what it means to be able to do so
much, And the actor’s art is even more difficult!  For its execution
must be immediate and spontaneous.  The word is delivered, the action
is done, and the picture is painted!  Can I pause and say, “Ladies and
gentlemen, that is not the way I wanted to do this, or to say that; if
you will allow me to try again, I think I can improve upon it?”
The most severe critic can never tell me more, or scold me more than I
scold myself.  I have never left the stage satisfied with myself.  And
I am convinced that every artist feels as I do about his work.  It is
the undoubted duty of the critic to criticise, and that means to blame
as well as to praise; and it must be confessed that, taking all things
into consideration, the critics of this country are actuated by
honesty of purpose and kindliness of spirit, and very often their work
is, in addition, of marked literary value.  Occasionally we will still
meet the man who is anxious to impress his fellow citizens with the
fact that he has been abroad, and tinctures all his views of plays and
actors with references to Herr Dinkelspiegel or Frau Mitterwoorzer; or
who, having spent a few hours in Paris, is forced to drag in by the
hair Monsieur Popin or Mademoiselle Fifine.  But as a matter of fact,
is not the interpretation of tragedy and comedy by the American stage
superior to the German and French?–for the whole endeavour in this
country has been toward a closer adherence to nature.  In France and
in Germany the ancient method of declamation still prevails, and the
great speeches of Goethe and Schiller and Racine and Corneille are to
all intents and purposes intoned.  No doubt this sounds very fine in
German and French, but how would you like it now in English?
The old-time actor had peculiar and primitive views as to elocution
and its uses.  I remember a certain old friend of mine, who, when he
recited the opening speech in “Richard III.,” and arrived at the line
“In the deep bosom of the ocean buried,” suggested the deep bosom of
the ocean by sending his voice down into his boots.  Yet these were
fine actors, to whom certain young gentlemen, who never saw them,
constantly refer.  The methods of the stage have completely changed,
and with them the tastes of the people.  The probability is that some
of the old actors of only a few years ago would excite much merriment
in their delineation of tragedy.  A very great tragedian of a past
generation was wont, in the tent scene in “Richard III.,” to hold a
piece of soap in his mouth, so that, after the appearance of the
ghosts, the lather and froth might dribble down his chin! and he
employed, moreover, a trick sword, which rattled hideously; and, what
with his foam-flecked face, his rolling eyes, his inarticulate groans,
and his rattling blade, the small boy in the gallery was scared into a
frenzy of vociferous delight!
Yet, whilst we have discarded these somewhat crude methods, we have
perhaps allowed ourselves to wander too far in the other direction,
and the critics are quite justified in demanding in many cases greater
virility and force.  The simulation of suppressed power is very useful
and very advisable, but when the fire-bell rings the horses have got
to come out, and rattle and race down the street, and rouse the town!
Whilst we are on the subject of these creations of the poets and the
actors, do you understand how important is discipline on the stage?
How can an actor be away from this earth, moving before you in the
spirit he has conjured up, only to be dragged back to himself and his
actual surroundings of canvas and paint and tinsel and limelights by
some disturbing influence in the audience or on the stage?  If you
want the best, if you love the art, foster it.  It is worthy of your
gentlest care and your kindest, tenderest thought.  Your silence is
often more indicative of appreciation than your applause.  The actor
does not need your applause in order to know when you are in sympathy
with him.
He feels very quickly whether you are antagonistic or friendly.  He
cares very little for the money, but a great deal for your affection
and esteem.  Discipline on the stage has almost entirely disappeared,
and year after year the exercise of our art becomes more difficult.  I
am sorry to say some newspapers are, unwittingly perhaps, largely
responsible for this.  When an editor discharges a member of his force
for any good and sufficient reason–and surely a man must be permitted
to manage and control his own business–no paper will publish a
two-column article, with appropriate cuts, detailing the wrongs of the
discharged journalist, and the hideous crime of the editor!  Even an
editor–and an editor is supposed to be able to stand almost
anything–would become weary after a while; discipline would cease,
and your newspapers would be ill-served.  Booth, Jefferson, and other
actors soon made up their minds that the easiest road was the best for
them.  Mr. Booth left the stage management entirely to Mr. Lawrence
Barrett and others, and Mr. Jefferson praised everybody and every
thing.  But this is not good for the stage.  My career on the stage is
nearly over, and until, shortly, I bid it farewell, I shall continue
to do my best; but we are all doing it under ever-growing
difficulties.  Actors on the stage are scarce, actors off the stage,
as I have demonstrated, I hope, are plentiful.  Life insurance
presidents–worthy presidents, directors, and trustees–have been so
busy acting their several parts in the past, and are in the present so
busy trying to unact them, men are so occupied from their childhood
with the mighty dollar, the race for wealth is so strenuous and
all-entrancing, that imagination is dying out; and imagination is
necessary to make a poet or an actor; the art of acting is the
crystallisation of all arts.  It is a diamond in the facets of which
is mirrored every art.  It is, therefore, the most difficult of all
arts.  The education of a king is barely sufficient for the education
of the comprehending and comprehensive actor.  If he is to satisfy
every one, he should possess the commanding power of a Caesar, the
wisdom of Solomon, the eloquence of Demosthenes, the patience of Job,
the face and form of Antinous, and the strength and endurance of
Hercules.
The stage is not likely to die of neglect anywhere.  But at this
moment it cannot be denied that the ship of the stage is drifting
somewhat hither and thither, Every breath of air and every current of
public opinion impels it first in one direction and then in another,
At one moment we may be said to be in the doldrums of the English
society drama, or we are sluggishly rolling along in a heavy ground
swell, propelled by a passing cat’s paw of revivals of old melodramas.
Again we catch a very faint northerly breeze from Ibsen, or a
southeaster from Maeterlinck and Hauptmann.  Sometimes we set our
sails to woo that ever-clearing breeze of Shakespeare, only to be
forced out of our course by a sputter of rain, an Irish mist, and half
a squall from George Bernard Shaw; but the greater part of the time
the ship of the stage is careering wildly under bare poles, with a man
lashed to the helm (and let us hope that, like Ulysses, he has cotton
wool in his ears), before a hurricane of comic opera.  We need a
recognised stage and a recognised school.  America has become too
great, and its influence abroad too large, for us to afford to have
recourse to that ancient and easy method of criticism which decries
the American and extols the foreign.  That is one of those last
remnants of colonialism and provincialism which must depart forever.
What could not be done for the people of this land, were we to have a
great and recognised theatre!  Consider our speech, and our manner of
speech!  Consider our voices, and the production of our voices!
Consider the pronunciation of words, and the curious use of vowels!
Let us say we have an established theatre, to which you come not only
for your pleasure, but for your education.  Of what immense advantage
this would be if behind its presiding officer there stood a board of
literary directors, composed of such men as William Winter, Howells,
Edward Everett Hale, and Aldrich, and others equally fine, and the
presidents of the great universities.  These men might well decide how
the American language should be spoken in the great American theatre,
and we should then have an authority in this country at last for the
pronunciation of certain words.  It would finally be decided whether
to say fancy or fahncy–dance or dahnce–advertisement or
advertysement, and so with many other words; whether to call the
object of our admiration “real elegant"–whether we should say “I
admire” to do this or that, and whether we should say “I guess"
instead of “I think.”  And the voice!  The education of the American
speaking voice is, I am sure all will agree, of immense importance.
It is difficult to love, or to continue to endure, a woman who shrieks
at you; a high-pitched, nasal, stringy voice is not calculated to
charm.  This established theatre of which we dream should teach men
and women how to talk; and how splendid it would be for future
generations if it should become characteristic of American men and
women to speak in soft and beautifully modulated tones!
These men of whom I have spoken could meet once a year in the great
green-room of this theatre of my imagination, and decide upon the
works to be produced–the great classics, the tragedies and comedies;
and living authors should be invited and encouraged.  Here, again, we
should have at last what we so badly need, an encouragement for men
and women to write poetry for the stage.  Nothing by way of the
beautiful seems to be written for us to-day, but perhaps the
acknowledgment and the hall-mark of a great theatre might prove an
incentive.
The training of the actor!  To-day there is practically none.  Actors
and actresses are not to be taught by patting them on the shoulders
and saying, “Fine!  Splendid!”  It is a hard, hard school, on the
contrary, of unmerciful criticism.  And he is a poor master who seeks
cheap popularity amongst his associates by glossing over and praising
what he knows to be condemnable.  No good result is to be obtained by
this method, but it is this method which has caused a great many
actors to be beloved, and the public to be very much distressed.
As for the practical side of an established theatre, I am absolutely
convinced that the national theatre could be established in this
country on a practical and paying basis; and not only on a paying
basis, but upon a profitable basis.  It would, however, necessitate
the investment of a large amount of capital.  In short, the prime cost
would be large, but if the public generally is interested, there is no
reason why an able financier could not float a company for this
purpose.  But under no circumstances must or can a national theatre,
in the proper use of the term, be made an object of personal or
commercial profit.  Nor can it be a scheme devised by a few
individuals for the exploitation of a social or literary fad.  The
national theatre must be given by the people to the people, and be
governed by the people.  The members of the national theatre should be
elected by the board of directors, and should be chosen from the
American and British stage alike, or from any country where English is
the language of the people.  Every inducement should be offered to
secure the services of the best actors; by actors, I mean actors of
both sexes; and those who have served for a certain number of years
should be entitled to a pension upon retirement.
It is not necessary to bother with further details; I only mention
this to impress the reader with the fact that the national theatre is
a practical possibility.  From my personal experience I am convinced
that serious effort upon the American stage meets with a hearty
endorsement.
Continue...

This full text of 
Library of Little Masterpieces: 19th Century Actor Autobiographies, edited by George Iles,
is in the public domain.


Also see: Acting: The First Six Lessons.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
You: On A Diet: The Owner's Manual for Waist ManagementBy Mehmet C. OzAt Amazon
