



Photograph by Alfred Ellis and Walery, London.
[Henry Brodribb Irving, son of the late Sir Henry Irving, was born in
London in 1870.  His first appearance on the stage was at the Garrick
Theatre, London, in “School,” when twenty-one.  In 1906 he toured with
success throughout the United States, appearing in plays made
memorable by his father, “The Lyons Mail,” “Charles I.,” and “The
Bells.”  Mr. Irving distinctly inherits Sir Henry Irving’s ability
both as an actor and as a thoughtful student of acting as an art.  In
1905 he gave a lecture, largely autobiographical, to the Academy of
Dramatic Art in London.  It appeared in the Fortnightly Review, May,
1905, and is republished by Small, Maynard & Co., Boston, in
“Occasional Papers.  Dramatic and Historical” by Mr. Irving.  By his
kindness, and that of his publishers, its pages are here drawn
upon.–ED.]
I received, not very long ago, in a provincial town, a letter from a
young lady, who wished to adopt the stage as a profession but was
troubled in her mind by certain anxieties and uncertainties.  These
she desired me to relieve.  The questions asked by my correspondent
are rather typical questions-questions that are generally asked by
those who, approaching the stage from the outside, in the light of
prejudice and misrepresentation, believe the calling of the actor to
be one morally dangerous and intellectually contemptible; one in which
it is equally easy to succeed as an artist and degenerate as an
individual.  She begins by telling me that she has a “fancy for the
stage,” and has “heard a great many things about it.”  Now, for any
man or woman to become an actor or actress because they have a “fancy
for the stage” is in itself the height of folly.  There is no calling,
I would venture to say, which demands on the part of the aspirant
greater searching of heart, thought, deliberation, real assurance of
fitness, reasonable prospect of success before deciding to follow it,
than that of the actor.  And not the least advantage of a dramatic
school lies in the fact that some of its pupils may learn to
reconsider their determination to go on the stage, become convinced of
their own unfitness, recognise in time that they will be wise to
abandon a career which must always be hazardous and difficult even to
those who are successful, and cruel to those who fail.  Let it be
something far sterner and stronger than mere fancy that decides you to
try your fortunes in the theatre.
My correspondent says she has “heard a great many things about the
stage.”  If I might presume to offer a piece of advice, it would be
this:  Never believe anything you hear about actors and actresses from
those who are not actually familiar with them.  The amount of
nonsense, untruth, sometimes mischievous, often silly, talked by
otherwise rational people about the theatre, is inconceivable were it
not for one’s own personal experience.  It is one of the penalties of
the glamour, the illusion of the actor’s art, that the public who see
men and women in fictitious but highly exciting and moving situations
on the stage, cannot believe that when they quit the theatre, they
leave behind them the emotions, the actions they have portrayed there.
And as there is no class of public servants in whom the public they
serve take so keen an interest as actors and actresses, the wildest
inventions about their private lives and domestic behaviour pass as
current, and are eagerly retailed at afternoon teas in suburban
drawing-rooms.
Now, the first question my correspondent asks me is this: “Does a
young woman going on the stage need a good education and also to know
languages?”  To answer the first part of the question is not, I think,
very difficult.  The supremely great actor or actress of natural
genius need have no education or knowledge of languages; it will be
immaterial whether he or she has enjoyed all the advantages of birth
and education or has been picked up in the streets; genius, the
highest talent, will assert itself irrespective of antecedents.  But I
should say that any sort of education was of the greatest value to an
actor or actress of average ability, and that the fact that the ranks
of the stage are recruited to-day to a certain extent from our great
schools and universities, from among classes of people who fifty years
ago would never have dreamed of entering our calling, is one on which
we may congratulate ourselves.  Though the production of great actors
and actresses will not be affected either one way or the other by
these circumstances, at the same time our calling must benefit in the
general level of its excellence, in its fitness to represent all
grades of society on the stage, if those who follow it are picked from
all classes, if the stage has ceased to be regarded as a calling unfit
for a man or woman of breeding or education,
The second question this lady asks me is this:
“Does she need to have her voice trained, and about what age do people
generally commence to go on the stage?”  The first part of this
question as to voice training touches on the value of an Academy of
Acting.  Of the value–the practical value–of such an institution
rightly conducted there can be no doubt.  That acting cannot be taught
is a well-worn maxim and perhaps a true one; but acting can be
disciplined; the ebullient, sometimes eccentric and disordered
manifestations of budding talent may be modified by the art of the
teacher; those rudiments, which many so often acquire painfully in the
course of rehearsal, the pupils who leave an academy should be masters
of and so save much time and trouble to those whose business it is to
produce plays.  The want of any means of training the beginner, of
coping at all with the floods of men and women, fit and unfit, who are
ever clamouring at the doors of the theatre, has been a long-crying
and much-felt grievance.  The establishment of this academy should go
far to remove what has been by no means an unjust reproach to our
theatrical system.  As to the age at which a person should begin a
theatrical career, I do not think there is any actor or actress who
would not say that it is impossible to begin too early–at least, as
early as a police magistrate will allow.  That art is long and life
short applies quite as truthfully to the actor’s as to any other art,
and as the years go on there must be many who regret that they did not
sooner decide to follow a calling which seems to carry one all too
quickly through the flight of time.
My correspondent also asks me a question which I shall answer very
briefly, but which it is as well should be answered; She writes, “Are
there many temptations for a girl on the stage, and need she
necessarily fall into them?”  Of course there are such temptations on
the stage, as there must be in any calling in which men and women are
brought into contact on a footing of equality; perhaps these
temptations are somewhat intensified in the theatre.  At the same
time, I would venture to say from my own experience of that branch of
theatrical business with which I have been connected–and in such
matters one can only speak from personal experience–that any woman
yielding to these temptations has only herself to blame, that any
well-brought-up, sensible girl will, and can, avoid them altogether,
and that I should not make these temptations a ground for dissuading
any young woman in whom I might be interested from joining our
calling.  To say, as a writer once said, that it was impossible for a
girl to succeed on the stage without impaired morals, is a statement
as untrue as to say that no man can succeed as a lawyer unless he be a
rogue, a doctor unless he be a quack, a parson unless be be a
hypocrite.
To all who intend to become actors and actresses, my first word of
advice would be–Respect this calling you have chosen to pursue.  You
will often in your experience hear it, see it in print, slighted and
contemned.  There are many reasons for this.  Religious prejudice,
fostered by the traditions of a by no means obsolete Puritanism, is
one; the envy of those who, forgetting the disadvantages, the
difficulties, the uncertainty of the actor’s life, see only the glare
of popular adulation, the glitter of the comparatively large salaries
paid to a few of us–such unreasoning envy as this is another; and the
want of sympathy of some writers with the art itself, who, unable to
pray with Goethe and Voltaire, remain to scoff with Jeremy Collier, is
a third.  There are causes from without that will always keep alive a
certain measure of hostility towards the player.  As long as the
public, in Hazlitt’s words, feel more respect for John Kemble in a
plain coat than the Lord Chancellor on the Woolsack, so long will this
public regard for the actor provoke the resentment of those whose
achievements in art appeal less immediately, less strikingly, to their
audience.  But if they would only pause to consider, surely they might
lay to their souls the unction that the immediate reward of the actor
in his lifetime is merely nature’s compensation to him for the
comparative oblivion of his achievements when he has ceased to be.
Imagine for one moment Shakespeare and Garrick contemplating at the
present moment from the heights the spectacle of their fame.  Who
would grudge the actor the few years of fervid admiration he was
privileged to enjoy, some one hundred and fifty years ago, as compared
with the centuries of living glory that have fallen to the great poet?
Sometimes you may hear your calling sneered at by those who pursue it.
There are few professions that are not similarly girded at by some of
their own members, either from disappointment or some ingrained
discontent.  When you hear such detraction, fix your thoughts not on
the paltry accidents of your art, such as the use of cosmetics and
other little infirmities of its practice, things that are obvious
marks for the cheap sneer, but look rather to what that art is capable
of in its highest forms, to what is the essence of the actor’s
achievement, what he can do and has done to win the genuine admiration
and respect of those whose admiration and respect have been worth the
having.
You will read and hear, no doubt, in your experience, that acting is
in reality no art at all, that it is mere sedulous copying of nature,
demanding neither thought nor originality.  I will only cite in reply
a passage from a letter of the poet Coleridge to the elder Charles
Mathews, which, I venture to think, goes some way to settle the
question.  “A great actor,” he writes, “comic or tragic, is not to be
a mere copy, a fac-simile, but an imitation of nature; now an
imitation differs from a copy in this, that it of necessity implies
and demands a difference, whereas a copy aims at identity and what a
marble peach on the mantelpiece, that you take up deluded and put down
with a pettish disgust, is compared with a fruit-piece of Vanhuysen’s,
even such is a mere copy of nature, with a true histrionic imitation.
A good actor is Pygmalion’s statue, a work of exquisite art, animated
and gifted with motion; but still art, still a species of poetry.”  So
writes Coleridge.  Raphael, speaking  of  painting, expresses the same
thought, equally applicable to the art of acting.  “To paint a fair
one,” he says, “it is necessary for me to see many fair ones; but
because there is so great a scarcity of lovely women, I am constrained
to make use of one certain ideal, which I have formed to myself in my
own fancy.”  So the actor who has to portray Hamlet, Othello,
Macbeth–any great dramatic character–has to form an ideal of such a
character in his own fancy, in fact, to employ an exercise of
imagination similar to that of the painter who seeks to depict an
ideal man or woman; the actor certainly will not meet his types of
Hamlet and Othello in the street.
But, whilst in your hearts you should cherish a firm respect for the
calling, the art you pursue, let that respect be a silent and modest
regard; it will be all the stronger for that.  I have known actors and
actresses who were always talking about their art with a big A, their
“art-life,” their “life-work,” their careers and futures, and so on.
Keep these things to yourselves, for I have observed that eloquence
and hyper-earnestness of this kind not infrequently go with rather
disappointing achievement.  Think, act, but don’t talk about it.  And,
above all, because you are actors and actresses, for that very reason
be sincere and unaffected; avoid rather than court publicity, for you
will have quite enough of it if you get on in your profession; the
successful actor is being constantly tempted to indiscretion.  Do not
yield too readily to the blandishments of the photographer, or the
enterprising editor who asks you what are the love scenes you have
most enjoyed playing on the stage, and whether an actor or actress can
be happy though married.  Be natural on the stage, and be just as
natural off it; regard the thing you have to do as work that has to be
done to the best of your power; if it be well done, it will bring its
own reward.  It may not be an immediate reward, but have faith, keep
your purpose serious, so serious as to be almost a secret; bear in
mind that ordinary people expect you, just because you are actors and
actresses, to be extraordinary, unnatural, peculiar; do your utmost at
all times and seasons to disappoint such expectations.
To the successful actor society, if he desire it, offers a warm and
cordial welcome.  Its members do not, it is true, suggest that he
should marry with their daughters, but why should they?  An actor has
a very unattractive kind of life to offer to any woman who is not
herself following his profession.  What I mean is that the fact of a
man being an actor does not debar him from such gratification as he
may find in the pleasures of society.  And I believe that the effect
of such raising of the actor’s status as has been witnessed in the
last fifty years has been to elevate the general tone of our calling
and bring into it men and women of education and refinement.
At the same time, remember that social enjoyments should always be a
secondary consideration to the actor, something of a luxury to be
sparingly indulged in.  An actor should never let himself be beguiled
into the belief that society, generally speaking, is seriously
interested in what he does, or that popularity in drawing-rooms
connotes success in the theatre.  It does nothing of the kind.  Always
remember that you can hope to have but few, very few friends or
admirers of any class who will pay to see you in a failure; you will
be lucky if a certain number do not ask you for free admission to see
you in a success.
It is to a public far larger, far more real and genuine than this,
that you will one day have to appeal.  It is in their presence that
you will finish your education.  The final school for the actor is his
audience; they are the necessary complement to the exercise of his
art, and it is by the impression he produces on them that he will
ultimately stand or fall; on their verdict, and on their verdict
alone, will his success or failure as an artist depend.  But, if you
have followed carefully, assiduously, the course of instruction now
open to you, when the time has arrived for you to face an audience you
will start with a very considerable handicap in your favour.  If you
have learnt to move well and to speak well, to be clear in your
enunciation and graceful in your bearing, you are bound to arrest at
once the attention of any audience, no matter where it may be, before
whom you appear.  Obvious and necessary as are these two acquirements
of graceful bearing and correct diction, they are not so generally
diffused as to cease to be remarkable.  Consequently, however modest
your beginning on the stage, however short the part you may be called
upon to play, you should find immediately the benefit of your
training.  You may have to unlearn a certain amount, or rather to
mould and shape what you have learnt to your new conditions, but if
you have been well grounded in the essential elements of an actor’s
education, you will stand with an enormous advantage over such of your
competitors as have waited till they go into a theatre to learn what
can be acquired just as well, better, more thoroughly, outside it.
It has been my object to deal generally with the actor’s calling, a
calling, difficult and hazardous in character, demanding much
patience, self-reliance, determination, and good temper.  This last is
not one of its least important demands on your character.  Remember
that the actor is not in one sense of the word an independent artist;
it is his misfortune that the practice of his art is absolutely
dependent on the fulfilment of elaborate external conditions.  The
painter, the musician, so long as they can find paint and canvas, ink
and paper, can work at their art, alone, independent of external
circumstances.  Not so the actor.  Before he can act, the theatre, the
play, scenery, company, these requisites, not by any means too easy to
find, must be provided.  And then it is in the company of others, his
colleagues, that his work has to be done.  Consequently patience, good
temper, fairness, unselfishness are qualities be will do well to
cultivate, and he will lose nothing, rather gain, by the exercise of
them.  The selfish actor is not a popular person, and, in my
experience, not as a rule a successful one.  “Give and take,” in this
little world of the theatre, and you will be no losers by it.
Learn to bear failure and criticism patiently.  They are part of the
actor’s lot in life.  Critics are rarely animated by any personal
hostility in what they may write about you, though I confess that when
one reads an unfavourable criticism, one is inclined to set it down to
anything but one’s own deserving.  I heard a great actor once say that
we should never read criticisms of ourselves till a week after they
were written–admirable counsel–but I confess I have not yet reached
that pitch of self-restraint that would enable me to overcome my
curiosity for seven days.  It is, however, a state of equanimity to
look forward to.  In the meantime, content yourself with the
recollection that ridicule and damning criticism have been the lot at
some time in their lives of the most famous actors and actresses, that
the unfavourable verdict of to-day may be reversed to-morrow.  It is
no good resenting failure; turn it to account rather; try to
understand it, and learn something from it.  The uses of theatrical
adversity may not be sweet, but rightly understood they may be very
salutary.
Do not let failure make you despond.  Ours is a calling of ups and
downs; it is an advantage of its uncertainty that you never know what
may happen next; the darkest hour may he very near the dawn.  This is
where Bohemianism, in the best sense of the term, will serve the
actor.  I do not mean by Bohemianism chronic intemperance and
insolvency.  I mean the gay spirit of daring and enterprise that
greets failure as graciously as success; the love of your own calling
and your comrades in that calling, a love that, no matter what your
measure of success, will ever remain constant and enduring; the
recognition of the fact that as an actor you but consult your own
dignity in placing your own calling as a thing apart, in leading such
a life as the necessities of that calling may demand; and choosing
your friends among those who regard you for yourself, not those to
whom an actor is a social puppet, to be taken up and dropped as he
happens for the moment to be more or less prominent in the public eye.
If this kind of Bohemianism has some root in your character, you will
find the changes and chances of your calling the easier to endure.
Do not despond in failure, neither be over-exalted by success.
Remember one success is as nothing in the history of an actor’s
career; he has to make many before he can lay claim to any measure of
fame; and over-confidence, an inability to estimate rightly the value
of a passing triumph, has before now harmed incalculably many an actor
or actress.  You will only cease to learn your business when you quit
it; look on success as but another lesson learnt to be turned to
account in learning the next.  The art of the actor is no less
difficult, no less long in comparison with life, than any other art.
In the intoxicating hour of success let this chastening thought have
some place in your recollection.
When you begin work as actors or actresses, play whenever you can and
whatever you can.  Remember that the great thing for the actor is to
be seen as often as possible, to be before the public as much as he
can, no matter how modest the part, how insignificant the production.
It is only when an actor has reached a position very secure in the
public esteem that he can afford, or that it may be his duty, to be
careful as to what he undertakes.  But before such a time is reached
his one supreme object must be to get himself known to the public, to
let them see his work under all conditions, until they find something
to identify as peculiarly his own; he should think nothing too small
or unimportant to do, too tiresome or laborious to undergo.  Work well
and conscientiously done must attract attention; there is a great deal
of lolling and idleness among the many thoughtless and indifferent
persons who drift on to the stage as the last refuge of the negligent
or incompetent.
The stage will always attract a certain number of worthless recruits
because it is so easy to get into the theatre somehow or other; there
is no examination to be passed, no qualification to be proved before a
person is entitled to call himself an actor.  And then the life of an
actor is unfortunately, in these days of long runs, one that lends
itself to a good deal of idleness and waste of time, unless a man or
woman be very determined to employ their spare time profitably.  For
this reason, I should advise any actor, or actress, to cultivate some
rational hobby or interest by the side of their work; for until the
time comes for an actor to assume the cares and labours of management,
he must have a great deal of time on his hands that can be better
employed than in hanging about clubs or lolling in drawing-rooms.  At
any rate, the actor or actress who thinks no work too small to do, and
to do to the utmost of his or her ability, who neglects no opportunity
that may be turned to account–and every line he or she speaks is an
opportunity–must outstrip those young persons who, though they may be
pleased to call themselves actors and actresses, never learn to regard
the theatre as anything but a kind of enlarged back-drawing-room, in
which they are invited to amuse themselves at an altogether inadequate
salary.
In regard to salary, when you start in your profession, do not make
salary your first consideration; do not suffer a few shillings or a
pound or two to stand between you and work.  This is a consideration
you may keep well in mind, even when you have achieved some measure of
success.  Apart from the natural tendency of the individual to place a
higher value on his services than that attached to them by others, it
is often well to take something less than you ask, if the work offered
you is useful.  Remember that the public judge you by your work, they
know nothing and care little about what is being paid you for doing
it.  To some people their own affairs are of such supreme importance
that they cannot believe that their personal concerns are unknown to,
and unregarded by, the outside world.  The intensely personal,
individual character of the actor’s work is bound to induce a certain
temptation to an exaggerated egotism.  We are all egotists, and it is
right that we should be, up to a point.  But I would urge the young
actor or actress to be always on the watch against developing,
especially in success, an extreme egotism which induces a selfishness
of outlook, an egregious vanity that in the long run weakens the
character, induces disappointment and discontent, and bores to
extinction other persons.
I would not for one moment advise an actor never to talk “shop"; it is
a great mistake to think that men and women should never talk in
public or private about the thing to which they devote their lives;
people, as a rule, are most interesting on the subject of their own
particular business in life.  Talk about the affairs of the theatre
within reason, and with due regard to the amenities of polite
conversation, but do not confuse the affairs of the theatre, broadly
speaking, with your own.  The one is lasting, general; the other
particular and fleeting.  “Il n’y a pas de l’homme necessaire” [No
man is indispensable].  Many persons would be strangely surprised if
they could see how rapidly their place is filled after they are gone,
no matter how considerable their achievement.  It may not be filled in
the same way, as well, as fittingly, but it will be filled, and
humanity will content itself very fairly well with the substitute.
This is especially true of the work of the actor.  He can but live as
a memory, and memory is proverbially short.
Continue...

This full text of 
Library of Little Masterpieces: 19th Century Actor Autobiographies, edited by George Iles,
is in the public domain.


Also see: Acting: The First Six Lessons.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
You: On A Diet: The Owner's Manual for Waist ManagementBy Mehmet C. OzAt Amazon
