



[Mr. William Winter’s “Life and Art of Edwin Booth” is indispensable
to a student of the American stage.  Here are two paragraphs chosen
from many as illuminating:
“The salient attributes of Booth’s art were imagination, insight,
grace, intense emotion, and melancholy refinement.  In Hamlet,
Richelieu, Othello, Iago, Lear, Bertuccio, and Lucius Brutus they were
conspicuously manifest.  But the controlling attribute,–that which
imparted individual character, colour and fascination to his
acting,–was the thoughtful introspective habit of a stately mind,
abstracted from passion and suffused with mournful dreaminess of
temperament.  The moment that charm began to work, his victory was
complete.  It was that which made him the true image of Shakespeare’s
thought, in the glittering halls of Elsinore, on its midnight
battlements, and in its lonely, wind-beaten place of graves.
“Under the discipline of sorrow, and through years that bring the
philosophic mind, Booth drifted further and further away from things
dark and terrible, whether in the possibilities of human life or in
the world of imagination.  That is the direction of true growth.  In
all characters that evoked his essential spirit–in characters which
rested on spiritualised intellect, or on sensibility to fragile
loveliness, the joy that is unattainable, the glory that fades, and
the beauty that perishes–he was peerless.  Hamlet, Richelieu, Faust,
Manfred, Jacques, Esmond, Sydney Carton, and Sir Edward Mortimer are
all, in different ways, suggestive of the personality that Booth was
fitted to illustrate.  It is the loftiest type that human nature
affords, because it is the embodied supremacy of the soul, and because
therein it denotes the only possible escape from the cares and
vanities of a transitory world.”
The letters which follow are from “Edwin Booth: Recollections by his
daughter, Edwina Booth Grossman, and Letters to Her and to His
Friends.”  Copyright, 1894, Century Company, New York.–ED.]
TO HIS DAUGHTER
BOOTH’S THEATER,
NEW YORK, November 15, 1871.
MY OWN DEAR DAUGHTER:
I arrived here last night, and found your pretty gift awaiting me.
Your letter pleased me very, very much in every respect, and your
little souvenir gave me far more delight than if it were of real gold.
When you are older you will understand how precious little things,
seemingly of no value in themselves, can be loved and prized above all
price when they convey the love and thoughtfulness of a good heart.
This little token of your desire to please me, my darling, is
therefore very dear to me, and I will cherish it as long as I live.
If God grants me so many years, I will show it you when you are a
woman, and then you will appreciate my preference for so little a
thing, made by you, to anything money might have bought.  God bless
you, my darling!  ...
God bless you again and again!  Your loving father.
TO HIS DAUGHTER
CHICAGO, March  2, 1873.
MY DEAR BIG DAUGHTER:
Your last letter was very jolly, and made me almost happy.  Pip (the
dog) is yelping to write to you, and so is your little brother, St.
Valentine, the bird; but I greatly fear they will have to wait another
week, for, you know, I have to hold the pen for them, and I have
written so many letters, and to-day my hand is tired.
Don’t you think it jollier to receive silly letters sometimes than to
get a repetition of sermons on good behaviour?  It is because I desire
to encourage in you a vein of pleasantry, which is most desirable in
one’s correspondence, as well as in conversation, that I put aside the
stern old father, and play papa now and then.
When I was learning to act tragedy, I had frequently to perform comic
parts, in order to acquire a certain ease of manner that my serious
parts might not appear too stilted; so you must endeavour in your
letters, in your conversation, and your general deportment, to be easy
and natural, graceful and dignified.  But remember that dignity does
not consist of over-becoming pride and haughtiness; self-respect,
politeness and gentleness in all things and to all persons will give
you sufficient dignity.  Well, I declare, I’ve dropped into a sermon,
after all, haven’t I?  I’m afraid I’11 have to let Pip and the bird
have a chance, or else I’11 go on preaching till the end of my letter.
You must tell me what you are reading now, and how you progress in
your studies, and how good you are trying to be.  Of that I have no
fear.  I doubt if I shall get to Philadelphia in June; so do not
expect me until school breaks up and then–"hey for Cos Cob” and the
fish-poles!  When I was last there the snow was high above our knees;
but still I liked it better than the city ....
Love and kisses from your grim old father.
TO HIS DAUGHTER
April  23, 1876.
MY DARLING DAUGHTER,
...  When I was at Eton (I don’t refer now to the dinner-table) my
Greek and Latin were of such a superior quality that had it not been
for an unforeseen accident I would have carried off all the honours.
The accident lay in this:  I never went to school there except in
dreams.  How often, ah! how often have I imagined the delights of a
collegiate education!  What a world of never-ending interest lies open
to the master of languages!
The best translations cannot convey to us the strength and exquisite
delicacy of thought in its native garb, and he to whom such books are
shut flounders about in outer darkness.  I have suffered so much from
the lack of that which my father could easily have given me in youth,
and which he himself possessed, that I am all the more anxious you
shall escape my punishment in that respect; that you may not, like me,
dream of those advantages which others enjoy through any lack of
opportunity or neglect of mine.  Therefore, learn to love your Latin,
your French, and your English grammar; standing firmly and securely on
them, you have a solid foothold in the field of literature....
Think how interesting it will be hereafter to refer to your journal,
and see the rapid development, not only of your mind, but of your
moral growth; only do not fail to record all your shortcomings; they
will not stand as reproaches, but as mere snags in the tortuous river
of your life, to be avoided in succeeding trips farther down the
stream.  They beset us all along the route, from the cradle to the
grave, and if we can only see them we can avoid many rough bumps.
God bless my darling!
PAPA.
TO HIS DAUGHTER
CHICAGO, October 9, 1886
...  I am glad to know that baby has begun to crawl; don’t put her on
her feet too soon; consider her legs a la bow....  I closed my first
week here with two enormous houses.  A hard week’s work has greatly
tired me....  Jefferson called and left with me the manuscript of his
reminiscences, which he has been writing.  So far as he has written
it, it is intensely interesting and amusing, and well written in a
free and chatty style; it will be the best autobiography of any actor
yet published if he continues it in its present form.  I sent you some
book notices from Lawrence Hutton’s clippings for me....  In the
article I send to-day you will see that I am gently touched up on the
point of the “old school"; my reference was not to the old style of
acting, but the old stock theatre as a school–where a beginner had
the advantage of a great variety of experience in farces, as well as
tragedies and comedies, and a frequent change of programme.  There is
no “school” now; there is a more natural style of acting, perhaps, but
the novice can learn nothing from long runs of a single play ...
TO HIS DAUGHTER
NEW YORK, January 5, 1888,
...  As for God’s reward for what I have done, I can hardly appreciate
it; it is more like punishment for misdeeds (of which I’ve done many)
than grace for good ones (if I’ve done any).  Homelessness is the
actor’s fate; physical incapacity to attain what is most required and
desired by such a spirit as I am a slave to.  If there be rewards, I
am certainly well paid, but hard schooling in life’s thankless lessons
has made we somewhat of a philosopher, and I’ve learned to take the
buffets and rewards of fortune with equal thanks, and in suffering all
to suffer–I won’t say nothing, but comparatively little.  Dick
Stoddard wrote a poem called “The King’s Bell,” which fits my case
exactly (you may have read it) .  He dedicated it to Lorimer Graham,
who never knew an unhappy day in his brief life, instead of to me, who
never knew a really happy one.  You mustn’t suppose from this that I’m
ill in mind or body: on the contrary, I am well enough in both; nor am
I a pessimist.  I merely wanted you to know that the sugar of my life
is bitter-sweet; perhaps not more so than every man’s whose experience
has been above and below the surface....  Business has continued
large, and increases a little every night; the play will run two weeks
longer.  Sunday, at four o’clock, I start for Baltimore, arriving
there at ten o’clock....
To-morrow, a meeting of actors, managers, and artists at breakfast, to
discuss and organise, if possible, a theatrical club[1] like the
Garrick of London....
TO HIS DAUGHTER
DETROIT, April 04, 1890.
...  Yes; it is indeed most gratifying to feel that age has not
rendered my work stale and tiresome, as is usually the case with
actors (especially tragedians) at my time.  Your dear mother’s fear
was that I would culminate too early, as I seemed then to be advancing
so rapidly.  Somehow I can’t rid myself of the belief that both she
and my father helped me.  But as for the compensation?  Nothing of
fame or fortune can compensate for the spiritual suffering that one
possessing such qualities has to endure.  To pass life in a sort of
dream, where “nothing is but what is not"–a loneliness in the very
midst of a constant crowd, as it were–is not a desirable condition of
existence, especially when the body also has to share the “penalty of
greatness,” as it is termed.  Bosh!  I’d sooner be an obscure farmer,
a hayseed from Wayback, or a cabinetmaker, as my father advised, than
the most distinguished man on earth.  But Nature cast me for the part
she found me best fitted for, and I have had to play it, and must play
it till the curtain falls.  But you must not think me sad about it.
No; I am used to it, and am contented.
I continue well, and act with a vigour which sometimes surprises
myself, and all the company notice it, and comment upon it.  I’m glad
the babes had a jolly birthday.  Bless ’em!  Love for all.
PAPA.
TO HIS DAUGHTER
THE PLAYERS, NEW YORK,
March 22, 1891.
DEAR DAUGHTER:
I’m in no mood for letter-writing to-day.  The shock (of Mr. Lawrence
Barrett’s death) so sudden and so distressing, and the gloomy,
depressing weather, entirely unfit me for the least exertion–even to
think.  Hosts of friends, all eager to assist poor Mrs. Barrett, seem
helpless in confusion, and all the details of the sad business seem to
be huddled on her ...
General Sherman’s son, “Father Tom,” as he is affectionately called by
all the family and the friends of the dear old General, will attend.
He was summoned from Europe recently to his father’s deathbed, and he
happens to be in time to perform services for his father’s friend,
poor Lawrence.  After the services to-morrow, the remains and a few
friends will go direct to Cohasset for the burial–Tuesday–where
Barrett had only two weeks ago placed his mother, removed from her New
York grave to a family lot which he had recently purchased at
Cohasset.  He had also enlarged his house there, where he intended to
pass his old age in privacy.  Doctor Smith was correct in his
assertion that the glandular disease was incurable, and the surgical
operation would prolong life only a year or so; the severe cold
produced pneumonia; which Barrett’s physicians say might have been
overcome but for the glandular disease still in the blood.  Mrs.
Barrett knew from the first operation that he had at most a year or so
to live, and yet by the doctor’s advice kept it secret, and did
everything to cheer and humour him.  She’s a remarkable woman.  She
has been expecting to be suddenly called to him for more than a year
past, yet the blow came with terrible force.  Milly, Mr. Barrett’s
youngest daughter, and her husband, came last night....  When I saw
Lawrence on Thursday he was in a burning fever and asked me to keep
away for fear his breath might affect me, and it pained him to talk.
He pulled through three acts of “De Mauprat” the night before, and
sent for his wife that night.  His death was very peaceful, with no
sign of pain.  A couple of weeks ago he and I were to meet General
Sherman at dinner: death came instead.  To-night Barrett had invited
about twenty distinguished men to meet me at Delmonico’s, and again
the grim guest attends....
My room is like an office of some state official; letters, telegrams,
and callers come every moment, some on business, many in sympathy.
Three hours have elapsed since I finished the last sentence, and I
expect a call from Bromley before I retire.  A world of business
matters have been disturbed by this sudden break of contracts with
actors and managers, and everything pertaining to next season, as well
as much concerning the balance of the present one, must be rearranged
or cancelled.  I, of course, am free; but for the sake of the company
I shall fulfil my time, to pay their salaries, this week here; and
next week in Brooklyn, as they were engaged by Barrett for my
engagement.  After which they will be out of employment for the
balance of the season...
PAPA.
TO MISS EMMA F. CARY
SAINT VALENTINE’S DAY, 1864.
MY DEAR FRIEND:
A little lull in the whirl of excitement in which my brain has nearly
lost its balance affords me an opportunity to write to you.  It would
be difficult to explain the many little annoyances I have been
subjected to in the production of “Richelieu,” but when I tell you
that it far surpasses “Hamlet,” and exceeds all my expectations, you
may suppose that I have not been very idle all this while.  I wish you
could see it.
Professor Peirce[2] has been here, and he will tell you of it.  It
really seems that the dreams of my past life–so far as my profession
is concerned–are being realised.  What Mary and I used to plan for my
future, what Richard and I used laughingly to promise ourselves in
“our model theatre,” seems to be realised–in these two plays, at
least.  As history says of the great cardinal, I am “too fortunate a
man not to be superstitious,” and as I find my hopes being fulfilled,
I cannot help but believe that there is a sufficient importance in my
art to interest them still; that to a higher influence than the world
believes I am moved by I owe the success I have achieved.  Assured
that all I do in this advance carries, even beyond the range of my
little world (the theatre), an elevating and refining influence, while
in it the effect is good, I begin to feel really happy in my once
uneasy sphere of action.  I dare say I shall soon be contented with my
lot.  I will tell you this much: I have been offered the means to a
speedy and an ample fortune, from all parts of the country, but prefer
the limit I have set, wherein I have the power to carry out my wishes,
though “on half pay,” as it were....
Ever your friend,
EDWIN BOOTH.
TO MISS EMMA F. CARY
[Three weeks after the assassination by his brother, John Wilkes
Booth, of President Lincoln.]
Saturday, May 6, 1865.
MY DEAR FRIEND:
I’ve just received your letter.  I have been in one sense unable to
write, but you know, of course, what my condition is, and need no
excuses.
I have been, by the advice of my friends, “cooped up” since I arrived
here, going out only occasionally in the evening.  My health is good,
but I suffer from the want of fresh air and exercise.
Poor mother is in Philadelphia, about crushed by her sorrows, and my
sister, Mrs. Clarke, is ill, and without the least knowledge of her
husband, who was taken from her several days ago, with Junius.
My position is such a delicate one that I am obliged to use the utmost
caution.  Hosts of friends are staunch and true to me.  Here and in
Boston I feel safe.  What I am in Philadelphia and elsewhere I know
not.  All I do [know] of the above named city is that there is one
great heart firm and faster bound to me than ever.
Sent in answer to dear Mary’s [his wife’s] prayers–I faithfully
believe it.  She will do what Mary struggled, suffered, and died in
doing.  My baby, too, is there.  Now that the greatest excitement is
over, and a lull is in the storm, I feel the need of that dear angel;
but during the heat of it I was glad she was not here.
When Junius and Mr. Clarke are at liberty, mother will come here and
bring Edwina [his daughter] to me.  I wish I could see with others’
eyes; all my friends assure me that my name shall be free, and that in
a little while I may be where I was and what I was; but, alas! it
looks dark to me.
God bless you all for your great assistance in my behalf; even dear
Dick aided me in my extremity, did he not?
Give my love to all and kisses to George.
...  I do not think the feeling is so strong in my favour in
Philadelphia as it is here and in Boston.  I am not known there.  Ever
yours.
TO MR. NAHUM CAPEN
[In response to an inquiry regarding his brother, John Wilkes Booth.]
WINDSOR HOTEL, NEW YORK,
July 28, 1881.
DEAR SIR:
I can give you very little information regarding my brother John.  I
seldom saw him since his early boyhood in Baltimore.  He was a
rattle-pated fellow, filled with quixotic notions.
While at the farm in Maryland he would charge on horseback through the
woods, “spouting” heroic speeches with a lance in his hand–a relic of
the Mexican war–given to father by some soldier who had served under
Taylor.  We regarded him as a good-hearted, harmless, though
wild-brained, boy, and used to laugh at his patriotic froth whenever
secession was discussed.  That he was insane on that one point no one
who knew him well can doubt.  When I told him that I had voted for
Lincoln’s reelection he expressed deep regret, and declared his belief
that Lincoln would be made king of America; and this I believe, drove
him beyond the limits of reason.  I asked him once why he did not join
the Confederate army.  To which he replied, “I promised mother I would
keep out of the quarrel, if possible, and I am sorry that I said so."
Knowing my sentiments, he avoided me, rarely visiting my house, except
to see his mother, when political topics were not touched upon–at
least in my presence.  He was of a gentle, loving disposition, very
boyish and full of fun–his mother’s darling–and his deed and death
crushed her spirit.  He possessed rare dramatic talent, and would have
made a brilliant mark in the theatrical world.  This is positively all
that I know about him, having left him a mere school-boy, when I went
with my father to California in 1852.  On my return in 1856 we were
separated by professional engagements, which kept him mostly in the
South while I was employed in the Eastern and Northern states.
I do not believe any of the wild, romantic stories published in the
papers concerning him; but of course he may have been engaged in
political matters of which I know nothing.  All his theatrical friends
speak of him as a poor crazy boy, and such his family think of him.  I
am sorry I can afford you no further light on the subject.  Very truly
yours,
ADVICE TO A YOUNG ACTOR
[TO WALTER THOMAS]
NEW YORK, August 28, 1889.
MY DEAR MR. THOMAS:
I was surprised to learn that your engagement with Mr. Barrett is
terminated, and am sorry for the cause, although I believe the result
will be to your advantage.  Your chances for promotion will be better
in a company that is not confined to so limited a repertoire as mine,
in which so few opportunities occur for the proper exercise of
youthful talent.  A frequent change of role, and of the lighter
sort–especially such as one does not like forcing one’s self to use
the very utmost of his ability in the performance of–is the training
requisite for a mastery of the actor’s art.
I had seven years’ apprenticeship at it, during which most of my
labour was in the field of comedy–"walking gentleman,” burlesque, and
low comedy parts–the while my soul was yearning for high tragedy.  I
did my best with all that I was cast for, however, and the unpleasant
experience did me a world of good.  Had I followed my own bent, I
would have been, long ago, a “crushed tragedian.”
I will, as you request, give you a line to Mr. Palmer, and I hope you
may obtain a position that will afford you the necessary practice.
With best wishes.  Truly yours,
EDWIN BOOTH.
Continue...

This full text of 
Library of Little Masterpieces: 19th Century Actor Autobiographies, edited by George Iles,
is in the public domain.


Also see: Acting: The First Six Lessons.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
You: On A Diet: The Owner's Manual for Waist ManagementBy Mehmet C. OzAt Amazon
