


There was not a sound.  That stillness, weird, unnerving, that
permeated, as it were, everywhere through that mysterious house,
was, if that were possible, accentuated now.  The four masked men in
evening dress, five including their leader, for the man who had
appeared in that other room with the rabbit was not here, were as
silent, as motionless, as the dead man who was lashed there in the
chair.  And to Jimmie Dale it seemed at first as though his brain,
stunned and stupefied at the shock, refused its functions, and left
him groping blindly, vaguely, with only a sort of dull, subconscious
realisation of menace and a deadly peril, imminent, hanging over
him.
He tried to rouse himself mentally, to prod his brain to action, to
pit it in a fight for life against these self-confessed criminals
and murderers with their mask of culture, who surrounded him now.
Was there a way out?  What was it the Tocsin had said–"the most
powerful and pitiless organisation of criminals the world has ever
known–the stake a fortune of millions–her life!”  There had,
indeed, been no overemphasis in the words she had used!  They had
taken pains themselves to make that ominously clear, these men!
Every detail of the strange house, with its luxurious furnishings,
its cleverly contrived appointments, breathed a horribly suggestive
degree of power, a deadly purpose, and an organisation swayed by a
master mind; and, grim evidence of the merciless, inexorable length
to which they would go, was the ghastly white face of the dead
chauffeur, bound hand and foot, in the chair before him!
That EMPTY glass in the hand of one of the men!  He could not take
his eyes from it–except as his eyes were drawn magnetically to that
FULL glass in the hand of one of the others.  What height of
sardonic irony!  He was to drink that other glass, to die because he
refused to answer questions that for years, with every resource at
his command, risking his liberty, his wealth, his name, his life,
with everything that he cared for thrown into the scales, he had
struggled to solve–and failed!
And then the leader spoke.
“Mr. Dale,” he said, with cold significance, “I regret to admit that
your pseudo taxicab driver was so ill-advised as to refuse to answer
the SAME questions that I have put to you.”
Five to one!  That was the only way out–and it was hopeless.  It
was the only way out, because, convinced that he could answer those
questions if he wanted to, these men were in deadly earnest; it was
hopeless, because they were–five to one!  And probably there were
as many more, twice or three times as many more within call.  But
what did it matter how many more there were!  He could fight until
he was overpowered, that was all he could do, and the five could
accomplish that.  Still, if he could knock the full glass out of
that man’s hand, and gain the door, then perhaps–he turned quickly,
as the door opened.  It was as though they had read his thoughts.  A
number of men were grouped outside in the corridor, then the door
closed again with a cordon ranged against it inside the room; and at
the same instant his arms and wrists were caught in a powerful grasp
by the two men immediately behind him, who all along had enacted the
role of guards.
Again the leader spoke.
“I will repeat the questions,” he said sharply.  “Where is the woman
whose ring was found on that man there in the chair?  And where is
the package that you two men had with you in the taxicab to-night?”
Jimmie Dale glanced from the tall, straight, immaculately clothed
figure of the speaker, from the threatening smile on the set lips
that just showed under the edge of the mask, to the dead man in the
chair.  He had faced the prospect of death before many times, but it
had come with the heat of passion accompanying it, it had come
quickly, abruptly, with every faculty called into action to combat
it, without time to dwell upon it, to sift, weigh, or measure its
meaning, and if there had been fear it had been subordinate to other
emotions.  But it was different now.  He could not, of course,
answer those questions; nor, he was doggedly conscious, would he
have answered them if he could–and there was no middle course.
Death, within the next few moments, stared him in the face; and it
seemed curiously irrelevant that, in a sort of unnatural calmness,
he should be attempting to analyse his feelings and emotions
concerning it.  All his life it had seemed to him that the acme of
human mental torture was the cell of a condemned criminal, with the
horror of its hopelessness, with the time to dwell upon it; and that
the acme of that torture itself must be that awful moment
immediately preceding execution, when anticipation at last was to
merge into soul-sickening reality.
Strange that thought should come!  Strange that he should be framing
a brain picture of such a scene, vivid, minute in detail!  No–not
strange.  He was picturing himself.  The analogy was not perfect, it
was true, he had not had the months, weeks, days and hours of
suspense; but it was perfect enough to bring home to him with
appalling force the realisation of his position.  He was standing as
a condemned man might stand in those last, final moments, those
moments which he had imagined must be the most terrible that could
exist in life; but that dismay of soul, the horror, the terror were
not his–there was, instead, a smouldering fury, a passionate
amazement that it was his own life that was threatened.  It seemed
impossible that it could be his voice that was speaking now in such
quiet, measured tones.
“Is it worth while, will it convince you now, any more than before,
to repeat that there is some mistake here?  I am no more able to
answer your questions than you are yourselves.  I never saw that man
in the chair there in my life until the moment that I hailed him in
his cab to-night.  I do not know who the woman is to whom that ring
belongs, much less do I know where she is.  And if there was a
package of any sort in the taxicab, as you state, I never saw it.”
The lips under the mask curved into a lupine smile.
“Think well, Mr. Dale!”  The man’s voice was low, menacing.
“Ethically, if you so choose to consider it, your refusal may be the
act of a brave man; practically, it is the act of–a fool.  Now–
your answer!”
“I have answered you,” said Jimmie Dale–and, relaxing the muscles
in his arms, let them hang limply for an instant in the grip of the
two men behind him.  “I have no other answer.”
It was only a sign, a motion of the leader’s hand–but with it,
quick as a lightning flash, Jimmie Dale was in action.  The limp
arms tautened into steel as he wrenched them loose, and, whirling
around, he whipped his fist to the chin of one of the two guards.
In an instant, with the blow, as the man staggered backward, the
room was in pandemonium.  There was a rush from the door, and two,
three, four leaping forms hurled themselves upon Jimmie Dale.  He
shook them off–and they came again.  There was no chance
ultimately, he knew that; it was only the elemental within him that
rose in fierce revolt at the thought of tame submission, that bade
him sell his life as dearly as he could.  Panting, gasping for
breath, dragging them by sheer strength as they clung to him, he got
his back to the wall, fighting with the savage fury and abandon of a
wild cat.
But it could not last.  Where one man went down before him, two
remorselessly appeared–the room seemed filled with men–they poured
in through the door–he laughed at them in a half-demented way–more
and more of them came–there was no play for his arms, no room to
fight–they seemed so close around him, so many of them upon him,
that he could not breathe–and he was bending, being crushed down as
by an intolerable weight.  And then his feet were jerked from
beneath him, he crashed to the floor, and, in another moment, bound
hand and foot, he was tied into a chair beside that other chair
whose grim occupant sat in such ghastly apathy of the scene.
The room cleared instantly of all but the original five.  His head
was drawn suddenly, violently backward, and clamped in that
position; and a metal instrument, forced into his mouth, while his
lips bled in their resistance, pried jaws apart and held them open.
“One drop!” the leader ordered curtly.
The man with the full glass bent over him, and dipped a glass rod
into the liquid.  The drop glistened a ruby red on the end of the
rod–and fell with a sharp, acrid, burning sensation upon Jimmie
Dale’s tongue.
For a moment Jimmie Dale’s animation, mental and physical, seemed
swept away from him in, as it were, a hiatus of hideous suspense.
What was it to be like this passing?  Why did it not act at once, as
it had acted on the rabbit they had showed him in the other room?
Yes, he remembered!  It took more than one drop for a man; and
besides, this was diluted.  One drop had no effect on a man; it
required–  Good God, ONE DROP EVEN OF THIS WAS ENOUGH?  He strained
forward in the chair until the sweat in great beads sprang from his
forehead, strained and fought and tore at his bonds in a paroxysm of
madness to free himself while there still remained a little
strength.  There was something filming before his eyes, a numbed
feeling was creeping through his limbs, robbing them, sapping them
of their vitality and power.  He felt himself slipping away into a
state of utter weakness, and his brain began to grow confused.
A voice seemed to float in the air near him:  “For the last time–
will you answer?”
With a supreme effort, Jimmie Dale strove to rally his tottering
senses.  Did they not understand the stupendous mockery of their
questions?  Did they not understand that he did not know?  He had
told them so–perhaps he had better tell them so again.
“I–”  He tried to speak, and found the words thick upon his tongue.
“I–do not–know.”
The glass itself was thrust abruptly between his lips.  Some of the
contents spilled and trickled upon his chin, and then a flood of it,
burning, fiery, poured down his throat.  A flood of it–and it
needed but THREE drops and there had been TEN in the glass!
So this was death–a hazy, nebulous thing!  There was no pain.  It
was like–like–nothingness.  And out of the nothingness SHE came.
Strange that she should come!  Alone she had fought these fiends and
outwitted them for–how long was it?  Three years!  She would be
more than ever alone now.  Pray God she did not finally fall into
their clutches!
How it burned now, that fatal draught they had forced down his
throat, and how it gripped at him and seemed to eat and bore its way
into the very tissues!  It was the end, and–no!  It was STIMULATING
him!  Strength seemed to be returning to his limbs; it seemed as
though he were being carried, as though the bonds about him were
being loosened; and now his brain seemed to be growing clearer.
He roused up with a startled exclamation.  He was back in the same
room in which he had first returned to consciousness after the
accident.  He was on the same couch.  The same masked figure was at
the same desk.  Had he been dreaming?  Was this then only some
horrible, ghastly nightmare through which he had passed?
No, it had been real enough; his clothes, rent and torn, and the
blood upon his hands, where the skin had been scraped from his
knuckles in the fight, bore evidence to that.  He must then have
lost consciousness for a while, though it seemed to him that at no
moment, hazy, irrational though his brain might have been, had he
become entirely oblivious to what was taking place around him.  And
yet it must have been so!
The eyes from behind the mask were fixed steadily upon him, and
below the mask there was the hard, unpleasant set to the lips that
Jimmie Dale had grown accustomed to expect.
The man spoke abruptly.
“That you find yourself alive, Mr. Dale,” he said grimly, “is no
confession of weakness upon the part of those with whom you have had
to deal here.  To bear witness to that there is one who is not
alive, as you have seen.  That man we knew.  With you it was
somewhat different.  Your presence in the taxicab was only
suspicious.  There was always the possibility that you might be one
of those ubiquitous ’innocent bystanders.’  Your name, your
position, the improbability that you could have anything in common
with–shall we say, the matter that so deeply interests us?–was all
in your favour.  However, presumption and probability are the tools
of fools.  We do not depend upon them–we apply the test.  And
having applied the test, we are convinced that you have told the
truth–that is all.”
He rose from his chair brusquely.  “I shall not apologise to you for
what has happened.  I doubt very much if you are in a frame of mind
to accept anything of the sort.  I imagine, rather, that you are
promising yourself that we shall pay, and pay dearly, for this–
that, among other things, we shall answer for the murder of that man
in the other room.  All this will be quite within your province, Mr.
Dale–and quite fruitless.  To-morrow morning the story that you are
preparing to tell now would sound incredible even in your own ears;
furthermore, as we shall take pains to see that you leave this place
with as little knowledge of its location as you obtained when you
arrived, your story, even if believed, would do little service to
you and less harm to us.  I think of nothing more, Mr. Dale, except–"
There was a whimsical smile on the lips now.  “Ah, yes, the
matter of your clothes.  We can, and shall be glad to make
reparation to you to the slight extent of offering you a new suit
before you go.”
Jimmie Dale scowled.  Sick, shaken, and weak as he was, the cool,
imperturbable impudence of the man was fast growing unbearable.
The man laughed.  “I am sure you will not refuse, Mr. Dale–since we
insist.  The condition of the clothes you have on at present might–
I say ’might’–in a measure support your story with some degree of
tangible evidence.  It is not at all likely, of course; but we
prefer to discount even so remote a possibility.  When you have
changed, you will be motored back to your home.  I bid you good-
night, Mr. Dale.”
Jimmie Dale rubbed his eyes.  The man was gone–through a door at
the rear of the desk, a door that he had not noticed before, that
was not even in evidence now, that was simply a movable section of
the wall panelling–and for an instant Jimmie Dale experienced a
sense of sickening impotence.  It was as though he stood
defenceless, unarmed, and utterly at the mercy of some venomous
power that could crush what it would remorselessly and at will in
its might.
The place was a veritable maze, a lair of hellish cleverness.  He
had no illusions now, he laboured under no false estimate of either
the ingenuity or the resources of this inhuman nest of vultures to
whom murder was no more than a matter of detail.  And it was against
these men that henceforth he was to match his wits!  There could be
no truce, no armistice.  It was their lives, or hers, or his!  Well,
he was alive now, the first round was over, and so far he had won.
His brows furrowed suddenly.  Had he?  He was not so sure, after
all.  He was conscious of a disquieting, premonitory intuition that,
in some way which he could not explain, the honours were not
entirely his.
He was apparently–the “apparently” was a mental reservation–quite
alone in the room.  He got up from the couch and walked shakily
across the floor to the desk.  A revolver lay invitingly upon the
blotting pad.  It was his own, the one they had taken from him after
the accident.  Jimmie Dale picked it up, examined it–and smiled a
little sarcastically at himself for his trouble.  It was unloaded,
of course.  He was twirling it in his hand, as a man, masked as
every one in the house was masked, and carrying a neatly folded suit
over his arm, entered from the corridor.
“The car is ready as soon as you are dressed,” announced the other
briefly.  He laid the clothes upon the couch–and settled himself
significantly in a chair.
Jimmie Dale hesitated.  Then, with a shrug of his shoulders,
recrossed the room, and began to remove his torn garments.  What was
the use!  They would certainly have their own way in the end.  It
wasn’t worth another fight, and there was nothing to be gained by a
refusal except to offer a sop to his own exasperation.
He dressed quickly, in what proved to be an exceedingly well-fitting
suit; and finally turned tentatively to the man in the chair.
The other stood up, and produced a heavy black silk scarf.
“If you have no objections,” he said curtly, “I’ll tie this over
your eyes.”
Again Jimmie Dale shrugged his shoulders.
“I am glad enough to get out on any conditions,” he answered
caustically.
“’Fortunate’ would be the better word,” rejoined the other
meaningly–and, deftly knotting the scarf, led Jimmie Dale
blindfolded from the room.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
