
Illustration by Peter Newell
Cover of Mr. Munchausen
(J. K. Bangs, 1901)




  The Baron crosses the Thames without the assistance of a bridge,
  ship, boat, balloon, or even his own will: rouses himself after a
  long nap, and destroys a monster who lived upon the destruction of
  others.
My first visit to England was about the beginning of the present
king’s reign. I had occasion to go down to Wapping, to see some goods
shipped, which I was sending to some friends at Hamburgh; after that
business was over, I took the Tower Wharf in my way back. Here I found
the sun very powerful, and I was so much fatigued that I stepped into
one of the cannon to compose me, where I fell fast asleep. This was
about noon: it was the fourth of June; exactly at one o’clock these
cannon were all discharged in memory of the day. They had been all
charged that morning, and having no suspicion of my situation, I was
shot over the houses on the opposite side of the river, into a
farmer’s yard, between Bermondsey and Deptford, where I fell upon a
large hay-stack, without waking, and continued there in a sound sleep
till hay became so extravagantly dear (which was about three months
after), that the farmer found it his interest to send his whole stock
to market: the stack I was reposing upon was the largest in the yard,
containing above five hundred load; they began to cut that first. I
woke with the voices of the people who had ascended the ladders to
begin at the top, and got up, totally ignorant of my situation: in
attempting to run away I fell upon the farmer to whom the hay
belonged, and broke his neck, yet received no injury myself. I
afterwards found, to my great consolation, that this fellow was a most
detestable character, always keeping the produce of his grounds for
extravagant markets.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Surprising Adventures of Baron Munchausen” (by Rudolph Erich Raspe, published in 1895) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Surprising Adventures of Baron Munchausen (Alan Rodgers Books)By Rudolph Erich RaspeAt Amazon
