


Among New York’s fashionable and ultra-exclusive clubs, the St.
James stood an acknowledged leader–more men, perhaps, cast an
envious eye at its portals, of modest and unassuming taste, as they
passed by on Fifth Avenue, than they did at any other club upon the
long list that the city boasts.  True, there were more expensive
clubs upon whose membership roll scintillated more stars of New
York’s social set, but the St. James was distinctive.  It guaranteed
a man, so to speak–that is, it guaranteed a man to be innately a
gentleman.  It required money, it is true, to keep up one’s
membership, but there were many members who were not wealthy, as
wealth is measured nowadays–there were many, even, who were pressed
sometimes to meet their dues and their house accounts, but the
accounts were invariably promptly paid.  No man, once in, could ever
afford, or ever had the desire, to resign from the St. James Club.
Its membership was cosmopolitan; men of every walk in life passed in
and out of its doors, professional men and business men, physicians,
artists, merchants, authors, engineers, each stamped with the
“hall mark” of the St. James, an innate gentleman.  To receive a two
weeks’ out-of-town visitor’s card to the St. James was something to
speak about, and men from Chicago, St. Louis, or San Francisco spoke
of it with a sort of holier-than-thou air to fellow members of their
own exclusive clubs, at home again.
Is there any doubt that Jimmie Dale was a gentleman–an INNATE
gentleman?  Jimmie Dale’s father had been a member of the St. James
Club, and one of the largest safe manufacturers of the United
States, a prosperous, wealthy man, and at Jimmie Dale’s birth he had
proposed his son’s name for membership.  It took some time to get
into the St. James; there was a long waiting list that neither
money, influence, nor pull could alter by so much as one iota.  Men
proposed their sons’ names for membership when they were born as
religiously as they entered them upon the city’s birth register.  At
twenty-one Jimmie Dale was elected to membership; and, incidentally,
that same year, graduated from Harvard.  It was Mr. Dale’s desire
that his son should enter the business and learn it from the ground
up, and Jimmie Dale, for four years thereafter, had followed his
father’s wishes.  Then his father died.  Jimmie Dale had leanings
toward more artistic pursuits than business.  He was credited with
sketching a little, writing a little; and he was credited with
having received a very snug amount from the combine to which he sold
out his safe-manufacturing interests.  He lived a bachelor life–his
mother had been dead many years–in the house that his father had
left him on Riverside Drive, kept a car or two and enough servants
to run his menage smoothly, and serve a dinner exquisitely when he
felt hospitably inclined.
Could there be any doubt that Jimmie Dale was innately a gentleman?
It was evening, and Jimmie Dale sat at a small table in the corner
of the St. James Club dining room.  Opposite him sat Herman
Carruthers, a young man of his own age, about twenty-six, a leading
figure in the newspaper world, whose rise from reporter to managing
editor of the morning NEWS-ARGUS within the short space of a few
years had been almost meteoric.
They were at coffee and cigars, and Jimmie Dale was leaning back in
his chair, his dark eyes fixed interestedly on his guest.
Carruthers, intently engaged in trimming his cigar ash on the edge
of the Limoges china saucer of his coffee set, looked up with an
abrupt laugh.
“No; I wouldn’t care to go on record as being an advocate of crime,"
he said whimsically; “that would never do.  But I don’t mind
admitting quite privately that it’s been a positive regret to me
that he has gone.”
“Made too good ’copy’ to lose, I suppose?” suggested Jimmie Dale
quizzically.  “Too bad, too, after working up a theatrical name like
that for him–the Gray Seal–rather unique!  Who stuck that on him–
you?”
Carruthers laughed–then, grown serious, leaned toward Jimmie Dale.
“You don’t mean to say, Jimmie, that you don’t know about that, do
you?” he asked incredulously.  “Why, up to a year ago the papers
were full of him.”
“I never read your beastly agony columns,” said Jimmie Dale, with a
cheery grin.
“Well,” said Carruthers, “you must have skipped everything but the
stock reports then.”
“Granted,” said Jimmie Dale.  “So go on, Carruthers, and tell me
about him–I dare say I may have heard of him, since you are so
distressed about it, but my memory isn’t good enough to contradict
anything you may have to say about the estimable gentleman, so
you’re safe.”
Carruthers reverted to the Limoges saucer and the tip of his cigar.
“He was the most puzzling, bewildering, delightful crook in the
annals of crime,” said Carruthers reminiscently, after a moment’s
silence.  “Jimmie, he was the king-pin of them all.  Clever isn’t
the word for him, or dare-devil isn’t either.  I used to think
sometimes his motive was more than half for the pure deviltry of it,
to laugh at the police and pull the noses of the rest of us that
were after him.  I used to dream nights about those confounded gray
seals of his–that’s where he got his name; he left every job he
ever did with a little gray paper affair, fashioned diamond-shaped,
stuck somewhere where it would be the first thing your eyes would
light upon when you reached the scene, and–”
“Don’t go so fast,” smiled Jimmie Dale.  “I don’t quite get the
connection.  What did you have to do with this–er–Gray Seal
fellow?  Where do you come in?”
“I?  I had a good deal to do with him,” said Carruthers grimly.  “I
was a reporter when he first broke loose, and the ambition of my
life, after I began really to appreciate what he was, was to get
him–and I nearly did, half a dozen times, only–”
“Only you never quite did, eh?” cut in Jimmie Dale slyly.  “How near
did you get, old man?  Come on, now, no bluffing; did the Gray Seal
ever even recognise you as a factor in the hare-and-hound game?”
“You’re flicking on the raw, Jimmie,” Carruthers answered, with a
wry grimace.  “He knew me, all right, confound him!  He favoured me
with several sarcastic notes–I’ll show ’em to you some day–
explaining how I’d fallen down and how I could have got him if I’d
done something else.”  Carruthers’ fist came suddenly down on the
table.  “And I would have got him, too, if he had lived.”
“Lived!” ejaculated Jimmie Dale.  “He’s dead, then?”
“Yes,” averted Carruthers; “he’s dead.”
“H’m!” said Jimmie Dale facetiously.  “I hope the size of the wreath
you sent was an adequate tribute of your appreciation.”
“I never sent any wreath,” returned Carruthers, “for the very simple
reason that I didn’t know where to send it, or when he died.  I said
he was dead because for over a year now he hasn’t lifted a finger.”
“Rotten poor evidence, even for a newspaper,” commented Jimmie Dale.
“Why not give him credit for having, say–reformed?”
Carruthers shook his head.  “You don’t get it at all, Jimmie,” he
said earnestly.  “The Gray Seal wasn’t an ordinary crook–he was a
classic.  He was an artist, and the art of the thing was in his
blood.  A man like that could no more stop than he could stop
breathing–and live.  He’s dead; there’s nothing to it but that–
he’s dead.  I’d bet a year’s salary on it.”
“Another good man gone wrong, then,” said Jimmie Dale capriciously.
“I suppose, though, that at least you discovered the ’woman in the
case’?”
Carruthers looked up quickly, a little startled; then laughed
shortly.
“What’s the matter?” inquired Jimmie Dale.
“Nothing,” said Carruthers.  “You kind of got me for a moment,
that’s all.  That’s the way those infernal notes from the Gray Seal
used to end up: ’Find the lady, old chap; and you’ll get me.’  He
had a damned patronising familiarity that would make you squirm.”
“Poor old Carruthers!” grinned Jimmie Dale.  “You did take it to
heart, didn’t you?”
“I’d have sold my soul to get him–and so would you, if you had been
in my boots,” said Carruthers, biting nervously at the end of his
cigar.
“And been sorry for it afterward,” supplied Jimmie Dale.
“Yes, by Jove, you’re right!” admitted Carruthers, “I suppose I
should.  I actually got to love the fellow–it was the GAME, really,
that I wanted to beat.”
“Well, and how about this woman?  Keep on the straight and narrow
path, old man,” prodded Jimmie Dale.
“The woman?” Carruthers smiled.  “Nothing doing!  I don’t believe
there was one–he wouldn’t have been likely to egg the police and
reporters on to finding her if there had been, would he?  It was a
blind, of course.  He worked alone, absolutely alone.  That’s the
secret of his success, according to my way of thinking.  There was
never so much as an indication that he had had an accomplice in
anything he ever did.”
Jimmie Dale’s eyes travelled around the club’s homelike, perfectly
appointed room.  He nodded to a fellow member here and there, then
his eyes rested musingly on his guest again.
Carruthers was staring thoughtfully at his coffee cup.
“He was the prince of crooks and the father of originality,"
announced Carruthers abruptly, following the pause that had ensued.
“Half the time there wasn’t any more getting at the motive for the
curious things he did, than there was getting at the Gray Seal
himself.”
“Carruthers,” said Jimmy Dale, with a quick little nod of approval,
“you’re positively interesting to-night.  But, so far, you’ve been
kind of scouting around the outside edges without getting into the
thick of it.  Let’s have some of your experiences with the Gray Seal
in detail; they ought to make ripping fine yarns.”
“Not to-night, Jimmie,” said Carruthers; “it would take too long."
He pulled out his watch mechanically as he spoke, glanced at it–and
pushed back his chair.  “Great Scott!” he exclaimed.  “It’s nearly
half-past nine.  I’d no idea we had lingered so long over dinner.
I’ll have to hurry; we’re a morning paper, you know, Jimmie.”
“What!  Really!  Is it as late as that.”  Jimmie Dale rose from his
chair as Carruthers stood up.  “Well, if you must–”
“I must,” said Carruthers, with a laugh.
“All right, O slave.”  Jimmie Dale laughed back–and slipped his
hand, a trick of their old college days together, through
Carruthers’ arm as they left the room.
He accompanied Carruthers downstairs to the door of the club, and
saw his guest into a taxi; then he returned inside, sauntered
through the billiard room, and from there into one of the cardrooms,
where, pressed into a game, he played several rubbers of bridge
before going home.
It was, therefore, well on toward midnight when Jimmie Dale arrived
at his house on Riverside Drive, and was admitted by an elderly
manservant.
“Hello, Jason,” said Jimmie Dale pleasantly.  “You still up!”
“Yes, sir,” replied Jason, who had been valet to Jimmie Dale’s
father before him.  “I was going to bed, sir, at about ten o’clock,
when a messenger came with a letter.  Begging your pardon, sir, a
young lady, and–”
“Jason"–Jimmie Dale flung out the interruption, sudden, quick,
imperative–"what did she look like?”
“Why–why, I don’t exactly know as I could describe her, sir,"
stammered Jason, taken aback.  “Very ladylike, sir, in her dress and
appearance, and what I would call, sir, a beautiful face.”
“Hair and eyes–what color?” demanded Jimmie Dale crisply.  “Nose,
lips, chin–what shape?”
“Why, sir,” gasped Jason, staring at his master, “I–I don’t rightly
know.  I wouldn’t call her fair or dark, something between.  I
didn’t take particular notice, and it wasn’t overlight outside the
door.”
“It’s too bad you weren’t a younger man, Jason,” commented Jimmie
Dale, with a curious tinge of bitterness in his voice.  “I’d have
given a year’s income for your opportunity to-night, Jason.”
“Yes, sir,” said Jason helplessly.
“Well, go on,” prompted Jimmie Dale.  “You told her I wasn’t home,
and she said she knew it, didn’t she?  And she left the letter that
I was on no account to miss receiving when I got back, though there
was no need of telephoning me to the club–when I returned would do,
but it was imperative that I should have it then–eh?”
“Good Lord, sir!” ejaculated Jason, his jaw dropped, that’s exactly
what she did say.”
“Jason,” said Jimmie Dale grimly, “listen to me.  If ever she comes
here again, inveigle her in.  If you can’t inveigle her, use force;
capture her, pull her in, do anything–do anything, do you hear?
Only don’t let her get away from you until I’ve come.”
Jason gazed at his master as though the other had lost his reason.
“Use force, sir?” he repeated weakly–and shook his head.  “You–you
can’t mean that, sir.”
“Can’t I?” inquired Jimmie Dale, with a mirthless smile.  “I mean
every word of it, Jason–and if I thought there was the slightest
chance of her giving you the opportunity, I’d be more imperative
still.  As it is–where’s the letter?”
“On the table in your studio, sir,” said Jason, mechanically.
Jimmie Dale started toward the stairs–then turned and came back to
where Jason, still shaking his head heavily, had been gazing
anxiously after his master.  Jimmie Dale laid his hand on the old
man’s shoulder.
“Jason,” he said kindly, with a swift change of mood, “you’ve been a
long time in the family–first with father, and now with me.  You’d
do a good deal for me, wouldn’t you?”
“I’d do anything in the world for you, Master Jim,” said the old man
earnestly.
“Well, then, remember this,” said Jimmie Dale slowly, looking into
the other’s eyes, “remember this–keep your mouth shut and your eyes
open.  It’s my fault.  I should have warned you long ago, but I
never dreamed that she would ever come here herself.  There have
been times when it was practically a matter of life and death to me
to know who that woman is that you saw to-night.  That’s all, Jason.
Now go to bed.”
“Master Jim,” said the old man simply, “thank you, sir, thank you
for trusting me.  I’ve dandled you on my knee when you were a baby,
Master Jim.  I don’t know what it’s about, and it isn’t for me to
ask.  I thought, sir, that maybe you were having a little fun with
me.  But I know now, and you can trust me, Master Jim, if she ever
comes again.”
“Thank you, Jason,” said Jimmie Dale, his hand closing with an
appreciative pressure on the other’s shoulder “Good-night, Jason.”
Upstairs on the first landing, Jimmie Dale opened a door, closed and
locked it behind him–and the electric switch clicked under his
fingers.  A glow fell softly from a cluster of shaded ceiling
lights.  It was a large room, a very large room, running the entire
depth of the house, and the effect of apparent disorder in the
arrangement of its appointments seemed to breathe a sense of charm.
There were great cozy, deep, leather-covered lounging chairs, a
huge, leather-covered davenport, and an easel or two with half-
finished sketches upon them; the walls were panelled, the panels of
exquisite grain and matching; in the centre of the room stood a
flat-topped rosewood desk; upon the floor was a dark, heavy velvet
rug; and, perhaps most inviting of all, there was a great, old-
fashioned fireplace at one side of the room.
For an instant Jimmie Dale remained quietly by the door, as though
listening.  Six feet he stood, muscular in every line of his body,
like a well-trained athlete with no single ounce of superfluous fat
about him–the grace and ease of power in his poise.  His strong,
clean-shaven face, as the light fell upon it now, was serious–a
mood that became him well–the firm lips closed, the dark, reliant
eyes a little narrowed, a frown on the broad forehead, the square
jaw clamped.
Then abruptly he walked across the room to the desk, picked up an
envelope that lay upon it, and, turning again, dropped into the
nearest lounging chair.
There had been no doubt in his mind, none to dispel.  It was
precisely what he had expected from almost the first word Jason had
spoken.  It was the same handwriting, the same texture of paper, and
there was the same old haunting, rare, indefinable fragrance about
it.  Jimmie Dale’s hands turned the envelope now this way, now that,
as he looked at it.  Wonderful hands were Jimmie Dale’s, with long,
slim, tapering fingers whose sensitive tips seemed now as though
they were striving to decipher the message within.
He laughed suddenly, a little harshly, and tore open the envelope.
Five closely written sheets fell into his hand.  He read them
slowly, critically, read them over again; and then, his eyes on the
rug at his feet, he began to tear the paper into minute pieces
between his fingers, depositing the pieces, as he tore them, upon
the arm of his chair.  The five sheets demolished, his fingers
dipped into the heap of shreds on the arm of the chair and tore them
over and over again, tore them until they were scarcely larger than
bits of confetti, tore at them absently and mechanically, his eyes
never shifting from the rug at his feet.
Then with a shrug of his shoulders, as though rousing himself to
present reality, a curious smile flickering on his lips, he brushed
the pieces of paper into one hand, carried them to the empty
fireplace, laid them down in a little pile, and set them afire.
Lighting a cigarette, he watched them burn until the last glow had
gone from the last charred scrap; then he crunched and scattered
them with the brass-handled fender brush, and, retracing his steps
across the room, flung back a portiere from where it hung before a
little alcove, and dropped on his knees in front of a round, squat,
barrel-shaped safe–one of his own design and planning in the years
when he had been with his father.
His slim, sensitive fingers played for an instant among the knobs
and dials that studded the door, guided, it seemed by the sense of
touch alone–and the door swung open.  Within was another door, with
locks and bolts as intricate and massive as the outer one.  This,
too, he opened; and then from the interior took out a short, thick,
rolled-up leather bundle tied together with thongs.  He rose from
his knees, closed the safe, and drew the portiere across the alcove
again.  With the bundle under his arm, he glanced sharply around the
room, listened intently, then, unlocking the door that gave on the
hall, he switched off the lights and went to his dressing room, that
was on the same floor.  Here, divesting himself quickly of his
dinner clothes, he selected a dark tweed suit with loose-fitting,
sack coat from his wardrobe, and began to put it on.
Dressed, all but his coat and vest, he turned to the leather bundle
that he had placed on a table, untied the thongs, and carefully
opened it out to its full length–and again that curious, cryptic
smile tinged his lips.  Rolled the opposite away from that in which
it had been tied up, the leather strip made a wide belt that went on
somewhat after the fashion of a life preserver, the thongs being
used for shoulder straps–a belt that, once on, the vest would hide
completely, and, fitting close, left no telltale bulge in the outer
garments.  It was not an ordinary belt; it was full of stout-sewn,
up-right little pockets all the way around, and in the pockets
grimly lay an array of fine, blued-steel, highly tempered
instruments–a compact, powerful burglar’s kit.
The slim, sensitive fingers passed with almost a caressing touch
over the vicious little implements, and from one of the pockets
extracted a thin, flat metal case.  This Jimmie Dale opened, and
glanced inside–between sheets of oil paper lay little rows of GRAY,
ADHESIVE, DIAMOND-SHAPED SEALS.
Jimmie Dale snapped the case shut, returned it to its recess, and
from another took out a black silk mask.  He held it up to the light
for examination.
“Pretty good shape after a year,” muttered Jimmie Dale, replacing
it.
He put on the belt, then his vest and coat.  From the drawer of his
dresser he took an automatic revolver and an electric flashlight,
slipped them into his pocket, and went softly downstairs.  From the
hat stand he chose a black slouch hat, pulled it well over his eyes–
and left the house.
Jimmie Dale walked down a block, then hailed a bus and mounted to
the top.  It was late, and he found himself the only passenger.  He
inserted his dime in the conductor’s little resonant-belled cash
receiver, and then settled back on the uncomfortable, bumping,
cushionless seat.
On rattled the bus; it turned across town, passed the Circle, and
headed for Fifth Avenue–but Jimmie Dale, to all appearances, was
quite oblivious of its movements.
It was a year since she had written him.  SHE!  Jimmie Dale did not
smile, his lips were pressed hard together.  Not a very intimate or
personal appellation, that–but he knew her by no other.  It WAS a
woman, surely–the hand-writing was feminine, the diction eminently
so–and had SHE not come herself that night to Jason!  He remembered
the last letter, apart from the one to-night, that he had received
from her.  It was a year ago now–and the letter had been hardly
more than a note.  The police had worked themselves into a frenzy
over the Gray Seal, the papers had grown absolutely maudlin–and she
had written, in her characteristic way:
Things are a little too warm, aren’t they, Jimmie?  Let’s let them
cool for a year.
Since then until to-night he had heard nothing from her.  It was a
strange compact that he had entered into–so strange that it could
never have known, could never know a parallel–unique, dangerous,
bizarre, it was all that and more.  It had begun really through his
connection with his father’s business–the business of manufacturing
safes that should defy the cleverest criminals–when his brains,
turned into that channel, had been pitted against the underworld,
against the methods of a thousand different crooks from Maine to
California, the report of whose every operation had reached him in
the natural course of business, and every one of which he had
studied in minutest detail.  It had begun through that–but at the
bottom of it was his own restless, adventurous spirit.
He had meant to set the police by the ears, using his gray-seal
device both as an added barb and that no innocent bystander of the
underworld, innocent for once, might be involved–he had meant to
laugh at them and puzzle them to the verge of madness, for in the
last analysis they would find only an abortive attempt at crime–and
he had succeeded.  And then he had gone too far–and he had been
caught–by HER.  That string of pearls, which, to study whose effect
facetiously, he had so idiotically wrapped around his wrist, and
which, so ironically, he had been unable to loosen in time and had
been forced to carry with him in his sudden, desperate dash to
escape from Marx’s the big jeweler’s, in Maiden Lane, whose strong
room he had toyed with one night, had been the lever which, AT
FIRST, she had held over him.
The bus was on Fifth Avenue now, and speeding rapidly down the
deserted thoroughfare.  Jimmie Dale looked up at the lighted windows
of the St. James Club as they went by, smiled whimsically, and
shifted in his seat, seeking a more comfortable position.
She had caught him–how he did not know–he had never seen her–did
not know who she was, though time and again he had devoted all his
energies for months at a stretch to a solution of the mystery.  The
morning following the Maiden Lane affair, indeed, before he had
breakfasted, Jason had brought him the first letter from her.  It
had started by detailing his every move of the night before–and it
had ended with an ultimatum: “The cleverness, the originality of the
Gray Seal as a crook lacked but one thing,” she had naively written,
“and that one thing was that his crookedness required a leading
string to guide it into channels that were worthy of his genius."
In a word, SHE would plan the coups, and he would act at her
dictation and execute them–or else how did twenty years in Sing
Sing for that little Maiden Lane affair appeal to him?  He was to
answer by the next morning, a simple “yes” or “no” in the personal
column of the morning NEWS-ARGUS.
A threat to a man like Jimmie Dale was like flaunting a red rag at a
bull, and a rage ungovernable had surged upon him.  Then cold reason
had come.  He was caught–there was no question about that–she had
taken pains to show him that he need make no mistake there.
Innocent enough in his own conscience, as far as actual theft went,
for the pearls would in due course be restored in some way to the
possession of their owner, he would have been unable to make even
his own father, who was alive then, believe in his innocence, let
alone a jury of his peers.  Dishonour, shame, ignominy, a long
prison sentence, stared him in the face, and there was but one
alternative–to link hands with this unseen, mysterious accomplice.
Well, he could at least temporise, he could always “queer” a game in
some specious manner, if he were pushed too far.  And so, in the
next morning’s NEWS-ARGUS, Jimmie Dale had answered “yes.”  And then
had followed those years in which there had been NO temporising, in
which every plan was carried out to the last detail, those years of
curious, unaccountable, bewildering affairs that Carruthers had
spoken of, one on top of another, that had shaken the old
headquarters on Mulberry Street to its foundations, until the Gray
Seal had become a name to conjure with.  And, yes, it was quite
true, he had entered into it all, gone the limit, with an eagerness
that was insatiable.
The bus had reached the lower end of Fifth Avenue, passed through
Washington Square, and stopped at the end of its run.  Jimmie Dale
clambered down from the top, threw a pleasant “good-night” to the
conductor, and headed briskly down the street before him.  A little
later he crossed into West Broadway, and his pace slowed to a
leisurely stroll.
Here, at the upper end of the street, was a conglomerate business
section of rather inferior class, catering doubtless to the poor,
foreign element that congregated west of Broadway proper, and to the
south of Washington Square.  The street was, at first glance,
deserted; it was dark and dreary, with stores and lofts on either
side.  An elevated train roared by overhead, with a thunderous,
deafening clamour.  Jimmie Dale, on the right-hand side of the
street, glanced interestedly at the dark store windows as he went
by.  And then, a block ahead, on the other side, his eyes rested on
an approaching form.  As the other reached the corner and paused,
and the light from the street lamp glinted on brass buttons, Jimmie
Dale’s eyes narrowed a little under his slouch hat.  The policeman,
although nonchalantly swinging a nightstick, appeared to be watching
him.
Jimmie Dale went on half a block farther, stooped to the sidewalk to
tie his shoe, glanced back over his shoulder–the policeman was not
in sight–and slipped like a shadow into the alleyway beside which
he had stopped.
It was another Jimmie Dale now–the professional Jimmie Dale.  Quick
as a cat, active, lithe, he was over a six foot fence in the rear of
a building in a flash, and crouched a black shape, against the back
door of an unpretentious, unkempt, dirty, secondhand shop that
fronted on West Broadway–the last place certainly in all New York
that the managing editor of the NEWS-ARGUS, or any one else, for
that matter, would have picked out as the setting for the second
debut of the Gray Seal.
From the belt around his waist, Jimmie Dale took the black silk
mask, and slipped it on; and from the belt, too, came a little
instrument that his deft fingers manipulated in the lock.  A curious
snipping sound followed.  Jimmie Dale put his weight gradually
against the door.  The door held fast.
“Bolted,” said Jimmie Dale to himself.
The sensitive fingers travelled slowly up and down the side of the
door, seeming to press and feel for the position of the bolt through
an inch of plank–then from the belt came a tiny saw, thin and
pointed at the end, that fitted into the little handle drawn from
another receptacle in the leather girdle beneath the unbuttoned
vest.
Hardly a sound it made as it bit into the door.  Half a minute
passed–there was the faint fall of a small piece of wood–into the
aperture crept the delicate, tapering fingers–came a slight rasping
of metal–then the door swung back, the dark shadow that had been
Jimmie Dale vanished and the door closed again.
A round, white beam of light glowed for an instant–and disappeared.
A miscellaneous, lumbering collection of junk and odds and ends
blocked the entry, leaving no more space than was sufficient for
bare passageway.  Jimmie Dale moved cautiously–and once more the
flashlight in his hand showed the way for an instant–then darkness
again.
The cluttered accumulation of secondhand stuff in the rear gave
place to a little more orderly arrangement as he advanced toward the
front of the store.  Like a huge firefly, the flashlight twinkled,
went out, twinkled again, and went out.  He passed a sort of crude,
partitioned-off apartment that did duty for the establishment’s
office, a sort of little boxed-in place it was, about in the middle
of the floor.  Jimmie Dale’s light played on it for a moment.  but
he kept on toward the front door without any pause.
Every movement was quick, sure, accurate, with not a wasted second.
It had been barely a minute since he had vaulted the back fence.  It
was hardly a quarter of a minute more before the cumbersome lock of
the front door was unfastened, and the door itself pulled
imperceptibly ajar.
He went swiftly back to the office now–and found it even more of a
shaky, cheap affair than it had at first appeared; more like a box
stall with windows around the top than anything else, the windows
doubtless to permit the occupant to overlook the store from the
vantage point of the high stool that stood before a long, battered,
wobbly desk.  There was a door to the place, too, but the door was
open and the key was in the lock.  The ray of Jimmie Dale’s
flashlight swept once around the interior–and rested on an antique,
ponderous safe.
Under the mask Jimmie Dale’s lips parted in a smile that seemed
almost apologetic, as he viewed the helpless iron monstrosity that
was little more than an insult to a trained cracksman.  Then from
the belt came the thin metal case and a pair of tweezers.  He opened
the case, and with the tweezers lifted out one of the gray-coloured,
diamond-shaped seals.  Holding the seal with the tweezers, he
moistened the gummed side with his lips, then laid it on a
handkerchief which he took from his pocket, and clapped the
handkerchief against the front of the safe, sticking the seal
conspicuously into place.  Jimmie Dale’s insignia bore no finger
prints.  The microscopes and magnifying glasses at headquarters had
many a time regretfully assured the police of that fact.
And now his hands and fingers seemed to work like lightning.  Into
the soft iron bit a drill–bit in and through–bit in and through
again.  It was dark, pitch black–and silent.  Not a sound, save the
quick, dull rasp of the ratchet–like the distant gnawing of a
mouse!  Jimmie Dale worked fast–another hole went through the face
of the old-fashioned safe–and then suddenly he straightened up to
listen, every faculty tense, alert, and strained, his body thrown a
little forward.  WHAT WAS THAT!
From the alleyway leading from the street without, through which he
himself had come, sounded the stealthy crunch of feet.  Motionless
in the utter darkness, Jimmie Dale listened–there was a scraping
noise in the rear–someone was climbing the fence that he had
climbed!
In an instant the tools in Jimmie Dale’s hands disappeared into
their respective pockets beneath his vest–and the sensitive fingers
shot to the dial on the safe.
“Too bad,” muttered Jimmie Dale plaintively to himself.  I could
have made such an artistic job of it–I swear I could have cut
Carruthers’ profile in the hole in less than no time–to open it
like this is really taking the poor old thing at a disadvantage.”
He was on his knees now, one ear close to the dial, listening as the
tumblers fell, while the delicate fingers spun the knob unerringly–
the other ear strained toward the rear of the premises.
Came a footstep–a ray of light–a stumble–nearer–the newcomer was
inside the place now, and must have found out that the back door had
been tampered with.  Nearer came the steps–still nearer–and then
the safe door swung open under Jimmie Dale’s hand, and Jimmie Dale,
that he might not be caught like a rat in a trap, darted from the
office–but he had delayed a little too long.
From around the cluttered piles of junk and miscellany swept the
light–full on Jimmie Dale.  Hesitation for the smallest fraction of
a second would have been fatal, but hesitation was something that in
all his life Jimmie Dale had never known.  Quick as a panther in its
spring, he leaped full at the light and the man behind it.  The
rough voice, in surprised exclamation at the sudden discovery of the
quarry, died in a gasp.
There was a crash as the two men met–and the other reeled back
before the impact.  Onto him Jimmie Dale sprang, and his hands flew
for the other’s throat.  It was an officer in uniform!  Jimmie Dale
had felt the brass buttons as they locked.  In the darkness there
was a queer smile on Jimmie Dale’s tight lips.  It was no doubt THE
officer whom he had passed on the other side of the street.
The other was a smaller man than Jimmie Dale, but powerful for his
build–and he fought now with all his strength.  This way and that
the two men reeled, staggered, swayed, panting and gasping; and
then–they had lurched back close to the office door–with a sudden
swing, every muscle brought into play for a supreme effort, Jimmie
Dale hurled the other from him, sending the man sprawling back to
the floor of the office, and in the winking of an eye had slammed
shut the door and turned the key.
There was a bull-like roar, the shrill CHEEP-CHEEP-CHEEP of the
patrolman’s whistle, and a shattering crash as the officer flung his
body against the partition–then the bark of a revolver shot, the
tinkle of breaking glass, as the man fired through the office
window–and past Jimmie Dale, speeding now for the front door, a
bullet hummed viciously.
Out on the street dashed Jimmie Dale, whipping the mask from his
face–and glanced like a hawk around him.  For all the racket, the
neighbourhood had not yet been aroused–no one was in sight.  From
just overhead came the rattle of a downtown elevated train.  In a
hundred-yard sprint, Jimmie Dale raced it a half block to the
station, tore up the steps–and a moment later dropped nonchalantly
into a seat and pulled an evening newspaper from his pocket.
Jimmie Dale got off at the second station down, crossed the street,
mounted the steps of the elevated again, and took the next train
uptown.  His movements appeared to be somewhat erratic–he alighted
at the station next above the one by which he had made his escape.
Looking down the street it was too dark to see much of anything, but
a confused noise as of a gathering crowd reached him from what was
about the location of the secondhand store.  He listened
appreciatively for a moment.
“Isn’t it a perfectly lovely night?” said Jimmie Dale amiably to
himself.  “And to think of that cop running away with the idea that
I didn’t see him when he hid in a doorway after I passed the corner!
Well, well, strange–isn’t it?”
With another glance down the street, a whimsical lift of his
shoulders, he headed west into the dilapidated tenement quarter that
huddled for a handful of blocks near by, just south of Washington
Square.  It was a little after one o’clock in the morning now and
the pedestrians were casual.  Jimmie Dale read the street signs on
the corners as he went along, turned abruptly into an intersecting
street, counted the tenements from the corner as he passed, and–for
the eye of any one who might be watching–opened the street door of
one of them quite as though he were accustomed and had a perfect
right to do so, and went inside.
It was murky and dark within; hot, unhealthy, with lingering smells
of garlic and stale cooking.  He groped for the stairs and started
up.  He climbed one flight, then another–and one more to the top.
Here, treading softly, he made an examination of the landing with a
view, evidently, to obtaining an idea of the location and the number
of doors that opened off from it.
His selection fell on the third door from the head of the stairs–
there were four all told, two apartments of two rooms each.  He
paused for an instant to adjust the black silk mask, tried the door
quietly, found it unlocked, opened it with a sudden, quick, brisk
movement–and, stepping in side, leaned with his back against it.
“Good-morning,” said Jimmie Dale pleasantly.
It was a squalid place, a miserable hole, in which a single
flickering, yellow gas jet gave light.  It was almost bare of
furniture; there was nothing but a couple of cheap chairs, a rickety
table–unpawnable.  A boy, he was hardly more than that, perhaps
twenty-two, from a posture in which he was huddled across the table
with head buried in out-flung arms, sprang with a startled cry to
his feet.
“Good-morning,” said Jimmie Dale again.  “Your name’s Hagan, Bert
Hagan–isn’t it?  And you work for Isaac Brolsky in the secondhand
shop over on West Broadway–don’t you?”
The boy’s lips quivered, and the gaunt, hollow, half-starved face,
white, ashen-white now, was pitiful.
“I–I guess you got me,” he faltered “I–I suppose you’re a plain-
clothes man, though I never knew dicks wore masks.”
“They don’t generally,” said Jimmie Dale coolly.  “It’s a fad of
mine–Bert Hagan.”
The lad, hanging to the table, turned his head away for a moment–
and there was silence.
Presently Hagan spoke again.  “I’ll go,” he said numbly.  I won’t
make any trouble.  Would–would you mind not speaking loud?  I–I
wouldn’t like her to know.”
“Her?” said Jimmie Dale softly.
The boy tiptoed across the room, opened a connecting door a little,
peered inside, opened it a little wider–and looked over his
shoulder at Jimmie Dale.
Jimmie Dale crossed to the boy, looked inside the other room–and
his lip twitched queerly, as the sight sent a quick, hurt throb
through his heart.  A young woman, younger than the boy, lay on a
tumble-down bed, a rag of clothing over her–her face with a
deathlike pallor upon it, as she lay in what appeared to be a
stupor.  She was ill, critically ill; it needed no trained eye to
discern a fact all too apparent to the most casual observer.  The
squalor, the glaring poverty here, was even more pitifully in
evidence than in the other room–only here upon a chair beside the
bed was a cluster of medicine bottles and a little heap of fruit.
Jimmie Dale drew back silently as the boy closed the door.
Hagan walked to the table and picked up his hat.
“I’m–I’m ready,” he said brokenly.  “Let’s go.”
“Just a minute,” said Jimmie Dale.  “Tell us about it.”
“Twon’t take long,” said Hagan, trying to smile.  “She’s my wife.
The sickness took all we had.  I–I kinder got behind in the rent
and things.  They were going to fire us out of here–to-morrow.  And
there wasn’t any money for the medicine, and–and the things she had
to have.  Maybe you wouldn’t have done it–but I did.  I couldn’t
see her dying there for the want of something a little money’d buy–
and–and I couldn’t"–he caught his voice in a little sob–"I
couldn’t see her thrown out on the street like that.”
“And so,” said Jimmie Dale, “instead of putting old Isaac’s cash in
the safe this evening when you locked up, you put it in your pocket
instead–eh?  Didn’t you know you’d get caught?”
“What did it matter?” said the boy.  He was twirling his misshappen
hat between his fingers.  “I knew they’d know it was me in the
morning when old Isaac found it gone, because there wasn’t anybody
else to do it.  But I paid the rent for four months ahead to-night,
and I fixed it so’s she’d have medicine and things to eat.  I was
going to beat it before daylight myself–I"–he brushed his hand
hurriedly across his cheek–"I didn’t want to go–to leave her till
I had to.”
“Well, say"–there was wonderment in Jimmie Dale’s tones, and his
English lapsed into ungrammatical, reassuring vernacular–"ain’t
that queer!  Say, I’m no detective.  Gee, kid, did you think I was?
Say, listen to this!  I cracked old Isaac’s safe half an hour ago–
and I guess there won’t be any idea going around that you got the
money and I pulled a lemon.  Say, I ain’t superstitious, but it
looks like luck meant you to have another chance, don’t it?”
The hat dropped from Hagan’s hands to the floor, and he swayed a
little.
“You–you ain’t a dick!” he stammered.  “Then how’d you know about
me and my name when you found the safe empty?  Who told you?”
A wry grimace spread suddenly over Jimmie Dale’s face beneath the
mask, and he swallowed hard.  Jimmie Dale would have given a good
deal to have been able to answer that question himself.
“Oh, that!” said Jimmie Dale.  “That’s easy–I knew you worked
there.  Say, it’s the limit, ain’t it?  Talk about your luck being
in, why all you’ve got to do is to sit tight and keep your mouth
shut, and you’re safe as a church.  Only say, what are you going to
do about the money, now you’ve got a four months’ start and are kind
of landed on your feet?
“Do?” said the boy.  “I’ll pay it back, little by little.  I meant
to.  I ain’t no–”  He stopped abruptly.
“Crook,” supplied Jimmie Dale pleasantly.  “Spit it right out, kid;
you won’t hurt my feelings none.  Well, I’ll tell you–you’re
talking the way I like to hear you–you pay that back, slide it in
without his knowing it, a bit at a time, whenever you can, and
you’ll never hear a yip out of me; but if you don’t, why it kind of
looks as though I have a right to come down your street and get my
share or know the reason why–eh?”
“Then you never get any share,” said Hagan, with a catch in his
voice.  “I pay it back as fast as I can.”
“Sure,” said Jimmie Dale.  “That’s right–that’s what I said.  Well,
so long–Hagan.”  And Jimmie Dale had opened the door and slipped
outside.
An hour later, in his dressing room in his house on Riverside Drive,
Jimmie Dale was removing his coat as the telephone, a hand
instrument on the table, rang.  Jimmie Dale glanced at it–and
leisurely proceeded to remove his vest.  Again the telephone rang.
Jimmie Dale took off his curious, pocketed leather belt–as the
telephone repeated its summons.  He picked out the little drill he
had used a short while before, and inspected it critically–feeling
its point with his thumb, as one might feel a razor’s blade.  Again
the telephone rang insistently.  He reached languidly for the
receiver, took it off its hook, and held it to his ear.
“Hello!” said Jimmie Dale, with a sleepy yawn.  “Hello!  Hello!  Why
the deuce don’t you yank a man out of bed at two o’clock in the
morning and have done with it, and–eh?  Oh, that you, Carruthers?”
“Yes,” came Carruthers’ voice excitedly.  “Jimmie, listen–listen!
The Gray Seal’s come to life!  He’s just pulled a break on West
Broadway!”
“Good Lord!” gasped Jimmie Dale.  “You don’t say!”
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
