


A moment later, Jimmie Dale stepped forward through the vestibule.
He was quite calm now; a sort of cold, merciless precision in every
movement succeeding the riot of turbulent emotions that had
possessed him as he had entered the house.
The half hour, the maximum length of time before the Magpie would
appear, as he had estimated it when out there under the stoop with
the Tocsin, had dwindled now to perhaps twenty minutes, twenty-five
at the outside.  Twenty-five minutes!  Twenty-five minutes was so
little that for an instant the temptation was strong upon him to
sacrifice, rather than any of those precious minutes, the Magpie
instead!  And then in the darkness, as he stole noiselessly across
the hall, he shook his head.  It would be a cowardly, brutal thing
to do.  What chance would a man with a record like the Magpie’s
stand if caught there?  How easy it would be to shift the murder of
the supposed Henry LaSalle to the Magpie’s shoulders!  Jimmie Dale’s
lips closed firmly.  Self-preservation was, perhaps, the first law,
but he would save the Magpie if he could–the Magpie should have his
chance!  The man might be a criminal, might deserve punishment at
the hands of the law, his liberty might be a menace to the
community–but he was not a murderer, his life forfeit for a crime
he had never committed!
If he, Jimmie Dale, could only in some way have arranged with the
Tocsin out there to keep the Magpie away altogether!  But it could
not be done without arousing the Magpie’s suspicions; and, as a
corollary to that, afterward, with the subsequent events, would
come–the deluge!  The law of the underworld was clear, concise, and
admitting of no appeal on that point; to double cross a pal meant,
sooner or later, a knife thrust, a blackjack, or–  But what
difference did it make what form the execution of the sentence took?
And, since, then, that was out of the question, since he could not
keep the Magpie away without practically risking his own life, the
Magpie at least must have his chance.
Jimmie Dale was at the library door now, that, according to the plan
the Tocsin had drawn for the Magpie, and as he remembered her
description when she had told him her story earlier in the evening,
was just at the foot of the staircase.  How dark it was!  Though the
stairs could be only a few feet away, he could not see them.  And
how intense the silence was again!  Here, where he stood, the
slightest stir from above must have reached him–but there was not a
sound.
His hand felt out for the doorknob, found it, turned it, and pushed
the door open.  He stepped inside the room and closed the door
behind him.  The safe, according to the Tocsin’s plan again, was in
that sort of alcove at the lower end of the library.  Jimmie Dale’s
flashlight played inquisitively about the room.  There was the
window, the only one in the room, the window through which the
Magpie proposed to enter; there was the archway of the alcove, with
its–no, there were no longer any portieres; and there was the safe,
he could see it quite plainly from where he stood at the upper end
of the room.
The flashlight went out for the space of perhaps thirty seconds–
thirty seconds of absolute silence, absolute stillness–then the
round, white ray of the light again, but glistening now on the
nickel knobs and dial of the safe–and Jimmie Dale was on his knees
before it.
A low, scarcely breathed exclamation, that seemed to mingle anxiety
and hesitation, escaped him.  He, who knew the make of every safe in
the country, knew this one for its true worth.  Twenty-five minutes!
Could he open it in that time, let alone with any time to spare!  It
was not like the one in Spider Jack’s; it was the kind that the
Magpie, however clever he might be in his own way, would be forced
to negotiate with “soup,” and, with the attendant noise, double his
chance of discovery and capture–and the responsibility for what
might have happened UPSTAIRS!  No; the Magpie must have his chance!
And, besides, the money in the safe apart, why should not he, Jimmie
Dale, have his own chance, as well?  All this would help.  The
motive–robbery; the perpetrator, there was grim mockery on his lips
now as the light went out and the sensitive fingers closed on the
knob of the dial, the perpetrator–the Gray Seal.  It would afford
excellent food for the violent editorial diatribes under which the
police again would writhe in frenzy!
Stillness again!  Silence!  Only a low, tense breathing; only, so
faint that it could not be heard a foot away, a curious scratching,
as from time to time the supersensitive fingers fell away from the
dial to rub upon the carpet–to increase even their sensitiveness by
setting the nerves to throbbing through the skin surface at the
tips.  And then Jimmie Dale’s head, ear pressed close against the
safe to catch the tumbler’s fall, was lifted–and the flashlight
played again on the dial.
“Twenty-eight and a quarter–left.”
How fast the time went–and how slowly!  Still the black shape
crouched there in the darkness against the safe.  At times, in
strange, ghostly flashes, the nickel dial with the ray upon it
seemed to leap out and glisten through the surrounding blackness; at
times, the quick intake of breath, as from great exertion; at times,
faint, musical little clicks, as, after abortive effort, the dial
whirled, preparatory to a fresh attempt.  And then, at last–a gasp
of relief:
“Ah!”
Came the sound, barely audible, as of steel sliding in well-oiled
grooves, the muffled thud of metal meeting metal as the bolts shot
back–and the heavy door swung outward.
Jimmie Dale stretched his cramped limbs, and wiped the moisture from
his face–then set to work again upon the inner door.  This was an
easier matter–far easier.  Five minutes, perhaps a little more,
went by–and then the inner door was open, and the flashlight’s ray
was flooding the interior of the safe.
A queer little sound, half of astonishment, half of disappointment,
issued from Jimmie Dale’s lips.  There was money here, a great deal
of money, undoubtedly, but there was no such sum as he had, somehow,
fantastically imagined from the Magpie’s evidently overcoloured
story that there would be; there was money, ten packages of
banknotes neatly piled in the bottom compartment–but there was no
half million of dollars!  He picked up one of the packages
hurriedly–and drew in his breath.  After all, there was a great
deal–the notes were of hundred-dollar denomination, and on the
bottom were two one-thousand-dollar bills!  Calculated roughly, if
each of the other nine packages contained a like amount, the total
must exceed a hundred thousand.
And now Jimmie Dale began to work with feverish haste.  From the
leather girdle inside his shirt came the thin metal insignia case–
and a gray seal was stuck firmly on the dial knob of the safe.  This
done, he tucked away the packages of banknotes, some into his
pockets and some inside his shirt; and then quickly ransacked the
interior of the safe, flauntingly spilling the contents of drawers
and pigeonholes out upon the floor.
He stood up, and, leaving the safe door wide open, walked back
across the room to the window, unfastened the catch, and opened the
window an inch or two.  The way was open now for the Magpie!  The
Magpie would have no need to make any noise in forcing an entrance;
he would be able to see almost at a glance that he had been
forestalled–by the Gray Seal; and that, as far as he was concerned,
the game was up.  The Magpie had his chance!  If the Magpie did not
take the hint and make his escape as noiselessly as he had entered–
it was his own fault!  He, Jimmie Dale, had given the Magpie his
chance.
Jimmie Dale turned from the window, and made his way out of the
library to the foot of the stairs, leaving the library door open
behind him.  How long had he been?  Was it more or less than the
twenty-five minutes?  He did not know–only, as yet, the Magpie had
not come, and now perhaps it did not make so much difference.
Where was he going now?  His foot was on the first stair–and
suddenly he drew it back, the cold sweat bursting out on his
forehead.  Where was he going now?  “THE FIRST ROOM ON THE RIGHT AT
THE HEAD OF THE LANDING.”  From his inner consciousness, as it were,
the answer, in all the bald, naked horror that it implied, flashed
upon him.  The first room on the right–THAT man’s room!  God, how
the darkness and the stillness began to palpitate again, and
suddenly seem to shriek out at him over and over the one single,
ghastly word–MURDER!
It had been with him, that thought, all the time he had been working
at the safe; but it had been there then only subconsciously, like
some heavy, nameless dread, subjugated for the moment by the work he
had had to do which had demanded the centred attention of every
faculty he possessed.  But now the moment had come when there was
only THAT before him, only that, nothing else–only that, the man
upstairs in the first room to the right of the landing!
Why did he hesitate?  Why did he stand there while the priceless
moments before daylight came were passing?  The man was a murderer,
a blotch on society, and, his life already forfeited, he was living
now only because the law had not found him out–the man was a
criminal, bloodstained–and his life, because he had taken her
father’s life and had tried to take the Tocsin’s own life, stood
between her and every hope of happiness, robbing her even literally,
in a material sense, of everything that the world could hold for
her!  Why did he hesitate?  It was that man’s life–or hers!  It was
the only way!
He put his foot upon the bottom step again–paused still another
instant–and then began stealthily to mount the stairs.  The
darkness!  There had never been, it seemed, such darkness before!
The stillness–he had never known silence so heavy, so full of
strange, premonitory pulsings; a silence that seemed so
incongruously full of clamouring whispers in his ears!  It must be
those imagined whispers that were affecting his nerve–for now, as
he gained the landing and slipped his automatic from his pocket, his
hand was shaking with a queer twitching motion.
For an instant, fighting for his self-composure, he stood striving
to locate his surroundings through the darkness.  The staircase was
a circular one, making the landing nearly at the front of the house,
and rearward from this, the Tocsin had said, a hallway ran down the
centre, with rooms on either side.  The first room to the right,
therefore, should be just at his hand.  He reached out, feeling
cautiously–there was nothing.  He edged to the right–still
nothing; edged a little farther, a sense of bewilderment growing
upon him, and finally his fingers touched the wall.  It was very
strange!  The hallway must be much wider than he had understood it
to be from what she had said!
He moved along now straight ahead of him, his hand on the wall,
feeling for the door–and with every step his bewilderment
increased.  Surely there must be some mistake–perhaps he had
misunderstood!  He had come fully twice the distance that one would
expect–and yet there was no door.  Ah, what was that?  His fingers
closed on soft, heavy velvet hangings.  These could hardly be in
front of a door, and yet–what else could it be?  He drew the
hangings warily apart, and felt behind them.  It was a window; but
it was shuttered in some way evidently, for he could not see out.
Jimmie Dale stood motionless there for fully a minute.  It seemed
absurd, preposterous, the conviction that was being forced home upon
him–that there were no rooms on the right-hand side of the corridor
at all!  But that was not like the Tocsin, accurate always in the
most minute details.  The room must be still farther along.  He was
tempted to use his flashlight–but that, as long as he could feel
his way, was an unnecessary risk.  A flashlight upstairs, where a
sleeping-room door might be ajar, or even wide open, where some one
wakeful, THAT man himself, perhaps, might see it, was quite another
matter than a flashlight in the closed and deserted library below!
He went on once more, still guiding himself by a light finger touch
upon the wall, passed another portiere similar to the first, and,
after that, another–and finally stopped by bringing up abruptly
against the end wall of the house.  It was certainly very strange!
There WERE no rooms on the right-hand side of the corridor.  And
here, hanging across the end wall, was another of those ubiquitous
velvet portieres.  He parted it, and, a little to his surprise,
found a window that was not shuttered, but that, instead, was
heavily barred by an ornamental grille work.  He could see out,
however, and found that he was looking directly out from the rear of
the house.  A lamp from the side street threw what was undoubtedly
the garage into shadowy outline, and he made out below him a short
stretch of yard between the garage and the house.  He remembered
that now–she had described all that to the Magpie.  There was no
driveway between the front and the rear.  The house being on the
corner, the entrance to the garage was directly from the side
street.  Yes, she had described all that exactly as it was, but–he
dropped the portiere and faced around, carrying his hand in a
nonplused way to his eyes–but here, upstairs, within the house, it
was not as she had said it was at all!  What did it mean?  She could
not have blundered so egregiously as that, unless–he caught his
breath suddenly–unless she had done so intentionally!  Was that it?
Had she surmised, formed a suspicion of what was in his mind, of
what he meant to do–and taken this means of defeating it?  If so–
well, it was too late for that now!  There was one way–only one
way!  Whatever the cost, whatever it might mean for him–there was
only one way out for her.
His flashlight was in his hand now, and the round, white ray shot
down the corridor–seemed suddenly to falter unsteadily–swept in
through an open door that was almost beside him–and then, as though
a nerveless hand held it, the ray dropped and played shakily on the
toe of his boot before it went out.
A stifled cry rose to his lips.  Something cold, like a hand of ice,
seemed to clutch at his heart.  Those portieres, the wide, richly
carpeted corridor!  It was the corridor of the night before!  That
room at his side was the room where he had seen Hilton Travers, the
chauffeur, dead, lashed in a chair!  He felt the sweat beads burst
out anew upon his forehead.
It Was the Crime Club!
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
