


It was only a little way back along the street from the Sanctuary to
the corner on the Bowery where as Jimmie Dale he had left her, where
as Larry the Bat now he was going to meet her again; it would take
only a moment or so, even at Larry the Bat’s habitual,
characteristic, slouching, gait–but it seemed that was all too
slow, that he must throw discretion to the winds and run the
distance.  His blood was tingling; there was elation upon him,
coupled with an almost childlike dread that she might be gone.
“The Tocsin!  The Tocsin!” he kept saying to himself.
Yes; she was still there, still whiningly imploring those who passed
to buy her miserable pencils–and then, with a quick-flung whisper
to him to follow as he slouched up close to her, she had started
slowly down the street.
“The Tocsin!  The Tocsin!  The Tocsin!"–his brain seemed to be
ringing with the words, ringing with them in a note clear as a
silver bell.  The Tocsin–at last!  The woman who so strangely, so
wonderfully, so mysteriously had entered into his life, and
possessed it, and filled it with a love and yearning that had come
to mold and sway and actuate his very existence–the woman for whom
he had fought; for whom he had risked, and gladly risked, his
wealth, his name, his honour–everything; the woman for whose sake
he, the Gray Seal, was sought and hounded as the most notorious
criminal of the age; she whose cleverness, whose resourcefulness,
whose amazing intimacy with the hidden things of the underworld had
seemed, indeed, to border on the supernatural; she, the Tocsin–the
woman whose face he had never seen before!  The woman whose face he
had never seen before–and who now was that wretched hag that
hobbled along the street before him, begging, whining, and
importuning the passers-by to purchase of her pitiful wares!
He laughed a little–buoyantly.  He had never pictured a first
meeting such as this!  A hag?  Yes!  And one as disreputable in
appearance as he himself, as Larry the Bat, was disreputable!  But
he had seen her eyes!  Inimitable as was her disguise, she could not
hide her eyes, or hide the pledge they held of the beauty of form
and feature beneath the tattered rags and the touch of a master in
the make-up that brought haggard want and age into the face–and
dimly he began to divine the source, the means by which she had
acquired the information that for years had enabled her to plan
their coups, that had enabled him to execute them under the guise of
crime, that for years had seemed beyond all human reach.
Where was she going?  Where was she taking him?  But what did it
matter!  The years of waiting were at an end–the years of mystery
in a few moments now would be mystery no more!
Ah!  She had turned from the Bowery, and was heading east.  He
shuffled on after her, guardedly, a half block behind.  It was well
that Jimmie Dale had disappeared, that he was Larry the Bat again–
the neighbourhood was growing more and more one that Jimmie Dale
could not long linger in without attracting attention; while, on the
other hand, it was the natural environment of such as Larry the Bat
and such as she, who was leading him now to the supreme moment of
his life.  Yes, it was that–the fulfillment of the years!  The
thought of it alone filled his mind, his soul; it brushed aside, it
blotted out for the time being the danger, the peril, the deadly
menace that hung over them both.  It was only that she, the Tocsin,
was here–only that at last they would be together.
On she went, traversing street after street, the direction always
trending toward the river–until finally she halted before what
appeared to be, as nearly as he could make out in the almost total
darkness of the ill-lighted street, a small and tumble-down, self-
contained dwelling that bordered on what seemed to be an unfenced
store yard of some description.  He drew his breath in sharply.  She
had halted–waiting for him to come up with her.  She was waiting
for him–WAITING for him!  It seemed as though he drank of some
strange, exhilarating elixir–he reached her side eagerly–and then–
and then–her hand had caught his, and she was leading him into the
house, into a black passage where he could see nothing, into a room
equally black over whose threshold he stumbled, and her voice in a
low, conscious way, with a little tremour, a half sob in it that
thrilled him with its promise, was in his ears:
“We are safe here, Jimmie, for a little while–but, oh, Jimmie, what
have I done!  What have I done to bring you into this–only–only–I
was so sure, so sure, Jimmie, that there was nothing more to fear!”
The blood was beating in hammer blows at his temples.  It seemed all
unreal, untrue that this moment could be his, that it was not a
dream–a dream which was presently to be snatched from him in a
bitter awakening.  And then he laughed out wildly, passionately.
No–it was true, it was real!  Her breath was on his cheek, it was a
living, pulsing hand that was still in his–and then soul and mind
and body seemed engulfed and lost in a mad ecstasy–and she was in
his arms, crushed to him, and he was raining kisses upon her face.
“I love you!  I love you!” he was crying hoarsely; and over and over
again: “I love you!  I love you!”
She did not struggle.  The warm, rich lips were yielding to his; he
could feel the throb, the life in the young, lithe form against his
own.  She was his–his!  The years, the past, all were swept away–
and she was his at last–his for always.  And there came a mighty
sense of kingship upon him, as though all the world were at his
feet, and virility, and a great, glad strength above all other
men’s, and a song was in his soul, a song triumphant–for she was
his!
“You!” he cried out–and strained her to him.  “You!” he cried
again–and kissed her lips and her eyelids and her lips again.
And then her head was buried on his shoulder, and she was crying
softly; but after a moment she raised her hands and laid them upon
his face, and held them there, and because it was dark, dared to
raise her head as well, and her eyes to look into his.
Then for a long time they stood there so, and for a long time
neither spoke–and then with a little startled, broken cry, as
though the peril and the menace hanging over them, forgotten for the
moment, were thrust like a knife stab suddenly upon her, she drew
herself away, and ran from him, and went and got a lamp, and lighted
it, and set it upon the table.
And Jimmie Dale, still standing there, watched her.  How gloriously
her eyes shone, dimmed and misty with the tears that filled them
though they were!  And there was nothing incongruous in the rags
that clothed her, in the squalour and poverty of the bare room, in
the white furrows that the tears had plowed through the grime and
make-up on her cheeks.
“You wonderful, wonderful woman!” Jimmie Dale whispered.
She shook her head as though almost in self-reproach.
“I am not wonderful, Jimmie,” she said, in a low voice.  “I"–and
then she caught his arm, and her voice broke a little–"I’ve brought
you into this–probably to your death.  Jimmie, tell me what
happened last night, and since then.  I–I’ve thought at times to-
day I should go mad.  Oh, Jimmie, there is so much to say to-night,
so much to do if–if we are ever to be together for–for always.
Last night, Jimmie–the telephone–I knew there was danger–that all
had gone wrong–what was it?”
His arms were around her shoulders, drawing her close to him again.
“I found the wires tapped,” he said slowly.
“Yes, and–and the man you met–the chauffeur?”
“He is dead,” Jimmie Dale answered gently.
He felt her hand close with a quick, spasmodic clutch upon his arm;
her face grew white–and for a moment she turned away her head.
“And–and the package?” she asked presently.
“I do not know,” replied Jimmie Dale.  “He did not have it with him;
he–”
“Wait!” she interrupted quickly.  “We are only wasting time like
this!  Tell me everything, everything just as it happened,
everything from the moment you received my letter.”
And, holding her there in his arms, softening as best he could the
more brutal details, he told her.  And, at the end, for a little
while she was silent; then in a strained, impulsive way she asked
again:
“The chauffeur–you are sure–you are positive that he is dead?”
“Yes,” said Jimmie Dale grimly; “I am sure.”  And then the pent-up
flood of questions burst from his lips.  Who was the chauffeur?  The
package, the box numbered 428, and John Johansson?  And the Crime
Club?  And the issue at stake?  The danger, the peril that
surrounded her?  And she–above all–more than anything else–about
herself–her strange life, its mystery?
She checked him with a strangely wistful touch of her finger upon
his lips, with a queer, pathetic shake of her head.
“No, Jimmie; not that way.  You would never understand.  I cannot–”
“But I am to know–now!  Surely I am to know NOW!” he cried, a
sudden sense of dismay upon him.  Three years!  Three years–and
always the “next” time!  “I must know now, if I am to help you!”
She smiled a little wanly at him, as she drew herself away, and,
dropping into a chair, placed her elbows on the rickety table,
cupping her chin in her hands.
“Yes; you are to know now,” she said, almost as though she were
talking to herself; then, with a swift intake of her breath,
impulsively: “Jimmie!  Jimmie!  I had thought that it would be all
so different when–when you came.  That–that I would have nothing
to fear–for you–for me–because–it would be all over.  And now
you are here, Jimmie–and, oh, thank God for you!–but I feel to-
night almost–almost as though it were hopeless, that–that we were
beaten.”
“Beaten!”  He stepped quickly to the table, and sat down, and took
one of her hands away from her face to hold it in both his own.
“Beaten!” he laughed out defiantly; then, playfully, soothingly, to
reassure her: “Jimmie Dale and Larry the Bat and the Gray Seal and
the Tocsin–BEATEN!  And after we have just scored the last trick!”
“But we do not hold many trumps, Jimmie,” she answered gravely.
“You have seen something of this Crime Club’s power, its methods,
its merciless, cruel, inhuman cunning, and you, perhaps, think that
you understand–but you have not begun to grasp the extent of either
that power or cunning.  This horrible organisation has been in
existence for many years.  I do not know how many.  I only know that
the men of whom it is composed are not ordinary criminals, that they
do not work in the ordinary way–to-day, they set the machinery of
fraud, deception, robbery, and murder in motion that ten years from
now, and, perhaps, only then, will culminate in the final success of
their schemes–and they play only for enormous stakes.  But"–her
lips grew set–"you will see for yourself.  I must not talk any
longer than is necessary; we must not take too much time.  You count
on three days before they begin to suspect that all is not right
with Jimmie Dale–I know them better than you, and I give you two
days, forty-eight hours at the outside, and possibly far less.
Jimmie"–abruptly–"did you ever hear of Peter LaSalle?”
“The capitalist?  Yes!” said Jimmie Dale.  “He died a few years ago.
I know his brother Henry well–at the club, and all that.”
“Do you!” she said evenly.  “Well, the man you know is not Peter
LaSalle’s brother; he is an impostor–and one of the Crime Club.”
“Not–Peter LaSalle’s brother!"–Jimmie Dale repeated the words
mechanically.  And suddenly his brain was whirling.  Vaguely, dimly,
in little memory snatches, events, not pertinent then, vitally
significant now, came crowding upon him.  Peter LaSalle had come
from somewhere in the West to live in New York; and very shortly
afterward had died.  The estate had been worth something over eleven
millions.  And there had been–he leaned quickly, tensely forward
over the table, staring at her.  “My God!” he whispered hoarsely.
“You are not, you cannot be–the–the daughter–Peter LaSalle’s
daughter, who disappeared strangely!”
“Yes,” she said quietly.  “I am Marie LaSalle.”
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
