


Larry the Bat shambled out of the side door of the tenement into the
back alleyway; shambled along the black alleyway to the street–and
smiled a little grimly as a shadow across the roadway suddenly
shifted its position.  The game was growing acute, critical,
desperate even–and it was his move.
Larry the Bat, disreputable denizen of the underworld, alias Jimmie
Dale, millionairs clubman, alias the Gray Seal, whom Carruthers of
the MORNING NEWS-ARGUS called the master criminal of the age,
shuffled along in the direction of the Bowery, his hands plunged
deep in the pockets of his frayed and tattered trousers, where his
fingers, in a curious, wistful way, fondled the keys of his own
magnificent residence on Riverside Drive.  It was his move–and it
was an impasse, ironical, sardonic, and it was worse–it was full of
peril.
True, he had outwitted Kline of the secret service two nights
before, when Kline had raided the counterfeiters’ den; true, he had
no reason to believe that Kline suspected HIM specifically, but the
man Kline wanted HAD entered the tenement that night, and since then
the house had been shadowed day and night.  The result was both
simple and disastrous–to Jimmie Dale.  Larry the Bat, a known
inmate of the house, might come and go as he pleased–but to emerge
from the Sanctuary in the person of Jimmie Dale would be fatal.
Kline had been outwitted, but Kline had not acknowledged final
defeat.  The tenement had been searched from top to bottom–
unostentatiously.  His own room on the first landing had been
searched the previous afternoon, when he was out, but they had
failed to find the cunningly contrived opening in the floor under
the oilcloth in the corner, an impromptu wardrobe, that would
proclaim Larry the Bat and Jimmie Dale to be one and the same
person–that would inevitably lead further to the establishment of
his identity as the Gray Seal.  In time, of course, the surveillance
would cease–but he could not wait.  That was the monumental irony
of it–the factor that, all unknown to Kline, was forcing the issue
hard now.  It was his move.
Since, years ago now, as the Gray Seal, he had begun to work with
HER, that unknown, mysterious accomplice of his, and the police,
stung to madness both by the virulent and constant attacks of the
press and by the humiliating prod of their own failures, sought
daily, high and low, with every resource at their command, for the
Gray Seal, he had never been in quite so strange and perilous a
plight as he found himself at that moment.  To preserve inviolate
the identity of Larry the Bat was absolutely vital to his safety.
It was the one secret that even she, who so strangely appeared to
know all else about him, he was sure, had not discovered–and it was
just that, in a way, that had brought the present impossible
situation to pass.
In the month previous, in a lull between those letters of hers, he
had set himself doggedly and determinedly to the renewed task of
what had become so dominantly now a part of his very existence–the
solving of HER identity.  And for that month, as the best means to
the end–means, however, that only resulted as futilely as the
attempts that had gone before–he had lived mostly as Larry the Bat,
returning to his home in his proper person only when occasion and
necessity demanded it.  He had been going home that evening, two
nights before, walking along Riverside Drive, when from the window
of the limousine she had dropped the letter at his feet that had
plunged him into the affair of the Counterfeit Five–and he had not
gone home!  Eventually, to save himself, he had, in the Sanctuary,
performing the transformation in desperate haste, again been forced
to assume the role of Larry the Bat.
That was really the gist of it.  And yesterday morning he had
remembered, to his dismay, that he had had little or no money left
the night before.  He had intended, of course, to replenish his
supply–when he got home.  Only he hadn’t gone home!  And now he
needed money–needed it badly, desperately.  With thousands in the
bank, with abundance even in his safe, in his own den at home, a
supply kept there always for an emergency, he was facing actual
want–he rattled two dimes, a nickel, and a few odd pennies
thoughtfully against the keys in his pocket.
To a certain extent, old Jason, his butler, could be trusted.  Jason
even knew that mysterious letters of tremendous secretive importance
came to the house, and the old man always meant well–but he dared
not trust even Jason with the secret of his dual personality.  What
was he to do?  He needed money imperatively–at once.  Thanks to
Kline, for the time being, at least, he could not rid himself of the
personality of Larry the Bat by the simple expedient or slipping
into the clothes of Jimmie Dale–he must live, act, and remain Larry
the Bat until the secret service officer gave up the hunt.  How
bridge the gulf between Jimmie Dale and Larry the Bat in old Jason’s
eyes!
Nor was that all.  There was still another matter, and one that, in
order to counteract it, demanded at once a serious inroad–to the
extent of a telephone call–upon his slender capital.  A too
prolonged and unaccounted-for absence from home, and old Jason, in
his anxious, blundering solicitude, would have the fat in the fire
at that end–and the city, and the social firmament thereof, would
be humming with the startling news of the disappearance of a well-
known millionaire.  The complications that would then ensue, with
himself powerless to lift a finger, Jimmie Dale did not care to
think about–such a contretemps must at all hazards be prevented.
Jimmie Dale reached the corner of the street, where it intersected
the Bowery, and paused languidly by the curb.  No one appeared to be
following.  He had not expected that there would be–but it was as
well to be sure.  He walked then a few steps along the Bowery–and
slipped suddenly into a doorway, from where he could command a view
of the street corner that he had just left.  At the end of ten
minutes, satisfied that no one had any concern in his immediate
movements, he shambled on again down the Bowery.
There was a saloon two blocks away that boasted a private telephone
booth.  Jimmie Dale made that his destination.
Larry the Bat was a very well-known character in that resort, and
the bullet-headed dispenser of drinks behind the bar nodded
unctuously to him over the heads of those clustered at the rail as
he entered; Larry the Bat, as befitted one of the elite of the
underworld, was graciously pleased to acknowledge the proletariat
salutation with a curt nod.  He walked down to the end of the room,
entered the telephone booth–and was carelessly careful to close the
door tightly behind him.
He gave the number of his residence on Riverside Drive, and waited
for the connection.  After some delay, Jason’s voice answered him.
“Jason,” said Jimmie Dale, in matter-of-fact tones, “I shall be out
of the city for another three or four days, possibly a week, and–"
he stopped abruptly, as a sort of gasp came to him over the wire.
“Thank God that’s you, sir!” exclaimed the old butler wildly.  “I’ve
been near mad, sir, all day!”
“Don’t get excited, Jason!” said Jimmie Dale a little sharply.  “The
mere matter of my absence for the last two days is nothing to cause
you any concern.  And while I am on the subject, Jason, let me say
now that I shall be glad if you will bear that fact in mind in
future.”
“Yes, sir,” stammered Jason.  “But, sir, it ain’t that–good Lord,
Master Jim, it ain’t that, sir!  It’s–it’s one of them letters.”
Something like a galvanic shock seemed to jerk the disreputable,
loose-jointed frame of Larry the Bat suddenly erect–and a strained
whiteness crept over the dirty, unwashed face.
“Go on, Jason,” said Jimmie Dale, without a quiver in his voice.
“It came this morning, sir–that shuffer with his automobile left
it.  I had just time to say you weren’t at home, sir, and he was
gone.  And then, sir, there ain’t been an hour gone by all through
the day that a woman, sir–a lady, begging your pardon, Master Jim–
hasn’t rung up on the telephone, asking if you were back, and if I
could get you, and where you were, and half frantic, sir, half
sobbing, sometimes, sir, and saying there was a life hanging on it,
Master Jim.”
Larry the Bat, staring into the mouthpiece of the instrument,
subconsciously passed his hand across his forehead, and
subconsciously noted that his fingers, as he drew them away, were
damp.
“Where is the letter now, Jason?” inquired Jimmie Dale coolly.
“Here on your desk, Master Jim.  Shall I bring it to you?”
Bring it to him!  How?  When?  Where?  Bring it to him!  The ghastly
irony of it!  Jimmie Dale tried to think–prodding, spurring
desperately that keen, lightning brain of his that had never failed
him yet.  How bridge the gulf between Larry the Bat and Jimmie Dale
in Jason’s eyes–not just for the replenishing of funds now, but
with a life at stake!
“No–I think not, Jason,” said Jimmie Dale calmly.  Just leave it
where it is.  And if she telephones again, say that you have told
me–that will be sufficient to satisfy any further inquiries.  And
Jason–”
“Yes, sir?”
“If she telephones again, try and find out where the call comes
from.”
“I haven’t forgotten what you said once, Master Jim, sir,” said the
old man eagerly.  “And I’ve been trying that sir, all day.  They’ve
all come from different pay stations, sir.”
A mirthless little smile tinged Jimmie Dale’s lips.  Of course!  He
might have known!  It was always that way, always the same.  He was
as near to the solution of her identity at that moment as he had
been years ago, when she, in some mysterious way, alone of all the
world, had identified him as the Gray Seal!
“Very good, Jason,” he said quietly.  “Don’t bother about it any
more.  It will be all right.  You can expect me when you see me.
Good-night.”  He hung the receiver on the hook, walked out of the
booth, and mechanically reached the street.
All right!  It was far from “all right"–very far from it.  It was
no trivial thing, that letter; they never had been trivial things,
those letters of hers, that involved so often a matter of life and
death–as this one now, perhaps, as her actions would seem to
indicate, involved life and death more urgently than any that had
gone before.  It was far from all right–at a moment when his own
position, his own safety, was at best but a desperate chance; when
his every energy, brain, wit, and cunning were taxed to the utmost
to save himself!  And yet, somehow, some way, at any cost, he must
get that letter–and at any cost he must act upon it!  To fail her
was to fail utterly in everything that failure in its most
miserable, its widest sense, implied–failure in that which rose
paramount to every other consideration in life!
Fail her!  Jimmie Dale’s lips thinned into a hard, drawn line–and
then parted slowly in a curiously whimsical smile.  It would be a
strange burglary that he had decided upon, in order that he might
not fail her–stranger than any the Gray Seal had ever committed,
and, in some respects, even more perilous!
He started along the Bowery, walking briskly now, toward the nearest
subway station, at Astor Place, his mind for the moment electing to
face the situation in a humour as whimsical as his smile.  Supposing
that, as Larry the Bat, he were caught and arrested during the next
hour, in Jimmie’s Dale’s residence on Riverside Drive!  With his
arrest as Larry the Bat, Jimmie’s Dale would automatically
disappear.  Would follow then the suspicion that Jimmie Dale, the
millionaire, had met with foul play, and as time went on, and Jimmie
Dale, being then in prison as Larry the Bat, did not reappear, the
assurance of it; then the certainty that suspicion would focus on
Larry the Bat as being connected with the millionaire’s death, since
Larry the Bat had been caught in Jimmie Dale’s home–and he would be
accused of his own murder!  It was quite humourous, of course, quite
grotesquely bizarre–but it was equally an exceedingly grim
possibility!  There were drawbacks to a dual personality!
“In a word,” confided Jimmie Dale softly to himself, and a serious
light crept into the dark, steady eyes, “I’m in a bit of a nasty
mess!”
At Astor Place he entered the subway; at Fourteenth Street he
changed to an express, and at Ninety-sixth Street he got out.  It
was but a short walk west to Riverside Drive, and from there his
house was only a few blocks farther on.
Jimmie Dale did not slouch now.  And for all his disreputable
attire, incongruous as it was in that neighbourhood, few people that
he passed paid any attention to him, none gave him more than a
casual glance–Jimmie Dale swung along, upright, with no attempt to
make himself inconspicuous, hurrying a little, as one intent upon a
definite errand.  As he neared his house he slowed his pace a little
until a couple, who were passing in front of it, had gone on; then
he went up the steps, but noiselessly as a shadow now, to the front
door, opened it softly, closed it softly behind him, and crouched
for a moment in the vestibule.
Through the monogrammed lace on the plate glass of the inner doors
he could see, a little indistinctly, into the reception hall beyond.
The hall was empty.  Jason, for that matter, would be the only one
likely to be about; the other servants would have no business there
in any case, and whether in their quarters above or below, they had
their own stairs at the rear.
Jimmie Dale inserted the key in the spring lock, and opened the door
a cautious fraction of an inch–to listen.  There was no sound–yes,
a subdued murmured–the servants were downstairs in the basement.
He slipped inside, slipped, in a flash, across the hall, and,
treading like a cat, went up the stairs.  He scarcely seemed to
breathe until, with a little sigh of relief, he stood inside his den
on the first floor, with the door shut behind him.
“I must speak to Jason about being a little more watchful,” muttered
Jimmie Dale facetiously.  “Here’s all my property at the mercy of–
Larry the Bat!”
An instant he stood by the door, looking about him–in the bright
moonlight streaming in through the side windows the room’s
appointments stood out in soft shadows, the huge davenport, the
great, luxurious easy-chairs, an easel with a half-finished canvas,
as he had left it; the big, flat-topped, rosewood desk, the open
fireplace–and then, his steps silent on the thick velvet rug under
foot, he walked quickly to the desk.
Yes, there it was–the letter.  He placed it hurriedly in his
pocket–the moonlight was not strong enough to read by, and he dared
not turn on the lights.
And now money–funds.  In the alcove behind the portiere, Jimmie
Dale dropped on his knees before the squat, barrel-shaped safe, and
opened it.  He reached inside, took out a package of banknotes,
placed the bills in his pocket–and hesitated a moment.  What else
would he require?  What act did that letter call upon the Gray Seal
to perform in the next few hours?  Jimmie Dale stared thoughtfully
into the interior of the safe.  Whatever it was, it must be
performed in the role of Larry the Bat, for though he could get into
his dressing room now, and become Jimmie Dale again, there were
still those watchers outside the Sanctuary–THEY must not become
suspicious–and if Larry the Bat disappeared mysteriously, Larry the
Bat would be the man that Kline and the secret service of the United
States would never cease hunting for, and that would mean that he
could never reassume a character that was as necessary for his
protection as breath was to life, so long as the Gray Seal worked.
True, he could change now to Jimmie Dale, but he would have to
change back again and return to the Sanctuary before morning, as
Larry the Bat–and remain there until Kline, beaten, called off his
human bloodhounds.  No, a change was not to be thought of.
What, then, would he require–that compact little kit of burglar
tools, rolled in its leather jacket, that, unrolled slipped about
his body like a close-fitting undervest?  As well to take it anyway.
He removed his coat and vest, took out the leather bundle from the
safe, untied the thongs that bound it together, unrolled it, passed
it around his body, life belt fashion, secured the thongs over his
shoulders, and put on his coat and vest again.  A revolver, a
flashlight?  He had both–at the Sanctuary, under the flooring–but
there were duplicates here!  He slipped them into his pockets.
Anything else–to forestall and provide for any possible
contingency?  He hesitated again for a moment, thinking, then slowly
closed the inner door of the safe, locked it, swung the outer door
shut–and, in the act of twirling the knobs, sprang suddenly to his
feet.  Sharp, shrill in the stillness of the room, the telephone
bell on the desk rang out clamourously.
Jimmie Dale’s face set hard, as he leaped out from behind the
curtain–had Jason heard it!  It rang again before he could reach
the desk–was ringing as he snatched the receiver from the hook.
“Yes, yes!” he called, in a low, guarded, hasty way, into the
mouthpiece.  “Hello!  What is it?”  And then one hand, resting on
the desk, closed around the edge, and tightened until the skin over
the knuckles grew ivory white.  It was–SHE!  She!  It was HER
voice–he had only heard it once in all his life–that night, two
nights before, in a silvery laugh from the limousine as it had sped
away from him down the road–but he knew!  It thrilled him now with
a mad rhapsody, robbing him for the moment of every thought save
that she was living, real, existent–that it was HER voice.  “It’s
you–YOU!” he said hoarsely.
“Oh, Jimmie–you at last!"–it came in a little gasping cry of
relief.  “The letter–”
“Yes, I’ve got it–it’s all right–it’s all right"–the words would
not seem to come fast enough in his desperate haste.  “But it’s you
now.  Listen!  Listen!” he pleaded.  “Tell me who you are!  My God!
how I’ve tried to find you, and–”
That rippling, silvery laugh again, but now, too, it seemed to his
eager ear, with just the faintest note of wistfulness in it.
“Some day, Jimmie.  That letter now.  It–”
Jimmie Dale straightened up suddenly–Jason’s steps, running,
sounded outside the room along the corridor–there was not an
instant to lose.
“Hang up!  Good-bye!  Danger!  Don’t ring again!” he whispered
hurriedly, and, with a miserable smile, replacing the receiver
bitterly on the hook, he jumped for the curtain.
He reached it none too soon.  The door opened, an electric-light
switch clicked, and the room was flooded with light.  Jason, still
running, headed for the desk.
“It’ll be her again!” Jimmie Dale heard the old man mutter, as from
the edge of the portiere he watched the other’s actions.
Jason picked up the telephone.
“Hello!  Hello!” he called–then began to click impatiently with the
receiver hook.  “Hello! . . .    Who? . . .  Central? . . .  I don’t
want any number–somebody was calling here. . . . What? . . .
Nobody on the wire!”
He set the telephone back on the desk with a bewildered air.
“That’s queer!” he exclaimed.  “I could have sworn I heard it ring
twice, and–”  He stopped abruptly, and, leaning across the desk,
hung there, wide-eyed, staring, while a sickly pallor began to steal
into his face.  “The letter!” he mumbled wildly.  “The letter–
Master Jim’s letter–the letter–it’s GONE!”
Trembling, excited, the old man began to search the desk, then down
on his knees on the floor under it; and then, growing more frantic
with every instant, rose and began to hunt around the room in an
agitated, aimless fashion.
Jason’s distress was very real–he was almost beside himself now
with fear and anxiety.  A whimsical, affectionate smile played over
Jimmie Dale’s lips at the old man’s antics–and changed suddenly
into one of consternation.  Jason was making directly now for the
curtain behind which he stood!  Perhaps, though, he would pass it
by, and–Jason’s hand reached out and grasped the portiere.
“Jason!” said Jimmie Dale sharply.
The old man staggered back as though he had been struck, tried to
speak, choked, and gazed at the curtain with distended eyes.
“Is–is that you, sir–Master Jim–behind the curtain there?” he
finally blurted out.  “I–sir–you gave me a start–and the letter,
Master Jim–”
“Don’t lose your head, Jason,” said Jimmie Dale coolly.  “I’ve got
the letter.  Now do as I bid you.”
“Yes–Master Jim,” faltered the old man.
“Pull down the window shades and draw the portiere together,"
directed Jimmie Dale.
Jason, still overwrought and excited, obeyed a little awkwardly.
“Now the lights, Jason,” instructed Jimmie Dale.  “Turn them off,
and go and sit down in that chair at the desk.”
Again Jason obeyed, stumbling in the darkness as he returned from
the electric-light switch at the farther end of the room.  He sat
down in the chair.
Larry the Bat stepped out from behind the curtain.  “I came for that
letter, Jason,” he explained quietly.  “I am going out again now.  I
may be back to-morrow; I may not be back for a week.  You will say
nothing, not a word, of my having been here to-night.  Do you
understand, Jason?”
“Yes, sir,” said Jason; then hesitantly: “Would you mind saying,
sir, when you came in?”
“It’s of no consequence, Jason–is it?”
“No, sir,” said Jason.
Jimmie Dale smiled in the darkness.
“Jason!”
“Yes, sir.”
“I wish you to remain where you are, without leaving that chair, for
the next ten minutes.”  He moved across the room to the door.
“Good-night, Jason,” he said.
“Good-night, Master Jim–good-night, sir–oh, Lord!”
Jimmie Dale did not require that ten minutes; it was a very wide
margin of safety to obviate the possibility of Jason, from a window,
detecting the exit of a disreputable character from the house–in
three minutes he was turning the corner of the first cross street
and walking rapidly away from Riverside Drive.
In the subway station Jimmie Dale read the letter–read it twice
over, as he always read those strange epistles of hers that opened
the door to new peril, new danger to the Gray Seal, but too, that
seemed somehow to draw tighter, in a glad, big way, the unseen bond
between them; read it, as he always read those letters, almost
subconsciously committing the very words to memory with that keen
faculty of brain of his.  But now as he began to tear the sheet and
envelope into minute particles, a strained, hard look was on his
face and in his eyes, and his lips, half parted, moved a little.
“It’s a death warrant,” muttered Jimmie Dale.  “I–I guess to-night
will see the end of the Gray Seal.  She says I needn’t do it, but I
guess it’s worth the risk–a human life!”
A downtown express roared into the station.
“What time is it?” Jimmie Dale asked the guard, as he stepped
aboard.
“’Bout midnight,” the man answered tersely.
The forward car was almost empty, and Jimmie Dale chose a seat by
himself.  How did she know?  How did she know not only this, but the
hundred other affairs that she had outlined in those letters of
hers?  By what means, superhuman, indeed, it seemed, did she–Jimmie
Dale jerked himself erect suddenly.  What good did it do to
speculate on that now, when every minute was priceless?  What was HE
to do, how was he to act, what plan could he formulate and carry
out, and WIN against odds that, at the outset, were desperate enough
even to forecast almost certain failure–and death!
Who would ever have suspected old Tom Ludgate, known for years
throughout the squalour of the East Side as old Luddy, the pushcart
man, of having a bag of unset diamonds under his pillow–or under
the sack, rather, that he probably used for a pillow!  What a queer
thing to do!  But then, old Luddy was a character–apparently always
in the most poverty-stricken condition, apparently hardly more than
keeping body and soul together, trusting no one, and obsessed by the
dread that by depositing in a bank some one would discover that he
had money, and attempt to force it from him, he had put his savings,
year after year, for twenty years, twenty-five years, perhaps, into
unset stone–diamonds.  How had she found that out?
Jimmie Dale sank into a deeper reverie.  He could steal them all
right, and they would be well worth the stealing–old Luddy had done
well, and lived and existed on next to nothing–the stones, she
said, were worth about fifteen thousand dollars.  Not so bad, even
for twenty-five years of vegetable selling from a pushcart!  He
could steal them all right; it would tax the Gray Seal’s ingenuity
little to do so simple a thing as that, but that was not all, nor,
indeed, hardly a factor in it–it was vital that if he were to
succeed at all he must steal them PUBLICLY, as it were.
And after that–WHAT?  His own chances were pretty slim at best.
Jimmie Dale, staring at the grayness of the subway wall through the
window, shook his head slowly–then, with a queer little
philosophical shrug of his shoulders, he smiled gravely, seriously.
It was all a part of the game, all a part of the life–of the Gray
Seal!
It was half-past twelve, or a little later, as nearly as he could
judge, for Larry the Bat carried no such ornate thing in evidence as
a watch, as he halted at the corner of a dark, squalid street in the
lower East Side.  It was a miserable locality–in daylight humming
with a cosmopolitan hive of pitiful humans dragging out as best they
could an intolerable existence, a locality peopled with every
nationality on earth, their community of interest the struggle to
maintain life at the lowest possible expenditure, where necessity
even was pared and shaved down to a minimum; but now, at night time,
or rather in the early-morning hours, the darkness, in very mercy,
it seemed, covered it with a veil, as it were, and in the quiet that
hung over it now hid the bald, the hideous, aye, and the piteous,
too, from view.
It was a narrow street, and the row of tenement houses, each house
almost identical with its neighbour, that flanked the pavement on
either side, seemed, from where Jimmie Dale stood looking down its
length, from the corner, to converge together at a point a little
way beyond, giving it an unreal, ominous, cavernlike effect.  And,
too, there seemed something ominous even in its quiet.  It was as
though one sensed acutely the crouching of some Thing in its lair–
waiting silently, viciously, with sullen patience.
A footstep sounded–another.  Jimmie Dale drew quickly back around
the corner into an areaway.  Two men passed–in helmets–swinging
their nightsticks–that beat was always policed in pairs!
They passed on, turned the corner, and went down the narrow cross
street that Jimmie Dale had just been inspecting.  He started to
follow–and drew back again abruptly.  A form flitted suddenly
across the road and disappeared in the darkness in the officers’
wake–ten yards behind the first another followed–at the same
interval of distance still another–and yet still one more–four in
all.
The darkness hid all six, the two policemen, the four men behind
them–the only sounds were the OFFICERS’ footsteps dying away in the
distance.
Jimmie Dale’s fingers were mechanically testing the mechanism of the
automatic in his pocket.
“The Skeeter’s gang!” he muttered to himself.  “Red Mose, the
Midget, Harve Thoms–and the Skeeter!  The Worst apaches in the city
of New York; death contractors–the lowest bidders!  Professional
assassins, and a man’s life any time for twenty-five dollars!  I
wonder–I’ve never done it yet–but I wonder if it would be a crime
in God’s sight if one shot–to KILL!”
Jimmie Dale was at the corner again–again the street before him was
black, deserted, empty.  He chose the right hand side, and, well in
the shadow of the houses, as an extra precaution, stole along
silently.  He stopped finally before one where, in the doorway, hung
a little sign.  Jimmie Dale mounted the porch, and with his eyes
close to the sign could just make out the larger words in the big
printed type:
Jimmie Dale nodded.  That was right.  The first house on the right-
hand side, with the room-to-rent sign, her letter had said.  His
fingers were testing the doorknob.  The door was not locked.
“Naturally, it wouldn’t be locked,” Jimmie Dale told himself grimly–
and stepped inside.
He stood for an instant without movement, every faculty on the
alert.  Far up above him a step, guarded though his trained ear made
it out to be, creaked faintly upon the stairs–there was no other
sound.  The creaking, almost inaudible at its loudest, receded
farther up–and silence fell.
In the darkness, noiselessly, Jimmie Dale groped for the stairway,
found it, and began to ascend.  The minutes passed–it seemed a
minute even from step to step, and there were three flights to the
top!  There must be no creaking this time–the slightest sound, he
knew well enough, would be not only fatal to the work he had to do,
but probably fatal to himself as well.  He had been near death many
times–the consciousness that he was nearer to it now, possibly,
than he had ever been before, seemed to stimulate his senses into
acute and abnormal energy.  And, too, the physical effort, as, step
by step, the flexed muscles relaxing so slowly, little by little,
gradually, each time as he found foothold on the step higher up, was
a terrific strain.  At the top his face was bathed in perspiration,
and he wiped it off with his coat sleeve.
It was still dark here, intensely dark, and his eyes, though grown
accustomed to it, could make out nothing but the deeper shadow of
the walls.  But thanks to her, always a mistress of accurate and
minute detail, he possessed a mental plan of his surroundings.  The
head of the stairs gave on the middle of the hallway–the hallway
ran to his right and left.  To his right, on the opposite side of
the hall, was the door of old Luddy’s squalid two-room apartment.
For a moment Jimmie Dale stood hesitant–a sudden perplexity and
anxiety growing upon him.  It was strange!  What did it mean?  He
had nerved himself to a quick, desperate attempt, trusting to
surprise and his own wit and agility for victory–there had seemed
no other way than that, since he had seen those four men at the
corner–since they were AHEAD of him.  True, they were not much
ahead of him, not enough to have accomplished their purpose–and,
furthermore, they were not in that room.  He knew that absolutely,
beyond question of doubt.  He had listened for just that all the
nerve-racking way up the stairs.  But where were they?  There was no
sound–not a sound–just blackness, dark, impenetrable, utter, that
began to palpitate now.
It came in a whisper, wavering, sibilant–from his left.  A sort of
relief, fierce in the breaking of the tense expectancy, premonitory
in the possibilities that it held, swept Jimmie Dale.  He crept
along the hall.  The whisper had come from that room, presumably
empty–that was for rent!
By the door he crouched–his sensitive fingers, eyes to Jimmie Dale
so often–feeling over jamb and panels with a delicate, soundless
touch.  The door was just ajar.  The fingers crept inside and
touched the knob and lock–there was no key within.
The whispering still went on–but it seemed like a screaming of
vultures now in Jimmie Dale’s ears, as the words came to him.
“Aw, say, Skeeter, dis high-brow stunt gives me de pip!  Me fer
goin’ in dere an’ croakin’ de geezer reg’lar, widout de frills.
Who’s to know?  Say, just about two minutes, an’ we’re beatin’ it
wid de sparklers.”
An inch, a half inch at a time, the knob slowly, very, very slowly
turning, the door was being closed by the crouched form on the
threshold.
“Close yer trap, Mose!” came a fierce response.  “We ain’t fixed the
lay all day for nothin’.  There ain’t a soul on earth knows he’s got
any sparklers, ’cept us.  If there was, it would be different–then
they’d know that was what whoever did it was after, see?”
The door was closed–the knob slowly, very, very slowly being
released again.  From one of the leather pockets under Jimmie Dale’s
vest came a tiny steel instrument that he inserted in the key-hole.
The same voice spoke on:
“That’s what we’re croaking him for, ’cause nobody knows about them
diamonds, and so’s he can’t TELL anybody afterward that any were
pinched.  An’ that’s why it’s got to look like he just got tired of
living and did it himself.  I guess that’ll hold the police when
they find the poor old duck hanging from the ceiling, with a bit of
cord around his neck, and a chair kicked out from under his feet on
the floor.  Ain’t you got the brains of a louse to see that?”
“Sure"–the whisper came dully, in grudging intonation through the
panels–the door was locked.  “Sure, but it’s de hangin’ ’round
waitin’ to get busy that’s gettin’ me goat, an’–”
Jimmie Dale straightened up and began to retreat along the corridor.
A merciless rage was upon him now, every fiber of his being seemed
to tingle and quiver with it–the damnable, hellish ingenuity of it
all seemed to choke and suffocate him.
“Luck!” muttered Jimmie Dale between his clenched teeth.  “Oh, the
blessed luck to get that door locked!  I’ve got time now to set the
stage for my own get-away before the showdown!”
He stole on along the corridor.  Excerpts from her letter were
running through his brain: “It would do no good to warn him, Jimmie–
the Skeeter and his gang would never let up on him until they got
the stones. . . .  It would do no good for you to steal them first,
for they would only take that as a ruse of old Luddy’s, and murder
the man first and hunt afterward. . . .  In some way you must let
the Skeeter SEE you steal them, make them think, make them certain
that it is a bona-fide theft, so that they will no longer have any
interest or any desire to do old Luddy harm. . . .  And for it to
appear real to them, it must appear real to old Luddy himself–do
not take any chances there.”
Jimmie Dale’s eyes narrowed.  Yes, it was simple enough now with
that pack of hell’s wolves guarded for the moment by a locked door,
forced to give him warning by breaking the door before they could
get out.  It was simple enough now to enter old Luddy’s room, steal
the stones at the revolver point, then make enough disturbance–when
he was ready–to set the gang in motion, and, as they rushed in open
him, to make his escape with the stones to the roof through Luddy’s
room.  That was simple enough–there was an opening to the roof in
Luddy’s room, she had said, and there was a ladder kept there in
place.  On hot nights, it seemed, the old man used to go up there
and sleep on the roof–not now, of course.  It was too late in the
year for that–but the opening in the roof was there, and the ladder
remained there, too.
Yes, it was simple enough now.  And the next morning the papers
would rave with execrations against the Gray Seal–for the robbery
of the life savings of a poor, defenseless old man, for committing
as vile and pitiful a crime as had ever stirred New York!  Even
Carruthers, of the MORNING NEWS-ARGUS, would be moved to bitter
attack.  Good old Carruthers–who little thought that the Gray Seal
was his old college pal, his present most intimate friend, Jimmie
Dale!  And afterward–after the next morning?  Well, that, at least,
had never been in doubt.  Old Luddy could be made to leave New York,
and, once away, with the Skeeter and his gang robbed of incentive to
pay any further attention to him, the stones could be secretly
returned to the old man.  And it would to the public, to the police,
be just another of the Gray Seal’s crimes–that was all!
Jimmie Dale had reached old Luddy’s door.  The Gray Seal?  Oh, yes,
they would know it was the Gray Seal–the insignia was familiar
enough; familiar to the crooks of the underworld, who held it in
awe; familiar to the police, to whom it was an added barb of
ridicule.  He was placing it now, that insignia, a diamond-shaped,
gray paper seal, on the panel of the door; and now, a black silk
mask adjusted over his face, Jimmie Dale bent to insert the little
steel instrument in the lock–a pitiful, paltry thing, a cheap lock,
to fingers that could play so intimately with twirling knobs and
dials, masters of the intricate mechanism of vaults and safes!
And then, about to open the door, a sort of sudden dismay fell upon
him.  He had not thought of that–somehow, it had not occurred to
him!  WHAT WAS IT THEY WERE WAITING FOR?  Why had they not struck at
once, as, when he had first entered the house, he had supposed they
would do?  What was it?  Why was it?  Was old Luddy out?  Were they
waiting for his return–or what?
The door, without sound, moved gradually under his hand.  A faint
odor assailed his nostrils!  It was dark, very dark.  Across the
room, in a direct line, was the doorway of the inner room–she had
explained that in her letter.  It was slow progress to cross that
room without sound, in silence–it was a snail’s movement–for fear
that even a muscle might crack.
And now he stood in the inner doorway.  It was dark here, to–and
yet, how bizarre, a star seemed to twinkle through the very roof of
the room itself!  The odour was pungent now.  There was a long-drawn
sigh–then a low, indescribable sound of movement.  SOMEBODY, APART
FROM OLD LUDDY, WAS IN THE ROOM!
It swept, the full consciousness of it, upon Jimmie Dale in an
instantaneous flash.  Chloroform; the open scuttle in the roof; the
waiting of those others–all fused into a compact logical whole.
They had loosened the scuttle during the day, probably when old
Luddy was away–one of them had crept down there now to chloroform
the old man into insensibility–the others would complete the
ghastly work presently by stringing their victim up to the ceiling–
and it would be suicide, for, long before morning came, long before
the old man would be discovered, the fumes of the chloroform would
be gone.
It seemed like a cold hand, deathlike, clutching at his heart.  Was
he too late, after all!  Chloroform alone could–kill!  To the
right, just a little to the right–he must make no mistake–his ear
placed the sound!  He whipped his hands from the side pockets of his
coat–the ray of his flashlight cut across the room and fell upon an
aged face upon a bed, upon a hand clutching a wad of cloth, the
cloth pressed horribly against the nose and mouth of the upturned
face–and then, roaring in the stillness, spitting a vicious lane of
fire that paralleled the flashlight’s ray, came the tongue flame of
his automatic.
There was a yell, a scream, that echoed out, reverberated, and went
racketing through the house, and Jimmie Dale leaped forward–over a
table, sending it crashing to the floor.  The man had reeled back
against the wall, clutching at a shattered wrist, staring into the
flashlight’s eye, white-faced, jaw dropped, lips working in mingled
pain and fear.
“Harve Thoms–you, eh?” gritted Jimmie Dale.
A cunning look swept the distorted face.  Here, apparently, was only
one man–there were pals, three of them, only a few yards away.
“You ain’t got nothing on me!” he snarled, sparring for time.  “You
police are too damned fresh with your guns!”
“I’ll take yours!” snapped Jimmie Dale, and snatched it deftly from
the other’s pocket.  “This ain’t any police job, my bucko, and you
make a move and I’ll drop you for keeps, if what you’ve got already
ain’t enough to teach you to keep your hands off jobs that belong to
your betters!”
He was working with mad haste as he spoke.  One minute at the
outside was, perhaps, all he could count upon.  Already he had
caught the rattle of the locked door down the hall.  He lit a match
and turned on the gas over the bed–it was the most dangerous thing
he could do–he knew that well enough, none knew it better–it was
offering himself as a fair mark when the others rushed in, as they
would in a moment now–but the Skeeter and his gang and this man
here must have no misconception of his purpose, his reason for being
there, the same as their own, the theft of the stones–and no
misconception as to his SUCCESS.
“Y’ain’t the police!"–it came in a choked gasp from the other, as
he blinked in the sudden light “Say then–”
“Shut up!” ordered Jimmie Dale curtly.  “And mind what I told you
about moving!”  He leaned over the bed.  Old Luddy, though under the
influence of the chloroform, was moving restlessly.  Thoms had
evidently only begun to apply the chloroform–old Luddy was safe!
Jimmie Dale ran his hand in under the pillow.  “If you ain’t swiped
them already they ought to be here!” he growled; “and if you have
I’ll–ah!”  A little chamois bag was in his hand.  He laughed
sneeringly at Thoms, opened the bag, allowed a few stones to trickle
into his hand–and then, without stopping to replace them, dashed
stones and bag into his pocket.  The door along the corridor crashed
open.
“What’s that?” he gasped out, in well-simulated fright–and sprang
for the ladder that led up to the roof.
It had all taken, perhaps, the minute that he had counted on–no
more.  Noises came from the floors below now, a confusion of them–
the shot, the scream had been heard by others, save those who had
been in the locked room.  And the latter were outside now in the
corridor, running to their accomplice’s aid.
There was a pause at the outer door–then an oath–and coupled with
the oath an exclamation:
“The Gray Seal!”
They had swept a flashlight over the door panel–Jimmie Dale,
halfway up the ladder, smiled grimly.
The door opened–there was a rush of feet.  The man with the
shattered wrist yelled, cursing wildly:
“Here he is–on the ladder!  Let him have it!  Fill him full of
holes!”
Jimmie Dale was in the light–they were in the dark of the outer
room.  He fired at the threshold, checking their rush–as a hail of
bullets chipped and tore at the ladder and spat wickedly against the
wall.  He swung through to the roof, trying, as he did so, to kick
the ladder loose behind him.  It was fastened!
The three gunmen jumped into the room–from the roof Jimmie Dale got
a glimpse of them below, as he flung himself clear of the opening.
Bullets whistled through the aperture–a voice roared up as he
gained his feet:
“Come on!  After him!  The whole place is alive, but this lets us
out.  We can frame up how we came to be here easy enough.  Never
mind the old geezer there any more!  Get the Gray Seal–the reward
that’s out for him is worth twice the sparklers, and–”
Jimmie Dale hurled the cover over the scuttle.  He could have stood
them off from above and kept the ladder clear with his revolver, but
the alarm seemed general now–windows were opening, voices were
calling to one another–from the windows across the street he must
stand out in sharp outline against the sky.  Yes–he was seen now.
A woman’s voice, from a top-story window across the street, screamed
out, high-pitched in excitement:
“There he is!  There he is!  On the roof there!”
Jimmie Dale started on the run along the roof.  The houses, built
wall to wall, flat-roofed, seemed to offer an open course ahead of
him–until a lane or an intersecting street should bar his way!  But
they were not quite all on the same level, though–the wall of the
next house rose suddenly breast high in front of him.  He flung
himself up, regained his feet–and ducked instantly behind a
chimney.
The crack of a revolver echoed through the night–a bullet drummed
through the air–the Skeeter and his gang were on the roof now,
dashing forward, firing as they ran.  Two shots from Jimmie Dale’s
automatic, in quick succession cooled the ardour of their rush–and
they broke, black, flitting forms, for the shelter of chimneys, too.
And now the whole neighbourhood seemed awakened.  A dull-toned roar,
as from some great gulf below, rolled up from the street, a medley
of slamming windows, the rush of feet as people poured from the
houses, cries, shouts, and yells–and high over all the shrill call
of the police-patrol whistle–and the CRACK, CRACK, CRACK of the
Skeeter’s revolver shots–the Skeeter and his hellhounds for once
self-appointed allies of the law!
Twice again Jimmie Dale fired–then crouching, running low, he
zigzagged his way across the next roof.  The bullets followed him–
once more his pursuers dashed forward.  And again Jimmie Dale, his
face set like stone now, his breath coming in hard gasps, dodged
behind a chimney, and with his gun checked their rush for the third
time.
He glanced about him–and with a growing sense of disaster saw that
two houses farther on the stretch of roof appeared to end.  There
would be a lane or a street there!  And in another minute or two, if
it were not already the case, others would be following the gunmen
to the roof, and then he would be–he caught his breath suddenly in
a queer little strangled cry of relief.  Just back of him, a few
yards away, his eyes made out what, in the darkness, seemed to be a
glass skylight.
A dark form sped like a deeper shadow across the black in front of
him, making for a chimney nearer by, closing in the range.  Jimmie
Dale fired–wide.  Tight as was the corner he was in, little as was
the mercy deserved at his hands, he could not, after all, bring
himself to shoot–to kill.
A voice, the Skeeter’s, bawled out raucously:
“Rush him all together–from different sides at once!”
A backward leap!  Jimmie Dale’s boot was crashing glass and frame,
stamping at it desperately, making a hole for his body through the
skylight.  A yell, a chorus of them, answered this–then the crunch
of racing feet on the gravel roof.  He emptied his revolver,
sweeping the darkness with a semicircle of vicious flashes.
It seemed an hour–it was barely the fraction of a second, as he
hung by his hands from the side of the skylight frame, his body
swinging back and forth in the unknown blackness below.  The
skylight might be, probably was, directly over the stair well, and
open clear to the basement of the house–but it was his only chance.
He swung his body well out, let go–and dropped.  With the impetus
he smashed against a wall, was flung back from it in a sort of
rebound, and his hands closed, gripping fiercely, on banisters.  It
had been the stair well beyond any question of doubt, but his swing
had sent him clear of it.
Above, they had not yet reached the skylight.  Jimmie Dale snatched
a precious moment to listen, as he rose, and found himself, apart
from bruises, perhaps unhurt.  There was commotion, too, in this
house below, the alarm had extended and spread along the block–but
the commotion was all in the FRONT of the house–the street was the
lure.
Jimmie Dale started down the stairs, and in an instant he had gained
the landing.  In another he had slipped to the rear of the hall–
somewhere there, from the hall itself, from one of the rear rooms,
there must be an exit to the fire escape.  To attempt to leave by
the front way was certain capture.
They were yelling, shouting down now through the sky-light above, as
Jimmie Dale softly raised the window sash at the rear of the hall.
The fire escape was there.  Shouts from along the corridor, from the
tenement dwellers who had been crowding their neighbours’ rooms,
craning their necks probably from the front windows, answered the
shouts now from the roof and the skylight; doors opened; forms
rushed out–but it was dark in the corridor, only a murky yellow at
the upper end from the opened doors.
Jimmie Dale slipped through the window to the fire escape, and,
working cautiously, silently, but with the speed of a trained
athlete, made his way down.  At the bottom he dropped from the iron
platform into the back yard, ran for the fence and climbed over into
a lane on the other side.
And then, as he ran, Jimmie Dale snatched the mask from his face and
put it in his pocket.  He was safe now.  He swept the sweat drops
from his forehead with the back of his hand–noticing them for the
first time.  It had been close–almost as close for him as it had
been for old Luddy.  And to-morrow the papers would execrate the
Gray Seal!  He smiled a little wanly.  His breath was still coming
hard.  Presently they would scour the lane–when they found that
their quarry was not in the house.  What a racket they were making!
The whole district seemed roused like a swarm of angry bees.
He kept on along the lane–and dodged suddenly into a cross street
where the two intersected.  The clang of a bell dinned discordantly
in his ears–a patrol wagon swept by him, racing for the scene of
the disturbance–the riot call was out!
Again Jimmie Dale smiled wearily, passing his hand across his eyes.
“I guess,” said Jimmie Dale, “I’m pretty near all in.  And I guess
it’s time that Larry the Bat went–home.”
And a little later a figure turned from the Bowery and shambled down
the cross street, a disreputable figure, with hands plunged deep in
his pockets–and a shadow across the roadway suddenly shifted its
position as the shambling figure slouched into the black alleyway
and entered the tenement’s side door.
And Larry the Bat smiled softly to himself–Kline’s men were still
on guard!
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
