


As the minutes passed, many of them, Jimmie Dale sat there
motionless, staring before him at the desk that was faintly outlined
in the unlighted room.  Then somewhere in the house a clock struck
the hour.  Five o’clock!  He raised his head.  YES!  It could be
done!  There was a way!  He had the germ of it now.  And now the
plan began to grow, to take form and shape in his mind, to dovetail,
to knit the integral parts into a comprehensive whole.  There was a
way–but he must have assistance.  Jason–yes, assuredly.  Benson,
his chauffeur–yes, equally as trustworthy as Jason.  Benson was
devoted to him; and moreover Benson was young, alert, daring, cool.
He had had more than one occasion to test Benson’s resourcefulness
and nerve!
Jimmie Dale rose abruptly, went to the rear window, and, parting the
curtains cautiously, stood peering down into the courtyard.  Yes, it
was feasible; even a little more than feasible.  The garage fronted
the driveway, of course, to give free entrance and egress to the
cars, but where the wall of the garage and the rear wall of the
house overlapped, as it were, the space between them was not much
more than ten yards; and here the shadows of the two walls,
mingling, lay like a black, impenetrable pathway–not like that
other shadow he had seen moving at the side of the garage, and that,
if not for the moment discernible, was none the less surely still
lurking there!
Satisfied, Jimmie Dale swung briskly from the window, and, going now
to his bedroom across the hall, undressed and went to bed–but not
to sleep.  There would be time enough to sleep, all day, if he
wished; now, there were still the little details to be thought out
that, more than anything else, could make or wreck his plans.  A
point overdone, the faintest suggestion of a false note where men of
the calibre of those against whom he was now fighting for his life
were concerned, would not only make his scheme abortive, but would
place him utterly at their mercy.
It was nine o’clock when he rang for Jason.
“Jason,” he said abruptly, as the other entered, “I want you to
telephone for Doctor Merlin.”
“The doctor, sir!” exclaimed the old man anxiously.  “You’re–you’re
not ill, Master Jim, sir?”
“Do I look ill, Jason?” inquired Jimmie Dale gravely.
“Well, sir,” admitted Jason, in concern; “a bit done up, sir,
perhaps.  A little pale, sir; though I’m sure–”
“I’m glad to hear it,” said Jimmie Dale, sitting up in bed.  “The
worse I look, the better!”
“I–I beg pardon, sir?” stammered Jason.
“Jason,” said Jimmie Dale, gravely again, “you have had reason to
know that on several occasions my life has been threatened.  It is
threatened now.  You know from last night that this house is now
watched.  You may, or you may not have surmised–that our telephone
wires have been tapped.”
“Tapped, sir!"–Jason’s face had gone a little gray.
“Yes; a party line, so to speak,” said Jimmie Dale grimly.  “Do you
understand?  You must be careful to say no more, no less than
exactly what I tell you to say.  Now go and telephone!  Ask the
doctor to come over and see me this morning.  Simply say that I am
not feeling well; but that, apart from being apparently in a very
nervous condition, you do not know what is the matter.”
“Yes, sir–good Lord, sir!” gasped Jason–and left the room to carry
out his orders.
An hour later, Doctor Merlin had been and gone–and had left two
prescriptions; one written, the other verbal.  With the written one,
Benson, in his chauffeur’s livery, was dispatched to the drug store;
the verbal one was precisely what Jimmie Dale had expected from the
fussy old family physician: “Two or three days of quiet in the house
James; and if you need me again, let me know.”
“Now, Jason,” said Jimmie Dale, when the old man had returned from
ushering Doctor Merlin from the house, “our friends out there will
be anxious to learn the verdict.  I was to dine with the Ross-
Hendersons to-morrow night, was I not?”
“Yes, sir; I think so, sir.”
“Make sure!” said Jimmie Dale.  “Look in my engagement book there on
the table.”
Jason looked.
“Yes, sir, that’s right,” he announced.
“Very good,” said Jimmie Dale softly.  “Now go and telephone again,
Jason.  Present my regrets and excuses to the Ross-Hendersons, and
say that under the doctor’s orders I am confined to the house for
the next few days–and, Jason!”
“Yes, sir?”
“When Benson returns with the medicine let him bring it here
himself–and I shall want you as well.”
Jimmie Dale propped himself up a little wearily on the pillows, as
Jason went out of the room.  After all, his condition was not
entirely feigned.  He was, as a matter of fact, pretty well played
out, both mentally and physically.  Certainly, that he should
require a doctor and be confined to the house could not arouse
suspicion even in the minds of those alert, aristocratic thugs of
the Crime Club, prone as they would be to suspect anything–a man
who had been knocked unconscious in an automobile smash the night
before, had been in a fight, had been subjected to a terrific mental
shock, to say nothing of the infernal drug that had been
administered to him, might well be expected to be indisposed the
next morning, and for several mornings following that!  It might,
indeed, even cause them to relax their vigilance for the time being–
though he dared build nothing on that.  Well, he had only to coach
Benson and Jason in the parts they were to play, and the balance of
the morning and all the afternoon was his in which to rest.
He reached over to the table, picked up a pencil and paper, and
began to jot down memoranda.  He had just tossed the pencil back on
the table as the two men entered.
Jason, at a sign, closed the door quietly.
Jimmie Dale looked at Benson half musingly, half whimsically, for a
moment before he spoke.
“Benson,” he said, “the back seat of the large touring car is hinged
and lifts up, once the cushion is removed, doesn’t it?”
“Yes, sir,” Benson answered promptly.
“And there’s space enough for, say, a man inside, isn’t there?”
“Why, yes, sir; I suppose so–at a squeeze"–Benson stared blankly.
“Quite so!” said Jimmie Dale calmly.  “Now, another matter, Benson:
I believe some chauffeurs have a habit, when occasion lends itself,
of taking, shall we say, their ’best girl’ out riding in their
masters’ machines?”
“SOME might,” Benson replied, a little stiffly.  “I hope you don’t
think, sir, that–”
“One moment, Benson.  The point is, it’s done–quite generally?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And you have a ’best girl,’ or at least could find one for such a
purpose, if you were so inclined?”
“Yes, sir,” said Benson; “but–”
“Very good!” Jimmie Dale interrupted.  “Then to-night, Benson,
taking advantage of my illness, and to-morrow night, and the nights
after that until further notice, you will acquire and put into
practice that reprehensible habit.”
“I–I don’t understand, Mr. Dale.”
“No; I dare say not,” said Jimmie Dale–and then the whimsicality
dropped from him.  “Benson,” he said slowly, “do you remember a
night, nearly four years ago, the first night you ever saw me?  You
had, indiscreetly, I think, displayed more money than was wise in
that East Side neighbourhood.”
“I remember,” said Benson, with a sudden start; then simply: “I
wouldn’t be here now, sir, if it hadn’t been for you.”
“Well,” said Jimmie Dale quietly, “the tables are turned to-day,
Benson.  As Jason already knows, this house is watched.  For reasons
that I cannot explain, I am in great danger.  Bluntly, I am putting
my life in your hands–and Jason’s.”
Benson looked for an instant from Jimmie Dale to Jason, caught the
strained, troubled expression on the old man’s face, then back again
at Jimmie Dale.
“D’ye mean that, sir!” he cried.  “Then you can count on me, Mr.
Dale, to the last ditch!”
“I know that, Benson,” Jimmie Dale said softly.  “And now, both of
you, listen!  It is imperative that I should get away from the
house; and equally imperative that those watching should believe
that I am still here.  Not even the servants are to be permitted a
suspicion that I am not here in my bed, ill.  That, Jason, is your
task.  You will allow no one to wait on me but yourself; you will
bring the meal trays up regularly–and eat the food yourself.  You
will answer all inquiries, telephone and otherwise, in person–I am
not seeing any one.  You understand perfectly, Jason?”
“I understand, Master Jim.  You need have no fear, sir, on that
score.”
“Now, you, Benson,” Jimmie Dale went on.  “A few minutes ago I sent
you out in your chauffeur’s togs with that prescription.  You were
undoubtedly observed.  I wanted you to be.  It was quite necessary
that they should know and be able to recognise you again–to
disabuse their minds later on of the possibility that I might be
masquerading in your clothes; and also, of course, that they should
know who you were, and what your position was in the household.
Very well!  To-night, at eight o’clock exactly, you are to go out
from the back door of the house to the garage.  On the way out–it
will be quite dark then–I want you to drop something, say, a bunch
of keys that you had been jingling in your hand.  You are to
experience some difficulty in finding it again, move about a little
to force any one that may be lurking by the garage to retreat around
the corner.  Grumble a bit and make a little noise; but you are not
to overdo it–a couple of minutes at the outside is enough, by that
time I shall be under the car seat.  You will then run the machine
out to the street and stop at the curb, jump out, and, as though you
had forgotten something, hurry back to the garage.  You must not be
away long–enough only to permit, say, a passer-by to glance into
the car and satisfy himself that it is empty.  You understand, of
course, Benson, that the hood must be down–no closed car to invite
even the suggestion of concealment–that would be a fatal blunder.
Drive then to the young lady’s home by as direct a route as you can–
give no appearance of being aware that you are followed, as you
will be, and much less the appearance of attempting to elude
pursuit.  Act naturally.  Between here and your destination I will
manage readily enough to leave the car.  You will then take the
young lady for her drive–that is what they will be interested in–
your motive for going out to-night.  And, as I said, take her
driving again on each succeeding night–establish the HABIT to their
satisfaction.”
Jimmie Dale paused, glanced at the paper which he still held in his
hand, then handed it to Benson.
“Just one thing more, Benson,” he said: “Listed on that paper you
will find a different rendezvous for each night for the next five
nights, excluding to-night, which, after you have returned the young
lady to her home, you are to pass by on your way back here.  See
that your drive is always over in time for you to pass each night’s
rendezvous at half past eleven sharp.  Don’t stop unless I signal
you.  If I am not there, go right on home, and be at the next place
on the following night.  I am fairly well satisfied they will not
bother about you after to-night, or to-morrow night at the most;
but, for all that, you must take no chances, so, except in the route
you take in going to the young lady’s, always avoid covering the
same ground twice, which might give the appearance of having some
ulterior purpose in view–even in your drives, vary your runs.  Is
this clear, Benson?”
“Yes, sir,” said Benson earnestly.
“Very well, then,” said Jimmie Dale.  “Eight o’clock to the dot,
Benson–compare your time with Jason’s.  And now, Jason, see that I
get a chance to sleep until dinner time to-night.”
The hours that followed were hours of sound and much-needed sleep
for Jimmie Dale, and from which he awoke only on Jason’s entrance
that evening with the dinner tray.
“I’ve slept like a log, Jason!” he cried briskly, as he leaped out
of bed.  “Anything new–anything happened?”
“No, sir; not a thing,” Jason answered.  “Only, Master Jim, sir"–
the old man twisted his hands nervously–"I–you’ll excuse my saying
so, sir–I do hope you’ll be careful to-night, sir.  I can’t help
being afraid that something’ll happen to you, Master Jim.”
“Nonsense, Jason!” Jimmie Dale laughed cheerfully.  “There’s nothing
going to happen–to me!  You go ahead now and stay with the
servants, and get them out of the road at the proper time.”
He bathed, dressed, ate his dinner, and was slipping cartridges into
the magazine of his automatic when, within a minute or two of eight
o’clock, Jason’s whisper came from the doorway.
“It’s all clear now, Master Jim, sir.”
“Right!” Jimmie Dale responded–and followed Jason down the
stairway, and to the head of the cellar stairs.
Here Jason halted.
“God keep you, Master Jim!” said the old man huskily.  “Good-night,
Jason,” Jimmie Dale answered softly; and, with a reassuring squeeze
on the other’s arm, went on down to the cellar.
Here he moved quickly, noiselessly across to the window–not the
window of the night before, but another of the same description,
almost directly beneath the one in his den above, that faced the
garage and lay in the line of that black shadow path between the two
buildings.  Deftly, cautiously without sound, a half inch, an inch
at a time he opened it.  He stood listening, then.  A minute passed.
Then he heard Benson open and shut the back door; then Benson in the
yard; and then Benson’s voice in a muttered and irritable growl,
talking to himself, as he stamped around on the ground.
With a lithe, agile movement, Jimmie Dale pulled himself up and
through the window–and began to creep rapidly on hands and knees
toward the garage.  It was dark, intensely dark.  He could barely
distinguish Benson’s form, though, as he passed the other, the
slight sounds he made drowned out by the chauffeur’s angry
mumblings, he could have reached out and touched Benson easily.
He gained the interior of the garage, and, as Benson, came on again,
stepped lightly into the car, lifted the seat, and wriggled his way
inside.
It was close, stuffy, abominably cramped, but Jimmie Dale was
smiling grimly now.  Thanks to Benson, there wasn’t a possibility
that he had been seen.  He both felt and heard Benson start the car.
Then the car moved forward, ran the length of the driveway, bumped
slightly as it made the street–and stopped.  He heard Benson jump
out and run back–and then he listened intently, and the grim smile
flickered on his lips again.  Came the sound of a footstep on the
sidewalk close beside the car–then silence–the car shook a little
as though some one’s weight was on the step–then the footsteps
receded–Benson returned on the run–and the car started forward
once more.
Perhaps ten minutes passed.  Three times the car had swerved
sharply, making a corner turn.  Then Jimmie Dale pushed up the seat,
and, protected from observation from behind by the back of the car
itself, crawled out and crouched down on the floor of the tonneau.
“Don’t look around, Benson,” he said calmly.  “Are we followed?”
“Yes, sir.” Benson answered.  “At least, there’s always been a car
behind us, though not the same one.  They’re pretty clever.  There
must be three or four, each following the other.  Every time I turn
a corner it’s a different car that turns it behind me.”
“How far behind?” Jimmie Dale asked.
“Half a block.”
“Slow down a little,” instructed Jimmie Dale; “and don’t turn
another corner until they’ve had a chance to accomodate themselves
to your new speed.  You are going too fast for me to jump, and I
don’t want them to notice any change in speed, except what is made
in plain sight.  Yes; that’s better.  Where are we, Benson?”
“That’s Amsterdam Avenue ahead,” replied Benson.
“All right,” said Jimmie Dale quietly.  “Turn into it.  The more
people the better.  Tell me just as you are about to turn.”
“Yes, sir,” said Benson; then, almost on the instant, “All ready,
sir!”
Jimmie Dale’s hand reached out for the door catch, edged the door
ajar, the car swerved, took the corner–and Jimmie Dale stepped out
on the running board, hung there negligently for a moment as though
chatting with Benson, and then with an airy “good-night” dropped
nonchalantly to the ground, and the next instant had mingled with
the throng of pedestrians on the sidewalk.
A half minute later, a large gray automobile turned the corner and
followed Benson–and Jimmie Dale, stepping out into the street
again, swung on a downtown car.  The road to the Sanctuary was open!
In his impatience, now, the street car seemed to drag along every
foot of the way; but a glance at his watch, as he finally reached
the Bowery, and, walking then, rapidly approached the cross street a
few steps ahead that led to the Sanctuary, told him that it was
still but a quarter to nine.  But even at that he quickened his
steps a little.  He was free now!  There was a sort of savage,
elemental uplift upon him.  He was free!  He could strike now in his
own defense–and hers!  In a few moments he would be at the
Sanctuary; in a few more he would be Larry the Bat, and by to-morrow
at the latest he would see–The Tocsin.  After all, that “hour” was
not to be taken from him!  It was not, perhaps, the hour that she
had meant it should be, thought and prayed, perhaps, that it might
be!  It was not the hour of victory.  But it was the hour that meant
to him the realisation of the years of longing, the hour when he
should see her, see her for the first time face to face, when there
should be no more barriers between them, when–”
“Fer Gawd’s sake, mister, buy a pencil!”
A hand was plucking at his sleeve, the thin voice was whining in his
ear.  He halted mechanically.  A woman, old, bedraggled, ragged, was
thrusting a bunch of cheap pencils imploringly toward him–and then,
with a stifled cry, Jimmie Dale leaned forward.  The eyes that
lifted to his for an instant were bright and clear with the vigor of
youth, great eyes of brown they were, and trouble, hope, fear,
wistfulness, ay, and a glorious shyness were in their depths.  And
then the voice he knew so well, the Tocsin’s was whispering
hurriedly:
“I will be waiting here, Jimmie–for Larry the Bat.”
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
