


Whisperings!  Always whisperings, low, sibilant, floating errantly
from all sides, until they seemed a component part of the drug-laden
atmosphere itself.  And occasionally another sound: the soft SLAP-
SLAP of loose-slippered feet, the faint rustle of equally loose-
fitting garments.  And everywhere the sweet, sickish smell of opium.
It was Chang Foo’s, simply a cellar or two deeper in Chang Foo’s
than that in which Dago Jim had quarrelled once–and died!
Larry the Bat, vicious-faced, unkempt, disreputable, lay sprawled
out on one of the dive’s bunks, an opium pipe beside him.  But Larry
the Bat was not smoking; instead, his ear was pressed closely
against the boarding that formed the rather flimsy partition at the
side of the bunk.  One heard many things in Chang Foo’s if one cared
to listen–if one could first win one’s way through the carefully
guarded gateway, that to the uninitiated offered nothing more
interesting than the entrance to a Chinese tea-shop, and an
uninviting one at that!
HAD HE BEEN FOLLOWED IN HERE?  He had been shadowed for the last
hour; of that, at least, he was certain.  Why?  By whom?  For an
hour he had dodged in and out through the dens of the underworld, as
only one who was at home there and known to all could do–and at
last he had taken refuge in Chang Foo’s like a fox burrowing deep
into its hole.
Few could find their way into the most infamous opium den in all New
York, where not only the poppy ruled as master, but where crime was
hatched, ay, and carried to its ghastly consummation, sometimes, as
well; and of those few, not one but was of the underworld itself.
And it was that fact which held his muscles strained and rigid now
under the miserable rags that covered them, and it was that which
kept the keen, quick brain alert and active, every faculty keyed up
and tense.  If it were the police, he had little to fear, for they
could not force their way in without warning; but if it were the
underworld, he was in imminent peril, and had done little better
than run himself into a trap from which there was no escape.
“DEATH TO THE GRAY SEAL!"–he had heard that whispered more than
once in this very place.  Who knew at what moment the role of Larry
the Bat would be uncovered, and the underworld, where now he held so
high a place, would be at his throat like a pack of snarling wolves!
Who had been shadowing him during the last hour?
Whisperings!  Nothing tangible!  He could catch no words.  Only the
never-ending whisperings of gathered groups here and there–and
sometimes the clink of coin where some game was in progress.
The curtain before his bunk was drawn suddenly aside–and Larry the
Bat’s fingers, where his hand was carelessly hidden by his body
tightened upon his automatic.
“Smokee some more?”
The fingers relaxed.  It was only Sam Wah, one of the attendants.
“Nix!” said Larry the Bat, in a slightly muddled tone.  “Got
enough.”
The curtain fell into place again.  Larry the Bat’s lips set in a
thin smile.  Ultimately it made little difference whether it was the
police or the underworld!  The smile grew thinner.  It was the flip
of a coin, that was all!  With one there was the death house at Sing
Sing for the Gray Seal; with the other–well, there were many ways,
from a shot or a knife thrust in the open street, to his murder in
some hidden dive like this of Chang Foo’s, for instance, where he
now was–the Gray Seal was responsible for the occupancy of too many
penitentiary cells by those of the underworld to look for any other
fate!
He raised himself up sharply on his elbow.  A shrill, high note,
like the scream of a parrakeet, rang out a second time.  He tore the
curtain aside, and jumped to his feet.  All around him, in the
twinkling of an eye, Chinamen in fluttering blouses, chattering like
magpies, mingled with snarling, cursing whites, were running madly.
A voice, prefaced with an oath, bawled out behind him, as he sprang
forward and joined the rush:
“Beat it!  De cops!  Beat it!”
The police!  A raid!  Was it for HIM?  From rooms, an amazing number
of them, more forms rushed out, joined, divided, separated, and
dashed, some this way, some that, along branching passageways.
There had been raids before, the police had begun to change their
minds about Chang Foo’s, but Chang Foo’s was not an easy place to
raid.  House after house in that quarter of Chinese laundries, of
tea shops, of chop-suey joints, opened one into the other through
secret passages in the cellars.  Larry the Bat plunged down a
staircase, and halted in the darkness of a cellar, drawing back
against the wall while the flying feet of his fellow fugitives
scurried by him.
Was it for HIM, this raid?  If not, the police had not a hope of
getting him if he kept his head; for back in Chang Foo’s proper,
which would be quite closed off now, Chang Foo would be blandly
submitting to arrest, offering himself as a sort of glorified
sacrifice while the police confiscated opium and fan-tan layouts.
If the police had no other purpose than that in mind, Chang Foo
would simply pay a fine; the next night the place would be in full
blast again; and Chang Foo, higher than ever in the confidence of
the underworld’s aristocracy, would reap his reward–and that would
be all there was to it.
But was that all?  The raid had followed significantly close upon
the heels of his entry into Chang Foo’s.  Larry the Bat began to
move forward again.  He dared not follow the others, and, later on,
when quiet was restored, issue out into the street from any one of
the various houses in which he might temporarily have taken refuge.
There was a chance in that, a chance that the police might be more
zealous than usual, even if he particularly was not their game–and
he could take no chance.  Arrest for Larry the Bat, even on
suspicion, could have but one conclusion–not a pleasant one–the
disclosure that Larry the Bat was not Larry the Bat at all, but
Jimmie Dale, the millionaire club-man, and, to complete a fatal
triplication, that Larry the Bat and Jimmie Dale was the Gray Seal
upon whose head was fixed a price!
All was silence around him now, except that from overhead came
occasionally the muffled tread of feet.  He felt his way along into
a black, narrow passage, emerged into a second cellar, swept the
place with a single, circling gleam from a pocket flashlight, passed
a stairway that led upward, reached the opposite wall, and, dropping
on hands and knees, crawled into what, innocently enough, appeared
to be the opening of a coal bin.
He knew Chang Foo’s well–as he knew the ins and outs of every den
and place he frequented, knew them as a man knows such things when
his life at any moment might hang upon his knowledge.
He was in another passage now, and this, in a few steps, brought him
to a door.  Here he halted, and stood for a full five minutes,
absolutely motionless, absolutely still, listening.  There was
nothing–not a sound.  He tried the door cautiously.  It was locked.
The slim, sensitive, tapering fingers of Jimmie Dale, unrecognisable
now in the grimy digits of Larry the Bat, felt tentatively over the
lock.  To fingers that seemed in their tips to possess all the human
senses, that time and again in their delicate touch upon the dial of
a safe had mocked at human ingenuity and driven the police into
impotent frenzy, this was a pitiful thing.  From his pocket came a
small steel instrument that was quickly and deftly inserted in the
keyhole.  There was a click, the door swung open, and Jimmie Dale,
alias Larry the Bat, stepped outside into a back yard half a block
away from the entrance to Chang Foo’s.
Again he listened.  There did not appear to be any unusual
excitement in the neighbourhood.  From open windows above him and
from adjoining houses came the ordinary, commonplace sounds of
voices talking and laughing, even the queer, weird notes of a
Chinese chant.  He stole noiselessly across the yard, out into the
lane, and made his way rapidly along to the cross street.
In a measure, now, he was safe; but one thing, a very vital thing,
remained to be done.  It was absolutely necessary that he should
know whether he was the quarry that the police had been after in the
raid, if it was the police who had been shadowing him all evening.
If it was the police, there was but one meaning to it–Larry the Bat
was known to be the Gray Seal, and a problem perilous enough in any
aspect confronted him.  Dare he risk the Sanctuary–for the clothes
of Jimmie Dale?  Or was it safer to burglarise, as he had once done
before, his own mansion on Riverside Drive?
His thoughts were running riot, and he frowned, angry with himself.
There was time enough to think of that when he knew that it was the
police against whom he had to match his wits.
Well in the shadow of the buildings, he moved swiftly along the side
street until he came to the corner of the street on which, halfway
down the block, fronted Chang Foo’s tea-shop.  A glance in that
direction, and Jimmie Dale drew a breath of relief.  A patrol wagon
was backed up to the curb, and a half dozen officers were busy
loading it with what was evidently Chang Foo’s far from meagre stock
of gambling appurtenances; while Chang Foo himself, together with
Sam Wah and another attendant, were in the grip of two other
officers, waiting possibly for another patrol wagon.  There was a
crowd, too, but the crowd was at a respectful distance–on the
opposite side of the street.
Jimmie Dale still hugged the corner.  A man swaggered out from a
doorway, quite close to Chang Foo’s, and came on along the street.
As the other reached the corner, Jimmie Dale sidled forward.
“’Ello, Chick!” he said, out of the corner of his mouth.  “Wot’s de
lay?”
“’Ello, Larry!” returned the other.  “Aw, nuthin’!  De nutcracker on
Chang, dat’s all.”
“I t’ought mabbe dey was lookin’ for some guy dat was in dere,"
observed Jimmie Dale.
“Nuthin’ doin’!” the other answered.  “I was in dere meself.  De
whole mob beat it clean, an’ de bulls never batted an eye.  Didn’t
youse pipe me make me get-away outer Shanghai’s a minute ago?  De
bulls never went nowhere except into Chang’s.  Dere’s a new
lootenant in de precinct inaugeratin’ himself, dat’s all.  S’long,
Larry–I gotta date.”
“S’long, Chick!” responded Jimmie Dale–and started slowly back
along the cross street.
It was not the police, then, who were interested in his movements!
Then who?  He shook his head with a little, savage, impotent
gesture.  One thing was clear: it was too early to risk a return to
the Sanctuary and attempt the rehabilitation of Jimmie Dale.  If any
one was on the hunt for Larry the Bat, the Sanctuary would be the
last place to be overlooked.
He turned the next corner, hesitated a moment in front of a garishly
lighted dance hall, and finally shuffled in through the door, made
his way across the floor, nodding here and there to the elite of
gangland, and, with a somewhat arrogant air of proprietorship, sat
down at a table in the corner.  Little better than a tramp in
appearance, certainly the most disreputable-looking object in the
place, even the waiter who approached him accorded him a certain
curious deference–was not Larry the Bat the most celebrated dope
fiend below the dead line?
“Gimme a mug o’ suds!” ordered Jimmie Dale, and sprawled royally
back in his chair.
Under the rim of his slouch hat, pulled now far over his eyes, he
searched the faces around him.  If he had been asked to pick the
actors for a revel from the scum of the underworld, he could not
have improved upon the gathering.  There were perhaps a hundred men
and women in the room, the majority dancing, and, with the exception
of a few sight-seeing slummers, they were men and women whose
acquaintance with the police was intimate but not cordial–far from
cordial.
Jimmie Dale shrugged his shoulders, and sipped at the glass that had
been set before him.  It was grimly ironic that he should be, not
only there, but actually a factor and a part of the underworld’s
intimate life!  He, Jimmie Dale, a wealthy man, a member of New
York’s exclusive clubs, a member of New York’s most exclusive
society!  It was inconceivable.  He smiled sardonically.  Was it?
Well, then, it was none the less true.  His life unquestionably was
one unique, apart from any other man’s, but it was, for all that,
actual and real.
There had been three years of it now–since SHE had come into his
life.  Jimmie Dale slouched down a little in his chair.  The ice was
thin, perilously thin, that he was skating on now.  Each letter,
with its demand upon him to match his wits against police or
underworld, or against both combined, perhaps, made that peril a
little greater, a little more imminent–if that were possible, when
already his life was almost literally carried, daily, hourly, in his
hand.  Not that he rebelled against it; it was worth the price that
some day he expected he must pay–the price of honour, wealth, a
name disgraced, ruin, death.  Was he quixotic?  Immoderately so?  He
smiled gravely.  Perhaps.  But he would do it all over again if the
choice were his.  There were those who blessed the name of the Gray
Seal, as well as those who cursed it.  And there was the Tocsin!
Who was she?  He did not know, but he knew that he had come to love
her, come to care for her, and that she had come to mean everything
in life to him.  He had never seen her, to know her face.  He had
never seen her face, but he knew her voice–ay, he had even held her
for a moment, the moment of wildest happiness he had ever known, in
his arms.  That night when he had entered his library, his own
particular den in his own house, and in the darkness had found her
there–found her finally through no effort of his own, when he had
searched so fruitlessly for years to find her, using every resource
at his command to find her!  And she, because she had come of her
own volition, relying upon him, had held him in honour to let her go
as she had come–without looking upon her face!  Exquisite irony!
But she had made him a promise then–that the work of the Gray Seal
was nearly over–that soon there would be an end to the mystery that
surrounded her–that he should know all–that he should know HER.
He smiled again, but it was a twisted smile on the mechanically
misshapen lips of Larry the Bat.  NEARLY over!  Who knew?  That
“nearly” might be too late!  Even tonight he had been shadowed, was
skulking even now in this place as a refuge.  Who knew?  Another
hour, and the newsboys might be shrieking their “Uxtra!  Uxtra!  De
Gray Seal caught!  De millionaire Jimmie Dale de Jekyll an’ Hyde of
real life!”
Jimmie Dale straightened up suddenly in his seat.  There was a
shout, an oath bawled out high above the riot of noise, a chorus of
feminine shrieks from across the room.  What was the matter with the
underworld to-night?  He seemed fated to find nothing but centres of
disturbance– first a raid at Chang Foo’s, and now this.  What was
the matter here?  They were stampeding toward him from the other
side of the room.  There was the roar of a revolver shot–another.
Black Ike!  He caught an instant’s glimpse of the gunman’s distorted
face through the crowd.  That was it probably–a row over some moll.
And then, as Jimmie Dale lunged up from his chair to his feet to
escape the rush, pandemonium itself seemed to break loose.  Yells,
shots, screams, and oaths filled the air.  The crowd surged this way
and that.  Tables were overturned and sent crashing to the floor.
And then came sudden darkness, as some one of the attendants in
misguided excitability switched off the lights.
The darkness but served to increase the panic, not allay it.  With a
savage snap of his jaws, Jimmie Dale swung from his table in the
corner with the intention of making his way out by a side door
behind him–it was a case of the police again, and the patrolman
outside would probably be pulling a riot call by now.  And the
police–  He stopped suddenly, as though he had been struck.  An
envelope, thrust there out of the darkness, was in his hand; and her
voice, HERS, the Tocsin’s, was sounding in his ears:
“Jimmie!  Jimmie!  I’ve been trying all evening to catch you!
Quick!  Get to the Sanctuary and change your clothes.  There’s not
an instant to lose!  It’s for my sake to-night!”
And then a surging mob was around him on every side, and, pushing,
jostling, half lifting him at times from his feet, carried him
forward with its rush, and with him in its midst burst through the
door and out into the street.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
