


A white-gloved arm, a voice, and a silvery laugh!  “Just that–no
more!  Jimmie Dale, in his favourite seat, an aisle seat some seven
or eight rows back from the orchestra, stared at the stage, to all
outward appearances absorbed in the last act of the play; inwardly,
quite oblivious to the fact that even a play was going on.
A white-gloved arm, a voice, and a silvery laugh!  The words had
formed themselves into a sort of singsong refrain that, for the last
few days, had been running through his head.  A strange enough
guiding star to mould and dictate every action in his life!  And
that was all he had ever seen of her, all that he had ever heard of
her–except those letters, of course, each of which had outlined the
details of some affair for the Gray Seal to execute.
Indeed, it seemed a great length of time now since he had heard from
her even in that way, though it was not so many days ago, after all.
Perhaps it was the calm, as it were, that, by contrast, had given
place to the strenuous months and weeks just past.  The storm raised
by the newspapers at the theft of Old Luddy’s diamonds had subsided
into sporadic diatribes aimed at the police; Kline, of the secret
service, had finally admitted defeat, and a shadow no longer skulked
day and night at the entrance to the Sanctuary–and Larry the Bat
bore the government indorsement, so to speak, of being no more
suspicious a character than that of a disreputable, but harmless,
dope fiend of the underworld.
Larry the Bat!  The Gray Seal!  Jimmie Dale the millionaire!  What
if it were ever known that that strange three were one!  What if–
Jimmie Dale smiled whimsically.  A burst of applause echoed through
the house, the orchestra was playing, the lights were on, seats
banged, there was the bustle of the rising audience, the play was at
an end–and for the life of him he could not have remembered a
single line of the last act!
The aisle at his elbow was already crowded with people on their way
out.  Jimmie Dale stooped down mechanically to reach for his hat
beneath his seat–and the next instant he was standing up, staring
wildly into the faces around him.
It had fallen at his feet–a white envelope.  Hers!  It was in his
hand now, those slim, tapering, wonderfully sensitive fingers of
Jimmie Dale, that were an “open sesame” to locks and safes,
subconsciously telegraphing to his mind the fact that the texture of
the paper–was hers.  Hers!  And she must be one of those around
him–one of those crowding either the row of seats in front or
behind, or one of those just passing in the aisle.  It had fallen at
his feet as he had stooped over for his hat–but from just exactly
what direction he could not tell.  His eyes, eagerly, hungrily,
critically, swept face after face.  Which one was hers?  What irony!
She, whom he would have given his life to know, for whom indeed he
risked his life every hour of the twenty-four, was close to him now,
within reach–and as far removed as though a thousand miles
separated them.  She was there–but he could not recognise a face
that he had never seen!
With an effort, he choked back the bitter, impotent laugh that rose
to his lips.  They were talking, laughing around him.  Her VOICE–
yes, he had once heard that, and that he would recognise again.  He
strained to catch, to individualise the tone sounds that floated in
a medley about him.  It was useless–of course–every effort that he
had ever made to find her had been useless.  She was too clever, far
too clever for that–she, too, would know that he could and would
recognise her voice where he could recognise nothing else.
And then, suddenly, he realised that he was attracting attention.
Level stares from the women returned his gaze, and they edged away a
little from his vicinity as they passed, their escorts crowding
somewhat belligerently into their places.  Others, in the same row
of seats as his own, were impatiently waiting to get by him.  With a
muttered apology, Jimmie Dale raised the seat of his chair, allowing
these latter to pass him–and then, slipping the letter into his
pocketbook, he snatched up his hat from the seat rack.
There was still a chance.  Knowing he was there, she would be on her
guard; but in the lobby, among the crowd and unaware of his
presence, there was the possibility that, if he could reach the
entrance ahead of her, she, too, might be talking and laughing as
she left the theatre.  Just a single word, just a tone–that was all
he asked.
The row of seats at whose end he stood was empty now, and, instead
of stepping into the thronged aisle, he made his way across to the
opposite side of the theatre.  Here, the far aisle was less crowded,
and in a minute he had gained the foyer, confident that he was now
in advance of her.  The next moment he was lost in a jam of people
in the lobby.
He moved slowly now, very slowly–allowing those behind to press by
him on the way to the entrance.  A babel of voices rose about him,
as, tight-packed, the mass of people jostled, elbowed, and pushed
good-naturedly.  It was a voice now, her voice, that he was
listening for; but, though it seemed that every faculty was strained
and intent upon that one effort, his eyes, too, had in no degree
relaxed their vigilance–and once, half grimly, half sardonically,
he smiled to himself.  There would be an unexpected aftermath to
this exodus of expensively gowned and bejewelled women with their
prosperous, well-groomed escorts!  There was the Wowzer over there–
sleek, dapper, squirming in and out of the throng with the agility
and stealth of a cat.  As Larry the Bat he had met the Wowzer many
times, as indeed he had met and was acquainted with most of the
elite of the underworld.  The Wowzer, beyond a shadow of doubt, in
his own profession stood upon a plane entirely by himself–among
those qualified to speak, no one yet had ever questioned the
Wowzer’s claim to the distinction of being the most dexterous and
finished “poke getter” in the United States!
The crowd thinned in the lobby, thinned down to the last few belated
stragglers, who passed him as he still loitered in the entrance; and
then Jimmie Dale, with a shrug of his shoulders that was a great
deal more philosophical than the maddening sense of chagrin and
disappointment that burned within him, stepped out to the pavement
and headed down Broadway.  After all, he had known it in his heart
of hearts all the time–it had always been the same–it was only one
more occasion added to the innumerable ones that had gone before in
which she had eluded him!
And now–there was the letter!  Automatically he quickened his steps
a little.  It was useless, futile, profitless, for the moment, at
least, to disturb himself over his failure–there was the letter!
His lips parted in a strange, half-serious, half-speculative smile.
The letter–that was paramount now.  What new venture did the night
hold in store for him?  What sudden emergency was the Gray Seal
called upon to face this time–what role, unrehearsed, without
warning, must he play?  What story of grim, desperate rascality
would the papers credit him with when daylight came?  Or would they
carry in screaming headlines the announcement that the Gray Seal was
caged and caught at last, and in three-inch type tell the world that
the Gray Seal was–Jimmie Dale!
A block down, he turned from Broadway out of the theatre crowds that
streamed in both directions past him.  The letter!  Almost
feverishly now he was seeking an opportunity to open and read it
unobserved; an eagerness upon him that mingled exhilaration at the
lure of danger with a sense of premonition that, irritably,
inevitably was with him at moments such as these.  It seemed, it
always seemed, that, with an unopened letter of hers in his
possession, it was as though he were about to open a page in the
Book of Fate and read, as it were, a pronouncement upon himself that
might mean life or death.
He hurried on.  People still passed by him–too many.  And then a
cafe, just ahead, making a corner, gave him the opportunity that he
sought.  Away from the entrance, on the side street, the brilliant
lights from the windows shone out on a comparatively deserted
pavement.  There was ample light to read by, even as far away from
the window as the curb, and Jimmie Dale, with an approving nod,
turned the corner and walked along a few steps until opposite the
farthest window–but, as he halted here at the edge of the street,
he glanced quickly behind him at a man whom he had just passed.  The
other had paused at the corner and was staring down the street.
Jimmie Dale instantly and nonchalantly produced his cigarette case,
selected a cigarette, and fastidiously tapped its end on his thumb
nail.
“Inspector Burton in plain clothes,” he observed musingly to
himself.  “I wonder if it’s just a fluke–or something else?  We’ll
see.”
Jimmie Dale took a box of matches from his pocket.  The first would
not light.  The second broke, and, with an exclamation of annoyance,
he flung it away.  The third was making a fitful effort at life, as
another man emerged hastily from the cafe’s side door, hurried to
the corner, joined the man who was still loitering there, and both
together disappeared at a rapid pace down the street.
Jimmie Dale whistled softly to himself.  The second man was even
better known than the first; there was not a crook in New York but
would side-step Lannigan of headquarters, and do it with amazing
celerity–if he could!
“Something up!  But it’s not my hunt!” muttered Jimmie Dale; then,
with a shrug of his shoulders: “Queer the way those headquarters
chaps fascinate and give me a thrill every time I see them, even if
I haven’t a ghost of a reason for imagining that–”
The sentence was never finished.  Jimmie Dale’s face was gray.  The
street seemed to rock about him–and he stared, like a man stricken,
white to the lips, ahead of him.  THE LETTER WAS GONE!  His hand,
wriggling from his empty pocket, swept away the sweat beads that
were bursting from his forehead.  It had come at last–the pitcher
had gone once too often to the well!
Numbed for an instant, his brain cleared now, working with lightning
speed, leaping from premise to conclusion.  The crush in the theatre
lobby–the pushing, the jostling, the close contact–the Wowzer, the
slickest, cleverest pickpocket in the United States!  For a moment
he could have laughed aloud in a sort of ghastly, defiant mockery–
he himself had predicted an unexpected aftermath, had he not!
Aftermath!  It was–the END!  An hour, two hours, and New York would
be metamorphosed into a seething caldron of humanity bubbling with
the news.  It seemed that he could hear the screams of the newsboys
now shouting their extras; it seemed that he could see the people,
roused to frenzy, swarming in excited crowds, snatching at the
papers; he seemed to hear the mob’s shouts swell in execration, in
exultation–it seemed as though all around him had gone mad.  The
mystery of the Gray Seal was solved!  It was Jimmie Dale, Jimmie
Dale, Jimmie, Dale, the millionaire, the lion of society–and there
was ignominy for an honoured name, and shame and disaster and
convict stripes and sullen penitentiary walls–or death!  A felon’s
death–the chair!
He was running now, his hands clenched at his sides; his mind,
working subconsciously, urging him onward in a blind, as yet
unrealised, objectless way.  And then gradually impulse gave way to
calmer reason, and he slowed his pace to a quick, less noticeable
walk.  The Wowzer!  That was it!  There was yet a chance–the
Wowzer!  A merciless rage, cold, deadly, settled upon him.  It was
the Wowzer who had stolen his pocketbook, and with it the letter.
There could be no doubt of that.  Well, there would be a reckoning
at least before the end!
He was in a downtown subway train now–the roar in his ears in
consonance, it seemed, with the turmoil in his brain.  But now, too,
he was Jimmie Dale again; and, apart from the slightly outthrust
jaw, the tight-closed lips, impassive, debonair, composed.
There was yet a chance.  As Larry the Bat he knew every den and lair
below the dead line, and he knew, too, the Wowzer’s favourite
haunts.  There was yet a chance, only one in a thousand, it was
true, almost too pitiful to be depended upon–but yet a chance.  The
Wowzer had probably not worked alone, and he and his pal, or pals,
would certainly not remain uptown either to examine or divide their
spoils–they would wait until they were safe somewhere in one of
their hell holes on the East Side.  If he could find the Wowzer,
reach the man BEFORE THE LETTER WAS OPENED–Jimmie Dale’s lips grew
tighter.  THAT was the chance!  It he failed in that–Jimmie Dale’s
lips drooped downward in grim curves at the corners.  A chance!
Already the Wowzer had at least a half hour’s lead, and, worse
still, there was no telling which one of a dozen places the man
might have chosen to retreat to with his loot.
Time passed.  His mind obsessed, Jimmie Dale’s physical acts were
almost wholly mechanical.  It was perhaps fifteen minutes since he
had discovered the loss of the letter, and he was walking now
through the heart of the Bowery.  Exactly how he had got there he
could not have told; he had only a vague realisation that, following
an intuitive sense of direction, he had lost not a second of time in
making his way downtown.
And now he found himself hesitating at the corner of a cross street.
Two blocks east was that dark, narrow alleyway, that side door that
made the entrance to the Sanctuary.  It would be safer, a hundred
times safer, to go there, change his clothes and his personality,
and emerge again as Larry the Bat–infinitely safer in that role to
explore the dens of the underworld, many of them indeed unknown and
undreamed of by the police themselves, than to trust himself there
in well-cut, fashionable tweeds–but that would take time.  Time!
When, with every second, the one chance he had, desperate as that
already was, was slipping away from him.  No; what was apparently
the greater risk at least held out the only hope.
He went on again–his brain incessantly at work.  At the worst,
there was one mitigating factor in it all.  He had no need to think
of her.  Whatever the ruin and disaster that faced him in the next
few hours, she in any case was safe.  There was no clew to HER
identity in the letter; and where he, for months on end, with even
more to work upon, had failed at every turn to trace her, there was
little fear that any one else would have any better success.  She
was safe.  As for himself–that was different.  The Gray Seal would
be referred to in the letter, there would be the outline, the data
for the “crime” she had planned for that night; and the letter,
though unaddressed, being found in his pocketbook, where cards and
notes and a dozen different things among its contents proclaimed him
Jimmie Dale, needed no further evidence as to its ownership nor the
identity of the Gray Seal.
Jimmie Dale’s fingers crept inside his vest and fumbled there for a
moment–and a diamond stud, extracted from his shirt front,
glistened sportively in the necktie that was now tucked jauntily in
at one side of his shirt bosom.  He had reached the Blue Dragon, one
of Wowzer’s usual hang outs, and, swerving from the sidewalk,
entered the place.  There was wild tumult within–a constant storm
of applause, derision, and hilarity that was hurled from the tables
around the room at the turkey-trotting, tango-writhing couples on
the somewhat restricted space of polished hardwood flooring in the
centre.  Jimmie Dale swaggered down the room, a cigar tilted up at
an angle between his teeth, his soft felt hat a little rakishly on
one side of his head and well over his nose.
At the end of the room, at the bar, Jimmie Dale leaned toward the
barkeeper and talked out of the corner of his mouth.  There were
private rooms upstairs, and he jerked his head surreptitiously
ceilingward.
“Say, is de Wowzer up dere?” he inquired in a cautious whisper.
The man behind the bar, well known to Jimmie Dale as one of the
Wowzer’s particular pals, favoured him with a blank stare.
“Never heard of de guy!” he announced brusquely.  “Wot’s yours?”
“Gimme a mug of suds,” said Jimmie Dale, reaching for a match.  He
puffed at his cigar, blew out the match, and, after a moment, flung
the charred end away–but on his hand, as, palm outward, he raised
it to take his glass, the match had traced a small black cross.
The barkeeper put down the beer he had just drawn, wiped his hand
hurriedly, and with sudden enthusiasm thrust it across the bar.
“Glad to know youse, cull!” he exclaimed.  “Wot’s de lay?”
Jimmie Dale smiled.
“Nix!” said Jimmie Dale.  “I just blew in from Chicago.  Used to
know de Wowzer dere.  He said dis place was on de level, an’ I could
always find him here, dat’s all.”
“Sure, youse can!” returned the barkeeper heartily.  “Only he ain’t
here now.  He beat it about fifteen minutes ago, him an’ Dago Jim.
I guess youse’ll find him at Chang’s, I heard him an’ Dago say dey
was goin’ dere.  Know de place?”
Jimmie Dale shook his head.
“I ain’t much wise to New York,” he explained.
“Aw, dat’s easy,” whispered the barkeeper.  “Go down to Chatham
Square, an’ den any guy’ll show youse Chang Foo’s.”  He winked
confidentially.  “I guess youse won’t bump yer head none gettin’
around inside.”
Jimmie Dale nodded, grinned back, emptied his glass, and dug for a
coin.
“Forget it!” observed the barkeeper cordially.  “Dis is on me.  Any
friend of de Wowzer’s gets de glad hand here any time.”
“T’anks!” said Jimmie Dale gratefully, as he turned away.  “So long,
then–see youse later.”
Chang Foo’s!  Jimmie Dale’s face set even a little harder than it
had before, as he swung on again down the Bowery.  Yes; he knew
Chang Foo’s–too well.  Underground Chinatown–where a man’s life
was worth the price of an opium pill–or less!  Mechanically his
hand slipped into his pocket and closed over the automatic that
nestled there.  Once in–where he had to go–and the chances were
even, just even, that was all, that he would ever get out.  Again he
was tempted to return to the Sanctuary and make the attempt as Larry
the Bat.  Larry the Bat was well enough known to enter Chang Foo’s
unquestioned, and–but again he shook his head and went on.  There
was not time.  The Wowzer and his pal–it was Dago Jim it seemed–
had evidently been drinking and loitering their way downtown from
the theatre, and he had gained that much on them; but by now they
would be smugly tucked away somewhere in that maze of dens below the
ground, and at that moment probably were gloating over the biggest
night’s haul they had ever made in their lives!
And if they were!  What then?  Once they knew the contents of that
letter–what then?  Buy them off for a larger amount than the many
thousands offered for the capture of the Gray Seal?  Jimmie Dale
gritted his teeth.  That meant blackmail from them all his life, an
intolerable existence, impossible, a hell on earth–the slave, at
the beck and call of two of the worst criminals in New York!  The
moisture oozed again to Jimmie Dale’s forehead.  God, if he could
get that letter before it was opened–before they KNEW!  If he could
only get the chance to fight for it–against ANY odds!  Life!  Life
was a pitiful consideration against the alternative that faced him
now!
From the Blue Dragon to Chang Foo’s was not far; and Jimmie Dale
covered the distance in well under five minutes.  Chang Foo’s was
just a tea merchant’s shop, innocuous and innocent enough in its
appearance, blandly so indeed, and that was all–outwardly; but
Jimmie Dale, as he reached his destination, experienced the first
sensation of uplift he had known that night, and this from what,
apparently, did not in the least seem like a contributing cause.
“Luck!  The blessed luck of it!” he muttered grimly, as he surveyed
the sight-seeing car drawn up at the curb, and watched the
passengers crowding out of it to the ground.  “It wouldn’t have been
as easy to fool old Chang as it was that fellow back at the Dragon–
and, besides, if I can work it, there’s a better chance this way of
getting out alive.”
The guide was marshalling his “gapers"–some two dozen in all, men
and women.  Jimmie Dale unostentatiously fell in at the rear; and,
the guide leading, the little crowd passed into the tea merchant’s
shop.  Chang Foo, a wizened, wrinkled-faced little Celestial, oily,
suave, greeted them with profuse bows, chattering the while volubly
in Chinese.
The guide made the introduction with an all-embracing sweep of his
hand.
“Chang Foo–ladies and gentlemen,” he announced; then held up his
hand for silence.  “Ladies and gentlemen,” he said impressively,
“this is one of the most notorious, if not THE most notorious dive
in Chinatown, and it is only through special arrangement with the
authorities and at great expense that the company is able
exclusively to gain an entree here for its patrons.  You will see
here the real life of the Chinese, and in half an hour you will get
what few would get in a lifetime spent in China itself.  You will
see the Chinese children dance and perform; the Chinese women at
their household tasks; the joss, the shrine of his hallowed
ancestors, at which Chang Foo here worships; and you will enter the
most famous opium den in the United States.  Now, if you will all
keep close together, we will make a start.”
In spite of his desperate situation, Jimmie Dale smiled a little
whimsically.  Yes; they would see it all–UPSTAIRS!  The same old
bunk dished out night after night at so much a head–and the nervous
little schoolma’am of uncertain age, who fidgeted now beside him,
would go back somewhere down in Maine and shiver while she related
her “wider experiences” in tremulous whispers into the shocked ears
of envious other maiden ladies of equally uncertain age.  The same
old bunk–and a profitable one for Chang Foo for more reasons than
one.  It was dust in the eyes of the police.  The police smiled
knowingly at mention of Chang Foo.  Who should know, if they didn’t,
that it was all harmless fake, all bunk!  And so it was–UPSTAIRS!
They were passing out of the shop now, bowed out through a side door
by the obsequious and oily Chang Foo.  And now they massed again in
a sort of little hallway–and Chang Foo, closing the door upon
Jimmie Dale, who was the last in the line, shuffled back behind the
counter in his shop to resume his guard duty over customers of quite
another ilk.  With the door closed, it was dark, pitch dark.  And
this, too, like everything else connected with Chang Foo’s
establishment, for more reasons than one–for effect–and for
security.  Nervous little twitters began to emanate from the women–
the guide’s voice rose reassuringly:
“Keep close together, ladies and gentlemen.  We are going upstairs
now to–”
Jimmie Dale hugged back against the wall, sidled along it, and like
a shadow slipped down to the end of the hall.  The scuffling of two
dozen pairs of feet mounting the creaky staircase drowned the slight
sound as he cautiously opened a door; the darkness lay black,
impenetrable, along the hall.  And then, as cautiously as he had
opened it, he closed the door behind him, and stood for an instant
listening at the head of a ladder-like stairway, his automatic in
his hand now.  It was familiar ground to Larry the Bat.  The steps
led down to a cellar; and diagonally across from the foot of the
steps was an opening, ingeniously hidden by a heterogeneous
collection of odds and ends, boxes, cases, and rubbish from the
pseudo tea shop above; a low opening in the wall to a passage that
led on through the cellars of perhaps half a dozen adjoining houses,
each of which latter was leased, in one name or another–by Chang
Foo.
Jimmie Dale crept down the steps, and in another moment had gained
the farther side of the cellar; then, skirting around the ruck of
cases, he stooped suddenly and passed in through the opening in the
wall.  And now he halted once more.  He was straining his eyes down
a long, narrow passage, whose blackness was accentuated rather than
relieved by curious wavering, gossamer threads of yellow light that
showed here and there from under makeshift thresholds, from doors
slightly ajar.  Faint noises came to him, a muffled, intermittent
clink of coin, a low, continuous, droning hum of voices; the sickly
sweet smell of opium pricked at his nostrils.
Jimmie Dale’s face set rigidly.  It was the resort, not only of the
most depraved Chinese element, but of the worst “white” thugs that
made New York their headquarters–here, in the succession of
cellars, roughly partitioned off to make a dozen rooms on either
side of the passage, dope fiends sucked at the drug, and Chinese
gamblers spent the greater part of their lives; here, murder was
hatched and played too often to its hellish end; here, the scum of
the underworld sought refuge from the police to the profit of Chang
Foo; and here, somewhere, in one of these rooms, was–the Wowzer.
The Wowzer!  Jimmie Dale stole forward silently, without a sound,
swiftly–pausing only to listen for a second’s space at the doors as
he passed.  From this one came that clink of coin; from another that
jabber of Chinese; from still another that overpowering stench of
opium–and once, iron-nerved as he was, a cold thrill passed over
him.  Let this lair of hell’s wolves, so intent now on their own
affairs, be once roused, as they certainly must be roused before he
could hope to finish the Wowzer, and his chances of escape were–
He straightened suddenly, alert, tense, strained.  Voices, raised in
a furious quarrel, came from a door just beyond him on the other
side of the passage, where a film of light streamed out through a
cracked panel–it was the Wowzer and Dago Jim!  And drunk, both of
them–and both in a blind fury!
It happened quick then, almost instantaneously it seemed to Jimmie
Dale.  He was crouched now close against the door, his eye to the
crack in the panel.  There was only one figure in sight–Dago Jim–
standing beside a table on which burned a lamp, the table top
littered with watches, purses, and small chatelaine bags.  The man
was lurching unsteadily on his feet, a vicious sneer of triumph on
his face, waving tauntingly an open letter and Jimmie Dale’s pocket-
book in his hands–waving them presumably in the face of the Wowzer,
whom, from the restrictions of the crack, Jimmie Dale could not see.
He was conscious of a sickening sense of disaster.  His hope against
hope had been in vain–the letter had been opened and read–THE
IDENTITY OF THE GRAY SEAL WAS SOLVED.
Dago Jim’s voice roared out, hoarse, blasphemous, in drunken rage:
“De Gray Seal–see!  Youse betcher life I knows!  I been waitin’ fer
somet’ing like dis, damn youse!  Youse been stallin’ on me fer a
year every time it came to a divvy.  Youse’ve got a pocketful now
youse snitched to-night dat youse are tryin’ to do me out of.  Well,
keep ’em"–he shoved his face forward.  “I keeps dis–see!  Keep ’em
Wowzer, youse cross-eyed–”
“Everyt’ing I pinched to-night’s on de table dere wid wot youse
pinched yerself,” cut in the Wowzer, in a sullen, threatening growl.
“Youse lie, an’ youse knows it!” retorted Dago Jim.  “Youse have
given me de short end every time we’ve pulled a deal!”
“Dat letter’s mine, youse–” bawled the Wowzer furiously.
“Why didn’t youse open it an’ read it, den, instead of lettin’ me do
it to keep me busy while youse short-changed me?” sneered Dago Jim.
“Youse t’ought it was some sweet billy-doo, eh?  Well, t’anks,
Wowzer–dat’s wot it is!  Say,” he mocked, “dere’s a guy’ll cash a
t’ousand century notes fer dis, an’ if he don’t–say, dere’s SOME
reward out fer the Gray Seal!  Wouldn’t youse like to know who it
is?  Well, when I’m ridin’ in me private buzz wagon, Wowzer, youse
stick around an’ mabbe I’ll tell youse–an’ mabbe I won’t!”
“By God"–the Wowzer’s voice rose in a scream–"youse hand over dat
letter!”
“Youse go to–”
Red, lurid red, a stream of flame seemed to cut across Jimmie Dale’s
line of vision, came the roar of a revolver shot–and like a madman
Jimmie Dale flung his body at the door.  Rickety at best, it crashed
inward, half wrenched from its hinges, precipitating him inside.  He
recovered himself and leaped forward.  The room was swirling with
blue eddies of smoke; Dago Jim, hands flung up, still grasping
letter and pocketbook, pawed at the air–and plunged with a sagging
lurch face downward to the floor.  There was a yell and an oath from
the Wowzer–the crack of another revolver shot, the hum of the
bullet past Jimmie Dale’s ear, the scorch of the tongue flame in his
face, and he was upon the other.
Screeching profanity, the Wowzer grappled; and, for an instant, the
two men rocked, reeled, and swayed in each other’s embrace; then,
both men losing their balance, they shot suddenly backward, the
Wowzer, undermost, striking his head against the table’s edge–and
men, table, and lamp crashed downward in a heap to the floor.
It had been no more, at most, than a matter of seconds since Jimmie
Dale had hurled himself into the room; and now, with a gurgling
sigh, the Wowzer’s arms, that had been wound around Jimmie Dale’s
back and shoulders, relaxed, and, from the blow on his head the man,
lay back inert and stunned.  And then it seemed to Jimmie Dale as
though pandemonium, unreality, and chaos at the touch of some
devil’s hand reigned around him.  It was dark–no, not dark–a spurt
of flame was leaping along the line of trickling oil from the broken
lamp on the floor.  It threw into ghastly relief the sprawled form
of Dago Jim.  Outside, from along the passageway, came a confused
jangle of commotion–whispering voices, shuffling feet, the swish of
Chinese garments.  And the room itself began to spring into weird,
flickering shadows, that mounted and crept up the walls with the
spreading fire.
There was not a second to lose before the room would be swarming
with that rush from the passageway–and there was still the letter,
the pocketbook!  The table had fallen half over Dago Jim–Jimmie
Dale pushed it aside, tore the crushed letter and the pocketbook
from the man’s hands–and felt, with a grim, horrible sort of
anxiety, for the other’s heartbeat, for the verdict that meant life
or death to himself.  There was no sign of life–the man was dead.
Jimmie Dale was on his feet now.  A face, another, and another
showed in the doorway–the Wowzer was regaining his senses,
stumbling to his knees.  There was one chance–just one–to take
those crowding figures by surprise.  And with a yell of “Fire!"
Jimmie Dale sprang for the doorway.
They gave way before his rush, tumbling back in their surprise
against the opposite wall; and, turning, Jimmie Dale raced down the
passageway.  Doors were opening everywhere now, forms were pushing
out into the semi-darkness–only to duck hastily back again, as
Jimmie Dale’s automatic barked and spat a running fire of warning
ahead of him.  And then, behind, the Wowzer’s voice shrieked out:
“Soak him!  Kill de guy!  He’s croaked Dago Jim!  Put a hole in him,
de–”
Yells, a chorus of them, took up the refrain–then the rush of
following feet–and the passageway seemed to racket as though a
Gatling gun were in play with the fusillade of revolver shots.  But
Jimmie Dale was at the opening now–and, like a base runner plunging
for the bag, he flung himself in a low dive through and into the
open cellar beyond.  He was on his feet, over the boxes, and dashing
up the stairs in a second.  The door above opened as he reached the
top–Jimmie Dale’s right hand shot out with clubbed revolver–and
with a grunt Chang Foo went down before the blow and the headlong
rush.  The next instant Jimmie Dale had sprung through the tea shop
and was out on the street.
A minute, two minutes more, and Chinatown would be in an uproar–
Chang Foo would see to that–and the Wowzer would prod him on.  The
danger was far from over yet.  And then, as he ran, Jimmie Dale gave
a little gasp of relief.  Just ahead, drawn up at the curb, stood a
taxicab–waiting, probably, for a private slumming party.  Jimmie
Dale put on a spurt, reached it, and wrenched the door open.
“Quick!” he flung at the startled chauffeur.  “The nearest subway
station–there’s a ten-spot in it for you!  Quick man–QUICK!  Here
they come!”
A crowd of Chinese, pouring like angry hornets from Chang Foo’s
shop, came yelling down the street–and the taxi took the corner on
two wheels–and Jimmie Dale, panting, choking for his breath like a
man spent, sank back against the cushions.
But five minutes later it was quite another Jimmie Dale, composed,
nonchalant, imperturbable, who entered an up-town subway train, and,
choosing a seat alone near the centre of the car, which at that hour
of night in the downtown district was almost deserted, took the
crushed letter from his pocket.  For a moment he made no attempt to
read it, his dark eyes, now that he was free from observation, full
of troubled retrospect, fixed on the window at his side.  It was not
a pleasant thought that it had cost a man his life, nor yet that
that life was also the price of his own freedom.  True, if there
were two men in the city of New York whose crimes merited neither
sympathy nor mercy, those two men were the Wowzer and Dago Jim–but
yet, after all, it was a human life, and, even if his own had been
in the balance, thank God it had been through no act of his that
Dago Jim had gone out!  The Wowzer, cute and cunning, had been quick
enough to say so to clear himself, but–Jimmie Dale smiled a little
now–neither the Wowzer, nor Chang Foo, nor Chinatown would ever be
in a position to recognise their uninvited guest!
Jimmie Dale’s eyes shifted to the letter speculatively, gravely.  It
seemed as though the night had already held a year of happenings,
and the night was not over yet–there was the letter!  It had
already cost one life; was it to cost another–or what?
It began as it always did.  He read it through once, in amazement; a
second time, with a flush of bitter anger creeping to his cheeks;
and a third time, curiously memorising, as it were, snatches of it
here and there.
“DEAR PHILANTHROPIC CROOK: Robbery of Hudson-Mercantile National
Bank–trusted employee is ex-convict, bad police record, served term
in Sing Sing three years ago–known to police as Bookkeeper Bob,
real name is Robert Moyne, lives at –– Street, Harlem–Inspector
Burton and Lannigan of headquarters trailing him now–robbery not
yet made public–”
There was a great deal more–four sheets of closely written data.
With an exclamation almost of dismay, Jimmie Dale pulled out his
watch.  So that was what Burton and Lannigan were up to!  And he had
actually run into them!  Lord, the irony of it!  The–  And then
Jimmie Dale stared at the dial of his watch incredulously.  It was
still but barely midnight!  It seemed impossible that since leaving
the theatre at a few minutes before eleven, he had lived through but
a single hour!
Jimmie Dale’s fingers began to pluck at the letter, tearing it into
pieces, tearing the pieces over and over again into tiny shreds.
The train stopped at station after station, people got on and off–
Jimmie Dale’s hat was over his eyes, and his eyes were glued again
to the window.  Had Bookkeeper Bob returned to his flat in Harlem
with the detectives at his heels–or were Burton and Lannigan still
trailing the man downtown somewhere around the cafe’s?  If the
former, the theft of the letter and its incident loss of time had
been an irreparable disaster; if the latter–well, who knew!  The
risk was the Gray Seal’s!
At One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Street Jimmie Dale left the train;
and, at the end of a sharp four minutes’ walk, during which he had
dodged in and out from street to street, stopped on a corner to
survey the block ahead of him.  It was a block devoted exclusively
to flats and apartment houses, and, apart from a few belated
pedestrians, was deserted.  Jimmie Dale strolled leisurely down one
side, crossed the street at the end of the block, and strolled
leisurely back on the other side–there was no sign of either Burton
or Lannigan.  It was a fairly safe presumption then that Bookkeeper
Bob had not returned yet, or one of the detectives at least would
have been shadowing the house.
Jimmie Dale, smiling a little grimly, retraced his steps again, and
turned deliberately into a doorway–whose number he had noted as he
had passed a moment or so before.  So, after all, there was time
yet!  This was the house.  “Number eighteen,” she had said in her
letter.  “A flat–three stories–Moyne lives on ground floor.”
Jimmie Dale leaned against the vestibule door–there was a faint
click–a little steel instrument was withdrawn from the lock–and
Jimmie Dale stepped into the hall, where a gas jet, turned down,
burned dimly.
The door of the ground-floor apartment was at his right, Jimmie Dale
reached up and turned off the light.  Again those slim, tapering,
wonderfully sensitive fingers worked with the little steel
instrument, this time in the lock of the apartment door–again there
was that almost inaudible click–and then cautiously, inch by inch,
the door opened under his hand.  He peered inside–down a hallway
lighted, if it could be called lighted at all, by a subdued glow
from two open doors that gave upon it–peered intently, listening
intently, as he drew a black silk mask from his pocket and slipped
it over his face.  And then, silent as a shadow in his movements,
the door left just ajar behind him, he stole down the carpeted
hallway.
Opposite the first of the open doorways Jimmie Dale paused–a
curiously hard expression creeping over his face, his lips beginning
to droop ominously downward at the corners.  It was a little sitting
room, cheaply but tastefully furnished, and a young woman,
Bookkeeper Bob’s wife evidently, and evidently sitting up for her
husband, had fallen sound asleep in a chair, her head pillowed on
her arms that were outstretched across the table.  For a moment
Jimmie Dale held there, his eyes on the scene–and the next moment,
his hand curved into a clenched fist, he had passed on and entered
the adjoining room.
It was a child’s bedroom.  A night lamp burned on a table beside the
bed, and the soft rays seemed to play and linger in caress on the
tousled golden hair of a little girl of perhaps two years of age–
and something seemed to choke suddenly in Jimmie Dale’s throat–the
sweet, innocent little face, upturned to his, was smiling at him as
she slept.
Jimmie Dale turned away his head–his eyelashes wet under his mask.
“BENEATH THE MATTRESS OF THE CHILD’S BED,” the letter had said.  His
face like stone, his lips a thin line now, Jimmie Dale’s hand
reached deftly in without disturbing the child and took out a
package–and then another.  He straightened up, a bundle of crisp
new hundred-dollar notes in each hand–and on the top of one,
slipped under the elastic band that held the bills together, an
unsealed envelope.  He drew out the latter, and opened it–it was a
second-class steamship passage to Vera Cruz, made out in a
fictitious name, of course, to John Davies, the booking for next
day’s sailing.  From the ticket, from the stolen money, Jimmie
Dale’s eyes lifted to rest again on the little golden head, the
smiling lips–and then, dropping the packages into his pockets, his
own lips moving queerly, he turned abruptly to the door.
“My God, the shame of it!” he whispered to himself.
He crept down the corridor, past the open door of the room where the
young woman still sat fast asleep, and, his mask in his pocket
again, stepped softly into the vestibule, and from there to the
street.
Jimmie Dale hurried now, spurred on it seemed by a hot, insensate
fury that raged within him–there was still one other call to make
that night–still those remaining and minute details in the latter
part of her letter, grim and ugly in their portent!
It was close upon one o’clock in the morning when Jimmie Dale
stopped again–this time before a fashionable dwelling just off
Central Park.  And here, for perhaps the space of a minute, he
surveyed the house from the sidewalk–watching, with a sort of
speculative satisfaction, a man’s shadow that passed constantly to
and fro across the drawn blinds of one of the lower windows.  The
rest of the house was in darkness.
“Yes,” said Jimmie Dale, nodding his head, “I rather thought so.
The servants will have retired hours ago.  It’s safe enough.”
He ran quickly up the steps and rang the bell.  A door opened almost
instantly, sending a faint glow into the hall from the lighted room;
a hurried step crossed the hall–and the outer door was thrown back.
“Well, what is it?” demanded a voice brusquely.
It was quite dark, too dark for either to distinguish the other’s
features–and Jimmie Dale’s hat was drawn far down over his eyes.
“I want to see Mr. Thomas H. Carling, cashier of the Hudson-
Mercantile National Bank–it’s very important,” said Jimmie Dale
earnestly.
“I am Mr. Carling,” replied the other.  “What is it?”
Jimmie Dale leaned forward.
“From headquarters–with a report,” he said, in a low tone.
“Ah!” exclaimed the bank official sharply.  “Well, it’s about time!
I’ve been waiting up for it–though I expected you would telephone
rather than this.  Come in!”
“Thank you,” said Jimmie Dale courteously–and stepped into the
hall.
The other closed the front door.  “The servants are in bed, of
course,” he explained, as he led the way toward the lighted room.
“This way, please.”
Behind the other, across the hall, Jimmie Dale followed and close at
Carling’s heels entered the room, which was fitted up, quite
evidently regardless of cost, as a combination library and study.
Carling, in a somewhat pompous fashion, walked straight ahead toward
the carved-mahogany flat-topped desk, and, as he reached it, waved
his hand.
“Take a chair,” he said, over his shoulder–and then, turning in the
act of dropping into his own chair, grasped suddenly at the edge of
the desk instead, and, with a low, startled cry, stared across the
room.
Jimmie Dale was leaning back against the door that was closed now
behind him–and on Jimmie Dale’s face was a black silk mask.
For an instant neither man spoke nor moved; then Carling, spare-
built, dapper in evening clothes, edged back from the desk and
laughed a little uncertainly.
“Quite neat!  I compliment you!  From headquarters with a report, I
think you said?”
“Which I neglected to add,” said Jimmie Dale, “was to be made in
private.”
Carling, as though to put as much distance between them as possible,
continued to edge back across the room–but his small black eyes,
black now to the pupils themselves, never left Jimmie Dale’s face.
“In private, eh?"–he seemed to be sparring for time, as he smiled.
“In private!  You’ve a strange method of securing privacy, haven’t
you?  A bit melodramatic, isn’t it?  Perhaps you’ll be good enough
to tell me who you are?”
Jimmie Dale smiled indulgently.
“My mask is only for effect,” he said.  “My name is–Smith.”
“Yes,” said Carling.  “I am very stupid.  Thank you.  I–” he had
reached the other side of the room now–and with a quick, sudden
movement jerked his hand to the dial of the safe that stood against
the wall.
But Jimmie Dale was quicker–without shifting his position, his
automatic, whipped from his pocket, held a disconcerting bead on
Carling’s forehead.
“Please don’t do that,” said Jimmie Dale softly.  “It’s rather a
good make, that safe.  I dare say it would take me half an hour to
open it.  I was rather curious to know whether it was locked or
not.”
Carling’s hand dropped to his side.
“So!” he sneered.  “That’s it, is it!  The ordinary variety of sneak
thief!”  His voice was rising gradually.  “Well, sir, let me tell
you that–”
“Mr. Carling,” said Jimmie Dale, in a low, even tone, unless you
moderate your voice some one in the house might hear you–I am quite
well aware of that.  But if that happens, if any one enters this
room, if you make a move to touch a button, or in any other way
attempt to attract attention, I’ll drop you where you stand!”  His
hand, behind his back, extracted the key from the door lock, held it
up for the other to see, then dropped it into his pocket–and his
voice, cold before, rang peremptorily now.  “Come back to the desk
and sit down in that chair!” he ordered.
For a moment Carling hesitated; then, with a half-muttered oath,
obeyed.
Jimmie Dale moved over, and stood in front of Carling on the other
side of the desk–and stared silently at the immaculate, fashionably
groomed figure before him.
Under the prolonged gaze, Carling’s composure, in a measure at
least, seemed to forsake him.  He began to drum nervously with his
fingers on the desk, and shift uneasily in his chair.
And then, from first one pocket and then the other, Jimmie Dale took
the two packages of banknotes, and, still with out a word, pushed
them across the desk until they lay under the other’s eyes.
Carling’s fingers stopped their drumming, slid to the desk edge,
tightened there, and a whiteness crept into his face.  Then, with an
effort, he jerked himself erect in his chair.
“What’s this?” he demanded hoarsely.
“About ten thousand dollars, I should say,” said Jimmie Dale slowly.
“I haven’t counted it.  Your bank was robbed this evening at closing
time, I understand?”
“Yes!”  Carling’s voice was excited now, the colour back in his
face.  “But you–how–do you mean that you are returning the money
to the bank?”
“Exactly,” said Jimmie Dale.
Carling was once more the pompous bank official.  He leaned back and
surveyed Jimmie Dale critically with his little black eyes.
“Ah, quite so!” he observed.  “That accounts for the mask.  But I am
still a little in the dark.  Under the circumstances, it is quite
impossible that you should have stolen the money yourself, and–”
“I didn’t,” said Jimmie Dale.  “I found it hidden in the home of one
of your employees.”
“You found it–WHERE?”
“In Moyne’s home–up in Harlem.”
“Moyne, eh?”  Carling was alert, quick now, jerking out his words.
“How did you come to get into this, then?  His pal?  Double-crossing
him, eh?  I suppose you want a reward–we’ll attend to that, of
course.  You’re wiser than you know, my man.  That’s what we
suspected.  We’ve had the detectives trailing Moyne all evening."
He reached forward over the desk for the telephone.  “I’ll telephone
headquarters to make the arrest at once.”
“Just a minute,” interposed Jimmie Dale gravely.  “I want you to
listen to a little story first.”
“A story!  What has a story got to do with this?” snapped Carling.
“The man has got a home,” said Jimmie Dale softly.  “A home, and a
wife–and a little baby girl.”
“Oh, that’s the game then, eh?  You want to plead for him?”  Carling
flung out gruffly.  “Well, he should have thought of all that
before!  It’s quite useless for you to bring it up.  The man has had
his chance already–a better chance than any one with his record
ever had before.  We took him into the bank knowing that he was an
ex-convict, but believing that we could make an honest man of him–
and this is the result.”
“And yet–”
“NO!” said Carling icily.
“You refuse–absolutely?”  Jimmie Dale’s voice had a lingering,
wistful note in it.
“I refuse!” said Carling bluntly.  “I won’t have anything to do with
it.”
There was just an instant’s silence; and then, with a strange, slow,
creeping motion, as a panther creeps when about to spring, Jimmie
Dale projected his body across the desk–far across it toward the
other.  And the muscles of his jaw were quivering, his words
rasping, choked with the sweep of fury that, held back so long,
broke now in a passionate surge.
“And shall I tell you why you won’t?  Your bank was robbed to-night
of one hundred thousand dollars.  There are ten thousand here.  THE
OTHER NINETY THOUSAND ARE IN YOUR SAFE!”
“You lie!”  Ashen to the lips, Carling had risen in his chair.  “You
lie!” he cried.  “Do you hear!  You lie!  I tell you, you lie!”
Jimmie Dale’s lips parted ominously.
“Sit down!” he gritted between his teeth.
The white in Carling’s face had turned to gray, his lips were
working–mechanically he sank down again in his chair.
Jimmie Dale still leaned over the desk, resting his weight on his
right elbow, the automatic in his right hand covering Carling.
“You cur!” whispered Jimmie Dale.  “There’s just one reason, only
one, that keeps me from putting a bullet through you while you sit
there.  We’ll get to that in a moment.  There is that little story
first–shall I tell it to you now?  For the past four years, and God
knows how many before that, you’ve gone the pace.  The lavishness of
this bachelor establishment of yours is common talk in New York–far
in excess of a bank cashier’s salary.  But you were supposed to be a
wealthy man in your own right; and so, in reality you were–once.
But you went through your fortune two years ago.  Counted a model
citizen, an upright man, an honour to the community–what were you,
Carling?  What ARE you?  Shall I tell you?  Roue, gambler, leading a
double life of the fastest kind.  You did it cleverly, Carling; hid
it well–but your game is up.  To-night, for instance, you are at
the end of your tether, swamped with debts, exposure threatening you
at any moment.  Why don’t you tell me again that I lie–Carling?”
But now the man made no answer.  He had sunk a little deeper in his
chair–a dawning look of terror in the eyes that held, fascinated,
on Jimmie Dale.
“You cur!” said Jimmie Dale again.  “You cur, with your devil’s
work!  A year ago you saw this night coming–when you must have
money, or face ruin and exposure.  You saw it then, a year ago, the
day that Moyne, concealing nothing of his prison record, applied
through friends for a position in the bank.  Your co-officials were
opposed to his appointment, but you, do you remember how you pleaded
to give the man his chance–and in your hellish ingenuity saw your
way then out of the trap!  An ex-convict from Sing Sing!  It was
enough, wasn’t it?  What chance had he!”  Jimmie Dale paused, his
left hand clenched until the skin formed whitish knobs over the
knuckles.
Carling’s tongue sought his lips, made a circuit of them–and he
tried to speak, but his voice was an incoherent muttering.
“I’ll not waste words,” said Jimmie Dale, in his grim monotone.
“I’m not sure enough myself–that I could keep my hands off you much
longer.  The actual details of how you stole the money to-day do not
matter–NOW.  A little later perhaps in court–but not now.  You
were the last to leave the bank, but before leaving you pretended to
discover the theft of a hundred thousand dollars–that, done up in a
paper parcel, was even then reposing in your desk.  You brought the
parcel home, put it in that safe there–and notified the president
of the bank by telephone from here of the robbery, suggesting that
police headquarters be advised at once.  He told you to go ahead and
act as you saw best.  You notified the police, speciously directing
suspicion to–the ex-convict in the bank’s employ.  You knew Moyne
was dining out to-night, you knew where–and at a hint from you the
police took up the trail.  A little later in the evening, you took
these two packages of banknotes from the rest, and with this
steamship ticket–which you obtained yesterday while out at lunch by
sending a district messenger boy with the money and instructions in
a sealed envelope to purchase for you–you went up to the Moynes’
flat in Harlem for the purpose of secreting them somewhere there.
You pretended to be much disappointed at finding Moyne out–you had
just come for a little social visit, to get better acquainted with
the home life of your employees!  Mrs. Moyne was genuinely pleased
and grateful.  She took you in to see their little girl, who was
already asleep in bed.  She left you there for a moment to answer
the door–and you–you"–Jimmie Dale’s voice choked again–"you blot
on God’s earth, you slipped the money and ticket under the child’s
mattress!”
Carling came forward with a lurch in his chair–and his hands went
out, pawing in a wild, pleading fashion over Jimmie Dale’s arm.
Jimmie Dale flung him away.
“You were safe enough,” he rasped on.  “The police could only
construe your visit to Moyne’s flat as zeal on behalf of the bank.
And it was safer, much more circumspect on your part, not to order
the flat searched at once, but only as a last resort, as it were,
after you had led the police to trail him all evening and still
remain without a clew–and besides, of course, not until you had
planted the evidence that was to damn him and wreck his life and
home!  You were even generous in the amount you deprived yourself of
out of the hundred thousand dollars–for less would have been
enough.  Caught with ten thousand dollars of the bank’s money and a
steamship ticket made out in a fictitious name, it was prima-facie
evidence that he had done the job and had the balance somewhere.
What would his denials, his protestations of innocence count for?
He was an ex-convict, a hardened criminal caught red-handed with a
portion of the proceeds of robbery–he had succeeded in hiding the
remainder of it too cleverly, that was all.”
Carling’s face was ghastly.  His hands went out again–again his
tongue moistened his dry lips.  He whispered:
“Isn’t–isn’t there some–some way we can fix this?”
And then Jimmie Dale laughed–not pleasantly.
“Yes, there’s a way, Carling,” he said grimly.  “That’s why I’m
here.”  He picked up a sheet of writing paper and pushed it across
the desk–then a pen, which he dipped into the inkstand, and
extended to the other.  “The way you’ll fix it will be to write out
a confession exonerating Moyne.”
Carling shrank back into his chair, his head huddling into his
shoulders.
“NO!” he cried.  “I won’t–I can’t–my God!–I–I–WON’T!”
The automatic in Jimmie Dale’s hand edged forward the fraction of an
inch.
“I have not used this–yet.  You understand now why–don’t you?” he
said under his breath.
“No, no!” Carling pushed away the pen.  “I’m ruined–ruined as it
is.  But this would mean the penitentiary, too–”
“Where you tried to send an innocent man in your place, you hound;
where you–”
“Some other way–some other way!”  Carling was babbling.  “Let me
out of this–for God’s sake, let me out of this!”
“Carling,” said Jimmie Dale hoarsely, “I stood beside a little bed
to-night and looked at a baby girl–a little baby girl with golden
hair, who smiled as she slept.”
Carling shivered, and passed a shaking hand across his face.
“Take this pen,” said Jimmie Dale monotonously; “or–THIS!”  The
automatic lifted until the muzzle was on a line with Carling’s eyes.
Carling’s hand reached out, still shaking, and took the pen; and his
body, dragged limply forward, hung over the desk.  The pen
spluttered on the paper–a bead of sweat spurting from the man’s
forehead dropped to the sheet.
There was silence in the room.  A minute passed–another. Carling’s
pen travelled haltingly across the paper then, with a queer, low cry
as he signed his name, he dropped the pen from his fingers, and,
rising unsteadily from his chair, stumbled away from the desk toward
a couch across the room.
An instant Jimmie Dale watched the other, then he picked up the
sheet of paper.  It was a miserable document, miserably scrawled:
“I guess it’s all up.  I guess I knew it would be some day.  Moyne
hadn’t anything to do with it.  I stole the money myself from the
bank to-night.  I guess it’s all up.
Thomas H. Carling.”
From the paper, Jimmie Dale’s eyes shifted to the figure by the
couch–and the paper fluttered suddenly from his fingers to the
desk. Carling was reeling, clutching at his throat–a small glass
vial rolled upon the carpet.  And then, even as Jimmie Dale sprang
forward, the other pitched head long over the couch–and in a moment
it was over.
Presently Jimmie Dale picked up the vial–and dropped it back on the
floor again.  There was no label on it, but it needed none–the
strong, penetrating odor of bitter almonds was telltale evidence
enough.  It was prussic, or hydrocyanic acid, probably the most
deadly poison and the swiftest in its action that was known to
science–Carling had provided against that “some day” in his
confession!
For a little space, motionless, Jimmie Dale stood looking down at
the silent, outstretched form–then he walked slowly back to the
desk, and slowly, deliberately picked up the signed confession and
the steamship ticket.  He held them an instant, staring at them,
then methodically began to tear them into little pieces, a strange,
tired smile hovering on his lips.  The man was dead now–there would
be disgrace enough for some one to bear, a mother perhaps–who knew!
And there was another way now–since the man was dead.
Jimmie Dale put the pieces in his pocket, went to the safe, opened
it, and took out a parcel, locked the safe carefully, and carried
the parcel to the desk.  He opened it there.  Inside were nearly two
dozen little packages of hundred-dollar bills.  The other two
packages that he had brought with him he added to the rest.  From
his pocket he took out the thin metal insignia case, and with the
tiny tweezers lifted up one of the gray-coloured, diamond-shaped
paper seals.  He moistened the adhesive side, and, still holding it
by the tweezers, dropped it on his handkerchief and pressed the seal
down on the face of the topmost package of banknotes.  He tied the
parcel up then, and, picking up the pen, addressed it in printed
characters:
Hudson-Mercantile National Bank,
New York City.
“District messenger–some way–in the morning,” he murmured.
Jimmie Dale slipped his mask into his pocket, and, with the parcel
under his arm, stepped to the door and unlocked it.  He paused for
an instant on the threshold for a single, quick, comprehensive
glance around the room–then passed on out into the street.
At the corner he stopped to light a cigarette–and the flame of the
match spurting up disclosed a face that was worn and haggard.  He
threw the match away, smiled a little wearily–and went on.
The Gray Seal had committed another “crime.”
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
