


Was he in the city?  In a suburban town?  On a country road?  It
seemed childishly absurd that he could not at least differentiate to
that extent; and yet, from the moment he had been placed in the
automobile in which he now found himself, he was forced to admit
that he could not tell.  He had started out with the belief that,
knowing New York and its surroundings as minutely as he knew them,
it would be impossible, do what they would to prevent it, that at
the end of the journey he should be without a clew, and a very good
clew at that, to the location of what he now called, appropriately
enough it seemed, the Crime Club.
But he had never ridden blindfolded in a car before!  He could see
absolutely nothing.  And if that increased or accentuated his sense
of hearing, it helped little–the roar of the racing car beat upon
his eardrums the more heavily, that was all.  He could tell, of
course, the nature of the roadbed.  They were running on an asphalt
road, that was obvious enough; but city streets and suburban streets
and hundreds of miles of country road around New York were of
asphalt!
Traffic?  He was quite sure, for he had strained his ears in an
effort to detect it, that there was little or no traffic; but then,
it must be one or two o’clock in the morning, and at that hour the
city streets, certainly those that would be chosen by these men,
would be quite as deserted as any country road!  And as for a sense
of direction, he had none whatever–even if the car had not been
persistently swerving and changing its course every little while.
If he had been able to form even an approximate idea of the compass
direction in which they had started, he might possibly have been
able in a general way to counteract this further effort of theirs to
confuse him; but without the initial direction he was essentially
befogged.
With these conclusions finally thrust home upon him, Jimmie Dale
philosophically subordinated the matter in his mind, and, leaning
back, composed himself as comfortably as he could upon his seat.
There was a man beside him, and he could feel the legs of two men on
the seat facing him.  These, with the driver, would make four.  He
was still well guarded!  The car itself was a closed car–not
hooded, the sense of touch told him–therefore a limousine of some
description.  These facts, in a sense inconsequential, were absorbed
subconsciously; and then Jimmie Dale’s brain, remorselessly active,
in spite of the pain from his throbbing head, was at work again.
It seemed as though a year had passed since, in the early evening,
as Larry the Bat, he had burrowed so ironically for refuge in Chang
Foo’s den–from her!  It seemed like some mocking unreality, some
visionary dream that, so short a while before, he had read those
words of hers that had sent the blood coursing and leaping through
his veins in mad exultation at the thought that the culmination of
the years had come, that all he longed for, hoped for, that all his
soul cried out for was to be his–"in an hour.”  An HOUR–and he was
to have seen her, the woman whose face he had never seen, the woman
whom he loved!  And the hour instead, the hours since then, had
brought a nightmare of events so incredible as to seem but phantoms
of the imagination.
Phantoms!  He sat up suddenly with a jerk.  The face of the dead
chauffeur, the limp form lashed in that chair, the horrible picture
in its entirety, every detail standing out in ghastly relief, took
form before him.  God knew there was no phantom there!
The man beside him, at the sudden start, lifted a hand and felt
hurriedly over the bandage across Jimmie Dale’s eyes.
Jimmie Dale was scarcely conscious of the act.  With that face
before him, with the scene re-enacting itself in his mind again, had
come another thought, staggering him for a moment with the new
menace that it brought.  He had had neither time nor opportunity to
think before; it had been all horror, all shock when he had entered
that room.  But now, like an inspiration, he saw it all from another
angle.  There was a glaring fallacy in the game these men had played
for his benefit to-night–a fallacy which they had counted on
glossing over, as it had, indeed, been glossed over, by the sudden
shock with which they had forced that scene upon him; or, failing in
that, they had counted on the fact that his, or any other man’s
nerve would have failed when it came to open defiance based on a
supposition which might, after all, be wrong, and, being wrong,
meant death.
But it was not supposition.  Either he was right now, or these men
were childish, immature fools–and, whatever else they might be,
they were not that!  NOT A SINGLE DROP OF POISON HAD PASSED THE
CHAUFFEUR’S LIPS.  The man had not been murdered in that room.  He
had not, in a sense, been murdered at all.  The man, absolutely,
unquestionably, without a loophole for doubt, had either been killed
outright in the automobile accident, or had died immediately
afterward, probably without regaining consciousness, certainly
without supplying any of the information that was so determinedly
sought.
Yes, he saw it now!  Their backs were against the wall, they were at
their wits’ end, these men!  The knowledge that the chauffeur
possessed, that they KNEW he possessed, was evidently life and death
to them.  To kill the man before they had wormed out of him what
they wanted to know, or, at least, until, by holding him a prisoner,
they had exhausted every means at their command to make him speak,
was the last thing they would do!
Jimmie Dale sat for a long time quite motionless.  The car was
speeding at a terrific rate along a straight stretch of road.  He
could almost have sworn, guided by some intuitive sense, that they
were in the country.  Well, even if it were so, what did that prove!
They might have started FROM New York itself–only to return to it
when they had satisfied themselves that he was sufficiently duped.
Or they might have started legitimately from outside New York, and
be going toward the city now.  Since the ultimate destination was
New York, and they had made no attempt to hide that from him, it was
useless to speculate–for at best it could be only speculation.  He
had decided that once before!  The man at his side felt again over
the scarf to see that it was in place.
Curiously now Jimmie Dale recalled the inward monitor that had
warned him the honours had not all been his in this first round with
the Crime Club to-night.  If they had deliberately murdered the
chauffeur because of a refusal to answer, they would equally have
done the same to him.  Fool that he had been not to have seen that
before!  And yet would it have made any difference?  He shook his
head.  He could not have acted to any better advantage than he had
done.  He could not–his lips curled in grim derision–have been any
more convincing.
Convincing!  It was all clear enough now!  If the chauffeur had
suffered death rather than talk, even admitting the fact that they
had more grounds for suspecting the chauffeur’s complicity, would
his, Jimmie Dale’s, mere denial, his choice, too, of death, have
been any the more convincing, or have saved his life where it had
not saved the other’s?  A certain added respect for these men,
against whom, until the end now, his victory or theirs, he realised
he was fighting for his life, came over him as he recognised the
touch of a master hand.  They did not know where to find the Tocsin;
the package that she had said was vital to them was still beyond
their reach; the chauffeur was dead; and he, Jimmie Dale, alone
remained–a clew that they had still to prove valid or invalid it
was true, but the only clew in their possession.  And, gaining
nothing from him by a show of force, to throw him off his guard,
they had let him go–meaning him to believe they were convinced he
knew nothing, and that the episode, the adventure of the night, was,
as far as they were concerned, ended, finished, and done with!
Time passed, a very long time, as he sat there.  It might have been
an hour–he could only hazard a guess.  Not one of the men in the
car had spoken a word.  But to Jimmie Dale, the car itself, the
ride, its duration, these three strange companions, were for the
time being extraneous.  Even that sick giddiness in his head had, at
least temporarily, gone from him.
And so, all unsuspectingly, he was to lead them to the Tocsin and
fall into the trap himself!  His hands, thrust deep in his pockets,
were tightly clenched.  They were clever enough, ingenious enough,
powerful enough to watch him henceforth at every turn–and from now
on, day and night, they were to be reckoned with.  Suppose that in
some way, as it might well have happened, for it was now vitally
necessary that she should communicate with him and he with her, he
had played blindly into their hands, and through him she should have
fallen into their power!  It brought a sickening chill, a sort of
hideous panic to Jimmie Dale–and then fury, anger, in a torrent,
surged upon him, and there came a merciless desire to crush, to
strangle, to stamp out this inhuman band of criminals that, with
intolerable effrontery to the laws of God and man, were so
elaborately and scientifically equipped for their monstrous
purposes!
And then Jimmie Dale, in the darkness, smiled again grimly as the
leader’s reference to the Gray Seal recurred to him.  Well, perhaps,
who knew, they would have reason more than they dreamed of to wish
the Gray Seal enrolled in their own ranks!  It was strange, curious!
He had thought all that was ended.  Only a few short hours before he
had hidden away all, everything that was incident to the life of the
Gray Seal, the clothes of Larry the Bat, that little metal case with
the gray-coloured, adhesive seals, a dozen other things, believing
that it only remained for him to return and destroy them at his
leisure as a finishing touch to the Gray Seal’s career–and now,
instead, he was face to face with the gravest and most dangerous
problem that she had ever called upon him to undertake!
Well, at least, the odds were not all in the Crime Club’s favour.
Where they now certainly believed him to be entirely off his guard,
he was thoroughly on his guard; and where they might suspect him,
watch him, they would suspect and watch only the character, the
person of Jimmie Dale, and count not at all upon either Larry the
Bat or–the Gray Seal.
A sort of savage elation fell upon Jimmie Dale.  His brain, that had
been stagnant, confused, physically sick with pain and suffering,
was working now with its old-time vigour and ease, mapping,
planning, scheming the way ahead.  To strike, and strike quickly–to
strike FIRST!  It must be his move next–not theirs!  And he must
act to-night at once, the moment he was given this pretence to
liberty that they had in store for him, before they had an
opportunity of closing down around him with a network of spies that
he could not elude.  By morning, Jimmie Dale would be Larry the Bat,
and inhabiting the Sanctuary again.  And a tip to Jason, his old
butler, to the effect, say, that he had gone away for a trip, would
account for his disappearance satisfactorily enough; it would not
necessarily arouse their suspicions when they eventually discovered
he was gone, for against that was always the possible, and quite
likely presumption that, where they had succeeded in nothing else,
they had at least succeeded in frightening him thoroughly and to the
extent of imbuing him with a hasty desire to put a safe distance
between himself and them.
And now, with his mind made up to his course of action, an intense
impatience to put his plan into effect, an irritation at the useless
twistings and turnings of the car that had latterly become more
frequent, took hold upon him.  How much longer was this to last!
They must have been fully an hour and a half on the road already,
and–ah, the car was stopping now!
He straightened up in his seat as the machine came to a halt–but
the man at his side laid a restraining hand upon him.  The car door
opened, and one of the men got out.  Jimmie Dale caught an
indistinct murmur of voices from without, then the man returned to
his seat, and the car went on again.
Another half hour passed, that, curbing his irritation and
impatience, was filled with the conjectures and questions that anew
came crowding in upon his mind.  Why had the car made that stop?  It
was rather curious.  It was certainly a prearranged meeting place.
Why?  And these clothes that he now wore–why had they made him
change?  His own had not been very badly torn.  The reason given him
was, on the face of it now, in view of what he now knew, mere
pretence.  What was the ulterior motive behind that pretence?  What
did this package, that had already cost a man his life to-night,
contain?  Who was the chauffeur?  What was this death feud between
the Tocsin and these men?  Did she know where the Crime Club was?
Who and where was John Johansson?  What was this box that was
numbered 428?  Could she supply the links that would forge the chain
into an unbroken whole?
And then for the second time the car slowed down–and this time the
man on the seat beside Jimmie Dale reached up and untied the scarf.
“You get out here,” said the man tersely.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
