


In the subway, ten minutes before, a freckled-faced messenger boy
had squeezed himself into a seat beside Jimmie Dale, yanked a dime
novel from a refractory pocket, and, blissfully lost to all the
world, had buried his head in its pages.  Jimmie Dale’s glance at
the youngster had equally, perforce, embraced the lurid title of the
thriller, “Dicing with Death,” so imperturbably thrust under his
nose.  At the time, he had smiled indulgently; but now, as he left
the subway and headed for his home on Riverside Drive, the words not
only refused to be ignored, but had resolved themselves into a
curiously persistent refrain in his mind.  They were exactly what
they purported to be, dime-novelish, of the deepest hue of yellow,
melodramatic in the extreme; but also, to him now, they were grimly
apt and premonitorily appropriate.  “Dicing with Death"–there was
not an hour, not a moment in the day, when he was not literally
dicing with death; when, with the underworld and the police allied
against him, a single false move would lose him the throw that left
death the winner!
The risk of the dual life enforced upon him grew daily greater, and
in the end there must be the reckoning.  He would have been a madman
to have shut his eyes in the face of what was obvious–but it was
worth it all, and in his soul he knew that he would not have had it
otherwise even now.  To-night, to-morrow, the day after, would come
another letter from the Tocsin, and there would be another “crime"
of the Gray Seal’s blazoned in the press–would that be the last
affair, or would there be another–or to-night, to-morrow, the day
after, would he be trapped before even one more letter came!
He shrugged his shoulders, as he ran up the steps of his house.
Those were the stakes that he himself had laid on the table to wager
upon the game, he had no quarrel there; but if only, before the end
came, or even with the end itself, he could find–HER!
With his latchkey he let himself into the spacious, richly
furnished, well-lighted reception hall, and, crossing this, went up
the broad staircase, his steps noiseless on the heavy carpet.
Below, faintly, he could hear some of the servants–they evidently
had not heard him close the door behind him.  Discipline was relaxed
somewhat, it was quite apparent, with Jason, that peer of butlers,
away.  Jason, poor chap, was in the hospital.  Typhoid, they had
thought it at first, though it had turned out to be some milder form
of infection.  He would be back in a few days now; but meanwhile he
missed the old man sorely from the house.
He reached the landing, and, turning, went along the hall to the
door of his own particular den, opened the door, closed it behind
him–and in an instant the keen, agile brain, trained to the little
things that never escaped it, that daily held his life in the
balance, was alert.  The room was unusually dark, even for night-
time.  It was as though the window shades had been closely drawn–a
thing Jason never did.  But then Jason wasn’t there!  Jimmie Dale,
smiling then a little quizzically at himself, reached up for the
electric-light switch beside the door, pressed it–and, his finger
still on the button, whipped his automatic from his pocket with his
other hand.  THE ROOM WAS STILL IN DARKNESS.
The smile on Jimmie Dale’s lips was gone, for his lips now had
closed together in a tight, drawn line.  The lights in the rest of
the house, as witness the reception hall, were in order.  This was
no ACCIDENT!  Silent, motionless, he stood there, listening.  Was he
trapped at last–in his own house!  By whom?  The police?  The thugs
of the underworld?  It made little difference–the end would differ
only in the method by which it was attained!  What was that!  Was
there a slight stir, a movement at the lower end of the room–or was
it his imagination?  His hand fell from the electric-light switch to
the doorknob behind his back.  Slowly, without a sound, it began to
turn under his slim, tapering fingers, whose deft, sensitive touch
had made him known and feared as the master cracksman of them all;
and, as noiselessly, the door began to open.
It was like a duel–a duel of silence.  What was the intruder,
whoever he might be, waiting for?  The abortive click of the
electric-light switch, to say nothing of the opening of the door
when he had entered, was evidence enough that he was there.  Was the
other trying to place him exactly through the darkness to make sure
of his attack!  The door was open now.  And suddenly Jimmie Dale
laughed easily aloud–and on the instant shifted his position.
“Well?” inquired Jimmie Dale coolly from the other side of the
threshold.
It seemed like a long-drawn sigh fluttering through the room, a gasp
of relief–and then the blood was pounding madly at his temples, and
he was back in the room again, the door closed once more behind him.
“Oh, Jimmie–why didn’t you speak?  I had to be sure that it was
you.”
It was her voice!  HERS!  The Tocsin!  HERE!  She was here–here in
his house!
“You!” he cried.  “You–here!”  He was pressing the electric-light
switch frantically, again and again.
Her voice came out of the darkness from across the room:
“Why are you doing that, Jimmie?  You know already that I have
turned off the lights.”
“At the sockets–of course!”  He laughed out the words almost
hysterically.  “Your face–I have never seen your face, you know."
He was moving quickly toward the reading lamp on his desk.
There was a quick, hurried swish of garments, and she was blocking
his way.
“No,” she said, in a low voice; “you must not light that lamp.”
He laughed again, shortly, fiercely now.  She was close to him, his
hands reached out for her, touched her, and thrilling at the touch,
swept her toward him.
“Jimmie–Jimmie–are you mad!” she breathed.
Mad!  Yes–he was mad with the wildest, most passionate exhilaration
he had ever known.  He found his voice with an effort.
“These months and years that I have tried until my soul was sick to
find you!” he cried out.  “And you are here now!  Your face–I must
see your face!”
She had wrenched herself away from him.  He could hear her breath
coming sharply in little gasps.  He groped his way onward toward the
desk.
“WAIT!"–her tones seemed to ring suddenly vibrant through the room.
“Wait, before you touch that lamp!  I–I put you on your honour not
to light it.”
He stopped abruptly.
“My–honour?” he repeated mechanically.
“Yes!  I came here to-night because there was no other way.  No
other way–do you understand?  I came, trusting to your honour not
to take advantage of the conditions that forced me to do this.  I
had no fear that I was wrong–I have no fear now.  You will not
light that lamp, and you will not make any attempt to prevent my
going away as I came–unknown.  Is there any question about it,
Jimmie?  I am in YOUR house.”
“You don’t know what you are saying!” he burst out wildly.  “I’ve
risked my life for a chance like this again and again; I’ve gone
through hell, living in squalour for a month on end as Larry the Bat
in the hope that I might discover who you are–and do you think I’ll
let anything stop me now!  I tell you, no–a thousand times no!”
She made no answer.  There was only her low, quick breathing coming
from somewhere near him.  He made another step toward the lamp–and
stopped.
“I tell you, no!” he said again, and took another step forward–and
stopped once more.
Still she made no answer.  A minute passed–another.  His hand
lifted and swept across his forehead in an agitated way.  Still
silence.  She neither moved nor spoke.  His hand dropped slowly to
his side.  There was a queer, twisted smile upon his lips.
“You win!” he said hoarsely.
“Thank you, Jimmie,” she said simply.
“And your name, who you are"–he was speaking, but he did not seem
to recognise his own voice–"the hundred other things I’ve sworn I’d
make you explain when I found you, are all taboo as well, I
suppose!”
“Yes,” she said.
He laughed bitterly.
“Don’t you know,” he cried out, “that between the police and the
underworld, our house of cards is likely to collapse at any minute–
that they are hunting the Gray Seal day and night!  Is it to be
always like this–that I am never to know–until it is too late!
She came toward him out of the darkness impulsively.
“They will never get you, Jimmie,” she said, in a suppressed voice.
And some day, I promise you now, you shall have your reward for to-
night.  You shall know–everything.”
“When?”  The word came from him with fierce eagerness.
“I do not know,” she answered gently.  “Soon, perhaps–perhaps
sooner than either of us imagine.”
“And by that you mean–what?” he asked, and his hand reached out for
her again through the blackness.
This time she did not draw away.  There was an instant’s hesitation;
then she spoke again hurriedly, a note of anxiety in her voice.
“You are beginning all over again, aren’t you, Jimmie?  And I have
told you that to-night I can explain nothing.  And, besides, it is
what has brought me here that counts now, and every moment is of–”
“Yes.  I know,” he interposed; “but, then, at least you will tell me
one thing: Why did you come to-night, instead of sending me a letter
as you always have before?”
“Because it is different to-night than it ever was before,” she
replied earnestly.  “Because there is something in what has happened
that I cannot explain myself; because there is danger, and where I
could not see clearly I feared a trap, and so I dared not send what,
in a letter, could at best be only vague and incomplete details.  Do
you see?”
“Yes,” said Jimmie Dale–but he was only listening in an abstracted
way.  If he could only see that face, so close to his!  He had
yearned for that with all his soul for years now!  And she was here,
standing beside him, and his hand was upon her arm; and here, in his
own den, in his own house, he was listening to another call to arms
for the Gray Seal from her own lips!  Honour!  Was he but a poor,
quixotic fool!  He had only to step to the desk and switch on the
light!  Why should–he steadied himself with a jerk, and drew away
his hand.  She was in HIS house.  “Go on,” he said tersely.
“Do you know, or did you ever hear of old Luther Doyle?” she asked.
“No,” said Jimmie Dale.
“Do you know a man, then, named Connie Myers?”
Connie Myers!  Who in the Bad Lands did not know Connie Myers, who
boasted of the half dozen prison sentences already to his credit?
Yes; he knew Connie Myers!  But, strangely enough, it was not in the
Bad Lands or as Larry the Bat that he knew the man, or that the
other knew him–it was as Jimmie Dale.  Connie Myers had introduced
himself one night several years ago with a blackjack that had just
missed its mark as the man had jumped out from a dark alleyway on
the East Side, and he, Jimmie Dale, had thrashed the other to within
an inch of his life.  He had reason to know Connie Myers–and Connie
Myers had reason to remember him!
“Yes,” he said, with a grim smile; “I know Connie Myers.”
“And the tenement across the street from where you live as Larry the
Bat–that, of course, you know.”  He leaned toward her wonderingly
now.
“Of course!” he ejaculated.  “Naturally!”
“Listen, then, Jimmie!”  She was speaking quickly now.  “It is a
strange story.  This Luther Doyle was already over fifty, when, some
eight or nine years ago, his parents died within a few months of
each other, and he inherited somewhere in the neighbourhood of a
hundred thousand dollars; but the man, though harmless enough, was
mildly insane, half-witted, queer, and the old couple, on account of
their son’s mental defects, took care to leave the money securely
invested, and so that he could only touch the interest.  During
these eight or nine years he has lived by himself in the same old
family house where he had lived with his parents, in a lonely spot
near Pelham.  And he has lived in a most frugal, even miserly,
manner.  His income could not have been less than six thousand
dollars a year, and his expenditures could not have been more than
six hundred.  His dementia, ironically enough from the day that he
came into his fortune, took the form of a most pitiable and abject
fear that he would die in poverty, misery, and want; and so, year
after year, cashing his checks as fast as he got them, never
trusting the bank with a penny, he kept hiding away somewhere in his
house every cent he could scrape and save from his income–which to-
day must amount, at a minimum calculation, to fifty thousand
dollars.”
“And,” observed Jimmie Dale quietly.  “Connie Myers robbed him of
it, and–”
“No!”  Her voice was quivering with passion, as she caught up his
words.  “Twice in the last month Connie Myers TRIED to rob him, but
the money was too securely hidden.  Twice he broke into Doyle’s
house when the old man was out, but on both occasions was
unsuccessful in his search, and was interrupted and forced to make
his escape on account of Doyle’s return.  To-night, an hour ago, in
an empty room on the second floor of that tenement, in the room
facing the landing, old Luther Doyle was MURDERED!”
There was silence for an instant.  Her hand had closed in a tight
pressure on his arm.  The darkness seemed to add a sort of ghastly
significance to her words.
“In God’s name, how do you know all this?” he demanded wildly.  “How
do you know all these things?
“Does that matter now?” she answered tensely.  “You will know that
when you know the rest.  Oh, don’t you understand, Jimmie, there is
not a moment to lose now?  It was easy to lure a half-witted
creature like that anywhere; it was Connie Myers who lured him to
the tenement and murdered him there–but from that point, Jimmie, I
am not sure of our ground.  I do not know whether Connie Myers is
alone in this or not; but I do know that he is going to Doyle’s
house again to-night to make another search for the money.  There is
no question but that old Doyle was murdered to give Connie Myers and
his accomplices, if there are any, a chance to tear the house inside
out to find the money, to give them the whole night to work in
without interruption if necessary–but Doyle dead in his own house
could have interfered no more with them than Doyle dead in that
tenement!  Why was he lured to the tenement by Connie Myers when he
could much more easily have been put out of the way in his own
house?  Jimmie, there is something behind this, something more that
you must find out.  There may be others in this besides Connie
Myers, I do not know; but there is something here that I am afraid
of.  Jimmie, you must get that man, you must get the others if there
are others, and you must stop them from getting the money in that
house to-night!  Do you understand now why I have come here?  I
could not explain in a letter; I do not quite seem to be explaining
now.  It would seem as though there were no need for the Gray Seal–
that simply the police should be notified.  But I KNOW, Jimmie, call
it intuition, what you will, I know that there is need for us, for
you to-night–that behind all this is a tragedy, deeper, blacker,
than even the brutal, cold-blooded murder that is already done.”
Her voice, in its passionate earnestness, died away; and an anger,
cold, grim, remorseless, settled upon Jimmie Dale–settled as it
always settled upon him at her call to arms.  His brain was already
at work in its quick, instant way, probing, sifting, planning.  She
was right!  It was strange, it was more than strange that, with the
added risk, the danger, the difficulty, the man should have been
brought miles to be done away with in that tenement!  Why?  Connie
Myers took form before him–the coarse features, the tawny hair that
straggled across the low forehead, the shifty eyes that were an
indeterminate colour between brown and gray, the thin lips that
seemed to draw in and give the jaw a protruding, belligerent effect.
And Connie Myers knew him as Jimmie Dale–it would have to be then
as Larry the Bat that the Gray Seal must work.  That meant time–to
go to the Sanctuary and change.
“The police,” he asked suddenly, aloud, “they have not yet
discovered the body?”
“Not yet,” she replied hurriedly.  “And that is still another reason
for haste–there is no telling when they will.  See–here!”  She
thrust a paper into his hand.  “Here is a plan of old Doyle’s house,
and directions for finding it.  You must get Connie Myers red-
handed, you must make him convict himself, for the evidence through
which I know him to be guilty can never be used against him.  And,
Jimmie, be careful–I know I am not wrong, that there is still
something more behind all this.  And now go, Jimmie, go!  There is
no time to lose!”  She was pushing him across the room toward the
door.
Go!  The word seemed suddenly to bring dismay.  It was she again who
was dominant now in his mind.  Who knew if to-night, when he was
taking his life in his hands again, would not be the last!  And she
was here now, here beside him–where she might never be again!
She seemed to divine his thoughts, for she spoke again, a strange
new note of tenderness in her voice that thrilled him.
“You must never let them get you, Jimmie–for my sake.  It will not
last much longer–it is near the end–and I shall keep my promise.
But go, now, Jimmie–go!”
“Go?” he repeated numbly.  “Go?  But–but you?”
“I?”  She slipped suddenly away from him, retreating back down the
room.  “I will go–as I came.”
“Wait!  Listen!” he pleaded.
There was no answer.
She was there–somewhere back there in the darkness still.  He stood
hesitant at the door.  It seemed that every faculty he possessed
urged him back there again–to her.  Could he let her escape him now
when she was so utterly in his power, she who meant everything in
his life!  And then, like a cold shock, came that other thought–she
who had trusted to his honour!  With a jerk, his hand swept out,
felt for the doorknob, and closed upon it.
“Good-night!” he said heavily, and stepped out into the hall.
It seemed for a while, even after he had gained the street and made
his way again to the subway, that nothing was concrete around him,
that he was living through some fantastical dream.  His head
whirled, and he could not think rationally–and then slowly, little
by little, his grip upon himself came back.  She had come–and gone!
With the roar of the subway in his ears, its raucous note seeming to
strike so perfectly in consonance with the turmoil within him, he
smiled mirthlessly.  After all, it was as it always was!  She was
gone–and ahead of him lay the chances of the night!
“Dicing with death!”  The words, unbidden, came back once more.  If
they were true before, they were doubly applicable now.  It was
different to-night from what it had ever been before, as she had
said.  Usually, to the smallest detail, everything was laid open,
clear before him in those astounding letters.  To-night, it was
vague at best.  A man had been murdered.  Connie Myers had committed
the murder under circumstances that pointed strongly to some hidden
motive behind and beyond the mere chance it afforded him to search
his victim’s house for the hidden cash.  What was it?
Jimmie Dale stared out at the black subway walls.  The answer would
not come.  Station after station passed.  At Fourteenth Street he
changed from the express to a local, got out at Astor Place, and a
few minutes later was walking rapidly down the upper end of the
Bowery.
The answer would not come–only the fact itself grew more and more
deeply significant.  The ghastly, callous fiendishness that lured an
old, half-witted man to his death had Jimmie Dale in that grip of
cold, merciless anger again, and there was a dull flush now upon his
cheeks.  Whatever it meant, whatever was behind it, one thing at
least was certain–HE WOULD GET CONNIE MYERS!
He was close to the Sanctuary now–it was down the next cross
street.  He reached the corner and turned it, heading east; but his
brisk walk had changed to a nonchalant saunter–there were some
people coming toward him.  It was the Gray Seal now, alert and
cautious.  The little group passed by.  Ahead, the tenement
bordering on the black alleyway loomed up–the Sanctuary, with its
three entrances and exits; the home of Larry the Bat.  And across
from it was that other tenement, that held a new interest for him
now, where, in an empty room on the second floor, she had said, old
Doyle still lay.  Should he go there?  He was thinking quickly now,
and shook his head.  It would take what he did not have to spare–
time.  It was already ten o’clock; and, granted that Connie Myers
had committed the crime only a little over an hour ago, the man by
this time would certainly be on his way to Doyle’s house near
Pelham, if, indeed, he were not already there.  No, there was no
time to spare–the question resolved itself simply into how long,
since he had already searched twice and failed on both occasions, it
would take Connie Myers to unearth old Doyle’s hiding place for the
money.
Jimmie Dale glanced sharply around him, slipped into the alleyway,
and, crouching against the tenement wall, moved noiselessly along to
the side entrance.  A moment more, and he had negotiated the rickety
stairs with practiced, soundless tread, was inside the squalid
quarters of Larry the Bat, and the door of the Sanctuary was locked
and bolted behind him.
Perhaps five minutes passed–and then, where Jimmie Dale, the
millionaire, had entered, there emerged Larry the Bat, of the
aristocracy and the elite of the Bad Lands.  But instead of leaving
by the side door and the alleyway, as he had entered, he went along
the lower hallway to the front entrance.  And here, instinctively,
he paused a moment at the top of the steps, as his eyes rested upon
the tenement on the opposite side of the street.
It was strange that the crime should have been committed there!
Something again seemed to draw him toward that empty room on the
second story.  He had decided once that he would not go, that there
was not time; but, after all, it would not take long, and there was
at least the possibility of gaining something more valuable even
than time from the scene of the crime itself–there might even be
the evidence he wanted there that would disclose the whole of Connie
Myers’ game.
He went down the steps, and started across the street; but halfway
over, he hesitated uncertainly, as a child’s cry came petulantly
from the doorway.  It was dark in the street; and, likewise, it was
one of those hot, suffocating evenings when, in the crowded
tenements of the poorer class, miserable enough in any case, misery
was added to a hundredfold for lack of a single God-given breath of
air.  These two facts, apparently irrelevant, caused Jimmie Dale to
change his mind again.  He had not noticed the woman with the baby
in her arms, sitting on the doorstep; but now, as he reached the
curb, he not only saw, but recognised her–and he swung on down the
street toward the Bowery.  He could not very well go in without
passing her, without being recognised himself–and that was a
needless risk.
He smiled a little wanly.  Once the crime was discovered, she would
not have hesitated long before informing the police that she had
seen him enter there!  Mrs. Hagan was no friend of his!  One could
not live as he had lived, as Larry the Bat, and not see something in
an intimate way of the pitiful little tragedies of the poor around
him; for, bad, tough, and dissolute as the quarter was, all were not
degraded there, some were simply–poor.  Mrs. Hagan was poor.  Her
husband was a day labourer, often out of a job–and sometimes he
drank.  That was how he, Jimmie Dale, or rather, Larry the Bat, had
come to earn Mrs. Hagan’s enmity.  He had found Mike Hagan drunk one
night, and in the act of being arrested, and had wheedled the man
away from the officer on the promise that he would take Hagan home.
And he was Larry the Bat, a dope fiend, a character known to all the
neighbourhood, and Mrs. Hagan had laid her husband’s condition to
HIS influence and companionship!  He had taken Mike Hagan home–and
Mrs. Hagan had driven Larry the Bat from the door of her miserable
one-room lodging in that tenement with the bitter words on her
tongue that only a woman can use when shame and grief and anger are
breaking her heart.
He shrugged his shoulders, as, back along the Bowery, he retraced
his steps, but now, with the hurried shuffle of Larry the Bat where
before had been the brisk, athletic stride of Jimmie Dale.
At Astor Place again, he took the subway, this time to the Grand
Central Station–and, well within an hour from the time he had left
the Sanctuary, including the train journey to Pelham, he was
standing in a clump of trees that fringed a deserted roadway.  He
had passed but few houses, once he was away from Pelham, and, as
well as he could judge, there was none now within a quarter of a
mile of him–except this one of old Luther Doyle’s that showed up
black and shadowy just beyond the trees.
Jimmie Dale’s eyes narrowed as he surveyed the place.  It was little
wonder that, known to have money, an attempt to rob old Doyle should
have been made in a place like this!  It was even more grimly
significant than ever of some deeper meaning that, in its loneliness
an ideal place for a murder, the man should have been lured from
there for that purpose to a crowded tenement in the city instead!
What did it mean?  Why had it been done?  He shook his head.  The
answer would not come now any more than it had come before in the
subway, or in the train on the way out, when he had set his brain so
futilely to solve the problem.
From a survey of the house, Jimmie Dale gave attention to the
details of his surroundings: the trees on either side; the open
space in front, a distance of fifty yards to the road; the absence
of any fence.  And then, abruptly, he stole forward.  There was no
light to be seen anywhere about the house.  Was it possible that
Connie Myers was not yet there?  He shook his head again
impatiently.  Connie Myers would not have wasted any time–as the
Tocsin had said, there was always present the possibility that the
crime in that tenement might be discovered at ANY moment.  Connie
Myers would have lost no time; for, let the discovery be made, let
the police identify the body, as they most certainly would, and they
would be out here hotfoot.  Jimmie Dale stood suddenly still.  What
did it mean!  He had not thought of that before!  If old Doyle had
been murdered HERE, there would not have been even the possibility
of discovery until the morning at the earliest, and Connie Myers
would have had all the time he wanted!
WHAT WAS THAT SOUND!  A low, muffled tapping, like a succession of
hammer blows, came from within the house.  Jimmie Dale darted
forward, reached the side of the house, and dropped on hands and
knees.  One question at least was answered–Connie Myers was inside.
The plan that she had given him showed an old-fashioned cellarway,
closed by folding trapdoors, that was located a little toward the
rear and, in a moment, creeping along, he came upon it.  His hands
felt over it.  It was shut, fastened by a padlock on the outside.
Jimmie Dale’s lips thinned a little, as he took a small steel
instrument from his pocket.  Either through inadvertence or by
intention, Connie Myers had passed up an almost childishly simple
means of entrance into the house!  One side of the trapdoor was
lifted up silently–and silently closed.  Jimmie Dale was in the
cellar.  The hammering, much more distinct now, heavy, thudding
blows, came from a room in the front–the connection between the
cellar and the house, as shown on the Tocsin’s plan, was through
another trapdoor in the floor of the kitchen.
Jimmie Dale’s flashlight played on a short, ladderlike stairway, and
in an instant he was climbing upward.  The sounds from the front of
the house continued now without interruption; there was little fear
that Connie Myers would hear anything else–even the protesting
squeak of the hinges as Jimmie Dale cautiously pushed back the
trapdoor in the flooring above his head.  An inch, two inches he
lifted it; and, his eyes on a level with the opening now, he peered
into the room.  The kitchen itself was intensely dark; but through
an open doorway, well to one side so that he could not see into the
room beyond, there struggled a curiously faint, dim glimmer of
light.  And then Jimmie Dale’s form straightened rigidly on the
stairs.  The blows stopped, and a voice, in a low growl, presumably
Connie Myers’, reached him.
“Here, take a drive at it from the lower edge!”
There was no answer–save that the blows were resumed again.  Jimmie
Dale’s face had set hard.  Connie Myers was not alone in this, then!
Well, the odds were a little heavier, DOUBLED–that was all!  He
pushed the trapdoor wide open, swung himself up through the opening
to the floor; and the next instant, back a little from the
connecting doorway, his body pressed closely against the kitchen
wall, he was staring, bewildered and amazed, into the next room.
On the floor, presumably to lessen the chance of any light rays
stealing through the tightly drawn window shades, burned a small oil
lamp.  The place was in utter confusion.  The right-hand side of a
large fireplace, made of rough, untrimmed stone and cement, and
which occupied almost the entire end of the room, was already
practically demolished, and the wreckage was littered everywhere;
part of the furniture was piled unceremoniously into one corner out
of the way; and at the fireplace itself, working with sledge and
bar, were two men.  One was Connie Myers.  An ironical glint crept
into Jimmie Dale’s eyes.  The false beard and mustache the man wore
would deceive no one who knew Connie Myers!  And that he should be
wearing them now, as he knelt holding the bar while the other struck
at it, seemed both uncalled for and absurd.  The other man, heavily
built, roughly dressed, had his back turned, and Jimmie Dale could
not see his face.
The puzzled frown on Jimmie Dale’s forehead deepened.  Somewhere in
the masonry of the fireplace, of course, was where old Luther Doyle
had hidden his money.  That was quite plain enough; and that Connie
Myers, in some way or other, had made sure of that fact was equally
obvious.  But how did old Luther Doyle get his money IN there from
time to time, as he received the interest and dividends whose
accumulation, according to the Tocsin, comprised his hoard!  And how
did he get it OUT again?
“All right, that’ll do!” grunted Connie Myers suddenly.  “We can pry
this one out now.  Lend a hand on the bar!”
The other dropped his sledge, turned sideways as he stooped to help
Connie Myers, his face came into view–and, with an involuntary
start, Jimmie Dale crouched farther back against the wall, as he
stared at the other.  It was Hagan!  Mrs. Hagan’s husband!  Mike
Hagan!”
“My God!” whispered Jimmie Dale, under his breath.
So that was it!  That the murder had been committed in the tenement
was not so strange now!  A surge of anger swept Jimmie Dale–and was
engulfed in a wave of pity.  Somehow, the thin, tired face of Mrs.
Hagan had risen before him, and she seemed to be pleading with him
to go away, to leave the house, to forget that he had ever been
there, to forget what he had seen, what he was seeing now.  His
hands clenched fiercely.  How realistically, how importunately, how
pitifully she took form before him!  She was on her knees, clasping
his knees, imploring him, terrified,
From Jimmie Dale’s pocket came the black silk mask.  Slowly, almost
hesitantly, he fitted it over his face–Mike Hagan knew Larry the
Bat.  Why should he have pity for Mike Hagan?  Had he any for Connie
Myers?  What right had he to let pity sway him!  The man had gone
the limit; he was Connie Myers’ accomplice–a murderer!  But the man
was not a hardened, confirmed criminal like Connie Myers.  Mike
Hagan–a murderer!  It would have been unbelievable but for the
evidence before his own eyes now.  The man had faults, brawled
enough, and drank enough to have brought him several times to the
notice of the police–but this!
Jimmie Dale’s eyes had never left the scene before him.  Both men
were throwing their weight upon the bar, and the stone that they
were trying to dislodge–they were into the heart of the masonry
now–seemed to move a little.  Connie Myers stood up, and, leaning
forward, examined the stone critically at top and bottom, prodding
it with the bar.  He turned from his examination abruptly, and
thrust the bar into Hagan’s hands.
“Hold it!” he said tersely.  “I’ll strike for a turn.”
Crouched, on his hands and knees, Hagan inserted the point of the
bar into the crevice.  Connie Myers picked up the sledge.
“Lower!  Bend lower!” he snapped–and swung the sledge.
It seemed to go black for a moment before Jimmie Dale’s eyes, seemed
to paralyse all action of mind and body.  There was a low cry that
was more a moan, the clang of the iron bar clattering on the floor,
and Mike Hagan had pitched forward on his face, an inert and huddled
heap.  A half laugh, half snarl purled from Connie Myers’ lips, as
he snatched a stout piece of cord from his pocket and swiftly
knotted the unconscious man’s wrists together.  Another instant,
and, picking up the bar, prying with it again, the loosened stone
toppled with a crash into the grate.
It had come sudden as the crack of doom, that blow–too quick, too
unexpected for Jimmie Dale to have lifted a finger to prevent it.
And now that the first numbed shock of mingled horror and amazement
was past, he fought back the quick, fierce impulse to spring out on
Connie Myers.  Whether the man was killed or only stunned, he could
do no good to Mike Hagan now, and there was Connie Myers–he was
staring in a fascinated way at Connie Myers.  Behind the stone that
the other had just dislodged was a large hollow space that had been
left in the masonry, and from this now Connie Myers was eagerly
collecting handfuls of banknotes that were rolled up into the shape
of little cylinders, each one grotesquely tied with a string.  The
man was feverishly excited, muttering to himself, running from the
fireplace to where the table had been pushed aside with the rest of
the furniture, dropping the curious little rolls of money on the
table, and running back for more.  And then, having apparently
emptied the receptacle, he wriggled his body over the dismantled
fireplace, stuck his head into the opening, and peered upward.
“Kinks in his nut, kinks in his nut!” Connie Myers was muttering.
“I’ll drop the bar through from the top, mabbe there’s some got
stuck in the pipe.”
He regained his feet, picked up the bar, and ran with it into what
was evidently the front hall–then his steps sounded running
upstairs.
Like a flash, Jimmie Dale was across the room and at the fireplace.
Like Connie Myers, he, too, put his head into the opening; and then,
a queer, unpleasant smile on his lips, he bent quickly over the man
on the floor.  Hagan was no more than stunned, and was even then
beginning to show signs of returning consciousness.  There was a
rattle, a clang, a thud–and the bar, too long to come all the way
through, dropped into the opening and stood upright.  Connie Myers’
footsteps sounded again, returning on the run–and Jimmie Dale was
back once more on the other side of the kitchen doorway.
It was all simple enough–once one understood!  The same queer smile
was still flickering on Jimmie Dale’s lips.  There was no way to get
the money out, except the way Connie Myers had got it out–by
digging it out!  With the irrational cunning of his mad brain, that
had put the money even beyond his own reach, old Doyle had built his
fireplace with a hollow some eighteen inches square in a great wall
of solid stonework, and from it had run a two-inch pipe up somewhere
to the story above; and down this pipe he had dropped his little
string-tied cylinders of banknotes, satisfied that his hoard was
safe!  There seemed something pitfully ironic in the elaborate,
insane craftiness of the old man’s fear-twisted, demented mind.
And now Connie Myers was back in the room again–and again a puzzled
expression settled upon Jimmie Dale’s face as he watched the other.
For perhaps a minute the man stood by the table sifting the little
rolls of money through his fingers gloatingly–then, impulsively, he
pushed these to one side, produced a revolver, laid it on the table,
and from another pocket took out a little case which, as he opened
it, Jimmie Dale could see contained a hypodermic syringe.  One more
article followed the other two–a letter, which Connie Myers took
out of an unsealed envelope.  He dropped this suddenly on the table,
as Mike Hagan, three feet away on the floor, groaned and sat up.
Hagan’s eyes swept, bewildered, confused, around him, questioningly
at Connie Myers–and then, resting suddenly on his bound wrists,
they narrowed menacingly.
“Damn you, you smashed me with that sledge on PURPOSE!” he burst
out–and began to struggle to his feet.
With a brutal chuckle, Connie Myers pushed Hagan back and shoved his
revolver under the other’s nose.
“Sure!” he admitted evenly.  “And you keep quiet, or I’ll finish you
now–instead of letting the police do it!”  He laughed out
jarringly.  “You’re under arrest, you know, for the murder of Luther
Doyle, and for robbing the poor old nut of his savings in his house
here.”
Hagan wrenched himself up on his elbow.
“What–what do you mean?” he stammered.
“Oh, don’t worry!” said Connie Myers maliciously.  “I’M not making
the arrest, I’d rather the police did that.  I’m not mixing up in
it, and by and by"–he lifted up the hypodermic for Hagan to see–
“I’m going to shoot a little dope into you that’ll keep you quiet
while I get away myself.”
Hagan’s face had gone a grayish white–he had caught sight of the
money on the table, and his eyes kept shifting back and forth from
it to Myers’ face.
“Murder!” he said huskily.  “There is no murder.  I don’t know who
Doyle is.  You said this house was yours–you hired me to come here.
You said you were going to tear down the fireplace and build
another.  You said I could work evenings and earn some extra money.”
“Sure, I did!”  There was a vicious leer now on Connie Myers’ lips.
“But you don’t think I picked you out by ACCIDENT, do you?  Your
reputation, my bucko, was just shady enough to satisfy anybody that
it wouldn’t be beyond you to go the limit.  Sure, you murdered
Doyle!  Listen to this.”  He took up the letter:
“TO THE POLICE: Luther Doyle was murdered this evening in the
tenement at 67 –– Street.  You’ll find his body in a room on the
second floor.  If you want to know who did it, look in Mike Hagan’s
room on the floor above.  There’s a paper stuck under the edge of
Hagan’s table with a piece of chewing gum, where he hid it.  You’ll
know what it is when you go out and take a look at Doyle’s house in
Pelham.  Yours truly,  A FRIEND.”
Mike Hagan did not speak–his lips were twitching, and there was
horror creeping into his eyes.
“D’ye get me!” sneered Connie Myers.  “Tell your story–who’d
believe it!  I got you cinched.  Twice I tried to get this old dub’s
coin out here, and couldn’t find it.  But the second time I found
something else–a piece of paper with a drawing of the fireplace on
it, and a place in the drawing marked with an X.  That was good
enough, wasn’t it?  That’s the paper I stuck under your table this
afternoon when your wife was out–see?  Somebody’s got to stand for
the job, and if it’s somebody else it won’t be me–get me!  When I
had a look at that fireplace I knew I couldn’t do the job alone in a
week, and I didn’t dare blast it with ’soup’ for fear of spoiling
what was inside.  And since I had to have somebody to help me, I
thought I might as well let him help me all the way through–and
stand for it.  I picked you, Mike–that’s why I croaked old Doyle in
your tenement to-night.  I wrote this letter while I was waiting for
you to show up at the station to come out here with me, and I’m
going to see that the police get it in the next hour.  When they
find Doyle in the room below yours, and that paper in your room, and
the busted fireplace here–I guess they won’t look any farther for
who did it.  And say"–he leaned forward with an ugly grin–"mabbe
you think I’m soft to be telling you all this?  But don’t you fool
yourself.  You don’t know me–you don’t know who I am.  So tell ’em
the TRUTH!  They won’t believe you anyway with evidence like that
against you–and the neater the story the more they’ll think it
shows brains enough on your part to have pulled a job like this!”
“My God!” Hagan was rocking on his knees, beads of sweat were
starting out on his forehead.  “You wouldn’t plant a man like that!"
he cried brokenly.  “You wouldn’t do it, would you?  My God–you
wouldn’t do that!”
Jimmie Dale’s face under his mask was white and rigid.  There was
something primal, elemental in the savagery that was sweeping upon
him.  He had it all now–ALL!  She had been right–there was need
to-night for the Gray Seal.  So that was the game, inhuman, hellish,
the whole of it, to the last filthy dregs–Connie Myers, to protect
himself, was railroading an innocent man to death for the crime that
he himself had committed!  There was a cold smile on Jimmie Dale’s
lips now, as he took his automatic from his pocket.  No, it wasn’t
quite all the game–there was still HIS hand to play!  He edged
forward a little nearer to the door–and halted abruptly, listening.
An automobile had stopped outside on the road.  Hagan was still
pleading in a frenzied way; Connie Myers was callously folding his
letter, while he watched the other warily–neither of the men had
heard the sound.
And then, quick, almost on the instant, came a rush of feet, a crash
upon the front door–an imperative command to open in the name of
the law.  THE POLICE!  Jimmie Dale’s brain was working now with
lightning speed.  Somehow the police had stumbled upon the crime in
that tenement; and, as he had foreseen in such an event, had
identified Doyle.  But they could not be sure that any one was
present here in the house now–they could not see a light any more
than he had.  He must get Mike Hagan away–must see that Connie
Myers did NOT get away.  Myers was on his feet now, fear struck in
his turn, the letter clutched in a tight-closed fist, his revolver
swung out, poised, in the other hand.  Hagan, too, was on his feet,
and, unheeded now by Connie Myers, was wrenching his wrists apart.
Another crash upon the door–another.  Another demand in a harsh
voice to open it.  Then some one running around to the window at the
side of the house–and Jimmie Dale sprang forward.
There was the roar of a report, a blinding flash almost in Jimmie
Dale’s eyes, as Connie Myers, whirling instantly at his entrance,
fired–and missed.  It happened quick then, in the space of the
ticking of a watch–before Jimmie Dale, flinging himself forward,
had reached the man.  Like a defiant challenge to their demand it
must have seemed to the officers outside, that shot of Connie Myers
at Jimmie Dale, for it was answered on the instant by another
through the side window.  And the shot, fired at random, the
interior of the room hidden from the officers outside by the drawn
shades, found its mark–and Connie Myers, a bullet in his brain,
pitched forward, dead, upon the floor.
“QUICK!” Jimmie Dale flung at Hagan.  “Get that letter out of his
hand!”  He jumped for the lamp on the floor, extinguished it, and
turned again toward Hagan.  “Have you got it?” he whispered tensely.
“Yes,” said Hagan, in a numbed way.
“This way, then!” Jimmie Dale caught Hagan’s arm, and pulled the
other across the room and into the kitchen to the trapdoor.
“Quick!” he breathed again.  “Get down there–quick!  And no noise!
They don’t know how many are in the house.  When they find HIM
they’ll probably be satisfied.”
Hagan, stupefied, dazed, obeyed mechanically–and, in an instant,
the trapdoor closed behind them, Jimmie Dale was standing beside the
other in the cellar.
“Not a sound now!” he cautioned once more.
His flashlight winked, went out, winked again; then held steadily,
in curious fascination it seemed, as, in its circuit, the ray fell
upon Hagan–FELL UPON THE TORN, RAGGED EDGE OF A PAPER IN HAGAN’S
HAND!  With a suppressed cry, Jimmie Dale snatched it away from the
other.  It was but a torn HALF of the letter!  “The other half!  The
other half, Hagan–where is it?” he demanded hoarsely.
Hagan, almost in a state of collapse, muttered inaudibly.  The crash
of a toppling door sounded from above.  Jimmie Dale shook the man
desperately.
“Where is it?” he repeated fiercely.
“He–he was holding it tight, it–it tore in his hand,” Hagan
stammered.  “Does it make any difference?  Oh, let’s get out of
here, whoever you are–for God’s sake let’s get out of here!”
Any difference!  Jimmie Dale’s jaws were clamped like a steel vise.
Any difference!  The difference between life and death for the man
beside him–that was all!  He was reading the portion in his hand.
It was the last part of the letter, beginning with: “There’s a paper
stuck under the edge of Hagan’s table–”  From above, from the floor
of the front room now, came the rush and trample of feet.  He could
not go back for the other half.  And any attempt to conceal the fact
that Connie Myers had been alone in the house was futile now.  They
would find the torn letter in the dead man’s hand, proof enough that
some one else had been there.  What was in that part of the letter
that was still clutched in that death grip upstairs?  A sentence
from it, that he had heard Connie Myers read, seemed to burn itself
into his brain.  “IF YOU WANT TO KNOW WHO DID IT, LOOK IN MIKE
HAGAN’S ROOM ON THE FLOOR ABOVE.”  And then, suddenly, like light
through the darkness, came a ray of hope.  He pulled Hagan to the
cellarway, and stealthily lifted one side of the double trapdoor.
There was a chance, desperate enough, one in a thousand–but still a
chance!
Voices from the house came plainly now, but there was no one in
sight.  The police, to a man, were evidently all inside.  From the
road in front showed the lamp glare of their automobile.
“Run for the car!” Jimmie Dale jerked out from between set teeth–
and with Hagan beside him, steadying the man by the arm, dashed
across the intervening fifty yards.
They had not been seen.  A minute more, and the car, evidently
belonging to the local police, for it was headed in the direction of
New York, and as though it had come from Pelham, swept down the
road, swept around a turn, and Jimmie Dale, with a gasp of relief,
straightened up a little from the wheel.
How much time had he?  The police must have heard the car; but,
equally, occupied as they were, they might well give it no thought
other than that it was but another car passing by.  There was no
telephone in the house; the nearest house was a quarter of a mile
away, and that might or might not have a telephone.  Could he count
on half an hour?  He glanced anxiously at the crouched figure beside
him.  He would have to!  It was the only chance.  They would
telephone the contents of the dead man’s half of the letter to the
New York police.  Could he get to Hagan’s room FIRST!  “Look in
Hagan’s room,” their part of the letter read–but it did not say for
WHAT, or exactly WHERE!  If they found nothing, Hagan was safe.
Connie Myers’ reputation, the fact that he was found in disguise at
Doyle’s house, was, barring any incriminating evidence, quite enough
to let Hagan out.  There would only remain in the minds of the
police the question of who, beside Connie Myers, had been in old
Doyle’s house that night?  And now Jimmie Dale smiled a little
whimsically.  Well, perhaps he could answer that–and, if not quite
to the satisfaction of the police, at least to the complete
vindication of Mike Hagan.
But he could not drive through towns and villages with a mask on his
face; and there, ahead now, lights were beginning to show.  And more
than ever now, with what was before him, it was imperative that Mike
Hagan should not recognise Larry the Bat.  Jimmie Dale glanced again
at Hagan–and slowed down the car.  They were on the outskirts of a
town, and off to the right he caught the twinkling lights of a
street car.
“Hagan,” he said sharply, “pull yourself together, and listen to me!
If you keep your mouth shut, you’ve nothing to fear; if you let out
a word of what’s happened to-night, you’ll probably go to the chair
for a crime you know nothing about.  Do you understand?–keep your
mouth shut!”
The car had stopped.  Hagan nodded his head.
“All right, then.  You get out here, and take a street car into New
York,” continued Jimmie Dale crisply.  “But when you get there, keep
away from your home for the next two or three hours.  Hang around
with some of the boys you know, and if you’re asked anything
afterward, say you were batting around town all evening.  Don’t
worry–you’ll find you’re out of this when you read the morning
papers.  Now get out–hurry!”  He pushed Hagan from the car.  “I’ve
got to make my own get-away.”
Hagan, standing in the road, brushed his hand bewilderingly across
his eyes.
“Yes–but you–I–”
“Never mind about that!” Jimmie Dale leaned out, and gripped Hagan’s
arm impressively.  “There’s only one thing you’ve got to think of,
or remember.  Keep your mouth shut!  No matter what happens, keep
your mouth shut–if you want to save your neck!  Good-night, Hagan!”
The car was racing forward again.  It shot streaking through the
streets of the town ahead, and, dully, over its own inferno, echoed
shouts, cries, and execrations of an outraged populace–then out
into the night again, roaring its way toward New York.
He had half an hour–perhaps!  It was a good thing Hagan did not
know, or had not grasped the significance of that torn letter–the
man would have been unmanageable with fear and excitement.  It would
puzzle Hagan to find no paper stuck under his table when he came to
look for it!  But that was a minor consideration, that mattered not
at all,
Half an hour!  On roared the car–towns, black roads, villages,
wooded lands were kaleidoscopic in their passing.  Half an hour!
Had he done it?  Had he come anywhere near doing it?  He did not
know.  He was in the city at last–and now he had to moderate his
speed; but, by keeping to the less frequented streets, he could
still drive at a fast pace.  One piece of good fortune had been his–
the long motor coat he had found in the car with which to cover the
rags of Larry the Bat, and without which he would have been obliged
to leave the car somewhere on the outskirts of the city, and to
trust, like Mike Hagan, to other and slower means of transportation.
Blocks away from Hagan’s tenement, he ran the car into a lane,
slipped off the motor coat, and from his pocket whipped out the
little metal insignia case–and in another moment a diamond-shaped
gray seal was neatly affixed to the black ebony rim of the steering
wheel.  He smiled ironically.  It was necessary, quite necessary
that the police should have no doubt as to who had been in Doyle’s
house with Connie Myers that night, or to whom they had so
considerately loaned their automobile!
He was running now–through lanes, dodging down side streets, taking
every short cut he knew.  Had he beaten the police to Mike Hagan’s
room?  It would be easy then.  If they were ahead of him, then, by
some means or other, he must still get that paper first.
He was at the tenement now–shuffling leisurely up the steps.  The
front door was open.  He entered, and went up the first flight of
stairs, then along the hall, and up the next flight.  He had half
expected the place to be bustling with excitement over the crime;
but the police evidently had kept the affair quiet, for he had seen
no one since he had entered.  But now, as he began to mount the
third flight, he went more slowly–some one was ahead of him.  It
was very dark–he could not see.  The steps above died away.  He
reached the landing, started along for Hagan’s room–and a light
blazed suddenly in his face, and a hard, quick grip on his shoulder
forced him back against the wall.  Then the flashlight wavered,
glistened on brass buttons went out, and a voice laughed roughly:
“It’s only Larry the Bat!”
“Larry the Bat, eh?”  It was another voice, harsh and curt.  “What
are you doing here?”
He was not first, after all!  The telephone message from Pelham–it
was almost certainly that–had beaten him!  They were ahead of him,
just ahead of him, they had only been a few steps ahead of him going
up the stairs, just a second ahead of him on their way to Hagan’s
room!  Jimmie Dale was thinking fast now.  He must go, too–to
Hagan’s room with them–somehow–there was no other way–there was
Hagan’s life at stake.
“Aw, I ain’t done nothin’!” he whined.  “I was just goin’ ter borrow
the price of a feed from Mike Hagan–lemme go!”
“Hagan, eh!” snapped the questioner.  “Are you a friend of his?”
“Sure, I am!”
The officers whispered for a moment together.
“We’ll try it,” decided the one who appeared to be in command.
“We’re in the dark, anyhow, and the thing may be only a steer.
Mabbe it’ll work–anyway, it won’t do any harm.”  His hand fell
heavily on Jimmie Dale’s shoulder.  “Mrs. Hagan know you?"
brusquely.
“Sure she does!” sniffled Larry the Bat.
“Good!” rasped the officer.  “Well, we’ll make the visit with you.
And you do what you’re told, or we’ll put the screws on you–see?
We’re after something here, and you’ve blown the whole game–savvy?
You’ve spilled the gravy–understand?”
In the darkness, Jimmie Dale smiled grimly.  It was far more than he
had dared to hope for–they were playing into his hands!
“But I don’t know ’bout any game,” grovelled Larry the Bat
piteously.
“Who in hell said you did!” growled the officer.  “You’re supposed
to have snitched the lay to us, that’s all–and mind you play your
part!  Come on!”
It was two doors down the hall to Mike Hagan’s room, and there one
of the officers, putting his shoulder to the door, burst it open and
sprang in.  The other shoved Jimmie Dale forward.  It was quickly
done.  The three were in the room.  The door was closed again.
Came a cry of terror out of the darkness, a movement as of some one
rising up hurriedly in bed; and then Mrs. Hagan’s voice:
“What is it!  Who is it!  Mike!”
The table–it was against the right-hand wall, Jimmie Date
remembered.  He sidled quickly toward it.
“Strike a light!” ordered the officer in charge.
Jimmie Dale’s fingers were feeling under the edge of the table–a
quick sweep along it–NOTHING!  He stooped, reaching farther in–
another sweep of his arm–and his fingers closed on a sheet of paper
and a piece of hard gum.  In an instant they were in his pocket.
A match crackled and flared up.  A lamp was lighted.  Larry the Bat
sulked sullenly against the wall.
Terror-stricken, wide-eyed, Mrs. Hagan had clutched the child lying
beside her to her arms, and was sitting bolt upright in bed.
“Now then, no fuss about it!” said the officer in charge, with
brutal directness.  “You might as well make a clean breast of Mike’s
share in that murder downstairs–Larry the Bat, here, has already
told us the whole story.  Come on, now–out with it!”
“Murder!"–her face went white.  “My Mike– MURDER!”  She seemed for
an instant stunned–and then down the worn, thin, haggard face
gushed the tears.  “I don’t believe it!” she cried.  “I don’t
believe it!”
“Come on now, cut that out!” prodded the officer roughly.  “I tell
you Larry the Bat, here, has opened everything up wide.  You’re only
making it worse for yourself.”
“Him!”  She was staring now at Jimmie Dale.  “Oh, God!” she cried.
“So that’s what you are, are you–a stool-pigeon for the cops?
Well, whatever you told them, you lie!  You’re the curse of this
neighbourhood, you are, and if my Mike is bad at all, it’s you
that’s helped to make him bad.  But murder–you LIE!”
She had risen slowly from the bed–a gaunt, pitiful figure,
pitifully clothed, the black hair, gray-streaked, streaming thinly
over her shoulders, still clutching the baby that, too, was crying
now.
The officers looked at one another and nodded.
“Guess she’s handing it straight–we’ll have a look on our own
hook,” the leader muttered.
She paid no attention to them–she was walking straight to Jimmie
Dale.
“It’s you, is it,” she whispered fiercely through her sobs “that
would bring more shame and ruin here–you that’s selling my man’s
life away with your filthy lies for what they’re paying you–it’s
you, is it, that–”  Her voice broke.
There was a frightened, uneasy look in Larry the Bat’s eyes, his
lips were twitching weakly, he drew far back against the wall–and
then, glancing miserably at the officers, as though entreating their
permission, began to edge toward the door.
For a moment she watched him, her face white with outrage, her hand
clenched at her side–and then she found her voice again.
“Get out of here!” she said, in a choked, strained way pointing to
the door.  “Get out of here–you dirty skate!”
“Sure!” mumbled Larry the Bat, his eyes on the floor.  “Sure!” he
mumbled–and the door closed behind him.
 

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
