


Not a sound as the key turned in the lock; not a sound as the door
swung back on its carefully oiled hinges; not a sound as Larry the
Bat slipped like a shadow into the blackness of the room, closing
the door behind him again.  With a tread as noiseless as a cat’s, he
was across the room to satisfy himself that the shutters were
tightly closed; and then the single gas jet flared up, murky,
yellow, illuminating the miserable, squalid room–the Sanctuary–the
home of Larry the Bat.  There was need for silence, need for
caution.  In five minutes, ten at the outside, he must emerge again–
as Jimmie Dale.
With a smile on his lips that mingled curiously chagrin and self-
commiseration, he took the letter from his pocket and tore it open.
It was she, then, who had been following him all evening, and, like
a blundering idiot, he had wasted precious, perhaps irreparable,
hours!  What had she meant by “It’s for my sake to-night”?  The
words had been ringing in his ears since the moment she had
whispered them in that panic-stricken crowd.  Was it not always for
her sake that he answered these calls to arms?  Was it not always
for her sake that he, as the Gray Seal, was–  The mental soliloquy
came to an abrupt end.  He had subconsciously read the first
sentence of the letter, and now, with sudden feverish eagerness and
excitement, he was reading it to the last word.
“DEAR PHILANTHROPIC CROOK:  In an hour after you receive this, if
all goes well, you shall know everything–everything.  Who I am–
yes, and my name.  It has been more than three years now, hasn’t it?
It has been incomprehensible to you, but there has been no other
way.  I dared not take the chance of discovery by any one; I dared
not expose you to the risk of being known by me.  Your life would
not have been worth a moment’s purchase.  Oh, Jimmie, am I only
making the mystery more mystifying?  But to-night, I think, I hope,
I pray that it is all at an end: though against me, and against you
to-night when you go to help me, is the most powerful and pitiless
organisation of criminals that the world has ever known; and the
stake we are playing for is a fortune of millions–and my life.  And
yet somehow I am afraid now, just because the end is so near, and
the victory seems so surely won.  And so, Jimmie, be careful; use
all that wonderful cleverness of yours as you have never used it
before, and–  But there should be no need for that, it is so simple
a thing that I am going to ask you to do.  Why am I writing so
illogically!  Nothing, surely, can possibly happen.  This is not
like one of my usual letters, is it?  I am beside myself to-night
with hope, anxiety, fear, and excitement.
“Listen, then, Jimmie:  Be at the northeast corner of Sixth Avenue
and Waverly Place at exactly half-past ten.  A taxicab will drive
up, as though you had signalled it in passing, and the chauffeur
will say: “I’ve another fare, in half an hour, sir, but I can get
you most anywhere in that time.”  You will be smoking a cigarette.
Toss it out into the street, make any reply you like, and get into
the cab.  Give the chauffeur that little ring of mine with the crest
of the bell and belfry and the motto, “Sonnez le Tocsin,” that you
found the night old Isaac Pelina was murdered, and the chauffeur
will give you in exchange a sealed packet of papers.  He will drive
you to your home, and I will telephone to you there.
“I need not tell you to destroy this.  Keep the appointment in your
proper person–as Jimmie Dale.  Carry nothing that might identify
you as the Gray Seal if any accident should happen.  And, lastly,
trust the pseudo chauffeur absolutely.”
There was no signature.  Her letters were never signed.  He stood
for a moment staring at the closely written sheets in his hand, a
heightened colour in his cheeks, his lips pressed tightly together–
and then his fingers automatically began to tear the letter into
pieces, and the pieces again into little shreds.  To-night!  It was
to be to-night, the end of all this mystery.  To-night was to see
the end of this dual life of his, with its constant peril!  To-night
the Gray Seal was to exit from the stage forever!  To-night, a
wonderful climax of the years, he was to see HER!
His blood was quickened now, his heart pounding in a faster beat; a
mad elation, a fierce uplift was upon him.  He thrust the torn bits
of paper into his pocket hurriedly, stepped across the room to the
corner, rolled back the oilcloth, and lifted up the loose plank in
the flooring, so innocently dustladen, as, more than once, to have
eluded the eyes of inquisitive visitors in the shape of police and
plain clothes men from headquarters.
From the space beneath he removed a neatly folded pile of clothes,
laid these on the bed, and began to undress.  He was working rapidly
now.  Tiny pieces of wax were removed from his nostrils, from under
his lips, from behind his ears; water from a cracked pitcher poured
into a battered tin basin, and mixed with a few drops of some liquid
from a bottle which he procured from its hiding place under the
flooring, banished the make-up stain from his face, his neck, his
wrists, and hands as if by magic.  It was a strange metamorphosis
that had taken place–the coarse, brutal-featured, blear-eyed,
leering countenance of Larry the Bat was gone, and in its place,
clean-cut, square-jawed, clear-eyed, was the face of Jimmie Dale.
And where before had slouched a slope-shouldered, misshapen, flabby
creature, a broad-shouldered form well over six feet in height now
stood erect, and under the clean white skin the muscles of an
athlete, like knobs of steel played back and forth with every
movement of his body.
In the streaked and broken mirror Jimmie Dale surveyed himself
critically, methodically, and, with a nod of satisfaction, hastily
donned the fashionably cut suit of tweeds upon the bed.  He rummaged
then through the ragged garments he had just discarded, transferred
to his pockets a roll of bills and his automatic, and paused
hesitantly, staring at the thin metal case, like a cigarette case,
that he held in the palm of his hand.  He shrugged his shoulders a
little whimsically; it seemed strange indeed that he was through
with that!  He snapped it open.  Within, between sheets of oil
paper, lay the scores of little diamond-shaped, gray-coloured,
adhesive paper seals–the insignia of the Gray Seal.  Yes, it seemed
strange that he was never to use another!  He closed the case,
gathered up the clothes of Larry the Bat, tucked the case in among
them, and shoved the bundle into the hole under the flooring.  All
these things would have to be destroyed, but there was not time to-
night; to-morrow, or the next day, would do for that.  What would it
be like to live a normal life again, without the menace of danger
lurking on every hand, without that grim slogan of the underworld,
“Death to the Gray Seal!” or that savage fiat of the police, “The
Gray Seal, dead or alive–but the Gray Seal!” forever ringing in his
ears?  What would it be like, this new life–with her?
The thought was thrilling him again, bringing again that eager,
exultant uplift.  In an hour, ONE hour, and the barriers of years
would be swept away, and she would be in his arms!
“It’s for my sake to-night!”  His face grew suddenly tense, as the
words came back to him.  That “hour” wasn’t over yet!  It was no
hysterical exaggeration that had prompted her to call her enemies
the most powerful and pitiless organisation of criminals that the
world had ever known.  It was not the Tocsin’s way to exaggerate.
The words would be literally true.  The very life she had led for
the three years that had gone stood out now as a grim proof of her
assertion.
Jimmie Dale replaced the flooring, carefully brushed the dust back
into the cracks, spread the oilcloth into place, and stood up.  Who
and what was this organisation?  What was between it and the Tocsin?
What was this immense fortune that was at stake?  And what was this
priceless packet that was so crucial, that meant victory now, ay,
and her life, too, she had said?
The questions swept upon him in a sort of breathless succession.
Why had she not let him play a part in this?  True, she had told him
why–that she dared not expose him to the risk.  Risk!  Was there
any risk that the Gray Seal had not taken, and at her instance!  He
did not understand, he smiled a little uncertainly, as he reached up
to turn out the gas.  There were a good many things that he did not
understand about the Tocsin!
The room was in darkness, and with the darkness Jimmie Dale’s mind
centred on the work immediately before him.  To enter the tenement
where he was known and had an acknowledged right as Larry the Bat
was one thing; for Jimmie Dale to be discovered there was quite
another.
He crossed the room, opened the door silently, stood for a moment
listening, then stepped out into the black, musty, ill-smelling
hallway, closing the door behind him.  He stooped and locked it.
The querulous cry of a child reached him from somewhere above–a
murmur of voices, muffled by closed doors, from everywhere.  How
many families were housed beneath that sordid roof he had never
known, only that there was miserable poverty there as well as vice
and crime, only that Larry the Bat, who possessed a room all to
himself, was as some lordly and super-being to these fellow tenants
who shared theirs with so many that there was not air enough for all
to breathe.
He had no doors to pass–his was next to the staircase.  He began to
descend.  They could scream and shriek, those stairs, like aged
humans, twisted and rheumatic, at the least ungentle touch.  But
there was no sound from them now.  There seemed something almost
uncanny in the silent tread.  Stair after stair he descended, his
entire weight thrown gradually upon one foot before the other was
lifted.  The strain upon the muscles, trained and hardened as they
were, told.  As he moved from the bottom step, he wiped little beads
of perspiration from his forehead.
The door, now, that gave on the alleyway!  He opened it, slipped
outside, darted across the narrow lane, stole along where the
shadows of the fence were blackest, paused, listening, as he reached
the end of the alleyway, to assure himself that there was no near-by
pedestrian–and stepped out into the street.
He kept on along the block, turned into the Bowery, and, under the
first lamp, consulted his watch.  It was a quarter past ten.  He
could make it easily in a leisurely walk.  He continued on up the
Bowery, finally crossed to Broadway, and shortly afterward turned
into Waverly Place.  At the corner of Fifth Avenue he consulted his
watch again–and now he lighted a cigarette.  Sixth Avenue was only
a block away.  At precisely half-past ten, to the second, he halted
on the designated corner, smoking nonchalantly.
A taxicab, coincidentally coming from an uptown direction, swung in
to the curb.
“Taxi, sir?  Yes, sir?”  Then, with an admirable mingling of
eagerness to secure the fare and a fear that his confession might
cause him the loss of it: “I’ve another fare in half an hour, sir,
but I can get you most anywhere in that time.”
Jimmie Dale’s cigarette was tossed carelessly into the street.
“St. James Club!” he said curtly, and stepped into the cab.
The cab started forward, turned the corner, and headed along Waverly
Place toward Broadway.  The chauffeur twisted around in his seat in
a matter-of-fact way, as though to ask further directions.
“Have you anything for me?” he inquired casually.
It lay where it always lay, that ring, between the folds of that
little white glove in his pocketbook.  Jimmie Dale took it out now,
and handed it silently to the chauffeur.
The other’s face changed instantly–composure was gone, and a quick,
strained look was in its place.
“I’m afraid I’ve been watched,” he said tersely.  “Look behind you,
will you, and tell me if you see anything?”
Jimmie Dale glanced backward through the little window in the hood.
“There’s another taxi just turned in from Sixth Avenue,” he reported
the next instant.
“Keep your eye on it!” instructed the chauffeur shortly.
The speed of the cab increased sensibly.
With a curious tightening of his lips, Jimmie Dale settled himself
in his seat so that he could watch the cab behind.  There was
trouble coming, intuitively he sensed that; and, he reflected
bitterly, he might have known!  It was too marvellous, too wonderful
ever to come to pass that this one hour, the thought of which had
fired his blood and made him glad beyond any gladness life had ever
held for him before, should bring its promised happiness.
“Where’s the cab now?” the chauffeur flung back over his shoulder.
They had passed Fifth Avenue, and were nearing Broadway.
“About the same distance behind,” Jimmie Dale answered.
“That looks bad!” the chauffeur gritted between his teeth.  “We’ll
have to make sure.  I’ll run down Lower Broadway.”
“If you think we’re followed,” suggested Jimmie Dale quietly, “why
not run uptown and give them the slip somewhere where the traffic is
thick?  Lower Broadway at this time of night is as empty and
deserted as a country road.”
The chauffeur’s sudden laugh was mirthless.
“My God, you don’t know what you are talking about!” he burst out.
“If they’re following, all hell couldn’t throw them off the track.
And I’ve got to know, I’ve got to be SURE before I dare make a move
to-night.  I couldn’t tell up in the crowded districts if I was
followed, could I?  They won’t come out into the open until their
hands are forced.”
The car swerved sharply, rounded the corner, and, speeding up faster
and faster, began to tear down Lower Broadway.
“Watch!  WATCH!” cried the chauffeur.
There was no word between them for a moment; then Jimmie Dale spoke
crisply:
“It’s turned the corner!  It’s coming this way!”
The taxicab was rocking violently with the speed; silent, empty,
Lower Broadway stretched away ahead.  Apart from an occasional
street car, probably there would be nothing between them and the
Battery.  Jimmie Dale glanced at his companion’s face as a light,
flashing by, threw it into relief.  It was set and stern, even a
little haggard; but, too, there was something else there, something
that appealed instantly to Jimmie Dale–a sort of bulldog grit that
dominated it.
“If he holds our speed, we’ll know!” the chauffeur was shouting now
to make himself heard over the roar of the car.  “Look again!  Where
is it now?”
Once more Jimmie Dale looked through the little rear window.  The
cab had been a block behind them when it had turned the corner, and
he watched it now in a sort of grim fascination.  There was no
possible doubt of it!  The two bobbing, bouncing headlights were
creeping steadily nearer.  And then a sort of unnatural calm settled
upon Jimmie Dale, and his hand went mechanically to his pocket to
feel his automatic there, as he turned again to the chauffeur.
“If you’ve got any more speed, you’d better use it!” he said
significantly.
The man shot a quick look at him.
“They are following us?  You are SURE?”
“Yes,” said Jimmie Dale.
The chauffeur laughed again in that mirthless, savage way.
“Lean over here, where I can talk to you!” he rasped out.  “The
game’s up, as far as I am concerned, I guess!  But there’s a chance
for you.  They don’t know you in this.”
“Give her more speed–or dodge into a cross street!” suggested
Jimmie Dale coolly.  “They haven’t got us yet, by a long way!”
The other shook his head.
“It’s not only that cab behind,” he answered, through set lips.
“You don’t know what we’re up against.  If they’re really after us,
there’s a trap laid in every section of this city–the devils!  It’s
the package they want.  Thank God for the presentiment that made me
leave it behind!  I was going back for it, you understand, if I was
satisfied that we weren’t followed.  Listen!  There’s a chance for
you–there’s none for me.  That package–remember this!–no one else
knows where it is, and it’s life and death to the one who sent you
here.  It’s in Box 428 at–  My God, LOOK!  Look there!” he yelled,
and, with a wrench at the wheel, sent the taxi lurching and
staggering for the car tracks in the centre of the street.
The scene, fast as thought itself, was photographing itself in every
detail upon Jimmie Dale’s brain.  From the cross street ahead, one
from each corner, two motor cars had nosed out into Broadway,
blocking the road on both sides.  And now the car on the left-hand
side was moving forward across the tracks to counteract the
chauffeur’s move, deliberately insuring a collision.  There was no
chance, no further room to turn, no time to stop–the man driving
the other car jumped for safety–they would be into it in an
instant.
“Box 428!” Jimmie pleaded fiercely.  “Go on, man!  Go on!  FINISH!”
“Yes!” cried the chauffeur.  “John Johansson, at–”
But Jimmie Dale heard no more.  There was the crash of impact as the
taxicab plowed into the car that had been so craftily manoeuvered in
front of it, and Jimmie Dale, lifted from his feet, was hurled
violently forward with the shock, and all went black before his
eyes.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
