



In choosing a few typical cases which illustrate the remarkable
mental qualities of my friend, Sherlock Holmes, I have
endeavoured, as far as possible, to select those which presented
the minimum of sensationalism, while offering a fair field for
his talents.  It is, however, unfortunately impossible entirely
to separate the sensational from the criminal, and a chronicler
is left in the dilemma that he must either sacrifice details
which are essential to his statement and so give a false
impression of the problem, or he must use matter which chance,
and not choice, has provided him with.  With this short preface I
shall turn to my notes of what proved to be a strange, though a
peculiarly terrible, chain of events.
It was a blazing hot day in August.  Baker Street was like an
oven, and the glare of the sunlight upon the yellow brickwork of
the house across the road was painful to the eye.  It was hard to
believe that these were the same walls which loomed so gloomily
through the fogs of winter.  Our blinds were half-drawn, and
Holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading and re-reading a letter
which he had received by the morning post.  For myself, my term
of service in India had trained me to stand heat better than
cold, and a thermometer at ninety was no hardship.  But the
morning paper was uninteresting.  Parliament had risen.
Everybody was out of town, and I yearned for the glades of the
New Forest or the shingle of Southsea.  A depleted bank account
had caused me to postpone my holiday, and as to my companion,
neither the country nor the sea presented the slightest
attraction to him.  He loved to lie in the very center of five
millions of people, with his filaments stretching out and running
through them, responsive to every little rumour or suspicion of
unsolved crime.  Appreciation of nature found no place among his
many gifts, and his only change was when he turned his mind from
the evil-doer of the town to track down his brother of the
country.
Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation I had
tossed side the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair I fell
into a brown study.  Suddenly my companion’s voice broke in upon
my thoughts:
“You are right, Watson,” said he.  “It does seem a most
preposterous way of settling a dispute.”
“Most preposterous!” I exclaimed, and then suddenly realizing how
he had echoed the inmost thought of my soul, I sat up in my chair
and stared at him in blank amazement.
“What is this, Holmes?” I cried.  “This is beyond anything which
I could have imagined.”
He laughed heartily at my perplexity.
“You remember,” said he, “that some little time ago when I read
you the passage in one of Poe’s sketches in which a close
reasoner follows the unspoken thoughts of his companion, you were
inclined to treat the matter as a mere tour-de-force of the
author.  On my remarking that I was constantly in the habit of
doing the same thing you expressed incredulity.”
“Oh, no!”
“Perhaps not with your tongue, my dear Watson, but certainly with
your eyebrows.  So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter
upon a train of thought, I was very happy to have the opportunity
of reading it off, and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof
that I had been in rapport with you.”
But I was still far from satisfied.  “In the example which you
read to me,” said I, “the reasoner drew his conclusions from the
actions of the man whom he observed. If I remember right, he
stumbled over a heap of stones, looked up at the stars, and so
on.  But I have been seated quietly in my chair, and what clues
can I have given you?”
“You do yourself an injustice.  The features are given to man as
the means by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are
faithful servants.”
“Do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from my
features?”
“Your features and especially your eyes.  Perhaps you cannot
yourself recall how your reverie commenced?”
“No, I cannot.”
“Then I will tell you.  After throwing down your paper, which was
the action which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a
minute with a vacant expression.  Then your eyes fixed themselves
upon your newly framed picture of General Gordon, and I saw by
the alteration in your face that a train of thought had been
started.  But it did not lead very far.  Your eyes flashed across
to the unframed portrait of Henry Ward Beecher which stands upon
the top of your books.  Then you glanced up at the wall, and of
course your meaning was obvious.  You were thinking that if the
portrait were framed it would just cover that bare space and
correspond with Gordon’s picture there.”
“You have followed me wonderfully!” I exclaimed.
“So far I could hardly have gone astray.  But now your thoughts
went back to Beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were
studying the character in his features. Then your eyes ceased to
pucker, but you continued to look across, and your face was
thoughtful.  You were recalling the incidents of Beecher’s
career.  I was well aware that you could not do this without
thinking of the mission which he undertook on behalf of the North
at the time of the Civil War, for I remember your expressing your
passionate indignation at the way in which he was received by the
more turbulent of our people.  You felt so strongly about it that
I knew you could not think of Beecher without thinking of that
also.  When a moment later I saw your eyes wander away from the
picture, I suspected that your mind had now turned to the Civil
War, and when I observed that your lips set, your eyes sparkled,
and your hands clenched I was positive that you were indeed
thinking of the gallantry which was shown by both sides in that
desperate struggle. But then, again, your face grew sadder, you
shook your head.  You were dwelling upon the sadness and horror
and useless waste of life.  Your hand stole towards your own old
wound and a smile quivered on your lips, which showed me that the
ridiculous side of this method of settling international
questions had forced itself upon your mind. At this point I
agreed with you that it was preposterous and was glad to find
that all my deductions had been correct.”
“Absolutely!” said I.  “And now that you have explained it, I
confess that I am as amazed as before.”
“It was very superficial, my dear Watson, I assure you.  I should
not have intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some
incredulity the other day.  But I have in my hands here a little
problem which may prove to be more difficult of solution than my
small essay I thought reading.  Have you observed in the paper a
short paragraph referring to the remarkable contents of a packet
sent through the post to Miss Cushing, of Cross Street, Croydon?”
“No, I saw nothing.”
“Ah! then you must have overlooked it.  Just toss it over to me.
Here it is, under the financial column.  Perhaps you would be
good enough to read it aloud.”
I picked up the paper which he had thrown back to me and read the
paragraph indicated. It was headed, “A Gruesome Packet.”
“Miss Susan Cushing, living at Cross Street, Croydon, has been
made the victim of what must be regarded as a peculiarly
revolting practical joke unless some more sinister meaning should
prove to be attached to the incident.  At two o’clock yesterday
afternoon a small packet, wrapped in brown paper, was handed in
by the postman.  A cardboard box was inside, which was filled
with coarse salt. On emptying this, Miss Cushing was horrified to
find two human ears, apparently quite freshly severed.  The box
had been sent by parcel post from Belfast upon the morning
before.  There is no indication as to the sender, and the matter
is the more mysterious as Miss Cushing, who is a maiden lady of
fifty, has led a most retired life, and has so few acquaintances
or correspondents that it is a rare event for her to receive
anything through the post.  Some years ago, however, when she
resided at Penge, she let apartments in her house to three young
medical students, whom she was obliged to get rid of on account
of their noisy and irregular habits.  The police are of opinion
that this outrage may have been perpetrated upon Miss Cushing by
these youths, who owed her a grudge and who hoped to frighten her
by sending her these relics of the dissecting-rooms.  Some
probability is lent to the theory by the fact that one of these
students came from the north of Ireland, and, to the best of Miss
Cushing’s belief, from Belfast.  In the meantime, the matter is
being actively investigated, Mr. Lestrade, one of the very
smartest of our detective officers, being in charge of the case.”
“So much for the Daily Chronicle,” said Holmes as I finished
reading.  “Now for our friend Lestrade.  I had a note from him
this morning, in which he says:
“I think that this case is very much in your line.  We have every
hope of clearing the matter up, but we find a little difficulty
in getting anything to work upon.  We have, of course, wired to
the Belfast post-office, but a large number of parcels were
handed in upon that day, and they have no means of identifying
this particular one, or of remembering the sender.  The box is a
half-pound box of honeydew tobacco and does not help us in any
way.  The medical student theory still appears to me to be the
most feasible, but if you should have a few hours to spare I
should be very happy to see you out here.  I shall be either at
the house or in the police-station all day.
“What say you, Watson?  Can you rise superior to the heat and run
down to Croydon with me on the off chance of a case for your
annals?”
“I was longing for something to do.”
“You shall have it then.  Ring for our boots and tell them to
order a cab.  I’ll be back in a moment when I have changed my
dressing-gown and filled my cigar-case.”
A shower of rain fell while we were in the train, and the heat
was far less oppressive in Croydon than in town.  Holmes had sent
on a wire, so that Lestrade, as wiry, as dapper, and as ferret-
like as ever, was waiting for us at the station.  A walk of five
minutes took us to Cross Street, where Miss Cushing resided.
It was a very long street of two-story brick houses, neat and
prim, with whitened stone steps and little groups of aproned
women gossiping at the doors.  Halfway down, Lestrade stopped and
tapped at a door, which was opened by a small servant girl.  Miss
Cushing was sitting in the front room, into which we were
ushered.  She was a placid-faced woman, with large, gentle eyes,
and grizzled hair curving down over her temples on each side.  A
worked antimacassar lay upon her lap and a basket of coloured
silks stood upon a stool beside her.
“They are in the outhouse, those dreadful things,” said she as
Lestrade entered.  “I wish that you would take them away
altogether.”
“So I shall, Miss Cushing.  I only kept them here until my
friend, Mr. Holmes, should have seen them in your presence.”
“Why in my presence, sir?”
“In case he wished to ask any questions.”
“What is the use of asking me questions when I tell you I know
nothing whatever about it?”
“Quite so, madam,” said Holmes in his soothing way.  “I have no
doubt that you have been annoyed more than enough already over
this business.”
“Indeed I have, sir. I am a quiet woman and live a retired life.
It is something new for me to see my name in the papers and to
find the police in my house.  I won’t have those things I here,
Mr. Lestrade.  If you wish to see them you must go to the
outhouse.”
It was a small shed in the narrow garden which ran behind the
house.  Lestrade went in and brought out a yellow cardboard box,
with a piece of brown paper and some string.  There was a bench
at the end of the path, and we all sat down while Homes examined
one by one, the articles which Lestrade had handed to him.
“The string is exceedingly interesting,” he remarked, holding it
up to the light and sniffing at it.  “What do you make of this
string, Lestrade?”
“It has been tarred.”
“Precisely.  It is a piece of tarred twine.  You have also, no
doubt, remarked that Miss Cushing has cut the cord with a
scissors, as can be seen by the double fray on each side.  This
is of importance.”
“I cannot see the importance,” said Lestrade.
“The importance lies in the fact that the knot is left intact,
and that this knot is of a peculiar character.”
“It is very neatly tied.  I had already made a note of that
effect,” said Lestrade complacently.
“So much for the string, then,” said Holmes, smiling, “now for
the box wrapper. Brown paper, with a distinct smell of coffee.
What, did you not observe it?  I think there can be no doubt of
it.  Address printed in rather straggling characters:  ’Miss S.
Cushing, Cross Street, Croydon.’  Done with a broad-pointed pen,
probably a J, and with very inferior ink.  The word ’Croydon’ has
been originally spelled with an ’i’, which has been changed to
’y’.  The parcel was directed, then, by a man—the printing is
distinctly masculine—of limited education and unacquainted with
the town of Croydon.  So far, so good!  The box is a yellow,
half-pound honeydew box, with nothing distinctive save two thumb
marks at the left bottom corner.  It is filled with rough salt of
the quality used for preserving hides and other of the coarser
commercial purposes.  And embedded in it are these very singular
enclosures.”
He took out the two ears as he spoke, and laying a board across
his knee he examined them minutely, while Lestrade and I, bending
forward on each side of him, glanced alternately at these
dreadful relics and at the thoughtful, eager face of our
companion.  Finally he returned them to the box once more and sat
for a while in deep meditation.
“You have observed, of course,” said he at last, “that the ears
are not a pair.”
“Yes, I have noticed that.  But if this were the practical joke
of some students from the dissecting-rooms, it would be as easy
for them to send two odd ears as a pair.”
“Precisely.  But this is not a practical joke.”
“You are sure of it?”
“The presumption is strongly against it.  Bodies in the
dissecting-rooms are injected with preservative fluid.  These
ears bear no signs of this.  They are fresh, too.  They have been
cut off with a blunt instrument, which would hardly happen if a
student had done it.  Again, carbolic or rectified spirits would
be the preservatives which would suggest themselves to the
medical mind, certainly not rough salt.  I repeat that there is
no practical joke here, but that we are investigating a serious
crime.”
A vague thrill ran through me as I listened to my companion’s
words and saw the stern gravity which had hardened his features.
This brutal preliminary seemed to shadow forth some strange and
inexplicable horror in the background. Lestrade, however, shook
his head like a man who is only half convinced.
“There are objections to the joke theory, no doubt,” said he,
“but there are much stronger reasons against the other.  We know
that this woman has led a most quiet and respectable life at
Penge and here for the last twenty years.  She has hardly been
away from her home for a day during that time.  Why on earth,
then, should any criminal send her the proofs of his guilt,
especially as, unless she is a most consummate actress, she
understands quite as little of the matter as we do?”
“That is the problem which we have to solve,” Holmes answered,
“and for my part I shall set about it by presuming that my
reasoning is correct, and that a double murder has been
committed.  One of these ears is a woman’s, small, finely formed,
and pierced for an earring.  The other is a man’s, sun-burned,
discoloured, and also pierced for an earring.  These two people
are presumably dead, or we should have heard their story before
now.  To-day is Friday.  The packet was posted on Thursday
morning.  The tragedy, then, occurred on Wednesday or Tuesday, or
earlier.  If the two people were murdered, who but their murderer
would have sent this sign of his work to Miss Cushing?  We may
take it that the sender of the packet is the man whom we want.
But he must have some strong reason for sending Miss Cushing this
packet.  What reason then?  It must have been to tell her that
the deed was done! or to pain her, perhaps.  But in that case she
knows who it is.  Does she know?  I doubt it.  If she knew, why
should she cal the police in?  She might have buried the ears,
and no one would have been the wiser. That is what she would have
done if she had wished to shield the criminal.  But if she does
not wish to shield him she would give his name.  There is a
tangle here which needs straightening to.”  He had been talking
in a high, quick voice, staring blankly up over the garden fence,
but now he sprang briskly to his feet and walked towards the
house.
“I have a few questions to ask Miss Cushing,” said he.
“In that case I may leave you here,” said Lestrade, “for I have
another small business on hand.  I think that I have nothing
further to learn form Miss Cushing.  You will find me at the
police-station.”
“We shall look in on our way to the train,” answered Holmes.  A
moment later he and I were back in the front room, where the
impassive lady was still quietly working away at her
antimacassar.  She put it down on her lap as we entered and
looked at us with her frank, searching blue eyes.
“I am convinced, sir,” she said, “that this matter is a mistake,
and that the parcel was never meant for me at all.  I have said
this several times to the gentlemen from Scotland Yard, but he
simply laughs at me.  I have not an enemy in the world, as far as
I know, so why should anyone play me such a trick?”
“I am coming to be of the same opinion, Miss Cushing,” said
Holmes, taking a seat beside her.  “I think that it is more than
probable—” He paused, and I was surprised, on glancing round to
see that he was staring with singular intentness at the lady’s
profile.  Surprise and satisfaction were both for an instant to
be read upon his eager face, though when she glanced round to
find out the cause of his silence he had become as demure as
ever.  I stared hard myself at her flat, grizzled hair, her trim
cap, her little gilt earrings, her placid features; but I could
see nothing which could account for my companion’s evident
excitement.
“There were one or two questions—”
“Oh, I am weary of questions!” cried Miss Cushing impatiently.
“You have two sisters, I believe.”
“How could you know that?”
“I observed the very instant that I entered the room that you
have a portrait group of three ladies upon the mantelpiece, one
of whom is undoubtedly yourself, while the others are so
exceedingly like you that there could be no doubt of the
relationship.”
“Yes, you are quite right.  Those are my sisters, Sarah and
Mary.”
“And here at my elbow is another portrait, taken at Liverpool, of
your younger sister, in the company of a man who appears to be a
steward by his uniform.  I observe that she was unmarried at the
time.”
“You are very quick at observing.”
“That is my trade.”
“Well, you are quite right.  But she was married to Mr. Browner a
few days afterwards.  He was on the South American line when that
was taken, but he was so fond of her that he couldn’t abide to
leave her for so long, and he got into the Liverpool and London
boats.”
“Ah, the Conqueror, perhaps?”
“No, the May Day, when last I heard.  Jim came down here to see
me once.  That was before he broke the pledge; but afterwards he
would always take drink when he was ashore, and a little drink
would send him stark, staring mad.  Ah! it was a bad day that
ever he took a glass in his hand again.  First he dropped me,
then he quarrelled with Sarah, and now that Mary has stopped
writing we don’t know how things are going with them.”
It was evident that Miss Cushing had come upon a subject on which
she felt very deeply.  Like most people who lead a lonely life,
she was shy at first, but ended by becoming extremely
communicative.  She told us many details about her brother-in-law
the steward, and then wandering off on the subject of her former
lodgers, the medical students, she gave us a long account of
their delinquencies, with their names and those of their
hospitals.  Holmes listened attentively to everything, throwing
in a question from time to time.
“About your second sister, Sarah,” said he.  “I wonder, since you
are both maiden ladies, that you do not keep house together.”
“Ah! you don’t know Sarah’s temper or you would wonder no more.
I tried it when I came to Croydon, and we kept on until about two
months ago, when we had to part.  I don’t want to say a word
against my own sister, but she was always meddlesome and hard to
please, was Sarah.”
“You say that she quarrelled with your Liverpool relations.”
“Yes, and they were the best of friends at one time.  Why, she
went up there to live in order to be near them.  And now she has
no word hard enough for Jim Browner.  The last six months that
she was here she would speak of nothing but his drinking and his
ways.  He had caught her meddling, I suspect, and given her a bit
of his mind, and that was the start of it.”
“Thank you, Miss Cushing,” said Holmes, rising and bowing.  “Your
sister Sarah lives, I think you said, at New Street, Wallington?
Good-bye, and I am very sorry that you should have been troubled
over a case with which, as you say, you have nothing whatever to
do.”
There was a cab passing as we came out, and Holmes hailed it.
“How far to Wallington?” he asked.
“Only about a mile, sir.”
“Very good.  Jump in, Watson.  We must strike while the iron is
hot.  Simple as the case is, there have been one or two very
instructive details in connection with it.  Just pull up at a
telegraph office as you pass, cabby.”
Holmes sent off a short wire and for the rest of the drive lay
back in the cab, with his hat tilted over his nose to keep the
sun from his face. Our drive pulled up at a house which was not
unlike the one which we had just quitted.  My companion ordered
him to wait, and had his hand upon the knocker, when the door
opened and a grave young gentleman in black, with a very shiny
hat, appeared on the step.
“Is Miss Cushing at home?” asked Holmes.
“Miss Sarah Cushing is extremely ill,” said he.  “She has been
suffering since yesterday from brain symptoms of great severity.
As her medical adviser, I cannot possibly take the responsibility
of allowing anyone to see her.  I should recommend you to call
again in ten days.”  He drew on his gloves, closed the door, and
marched off down the street.
“Well, if we can’t we can’t,” said Holmes, cheerfully.
“Perhaps she could not or would not have told you much.”
“I did not wish her to tell me anything.  I only wanted to look
at her.  However, I think that I have got all that I want.  Drive
us to some decent hotel, cabby, where we may have some lunch, and
afterwards we shall drop down upon friend Lestrade at the police-
station.”
Continue...

This complete text of the The Adventure of the Cardboard Box book by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is in the
public domain.

Also see The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (Boxed DVD Set Collection) from 1983, at Amazon.
And The Complete Sherlock Holmes: All 4 Novels and 56 Short Stories.

This Authorama page has been created by Philipp Lenssen
based on the Project Gutenberg text version.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
