


It was still early in the evening, but a little after nine o’clock.
The Fifth Avenue bus wended its way, jouncing its patrons,
particularly those on the top seats, across town, and turned into
Riverside Drive.  A short distance behind the bus, a limousine
rolled down the cross street leisurely, silently.
As the lights of passing craft on the Hudson and a myriad
scintillating, luminous points dotting the west shore came into
view, Jimmie Dale rose impulsively from his seat on the top of the
bus, descended the little circular iron ladder at the rear, and
dropped off into the street.  It was only a few blocks farther to
his residence on the Drive, and the night was well worth the walk;
besides, restless, disturbed, and perplexed in mind, the walk
appealed to him.
He stepped across to the sidewalk and proceeded slowly along.  A
month had gone by and he had not heard a word from–HER.  The break
on West Broadway, the murder of Metzer in Moriarty’s gambling hell,
the theft of Markel’s diamond necklace had followed each other in
quick succession–and then this month of utter silence, with no sign
of her, as though indeed she had never existed.
But it was not this temporary silence on her part that troubled
Jimmie Dale now.  In the years that he had worked with this unknown,
mysterious accomplice of his whom he had never seen, there had been
longer intervals than a bare month in which he had heard nothing
from her–it was not that.  It was the failure, total, absolute, and
complete, that was the only result for the month of ceaseless,
unremitting, doggedly-expended effort, even as it had been the
result many times before, in an attempt to solve the enigma that was
so intimate and vital a factor in his own life.
If he might lay any claims to cleverness, his resourcefulness, at
least, he was forced to admit, was no match for hers.  She came, she
went without being seen–and behind her remained, instead of clews
to her identity, only an amazing, intangible mystery, that left him
at times appalled and dismayed.  How did she know about those
conditions in West Broadway, how did she know about Metzer’s murder,
how did she know about Markel and Wilbur–how did she know about a
hundred other affairs of the same sort that had happened since that
night, years ago now, when out of pure adventure he had tampered
with Marx’s, the jeweller’s strong room in Maiden Lane, and she had,
mysteriously then, too, solved HIS identity, discovered him to be
the Gray Seal?
Jimmie Dale, wrapped up in his own thoughts, entirely oblivious to
his surroundings, traversed another block.  There had never been
since the world began, and there would never be again, so singular
and bizarre a partnership as this–of hers and his.  He, Jimmie
Dale, with his strange double life, one of New York’s young bachelor
millionaires, one whose social status was unquestioned; and she,
who–who WHAT?  That was just it!  Who what?  What was she?  What
was her name?  What one personal, intimate thing did he know about
her?  And what was to be the end?  Not that he would have severed
his association with her–not for worlds!–though every time, that,
by some new and curious method, one of her letters found its way
into his hands, outlining some fresh coup for him to execute, his
peril and danger of discovery was increased in staggering ratio.
To-day, the police hunted the Gray Seal as they hunted a mad dog;
the papers stormed and raved against him: in every detective bureau
of two continents he was catalogued as the most notorious criminal
of the age–and yet, strange paradox, no single crime had ever been
committed!
Jimmie Dale’s strong, fine-featured face lighted up.  Crime!  Thanks
to her, there were those who blessed the name of the Gray Seal,
those into whose lives had come joy, relief from misery, escape from
death even–and their blessings were worth a thousandfold the risk
and peril of disaster that threatened him at every minute of the
day.
“Thank God for her!” murmured Jimmie Dale softly.  “But–but if I
could only find her, see her, know who she is, talk to her, and hear
her voice!”  Then he smiled a little wanly.  “It’s been a pretty
tough month–and nothing to show for it!”
It had!  It had been one of the hardest months through which Jimmie
Dale had ever lived.  The St. James, that most exclusive club, his
favourite haunt, had seen nothing of him; the easel in his den, that
was his hobby, had been untouched; there had been days even when he
had not crossed the threshold of his home.  Every resource at his
command he had called into play in an effort to solve the mystery.
For nearly the entire month, following first this lead and then
that, he had lived in the one disguise that he felt confident she
knew nothing of–that was, or, rather, had become, almost a dual
personality with him.  From the Sanctuary, that miserable and
disreputable room in a tenement on the East Side, a tenement that
had three separate means of entrance and exit, he had emerged day
after day as Larry the Bat, a character as well known and as well
liked in the exclusive circles of the underworld as was Jimmie Dale
in the most exclusive strata of New York’s society and fashion.  And
it had been useless–all useless.  Through his own endeavours,
through the help of his friends of the underworld, the lives of half
a dozen men, Bert Hagan’s on West Broadway, for instance, Markel’s,
and others’, had been laid bare to the last shred, but nowhere could
be found the one vital point that linked their lives with hers, that
would account for her intimate knowledge of them, and so furnish him
with the clew that would then with certainty lead him to a solution
of her identity.
It was baffling, puzzling, unbelievable, bordering, indeed, on the
miraculous–herself, everything about her, her acts, her methods,
her cleverness, intangible in one sense, were terrifically real in
another.  Jimmie Dale shook his head.  The miraculous and this
practical, everyday life were wide and far apart.  There was nothing
miraculous about it–it was only that the key to it was, so far,
beyond his reach.
And then suddenly Jimmie Dale shrugged his shoulders in consonance
with a whimsical change in both mood and thought.
“Larry the Bat, is a hard taskmaster!” he muttered facetiously.
“I’m afraid I’m not very presentable this evening–no bath this
morning, and no shave, and, after nearly a month of make-up, that
beastly grease paint gets into the skin creases in a most intimate
way.”  He chuckled as the thought of old Jason, his butler, came to
him.  “I saw Jason, torn between two conflicting emotions, shaking
his head over the black circles under my eyes last night–he didn’t
know whether to worry over the first signs of a galloping decline,
or break his heart at witnessing the young master he had dandled on
his knees going to the damnation bowwows and turning into a
confirmed roue!  I guess I’ll have to mind myself, though.  Even
Carruthers detached his mind far enough from his editorial desk and
the hope of exclusively publishing the news of the Gray Seal’s
capture in the MORNING NEWS-ARGUS, to tell me I was looking seedy.
It’s wonderful the way a little paint will metamorphose a man!
Well, anyway, here’s for a good hot tub to-night, and a fresh start!
He quickened his pace.  There were still three blocks to go, and
here was no hurrying, jostling crowd to impede his progress; indeed,
as far as he could see up the Drive, there was not a pedestrian in
sight.  And then, as he walked, involuntarily, insistently, his mind
harked back into the old groove again.
“I’ve tried to picture her,” said Jimmie Dale softly to himself.
“I’ve tried to picture her a hundred, yes, a thousand times, and–”
A bus, rumbling cityward, went by him, squeaking, creaking, and
rattling in its uneasy joints–and out of the noise, almost at his
elbow it seemed, a voice spoke his name–and in that instant
intuitively he KNEW, and it thrilled him, stopped the beat of his
heart, as, dulcet, soft, clear as the note of a silver bell it fell–
and only one word:
“Jimmie!”
He whirled around.  A limousine, wheels just grazing the curb, was
gliding slowly and silently past him, and from the window a woman’s
arm, white-gloved and dainty, was extended, and from the fingers to
the pavement fluttered an envelope–and the car leaped forward.
For the fraction of a second, Jimmie Dale stood dazed, immovable, a
gamut of emotions, surprise, fierce exultation, amazement, a strange
joy, a mighty uplift, swirling upon him–and then, snatching up the
envelope from the ground, he sprang out into the road after the car.
It was the one chance he had ever had, the one chance she had ever
given him, and he had seen–a white-gloved arm!  He could not reach
the car, it was speeding away from him like an arrow now, but there
was something else that would do just as well, something that with
all her cleverness she had overlooked–the car’s number dangling on
the rear axle, the rays of the little lamp playing on the enamelled
surface of the plate!  Gasping, panting, he held his own for a yard
or more, and there floated back to him a little silvery laugh from
the body of the limousine, and then Jimmie Dale laughed, too, and
stopped–it was No.15,836!
He stood and watched the car disappear up the Drive.  What delicious
irony!  A month of gruelling, ceaseless toil that had been vain,
futile, useless–and the key, when he was not looking for it,
unexpectedly, through no effort of his, was thrust into his hand–
No.15,836!
Jimmie Dale, the gently ironic smile still on his lips, those slim,
supersensitive fingers of his subconsciously noting that the texture
of the envelope was the same as she always used, retraced his steps
to the sidewalk.
“Number fifteen thousand eight hundred and thirty-six,” said Jimmie
Dale aloud–and halted at the curb as though rooted to the spot.  It
sounded strangely familiar, that number!  He repeated it over again
slowly: “One-five-eight-three-six.”  And the smile left his lips,
and upon his face came the look of a chastened child.  She had used
a duplicate plate!  Fifteen thousand eight hundred and thirty-six
was the number of one of his own cars–his own particular runabout!
For a moment longer he stood there, undecided whether to laugh or
swear, and then his eyes fastened mechanically on the envelope he
was twirling in his fingers.  Here, at least, was something that was
not elusive; that, on the contrary, as a hundred others in the past
had done, outlined probably a grim night’s work ahead for the Gray
Seal!  And, if it were as those others had been, every minute from
the moment of its receipt was precious time.  He stepped under the
nearest street light, and tore the envelope open.
“Dear Philanthropic Crook,” it began–and then followed two closely
written pages.  Jimmie Dale read them, his lips growing gradually
tighter, a smouldering light creeping into his dark eyes, and once
he emitted a short, low whistle of consternation–that was at the
end, as he read the post-script that was heavily underscored: “Work
quickly.  They will raid to-night.  Be careful.  Look out for Kline,
he is the sharpest man in the United States secret service.”
For a brief instant longer, Jimmie Dale stood under the street lamp,
his mind in a lightning-quick way cataloguing every point in her
letter, viewing every point from a myriad angles, constructing,
devising, mapping out a plan to dove-tail into them–and then Jimmie
Dale swung on a downtown bus.  There was neither time nor occasion
to go home now–that marvellous little kit of burglar’s tools that
peeped from their tiny pockets in that curious leather undervest,
and that reposed now in the safe in his den, would be useless to him
to-night; besides, in the breast pocket of his coat, neatly folded,
was a black silk mask, and, relics of his role of Larry the Bat, an
automatic revolver, an electric flashlight, a steel jimmy, and a
bunch of skeleton keys, were distributed among the other pockets of
his smart tweed suit.
Jimmie Dale changed from the bus to the subway, leaving behind him,
strewn over many blocks, the tiny and minute fragments into which he
had torn her letter; at Astor Place he left the subway, walked to
Broadway, turned uptown for a block to Eighth Street, then along
Eighth Street almost to Sixth Avenue–and stopped.
A rather shabby shop, a pitiful sort of a place, displaying in its
window a heterogeneous conglomeration of cheap odds and ends, ink
bottles, candy, pencils, cigarettes, pens, toys, writing pads,
marbles, and a multitude of other small wares, confronted him.
Within, a little, old, sweet-faced, gray-haired woman stood behind
the counter, pottering over the rearrangement of some articles on
the shelves.
“My word!” said Jimmie Dale softly to himself.  “You wouldn’t
believe it, would you!  And I’ve always wondered how these little
stores managed to make both ends meet.  Think of that old soul
making fifteen or twenty thousand dollars from a layout like this–
even if it has taken her a lifetime!”
Jimmie Dale had halted nonchalantly and unconcernedly by the curb,
not too near the window, busied apparently in an effort to light a
refractory cigarette; and then, about to enter the store, he gazed
aimlessly across the street for a moment instead.  A man came
briskly around the corner from Sixth Avenue, opened the store door,
and went in.
Jimmie Dale drew back a little, and turned his head again as the
door closed–and a sudden, quick, alert, and startled look spread
over his face.
The man who had entered bent over the counter and spoke to the old
lady.  She seemed to listen with a dawning terror creeping over her
features, and then her hands went piteously to the thin hair behind
her ears.  The man motioned toward a door at the rear of the store.
She hesitated, then came out from behind the counter, and swayed a
little as though her limbs would not support her weight.
Jimmie Dale’s lips thinned.
“I’m afraid,” he muttered slowly, “I’m afraid that I’m too late even
now.”  And then, as she came to the door and turned the key on the
inside: “Pray Heaven she doesn’t turn the light out–or somebody
might think I was trying to break in!”
But in that respect Jimmie Dale’s fears were groundless.  She did
not turn out either of the gas jets that lighted the little shop;
instead, in a faltering, reluctant sort of manner, she led the way
directly through the door in the rear, and the man followed her.
The shop was empty–and Jimmie Dale was standing against the door on
the outside.  His position was perfectly natural–a hundred passers-
by would have noted nothing but a most commonplace occurrence–a man
in the act of entering a store.  And, if he appeared to fumble and
have trouble with the latch, what of it!  Jimmie Dale, however, was
not fumbling–hidden by his back that was turned to the street,
those wonderful fingers of his, in whose tips seemed embodied and
concentrated every one of the human senses, were working quickly,
surely, accurately, without so much as the wasted movement of a
single muscle.
A faint tinkle–and the key within fell from the lock to the floor.
A faint click–and the bolt of the lock slipped back.  Jimmie Dale
restored the skeleton keys and a little steel instrument that
accompanied them to his pocket–and quietly opened the door.  He
stepped inside, picked up the key from the floor, inserted it in the
lock, closed the door behind him, and locked it again.
“To guard against interruption,” observed Jimmie Dale, a little
quizzically.
He was, perhaps, thirty seconds behind the others.  He crossed the
shop noiselessly, cautiously, and passed through the door at the
rear.  It opened into a short passage that, after a few feet, gave
on a sort of corridor at right angles–and down this latter, facing
him, at the end, the door of a lighted room was open, and he could
see the figure of the man who had entered the shop, back turned,
standing on the threshold.  Voices, indistinct, came to him.
The corridor itself was dark; and Jimmie Dale, satisfied that he was
fairly safe from observation, stole softly forward.  He passed two
doors on his left–and the curious arrangement of the building that
had puzzled him for a moment became clear.  The store made the front
of an old tenement building, with apartments above, and the rear of
the store was a sort of apartment, too–the old lady’s living
quarters.
Step by step, testing each one against a possible creaking of the
floor, Jimmie Dale moved forward, keeping close up against one wall.
The man passed on into the room–and now Jimmie Dale could
distinguish every word that was being spoken; and, crouched up, in
the dark corridor, in the angle of the wall and the door jamb
itself, could see plainly enough into the room beyond.  Jimmie
Dale’s jaw crept out a little.
A young man, gaunt, pale, wrapped in blankets, half sat, half
reclined in an invalid’s chair; the old lady, on her knees, the
tears streaming down her face, had her arms around the sick man’s
neck; while the other man, apparently upset at the scene, tugged
vigorously at long, gray mustaches.
“Sammy!  Sammy!” sobbed the woman piteously.  “Say you didn’t do it,
Sammy–say you didn’t do it!”
Look here, Mrs. Matthews,” said the man with the gray mustaches
gently, “now don’t you go to making things any harder.  I’ve got to
do my duty just the same, and take your son.”
The young man, a hectic flush beginning to burn on his cheeks, gazed
wildly from one to the other.
“What–what is it?” he cried out.
The man threw back his coat and displayed a badge on his vest.
“I’m Kline of the secret service,” he said gravely.  “I’m sorry,
Sammy, but I want you for that little job in Washington at the
bureau–before you left on sick leave!”
Sammy Matthews struggled away from his mother’s arms, pulled himself
forward in his chair–and his tongue licked dry lips.
“What–what job?” he whispered thickly.
“You know, don’t you?” the other answered steadily.  He took a
large, flat pocketbook from his pocket, opened it, and took out a
five-dollar bill.  He held this before the sick man’s eyes, but just
out of reach, one finger silently indicating the lower left-hand
corner.
Matthews stared at it for a moment, and the hectic flush faded to a
grayish pallor, and a queer, impotent sound gurgled in his throat.
“I see you recognise it,” said the other quietly.  “It’s open and
shut, Sammy.  That little imperfection in the plate’s got you, my
boy.”
“Sammy!  Sammy!” sobbed the woman again.  “Sammy, say you didn’t do
it!”
“It’s a lie!” said Matthews hoarsely.  “It’s a lie!  That plate was
condemned in the bureau for that imperfection–condemned and
destroyed.”
“Condemned TO BE destroyed,” corrected the other, without raising
his voice.  “There’s a little difference there, Sammy–about twenty
years’ difference–in the Federal pen.  But it wasn’t destroyed;
this note was printed from it by one of the slickest gangs of
counterfeiters in the United States–but I don’t need to tell you
that, I guess you know who they are.  I’ve been after them a long
time, and I’ve got them now, just as tight as I’ve got you.  Instead
of destroying that plate, you stole it, and disposed of it to the
gang.  How much did they give you?”
Matthews’ face seemed to hold a dumb horror, and his fingers picked
at the arms of the chair.  His mother had moved from beside him now,
and both her hands were patting at the man’s sleeve in a pitiful
way, while again and again she tried to speak, but no words would
come.
“It’s a lie!” said Matthews again, in a colourless, mechanical way.
The man glanced at Mrs. Matthews as he put the five-dollar note back
into his pocket, seemed to choke a little, shook his head, and all
trace of the official sternness that had crept into his voice
disappeared.
“It’s no good,” he said in a low tone.  “Don’t do that, Mrs.
Matthews, I’ve got to do my duty.”  He leaned a little toward the
chair.  “It’s dead to rights, Sammy.  You might as well make a clean
breast of it.  It was up to you and Al Gregor to see that the plate
was destroyed.  It WASN’T destroyed; instead, it shows up in the
hands of a gang of counterfeiters that I’ve been watching for
months.  Furthermore, I’ve got the plate itself.  And finally,
though I haven’t placed him under arrest yet for fear you might hear
of it before I wanted you to and make a get-away, I’ve got Al Gregor
where I can put my hands on him, and I’ve got his confession that
you and he worked the game between you to get that plate out of the
bureau and dispose of it to the gang.”
“Oh, my God!"–it came in a wild cry from the sick man, and in a
desperate, lurching way he struggled up to his feet.  “Al Gregor
said that?  Then–then I’m done!”  He clutched at his temples.  “But
it’s not true–it’s not true!  If the plate was stolen, and it must
have been stolen, or that note wouldn’t have been found, it was Al
Gregor who stole it–I didn’t, I tell you!  I knew nothing of it,
except that he and I were responsible for it and–and I left it to
him–that’s the only way I’m to blame.  He’s caught, and he’s trying
to get out of it with a light sentence by pretending to turn State’s
evidence, but–but I’ll fight him–he can’t prove it–it’s only his
word against mine, and–”
The other shook his head again.
“It’s no good, Sammy,” he said, a touch of sternness back in his
tones again.  “I told you it was open and shut.  It’s not only Al
Gregor.  One of the gang got weak knees when I got him where I
wanted him the other night, and he swears that you are the one who
DELIVERED the plate to them.  Between him and Gregor and what I know
myself, I’ve got evidence enough for any jury against every one of
the rest of you.”
Horror, fear, helplessness seemed to mingle in the sick man’s
staring eyes, and he swayed unsteadily upon his feet.
“I’m innocent!” he screamed out.  “But I’m caught, I’m caught in a
net, and I can’t get out–they lied to you–but no one will believe
it any more than you do and–and it means twenty years for me–oh,
God!–twenty years,  and–”  His hands went wriggling to his temples
again, and he toppled back in a faint into the chair.
“You’ve killed him!  You’ve killed my boy!” the old lady shrieked
out piteously, and flung herself toward the senseless figure.
The man jumped for the table across the room, on which was a row of
bottles, snatched one up, drew the cork, smelled it, and ran back
with the bottle.  He poured a little of the contents into his cupped
hand, held it under young Matthews’ nostrils, and pushed the bottle
into Mrs. Matthews’ hands.
“Bathe his forehead with this, Mrs. Matthews,” he directed
reassuringly.  “He’ll be all right again in a moment.  There, see–
he’s coming around now.”
There was a long, fluttering sigh, and Matthews opened his eyes;
then a moment’s silence; and then he spoke, with an effort, with
long pauses between the words:
“Am–I–to–go–now?”
The words seemed to ring absolute terror in the old lady’s ears.
She turned, and dropped to her knees on the floor.
“Mr. Kline, Mr. Kline,” she sobbed out, “oh, for God’s love, don’t
take him!  Let him off, let him go!  He’s my boy–all I’ve got!
You’ve got a mother, haven’t you?  You know–”  The tears were
streaming down the sweet, old face again.  “Oh, won’t you, for God’s
dear name, won’t you let him go?  Won’t–”
“Stop!” the man cried huskily.  He was mopping at his face with his
handkerchief.  “I thought I was case-hardened, I ought to be–but I
guess I’m not.  But I’ve got to do my duty.  You’re only making it
worse for Sammy there, as well as me.”
Her arms were around his knees now, clinging there.
“Why can’t you let him off!” she pleaded hysterically.  “Why can’t
you!  Why can’t you!  Nobody would know, and I’d do anything–I’d
pay anything–anything–I’ll give you ten–fifteen thousand
dollars!”
“My poor woman,” he said kindly, placing his hand on her head, “you
are talking wildly.  Apart altogether from the question of duty,
even if I succeeded in hushing the matter up, I would probably at
least be suspected and certainly discharged, and I have a family to
support–and if I were caught I’d get ten years in the Federal
prison for it.  I’m sorry for this; I believe it’s your boy’s first
offence, and if I could let him off I would.”
“But you can–you can!” she burst out, rocking on her knees,
clinging tighter still to him, as though in a paroxysm of fear that
he might somehow elude her.  “It will kill him–it will kill my boy.
And you can save him!  And even if they discharged you, what would
that mean against my boy’s life!  You wouldn’t suffer, your family
wouldn’t suffer, I’ll–I’ll take care of that–perhaps I could raise
a little more than fifteen thousand–but, oh, have pity, have mercy–
don’t take him away!”
The man stared at her a moment, stared at the white face on the
reclining chair–and passed his hand heavily across his eyes.
“You will!  You will!”  It came in a great surging cry of joy from
the old lady.  “You will–oh, thank God, thank God!–I can see it in
your face!”
“I–I guess I’m soft,” he said huskily, and stooped and raised Mrs.
Matthews to her feet.  “Don’t cry any more.  It’ll be all right–
it’ll be all right.  I’ll–I’ll fix it up somehow.  I haven’t made
any arrests yet, and–well, I’ll take my chances.  I’ll get the
plate and turn it over to you to-morrow, only–only it’s got to be
destroyed in my presence.”
“Yes, yes!” she cried, trying to smile through her tears–and then
she flung her arms around her son’s neck again.  “And when you come
to-morrow, I’ll be ready with the money to do my share, too, and–”
But Sammy Matthews shook his head.
“You’re wrong, both of you,” he said weakly.  “You’re a white man,
Kline.  But destroying that plate won’t save me.  The minute a
single note printed from it shows up, they’ll know back there in
Washington that the plate was stolen, and–”
“No; you’re safe enough there,” the other interposed heavily.
“Knowing what was up, you don’t think I’d give the gang a chance to
get them into circulation, do you?  I got them all when I got the
plate.  And"–he smiled a little anxiously–"I’ll bring them here to
be destroyed with the plate.  It would finish me now, as well as
you, if one of them ever showed up.  Say,” he said suddenly, with a
catch in his breath, “I–I don’t think I know what I’m doing.”
Mrs. Matthews reached out her hands to him.
“What can I say to you!” she said brokenly, “What–”
Jimmie Dale drew back along the wall.  A little way from the door he
quickened his pace, still moving, however, with extreme caution.
They were still talking behind him as he turned from the corridor
into the passageway leading to the store, and from there into the
store itself.  And then suddenly, in spite of caution, his foot
slipped on the bare floor.  It was not much–just enough to cause
his other foot, poised tentatively in air, to come heavily down, and
a loud and complaining creak echoed from the floor.
Jimmie Dale’s jaws snapped like a steel trap.  From down the
corridor came a sudden, excited exclamation in the little old lady’s
voice, and then her steps sounded running toward the store.  In the
fraction of a second Jimmie Dale was at the front door.
“Clumsy, blundering fool!” he whispered fiercely to himself as he
turned the key, opened the door noiselessly until it was just ajar,
and turned the key in the lock again, leaving the bolt protruding
out.  One step backward, and he was rapping on the counter with his
knuckles.  “Isn’t anybody here?” he called out loudly.  “Isn’t any–
oh!"–as Mrs. Matthews appeared in the back doorway.  “A package of
cigarettes, please.”
She stared at him, a little frightened, her eyes red and swollen
with recent crying.
“How–how did you get in here?” she asked tremendously.
“I beg your pardon?” inquired Jimmie Dale, in polite surprise.
“I–I locked the door–I’m sure I did,” she said, more to herself
than to Jimmie Dale, and hurried across the floor to the door as she
spoke.
Jimmie Dale, still politely curious, turned to watch her.  For a
moment bewilderment and a puzzled look were in her face–and then a
sort of surprised relief.
“I must have turned the key in the lock without shutting the door
tight,” she explained, “for I knew I turned the key.”
Jimmie Dale bent forward to examine the lock–and nodded.
“Yes,” he agreed, with a smile.  “I should say so.”  Then, gravely
courteous: “I’m sorry to have intruded.”
“It is nothing,” she answered; and, evidently anxious to be rid of
him, moved quickly around behind the counter.  “What kind of
cigarettes do you want?”
“Egyptians–any kind,” said Jimmie Dale, laying a bill on the
counter.
He pocketed the cigarettes and his change, and turned to the door.
“Good-evening,” he said pleasantly–and went out.
Jimmie Dale smiled a little curiously, a little tolerantly.  As he
started along the street, he heard the door of the little shop close
with a sort of supercareful bang, the key turned, and the latch
rattle to try the door–the little old lady was bent on making no
mistake a second time!
And then the smile left Jimmie Dale’s lips, his face grew strained
and serious, and he broke into a run down the block to Sixth Avenue.
Here he paused for an instant–there was the elevated, the surface
cars–which would be the quicker?  He looked up the avenue.  There
was no train coming; the nearest surface car was blocks away.  He
bit his lips in vexation–and then with a jump he was across the
street and hailing a passing taxicab that his eyes had just lighted
on.
“Got a fare?” called Jimmie Dale.
“No, sir,” answered the chauffeur, bumping his car to an abrupt
halt.
“Good!” Jimmie Dale ran alongside, and yanked the door open.  “Do
you know where the Palace Saloon on the Bowery is?”
“Yes, sir,” replied the man.
Jimmie Dale held a ten-dollar bank note up before the chauffeur’s
eyes.
“Earn that in four minutes, then,” he snapped–and sprang into the
cab.
The taxicab swerved around on little better than two wheels, started
on a mad dash down the Avenue–and Jimmie Dale braced himself grimly
in his seat.  The cab swerved again, tore across Waverly Place,
circuited Washington Square, crossed Broadway, and whirled finally
into the upper end of the Bowery.
Jimmie Dale spoke once–to himself–plaintively.
“It’s too bad I can’t let old Carruthers in on this for a scoop with
his precious MORNING NEWS-ARGUS–but if I get out of it alive
myself, I’ll do well!  Wonder if the day’ll ever come when he finds
out that his very dear friend and old college pal, Jimmie Dale, is
the Gray Seal that he’s turned himself inside out for about four
years now to catch, and that he’d trade his soul with the devil any
time to lay hands on!  Good old Carruthers!  ’The most puzzling,
bewildering, delightful crook in the annals of crime’–am I?”
The cab drew up at the curb.  Jimmie Dale sprang out, shoved the
bill into the chauffeur’s hand, stepped quickly across the sidewalk,
and pushed his way through the swinging doors of the Palace Saloon.
Inside leisurely and nonchalantly, he walked down past the length of
the bar to a door at the rear.  This opened into a passageway that
led to the side entrance of the saloon on the cross street.  Jimmie
Dale emerged from the side entrance, crossed the street, retraced
his steps to the Bowery, crossed over, and walked rapidly down that
thoroughfare for two blocks.  Here he turned east into the cross
street; and here, once more, his pace became leisurely and
unhurried.
“It’s a strange coincidence, though possibly a very happy one,” said
Jimmie Dale, as he walked along, “that it should be on the same
street as the Sanctuary–ah, this ought to be the place!”
An alleyway, corresponding to the one that flanked the tenement
where, as Larry the Bat, he had paid room rent as a tenant for
several years, in fact, the alleyway next above it, and but a short
block away, intersected the street, narrow, black, and uninviting.
Jimmie Dale, as he passed, peered down its length.
“No light–that’s good!” commented Jimmie Dale to himself.  Then:
“Window opens on alleyway ten feet from ground–shoe store, Russian
Jew, in basement–go in front door–straight hallway–room at end–
Russian Jew probably accomplice–be careful that he does not hear
you moving overhead"–Jimmie Dale’s mind, with that curious faculty
of his, was subconsciously repeating snatches from her letter word
for word, even as he noted the dimly lighted, untidy, and disorderly
interior of what, from strings of leather slippers that decorated
the cellarlike entrance, was evidently a cheap and shoddy shoe store
in the basement of the building.
The building itself was rickety and tumble-down, three stories high,
and given over undoubtedly to gregarious foreigners of the poorer
class, a rabbit burrow, as it were, having a multitude of roomers
and lodgers.  There was nothing ominous or even secretive about it–
up the short flight of steps to the entrance, even the door hung
carelessly half open.
Jimmie Dale’s slouch hat was pulled a little farther down over his
eyes as he mounted the steps and entered the hallway.  He listened a
moment.  A sort of subdued, querulous hubbub seemed to hum through
the place, as voices, men’s, women’s, and children’s, echoing out
from their various rooms above, mingled together, and floated down
the stairways in a discordant medley.  Jimmie Dale stepped lightly
down the length of the hall–and listened again; this time intently,
with his ear to the keyhole of the door that made the end of the
passage.  There was not a sound from within.  He tried the door,
smiled a little as he reached for his keys, worked over the lock–
and straightened up suddenly as his ear caught a descending step on
the stairs.  It was two flights up, however–and the door was
unlocked now.  Jimmie Dale opened it, and, like a shadow, slipped
inside; and, as he locked the door behind him, smiled once more–the
door lock was but a paltry makeshift at best, but INSIDE his fingers
had touched a massive steel bolt that, when shot home, would yield
when the door itself yielded–and not before.  Without moving the
bolt, he turned–and his flashlight for a moment swept the room.
“Not much like the way they describe this sort of place in
storybooks!” murmured Jimmie Dale capriciously.  “But I get the
idea.  Mr. Russian Jew downstairs makes a bluff at using it for a
storeroom.”
Again the flashlight made a circuit.  Here, there, and everywhere,
seemingly without any attempt at order, were piles of wooden
shipping cases.  Only the centre of the room was clear and empty;
that, and a vacant space against the wall by the window.
Jimmie Dale, moving without sound, went to the window.  There was a
shade on it, and it was pulled down.  He reached up underneath it,
felt for the window fastening, and unlocked it; then cautiously
tested the window itself by lifting it an inch or two–it slid
easily in its grooves.
He stood then for a moment, hardfaced, a frown gathering his
forehead into heavy furrows, as the flashlight’s ray again and again
darted hither and thither.  There was nothing, absolutely nothing in
the room but wooden packing cases.  He lifted the cover of the one
nearest to him and looked inside.  It was quite empty, except for
some pieces of heavy cord, and a few cardboard shoe boxes that, in
turn, were empty, too.
“It’s here, of course,” said Jimmie Dale thoughtfully to himself.
“Clever work, too!  But I can’t move half a hundred packing cases
without that chap below hearing me; and I can’t do it in ten
minutes, either, which, I imagine is the outside limit of time.
Fortunately, though, these cases are not without their compensation–
a dozen men could hide here.”
He began to move about the room.  And now he stooped before one pile
of boxes and then another, curiously attempting to lift up the
entire pile from the bottom.  Some he could not move; others, by
exerting all his strength, gave a little; and then, finally, over in
one corner, he found a pile that appeared to answer his purpose.
“These are certainly empty,” he muttered.
There was just room to squeeze through between them and the next
stack of cases alongside; but, once through, by the simple expedient
of moving the cases out a little to take advantage of the angle made
by the corner of the room, he obtained ample space to stand
comfortably upright against the wall.  But Jimmie Dale was not
satisfied yet.  Could he see out into the room?  He experimented
with his flashlight–and carefully shifted the screen of cases
before him a little to one side.  And yet still he was not
satisfied.  With a sort of ironical droop at the corners of his
lips, as though suddenly there had flashed upon him the inspiration
that fathered one of those whimsical ideas and fancies that were so
essentially a characteristic of Jimmie Dale, he came out from behind
the cases, went across the room to the case he had opened when he
first entered, took out the cord and the cover of one of the
cardboard shoe boxes, and with these returned to his hiding place
once more.
The sounds from the upper stories of the tenement now reached him
hardly at all; but from below, directly under his feet almost, he
could hear some one, the proprietor of the shoe store probably,
walking about.
Tense, every faculty now on the alert, his head turned in a
strained, attentive attitude, Jimmie Dale threw on the flashlight’s
tiny switch, took that intimate and thin metal case from his pocket,
extracted a diamond-shaped, gray paper seal with the little
tweezers, moistened the adhesive side, and stuck it in the centre of
the white cardboard-box cover, then tore the edges of the cardboard
down until the whole was just small enough to slip into his pocket.
Through the cardboard he looped a piece of cord, placard fashion,
and with his pencil printed the four words–"with the compliments of
“–above the gray seal.  He surveyed the result with a grim,
mirthless chuckle–and put the piece of cardboard in his pocket.
“I’m taking the longest chances I ever took in my life,” said Jimmie
Dale very seriously to himself, as his fingers twisted, and doubled,
and tied the remaining pieces of cord together, and finally
fashioned a running noose in one end.  “I don’t–”  The cord and the
flashlight went into his pocket, the room was in darkness, the black
mask was whipped from his breast pocket and adjusted to his face,
and his automatic was in his hand.
Came the creak of a footstep, as though on a ladder exactly below
him, another, and another, receding curiously in its direction, yet
at the same time growing louder in sound as if nearer the floor–
then a crack of light showed in the floor in the centre of the room.
This held for an instant, then expanded suddenly into a great
luminous square–and through a trapdoor, opened wide now, a man’s
head appeared.
Jimmie Dale’s eyes, fixed through the space between the piles of
cases, narrowed–there was, indeed, little doubt but that the shoe-
store proprietor below was an accomplice!  The store served a most
convenient purpose in every respect–as a secret means of entry into
the room, as a sort of guarantee of innocence for the room itself.
Why not!  To the superficial observer, to the man who might by some
chance blunder into the room–it was but an adjunct of the store
itself!
The man in the trap-doorway paused with his shoulders above the
floor, looked around, listened, then drew himself up, walked across
the floor, and shot the heavy bolt on the door that led into the
hallway of the house.  He returned then to the trapdoor, bent over
it, and whistled softly.  Two more men, in answer to the summons,
came up into the room.
“The Cap’ll be along in a minute,” one of them said.  “Turn on the
light.”
A switch clicked, flooding the room with sudden brilliancy from half
a dozen electric bulbs.
“Too many!” grunted the same voice again.  “We ain’t working to-
night–turn out half of ’em.”
The sudden transition from the darkness for a moment dazzled Jimmie
Dale’s eyes–but the next moment he was searching the faces of the
three men.  There were few crooks, few denizens of the crime world
below the now obsolete but still famous dead line that, as Larry the
Bat, he did not know at least by sight.
“Moulton, Whitie Burns, and Marty Dean,” confided Jimmie Dale softly
to himself.  “And I don’t know of any worse, except–the Cap.  And
gun fighters, every one of them, too–nice odds, to say nothing of–”
“Here’s the Cap now!” announced one of the three.  “Hello, Cap,
where’d you raise the mustache?”
Jimmie Dale’s eyes shifted to the trapdoor, and into them crept a
contemptuous and sardonic smile–the man who was coming up now and
hoisting himself to the floor was the man who, half an hour before,
had threatened young Sammy Matthews with arrest.
The Cap, alias Bert Malone, alias a score of other names, closed the
trapdoor after him, pulled off his mustache and gray wig, tucked
them in his pocket, and faced his companions brusquely.
“Never mind about the mustache,” he said curtly.  “Get busy, the lot
of you.  Stir around and get the works out!”
“What for?” inquired Whitie Burns, a sharp, ferret-faced little man.
“We got enough of the old stuff on hand now, and that bum break
Gregor made when he pinched the cracked plate put the finish on
that.  Say, Cap–”
“Close your face, Whitie, and get the works out!” Malone cut in
shortly.  “We’ve only got the whole night ahead of us–but we’ll
need it all.  We’re going to run the queer off that cracked plate.”
One of the others, Marty Dean this time, a certain brutal
aggressiveness in both features and physique, edged forward.
“Say, what’s the lay?” he demanded.  “A joke?  We printed one fiver
off that plate–and then we knew enough to quit.  With that crack
along the corner, you couldn’t pass ’em on a blind man!  And Gregor
saying he thought we could patch the plate up enough to get by with
gives me a pain–he’s got jingles in his dome factory!  Run them
fivers eh–say, are you cracked, too?”
“Aw, forget it!” observed Malone caustically.  “Who’s running this
gang?”  Then, with a malicious grin: “I got a customer for those
fivers–fifteen thousand dollars for all we can turn out to-night.
See?”
The others stared at him for a moment, incredulity and greed
mingling in a curious half-hesitant, half-expectant look on their
faces.
Then Whitie Burns spoke, circling his lips with the tip of his
tongue:
“D’ye mean it, Cap–honest?  What’s the lay?  How’d you work it?”
Malone, unbending with the sensation he had created, grinned again.
“Easy enough,” he said offhandedly.  It was like falling off a log.
Gregor said, didn’t he, that the only way he had been able to get
his claws on that plate was on account of young Matthews going away
sick–eh?  Well, the old Matthews woman, his mother, has got money–
about fifteen thousand.  I guess she ain’t got any more than that,
or I’d have raised the ante.  Aw, it was easy.  She threw it at me.
I framed one up on them, that’s all.  I’m Kline, of the secret
service–see?  I don’t suppose they’d ever seen him, though they’d
know his name fast enough, but I made up something like him.  I
showed them where I had a case against Sammy for pinching the plate
that was strong enough to put a hundred innocent men behind the
bars.  Of course, he knew well enough he was innocent, but he could
see the twenty years I showed him with both eyes.  Say, he mussed
all over the place, and went and fainted like a girl.  And then the
old woman came across with an offer of fifteen thousand for the
plate, and corrupted me.”  Malone’s cunning, vicious face, now that
the softening effects of the gray hair and mustache were gone,
seemed accentuated diabolically by the grin broadening into a laugh,
as he guffawed.
Marty Dean’s hand swung with a bang to Malone’s shoulder.
“Say, Cap–say, you’re all right!” he exclaimed excitedly.  You’re
the boy!  But what’s the good of running anything off the plate
before turning it over to ’em–the stuff’s no good to us.”
“You got a wooden nut, with sawdust for brains,” said Malone
sarcastically.  “If he’d thought the gang of counterfeiters that was
supposed to have bought the plate from him had run off only one
fiver and then stopped because they say it wouldn’t get by, and
weren’t going to run any more, and just destroy the plate like it
was supposed to have been destroyed to begin with, and it all end up
with no one the wiser, where d’ye think we’d have banked that
fifteen thousand!  I told him I had the whole run confiscated, and
that the queer went with the plate, so we’ll just make that little
run to-night–that’s why I sent word around to you this morning.”
“By the jumping!” ejaculated Whitie Burns, heavy with admiration.
“You got a head on you, Cap!”
“It’s a good thing for some of you that I have,” returned Malone
complacently.  “But don’t stand jawing all night.  Go on, now–get
busy!”
There was no surprise in Jimmie Dale’s face–he had chosen his
position behind a pile of cases that he had been extremely careful,
as a man is careful when his life hangs in the balance, to assure
himself were empty.  None of the four came near or touched the pile
behind which he stood; but, here and there about the room, they
pulled this one and that one out from various stacks.  In scarcely
more than a moment, the room was completely transformed.  It was no
longer a storeroom for surplus stock, for the storage of bulky and
empty packing cases!  From the cases the men had picked out, like a
touch of magic, appeared a veritable printing plant, an elaborate
engraver’s outfit–a highly efficient foot-power press, rapidly
being assembled by Whitie Burns; an electric dryer, inks, a pile of
white, silk-threaded bank-note paper, a cutter, and a score of other
appurtenances.
“Yes,” said Jimmie Dale very gently to himself.  “Yes, quite so–but
the plate?  Ah!”  Malone was taking it out from the middle of a
bundle of old newspapers, loosely tied together, that he had lifted
from one of the cases.
Jimmie Dale’s eyes fastened on it–and from that instant never left
it.  A minute passed, two, three of them–the four men were silently
busy about the room–Malone was carefully cleaning the plate.
“They will raid to-night.  Look out for Kline, he is the sharpest
man in the United State secret service"–the warning in her letter
was running through Jimmie Dale’s mind.  Kline–the real Kline–was
going to raid the place to-night.  When?  At what time?  It must be
nearly eleven o’clock already, and–
It came sudden, quick as the crack of doom–a terrific crash against
the bolted door–but the door, undoubtedly to the surprise of those
without, held fast, thanks to the bolt.  The four men, white-faced,
seemed for an instant turned to statues.  Came another crash against
the door–and a sharp, imperative order to those within to open it
and surrender.
“We’re pinched!  Beat it!” whispered Whitie Burns wildly–and dashed
for the trapdoor.
Like a rat for its hole, Marty Dean followed.  Malone, farther away,
dropped the plate on the floor, and rushed, with Moulton beside him,
after the others–but he never reached the trapdoor.
Over the crashing blows, raining now in quick succession on the door
of the room, over a startled commotion as lodgers, roomers, and
tenants on the floor above awoke into frightened activity with
shouts and cries, came the louder crash of a pile of packing boxes
hurled to the floor.  And over them, vaulting those scattered in his
way, Jimmie Dale sprang at Malone.  The man reeled back, with a
cry.  Moulton dashed through the trapdoor and disappeared.  The
short, ugly barrel of Jimmie Dale’s automatic was between Malone’s
eyes.
“You make a move,” said Jimmie Dale, in a low sibilant way, “and
I’ll drop you where you stand!  Put your hands behind your back–
palms together!”
Malone, dazed, cowed, obeyed.  A panel of the door split and rent
down its length–the hinges were sagging.  Jimmie Dale worked like
lightning.  The cord with the slip noose from his pocket went around
Malone’s wrists, jerked tight, and knotted; the placard, his lips
grim, with no sign of humour, Jimmie Dale dangled around the man’s
neck.
“An introduction for you to Mr. Kline out there–that you seem so
fond of!” gritted Jimmie Dale.  Then, working as he talked: “I’ve
got no time to tell you what I think of you, you pitiful hound"–he
snatched up the plate from the floor and put it in his pocket–"
Twenty years, I think you said, didn’t you?"–his hand shot into
Malone’s pocket-book, and extracted the five-dollar note–”  If you
can open this with your toes maybe you can get a way"–he wrenched
the trapdoor over and slammed it shut–"good-night, Malone"–and he
leaped for the window.
The door tottered inward from the top, ripping, tearing, smashing
hinges, panels, and jamb.  Jimmie Dale got a blurred vision of brass
buttons, blue coats, and helmets, and, in the forefront, of a
stocky, gray-mustached, gray-haired man in plain clothes.
Jimmie Dale threw up the window, swung out, as with a rush the
officers burst through into the room and a revolver bullet hummed
viciously past his ear, and dropped to the ground–into encircling
arms!
“Ah, no, you don’t, my bucko!” snapped a hoarse voice in his ear.
“Keep quiet now, or I’ll crack your bean–understand!”
But the officer, too heavy to be muscular, was no match for Jimmie
Dale, who, even as he had dropped from the sill, had caught sight of
the lurking form below; and now, with a quick, sudden, lithe
movement he wriggled loose, his fist from a short-arm jab smashed
upon the point of the other’s jaw, sending the man staggering
backward–and Jimmie Dale ran.
A crowd was already collecting at the mouth of the alleyway, mostly
occupants of the house itself, and into these, scattering them in
all directions, eluding dexterously another officer who made a grab
for him, Jimmie Dale charged at top speed, burst through, and headed
down the street, running like a deer.
Yells went up, a revolver spat venomously behind him, came the
shrill CHEEP-CHEEP! of the police whistle, and heavy boots pounding
the pavement in pursuit.
Down the block Jimmie Dale raced.  The yells augmented in his rear.
Another shot–and this time he heard the bullet buzz.  And then he
swerved–into the next alleyway–that flanked the Sanctuary.
He had perhaps a ten yards’ lead, just a little more than the
distance from the street to the side door of the Sanctuary that
opened on the alleyway.  And, as he ran now, his fingers tore at his
clothing, loosening his tie, unbuttoning coat, vest, collar, shirt,
and undershirt.  He leaped at the door, swung it open, flung himself
inside–and then sacrificing speed to silence, went up the stairs
like a cat, cramming his mask now into his pocket.
His room was on the first landing.  In an instant he had unlocked
the door, entered, and locked it again behind him.  From outside, an
excited street urchin’s voice shrilled up to him:
“He went in that door!  I seen him!”
The police whistle chirped again; and then an authoritative voice:
“Get around and watch the saloon back of this, Heeney–there’s a way
out through there from this joint.”
Jimmie Dale, divested of every stitch of clothing that he had worn,
pulled a disreputable collarless flannel shirt over his head, pulled
on a dirty and patched pair of trousers, and slipped into a
threadbare and filthy coat.  Jimmie Dale was working against
seconds.  They were at the lower door now.  He lifted the oilcloth
in the corner of the room, lifted up the loose piece of the
flooring, shoved his discarded garments inside, and from a little
box that was there smeared the hollow of his hand with some black
substance, possessed himself of two little articles, replaced the
flooring, replaced the oilcloth, and, in bare feet, stole across the
room to the door.  Against the door, without a sound, Jimmie Dale
placed a chair, and on the chair seat he laid the two little
articles he had been carrying in his hand.  It was intensely black
in the room, but Jimmie Dale needed no light here.  From under the
bed he pulled out a pair of woolen socks and a pair of congress
boots, both as disreputable as the rest of his attire, put them on–
and very quietly, softly, cautiously, stretched himself out on the
bed.
The officers were at the top of the stairs.  A voice barked out:
“Stand guard on this landing, Peters.  Higgins, you take the one
above.  We’ll start from the top of the house and work down.  Allow
no one to pass you.”
“Yes, sir!  Very good, Mr. Kline,” was the response.
Kline!–the sharpest man in the United States secret service, she
had said.  Jimmie Dale’s lips set.
“I’m glad I had no shave this morning,” said Jimmie Dale grimly to
himself.
His fingers were working with the black substance in the hollow of
his hand–and the long, slim, tapering fingers, the shapely, well-
cared-for hands grew unkempt and grimy, black beneath the finger
nails–and a little, too, played its part on the day’s growth of
beard, a little around the throat and at the nape of the neck, a
little across the forehead to meet the locks of straggling and
disordered hair.  Jimmie Dale wiped the residue from the hollow of
his hand on the knee of his trousers–and lay still.
An officer paced outside.  Upstairs doors opened and closed.  Gruff,
harsh tones in commands echoed through the house.  The search party
descended to the second floor–and again the same sounds were
repeated.  And then, thumping down the creaking stairs, they stopped
before Jimmie Dale’s room.  Some one tried the door, and, finding it
locked, rattled it violently.
“Open the door!”  It was Kline’s voice,
Jimmie Dale’s eyes were closed, and he was breathing regularly,
though just a little slower than in natural respiration.
“Break it down!” ordered Kline tersely.
There was a rush at it–and it gave.  It surged inward, knocked
against the chair, upset the latter, something tinkled to the floor–
and four officers, with Kline at their head, jumped into the room.
Jimmie Dale never moved.  A flashlight played around the room and
focused upon him–and then he was shaken roughly–only to fall
inertly back on the bed again.
“I guess this is all right, Mr. Kline,” said one of the officers.
“It’s Larry the Bat, and he’s doped to the eyes.  There’s the stuff
on the floor we knocked off the chair.”
“Light the gas!” directed Kline curtly; and, being obeyed, stooped
to the floor and picked up a hypodermic syringe and a small bottle.
He held the bottle to the light, and read the label: LIQUOR
MORPHINAE.   “Shake him again!” he commanded.
None too gently, a policeman caught Jimmie Dale by the shoulder and
shook him vigorously–again Jimmie Dale, once the other let go his
hold, fell back limply on the bed, breathing in that same, slightly
slowed way.
“Larry the Bat, eh?” grunted Kline; then, to the officer who had
volunteered the information: “Who’s Larry the Bat?  What is he?  And
how long have you known him?”
“I don’t know who he is any more than what you can see there for
yourself,” replied the officer.  “He’s a dope fiend, and I guess a
pretty tough case, though we’ve never had him up for anything.  He’s
lived here ever since I’ve been on the beat, and that’s three years
or–”
“All right!” interrupted Kline crisply.  “He’s no good to us!  You
say there’s an exit from this house into that saloon at the back?”
“Yes, sir but the fellow, whoever he is, couldn’t get away from
there.  Heeney’s been over on guard from the start.”
“Then he’s still inside there,” said Kline, clipping off his words.
“We’ll search the saloon.  Nice night’s work this is!  One out of
the whole gang–and that one with the compliments of the Gray Seal!”
The men went out and began to descend the stairs.
“One,” said Jimmie Dale to himself, still motionless, still
breathing in that slow way so characteristic of the drug.  “Two.
Three.  Four.”
The minutes went by–a quarter of an hour–a half hour.  Still
Jimmie Dale lay there–still motionless–still breathing with slow
regularity.  His muscles began to cramp, to give him exquisite
torture.  Around him all was silence–only distant sounds from the
street reached him, muffled, and at intervals.  Another quarter of
an hour passed–an eternity of torment.  It seemed to Jimmie Dale,
for all his will power, that he could not hold himself in check,
that he must move, scream out even in the torture that was passing
all endurance.  It was silent now, utterly silent–and then out of
the silence, just outside his door, a footstep creaked–and a man
walked to the stairs and went down.
“Five,” said Jimmie Dale to himself.  “The sharpest man in the
United States secret service.”
And then for the first time Jimmie Dale moved–to wipe away the
beads of sweat that had sprung out upon his forehead.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
