


Nearly midnight already!  It was even later than he had thought.
Larry the Bat pressed his face against a shop’s windowpane on the
Bowery for a glance at a clock that had caught his eye on the wall
within.  Nearly midnight!
He slouched on again hurriedly, still debating in his mind, as he
had been debating it all the way from the Tocsin’s, the question of
returning again to the Sanctuary.  So far, the way both to Spider
Jack’s and the Sanctuary had been in the same direction–but the
Sanctuary was on the next street.
Jimmie Dale reached the corner–and hesitated.  It was strange how
strong was the intuition upon him to-night that bade him go on and
make all speed to Spider Jack’s–while equally strong was the cold,
stubborn logic that bade him go first to the Sanctuary.  There were
things that he needed there that would probably be absolutely
essential to him before the night was out, things without which he
might be so badly handicapped as to invite failure from the start;
and yet–it was already midnight!
Ostensibly both Makoff and Spider Jack closed their places at
eleven.  But that might mean anything–depending upon their own
respective inclinations, or on what of their own peculiar brand of
deviltry might be afoot.  If they were still about, still in
evidence, he was still too early, midnight though it was; though, on
the other hand, if the coast was clear, he could ill afford to lose
a moment of the time between now and the hour that the Magpie had
planned for the robbery of Henry LaSalle, for it would not be an
easy matter, even once inside Spider Jack’s, to find that package–
since it was Spider’s open boast that things committed to his care
were where the police, or any one else, might as well whistle and
suck their thumbs as try to find them!
And then, with sudden decision, taking his hesitation, as it were,
by the throat, Jimmie Dale hurried on again–to the Sanctuary.  At
most, it could delay him but another fifteen minutes, and by half-
past twelve, or a quarter to one at the latest, he would be at
Spider Jack’s.
Disdaining the secrecy of the side door on the alley, for who had a
better right or was better known there than Larry the Bat, a tenant
of years, he entered the tenement by the front door, scuffled up the
stairs to the first landing, and let himself into his disreputable
room.  He locked the door behind him, lighted the choked and wheezy
gas jet, in a single, sharp-flung glance assured himself that the
blinds were tightly shut, and, kneeling in the far corner, threw
back the oilcloth and lifted up the loose section of the flooring
beneath.  He reached inside, fumbling under the neatly folded
clothes of Jimmie Dale, and in a moment laid his leather girdle with
its kit of burglar’s tools on the floor beside him; and beside that
again an electric flashlight, a black silk mask, and–what he had
never expected to use again when, early the night before, he had, as
he had believed, put it away forever–the thin, metal insignia case
of the Gray Seal.  Another moment, and, with the flooring replaced,
the oilcloth rolled back into position, he had stripped off his coat
and was pulling his spotted, greasy shirt off over his head; then,
stooping quickly, he picked up the girdle, put it on, put on his
shirt again over it, put on his coat, put the metal case, the
flashlight, and the mask in his pockets–and once more the Sanctuary
was in darkness.
It was perhaps fifteen minutes later that Jimmie Dale turned into
the upper section of Thompson Street.  Here he slowed his pace, that
had been almost a run since he had left the Sanctuary, and began to
shuffle leisurely along; for the street, that a few hours before
would have been choked with its pushcarts and venders, its half
naked children playing where they could find room in the gutters,
its sidewalks thronged with shawled women and picturesquely dressed,
earringed, dark-visaged men, a scene, as it were, transported from
some foreign land, was still far from deserted; the quiet, if quiet
it could be called, was but comparative, there were many yet about,
and he had no desire to attract attention by any evidence of undue
haste.  And, besides, Spider Jack’s was just ahead, making the
corner of the alleyway a few hundred feet farther on, and he had
very good reasons for desiring to approach Spider’s little novelty
store at a pace that would afford him every opportunity for
observation.
On he shuffled along the street, until, reaching Spider Jack’s, a
little two-storied, tumble-down brick structure, a muttered
exclamation of satisfaction escaped him.  The shop was closed and
dark; and, though Spider Jack lived above the store, there were no
lights even in the upper windows.  Spider Jack presumably was either
out, or in bed!  So far, then, he could have asked for nothing more.
Jimmie Dale edged in close to the building as he slouched by, so
close that his hat brim seemed to touch the windowpane.  It was
possible that from a room at the rear of the store there might be a
light with a telltale ray perhaps filtering through, say, a door
crack.  But there was nothing–only blackness within.
He paused at the corner of the building by the alleyway.  Down here,
adjoining the high board fence of Spider Jack’s back yard, Makoff
made pretense at pawnbrokering in a small and dingy wooden building,
that was little more pretentious than a shed–and in Makoff’s place,
so far as he could see, there was no light, either.
Jimmie Dale’s fingers were industriously rolling a cigarette, as,
under the brim of his slouch hat, his eyes were noting every detail
around him.  A yard in against the wall of Spider Jack’s, the wall
cutting off the rays of the street lamp at a sharp angle, it was
shadowy and black–and beyond that, farther in, the alleyway was
like a pit.  It would take less, far less, than the fraction of a
second to gain that yard, but some one was approaching behind him,
and a little group of people loitered, with annoying persistency,
directly across the way on the other side of the street.  Jimmie
Dale stuck the cigarette between his lips, fumbled in his pockets,
and finally produced a box of matches.  The group opposite was
moving on now; the footsteps he had heard behind him, those of a
man, drew nearer, the man passed by–and the box of matches in
Jimmie Dale’s hand dropped to the ground.  He reached to pick them
up, and in his stooping posture, without seeming to turn his head,
flung a quick glance behind him up the street.  No one, for that
fraction of a second that he needed, was near enough to see–and in
that fraction of a second Jimmie Dale disappeared.
A dozen yards down the lane, he sprang for the top of the high
fence, gripped it, and, lithe and active as a cat, swung himself up
and over, and dropped noiselessly to the ground on the other side.
Here he stood motionless for a moment, close against the fence, to
get his bearings.  The rear of Spider Jack’s building loomed up
before him–the back windows as unlighted as those in front.  Luck
so far, at least, was with him!  He turned and looked about him,
and, his eyes growing accustomed to the darkness, he could just make
out Makoff’s place, bordering the end of the yard–nor, from this
new vantage point, could he discover, any more than before, a single
sign of life about the pawnbroker’s establishment.
Jimmie Dale stole forward across the yard, mounted the three steps
of the low stoop at Spider Jack’s back door, and tried the door
cautiously.  It was locked.  From his pocket came the small steel
instrument that had stood Larry the Bat in good stead a hundred
times before in similar circumstances.  He inserted it in the
keyhole, worked deftly with it for an instant–and tried the door
again.  It was still locked.  And then Jimmie Dale smiled almost
apologetically.  Spider Jack did not use ordinary locks on his back
door!
The discountenanced instrument went back into his pocket, and now
Jimmie Dale’s hand slipped inside his shirt, and from one of the
little, upright pockets of the leather belt, and from still another,
and from after that a third, came the vicious little blued-steel
tools.  The sensitive fingers travelled slowly up and down the side
of the door–and then he was at work in earnest.  A minute passed–
another–there was a dull, low, grating sound, a snick as of metal
yielding suddenly–and Jimmie Dale was coolly stowing away his tools
again inside his shirt.
He pushed the door open an inch, listened, then swung it wide,
stepped inside, and closed it behind him.  A round, white beam of
light flashed in a quick circle–and went out.  It was a sort of
storeroom, innocent enough and orderly enough in appearance, bare-
floored, with boxes and packing cases piled neatly against the
walls.  In one corner a staircase led to the story above–and from
above, quite audibly now, he caught the sound of snoring.  Spider
Jack was in bed, then!
Directly facing him was the open door of another room, and Jimmie
Dale, moving softly forward, entered it.  He had never been in
Spider Jack’s before, and his first concern was to form an intimate
acquaintanceship with his surroundings.  Again the flashlight
circled, and again went out.
“No windows!” muttered Jimmie Dale under his breath.  “Nothing very
fancy about the architecture!  Three rooms in a row!  Store in front
of this room through that door of course.  Wonder if the door’s
locked, though it’s a foregone conclusion the package wouldn’t be in
there.”
Not a sound, his tread silent, he crossed to the closed door that he
had noticed.  It was unlocked, and he opened it tentatively a little
way.  A faint glow of light diffused itself through the opening.
Jimmie Dale nodded his head and closed the door again.  The street
lamp, shining through the shop windows, accounted for the light.
And now the flashlight played with steady inquisitiveness about him.
The room in which he stood seemed to combine a sort of office, with
a lounging room, in which Spider Jack, no doubt, entertained his
particular cronies.  There was table in the centre, cards still upon
it, chairs about it.  Against the wall farthest away from the shop
stood a huge, old-fashioned cabinet; and a little farther along,
anglewise, partitioning off the corner, as it were, hung, for some
purpose or other, a cretonne curtain.  Also, against the wall next
to the lane, bringing a commiserating smile to Jimmie Dale’s lips as
his eyes fell upon it, was a clumsy, lumbering, antique safe.
Jimmie Dale’s eyes returned to the curtain.  What was it doing
there?  What was it for?  Instinctively he stepped over to examine
it.  A single glance, however, as he lifted it aside, sufficed.  It
was nothing but a make-shift clothes closet.  He turned from it,
switched off the flashlight, and stood staring meditatively into the
darkness.  In a strange house, with the knowledge to begin with that
what he sought was carefully hidden, it was no sinecure to find that
package.  He had never for a moment imagined that it would be.  But
of one thing, however, there was no uncertainty in his mind–he
would get the package!–by search if possible, by other means if
search failed.  It was now close to one o’clock.  If by two o’clock
his efforts had been fruitless, Spider Jack would hand over the
package–at the revolver point!  It was quite simple!  Meanwhile–
Jimmie Dale shrugged his shoulders, and, going over to the safe,
knelt down in front of it–meanwhile, as well begin here as anywhere
else.
The trained fingers closed on the handle–and on the instant, as
though in startled amazement, shifted to the dial.  They came back
to the handle–a wrench–then a low, amused chuckle–and the door
swung open.  The great, unwieldy thing was only a monumental bluff!
It not only had not been locked, but it COULD NOT be locked–the
mechanism was out of order, the bolts could not be moved by so much
as a hair’s breadth!
Still chuckling, Jimmie Dale shot the flashlight’s ray into the
interior of the safe–and the chuckle died on his lips, and into his
face came a look of strained bewilderment.  Inside, everything was
in chaos, books, papers, a miscellany of articles, as though they
had first been ruthlessly pulled out on the floor, then gathered up
in an armful and crammed back inside again.  For an instant he did
not move, and then a queer, hard, mirthless smile drew down the
corners of his mouth.  With a sort of bitter, expectant nod of his
head, he turned the light upon the door of the safe.  Yes, there
were the scratches that the tools had left; and, as though in
sardonic jest, the holes, where the steel bit had bored, were
plugged with putty and rubbed over with some black substance that
was still wet and came off, smearing his finger, as he touched it.
It could not have been done long ago, then!  How long?  A half hour–
an hour?  Not more than that!
Mechanically he closed the door of the safe, rose to his feet and,
almost heedless of noise now, the flashlight ray dancing before him,
he jumped across to the old-fashioned cabinet and pulled the door
open.  Here, as within the safe, all inside, plain evidence of
thorough, if hasty, search, was scattered and tossed about in
hopeless confusion.
He shut the cabinet door; the flashlight went out; and he stood like
a man stunned, the sense of some abysmal disaster upon him.  He was
too late!  The game was up!  If it had ever been here, the package
was gone now–GONE!  The Crime Club had been here before him!
“The game was up!  The game was up!"–his mind seemed to keep on
repeating that.  The Crime Club had beaten him by an hour, at most,
and had been here, and had searched.  It was strange, though, that
they should have been at such curious pains to cover their tracks by
leaving the room in order, by such paltry efforts to make the safe
appear untouched when the first glance that was at all critical
would disclose immediately what had been done!  Why should they need
to cover their tracks at all; or, if it was necessary, why, above
all, in such a pitifully inadequate way!  His mind barked back to
the same ghastly refrain–"the game was up!”
NO!  Not yet!  There was still a chance!  There was still Spider
Jack!  Suppose, in spite of their search, they had failed to find
the package!  Jimmie Dale’s lips set in a thin line, as he started
abruptly toward the door.  There was still that chance, and one
thing was grimly certain–Spider Jack would, at least, show him
where the package HAD BEEN!
And then, halfway to the door, he halted suddenly, and stood still–
listening.  An electric bell was ringing loudly, imperiously,
somewhere upstairs.  Followed almost immediately the sound of some
one, Spider Jack presumably, moving hurriedly about overhead; and
then, a moment later, steps coming down the staircase in the
adjoining room.
Jimmie Dale drew back, flattening himself against the wall.  Spider
Jack entered the room, stumbled across it, in the darkness, fumbled
for the door that led into his little shop, opened it, passed
through, fumbled around in there again, for matches evidently, then
lighted a gas jet in the store, and, going to the street door,
opened it.
Jimmie Dale had edged along the wall a little to a position where he
had an unobstructed view through the open doorway connecting the
shop and the room in which he stood.  Spider Jack, in trousers and
shirt, hastily donned, no doubt, as he had got out of bed, was
standing in the street doorway, and beyond him loomed the forms of
several men.  Spider Jack stepped aside to allow his visitors to
enter–and suddenly, a cry barely suppressed upon his lips, Jimmie
Dale involuntarily strained forward.  Three men had entered, but his
eyes were fixed, fascinated, upon only one–the first of the three.
Was it an hallucination?  Was he mad–-dreaming?  It was Hilton
Travers, THE CHAUFFEUR–the man whom he could have sworn he had last
seen dead, lashed in that chair, in that ghastly death chamber of
the Crime Club!
“Rather rough on you, Spider, to pull you out of bed at this hour,"
the chauffeur was saying apologetically.
“Oh, that’s all right, seein’ it’s you, Travers,” Spider Jack
answered, gruffly amiable.  “Only I was kind of lookin’ for you last
night.”
“I know,” the chauffeur replied; “but I couldn’t connect with my
friends here.  Shake hands with them, Spider–Bob Marvin–Harry
Stead.”
“Glad to know you, gents,” said Spider Jack, with a handgrip apiece.
The chauffeur lowered his voice a little.
“I suppose we’re alone here, eh, Spider?  Yes?  Well, then, you know
what I’ve come for–that package–Marvin and Stead, here, are the
ones that are in on it with me.  Get it for me, will you, Spider?”
“Sure–Mr. Johansson!” Spider grinned.  “Sure!  Come on into the
back room and make yourselves comfortable.  I’ll be mabbe five
minutes, or so.”
Jimmie Dale’s brain was whirling.  What did it mean?  He could not
seem to understand.  His mind seemed to refuse its functions.
Travers, the chauffeur–ALIVE!  He drew in his breath sharply.  That
curtain in the corner!  He must see this out now!  They were coming!
Quick, noiseless, he stole along the side of the wall, reached the
corner, and slipped in behind the curtain, as Spider Jack, striking
a match, entered the room.
Spider Jack lighted the gas, and, as the others followed behind him,
waved them toward the chairs around the table.
“I’ll just ask you gents not to leave the room,” he said meaningly,
over his shoulder, as he stepped toward the rear door.  “It’s kind
of a fad of mine to keep some things even from my wife!”
“All right, Spider–I understand,” the chauffeur returned readily.
Jimmie Dale’s knife cut a tiny slit in the cretonne on a level with
his eyes.  The three men had seated themselves at the table, and
appeared to be listening intently.  Spider Jack’s footsteps echoed
back as he crossed the rear room, sounded dull and muffled
descending the stoop outside, and died away.
“I told you it wasn’t in the house!” the man who had been introduced
as Stead laughed shortly.  “We wasted the hour we had here.”
The third man spoke crisply, incisively, to the chauffeur.
“Turn down that gas jet a little!  You’ve got across with it so far–
but you can’t stand a searchlight, Clarke!
And at the words, in a flash, the meaning of it, all of it, to the
last detail that was spelling death, ruin, and disaster for her, the
Tocsin, for himself as well, burst upon Jimmie Dale.  That VOICE!
He would have known it, recognised it, among a thousand–it was the
masked man of the night before, the leader, the head of the Crime
Club!  And it was not Travers there at all!  He remembered now, too
well, that second room they had showed him in the Crime Club–its
multitude of disguises, though in this case they had the dead man’s
clothes ready to their hands–the leader’s boast that impersonation
was but child’s play to them!  And now he understood why they had
covered up the traces of their search in only so curiously
inadequate a manner.  They had failed to find the package, and, as a
last resort, had adopted the ruse of impersonating Hilton Travers,
the chauffeur, which made it necessary that when they called Spider
Jack from his bed, as they had just done, that Spider Jack, at a
CASUAL glance, should notice nothing amiss–but it would be no more
than a casual glance, for, who should know better than they, he
would not have to go for the package to any place that they had
disturbed!  And he, Jimmie Dale, could only stand here and watch
them, helpless, powerless to move!  Three of them!  A step out into
the room was to invite certain death.  It would not matter, his
death–if he could gain anything for her, for the Tocsin, by it.
But what could he gain–by dying?  He clenched his hands until the
nails bit into the flesh.
Spider Jack re-entered the room, carrying what looked like a large,
bulky, manila envelope, heavily sealed, in his hand.  He tossed it
on the table.
“There you are, Travers!” he said.
“I wonder,” suggested the leader pleasantly, “if, now that we’re
here, Travers, your friend would mind letting us have this room for
a few minutes to ourselves to clean up the business?”
“Sure!” agreed Spider Jack cordially.  “You’re welcome to it!  I’ll
wait out here in the store until you say the word.”
He went out, closing the door after him.  The leader picked up the
package.
“We’ll take no chances with this,” he said grimly.  “It’s been too
close a call.  After we’ve had a look at it, we’ll put it out of
harm’s way on the spot, here, while we’ve got it–before we leave!”
He ripped the package open, and disclosed perhaps a dozen official-
looking documents, besides a miscellaneous number of others.  He
took up the first of the papers, glanced through it hurriedly, then
tossed it to the pseudo chauffeur.
“Tear it up, and tear it up–SMALL!” he ordered tersely.  The next,
after examining it as he had the first, he tossed to the other man.
“Go ahead!"–curtly.  “Work fast!  From the looks of these, Travers
had us cold!  There’s proof enough here of LaSalle’s murder to send
us all to the chair!”
He went on glancing through the documents; and then suddenly,
joining the others in their work, began to rip and tear at the
papers himself.
A sort of cold horror had settled upon Jimmie Dale, and his forehead
was clammy wet.  The inhuman irony of it!  That he should stand
there and watch, impotent to prevent it, the destruction of what he
would have given his life to secure!  And then slowly, a grim, hard,
merciless smile came to his lips.  He had recognised the leader’s
voice–now he would recognise the leader’s FACE.  At least, that was
left to him–perhaps the master trump of all.  It would not be very
hard to find the Crime Club now–with that man to lead the way!
The scraps of paper, tiny shreds, mounted into a heap on the table–
and with the last of the contents of the package destroyed, the
leader stood up.
“Put these pieces in your pockets; we don’t want to leave them
here,” he directed quietly.  “And then let’s get out.”
In scarcely a moment, the last scrap of paper had vanished.  The
three men walked to the door, passed through it, and joined Spider
Jack in the store–and Jimmie Dale, slipping out from behind the
curtain, gained the door of the rear room, crept through it, reached
the stoop, and then, darting like the wind across the yard, was over
the fence in a second, and in another was out of the alleyway and on
the street.
He was in time–in plenty of time.  They had just left Spider
Jack’s, and were, perhaps, fifty yards or so ahead of him.  He
slouched on behind them–the cold, grim smile on his lips once more.
It was the Crime Club now, that hell’s cradle where their devil’s
schemes were hatched, that was the one thing left to him; they would
lead him to that, and then–and then it would be his turn to STRIKE!
They turned the first corner.  And suddenly, as the racing engine of
an automobile caught his ear, he broke into a run, and dashed around
the corner after them–in time to see them jump into a car, and the
car speed off along the street!  He halted, as though he were
suddenly dazed–started involuntarily to run forward again–stopped
with a hollow laugh at the futility of it–and stood still and
motionless on the sidewalk.
And then he swayed a little, and his face grew gray.  Failure,
defeat, ruin–in that moment he knew them all to their bitterest
dregs.  How could he go to her!  How could he face her, and tell her
that they were beaten, that the last hope was gone, that he had
failed!
“God!” he cried aloud, and clenched his hands.
Then deep in his consciousness a thought stirred, and he swept a
shaking hand across his eyes.  Why had it come again, that thought!
Did it mean that HE must play–the last card!  There was a way–
there had always been a way.  The way the Crime Club took–MURDER.
It was their own weapon!  If the man who posed as Henry LaSalle were
killed!  If that man–were killed!
“The Magpie was to be there at three!” he muttered–and started
mechanically back along the street.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
