


There was silence between them.  Minute after minute passed.
Neither spoke.
Jimmie Dale dropped back into his chair again, and stared
abstractedly before him.  “We do not hold many trumps, Jimmie–we do
not hold many trumps"–her words were repeating themselves over and
over in his mind.  They seemed to challenge him mockingly to deny
what was so obviously a fact, and because he could not deny it to
taunt and jeer at him–to jeer at him, when all that was held at
stake hung literally upon his next move!
He looked up mechanically as the Tocsin walked to a broken mirror at
the rear of the miserable room; nodded mechanically in approval as
she began deftly to retouch the make-up on her face where the tears
had left their traces–and resumed his abstracted gaze before him.
Box number four-two-eight–John Johansson–the Crime Club–the
identity of the man who was posing as Henry LaSalle!  If only he
could hit upon a clew to the solution of a single one of those
things, or a single phase of one of them–if only he could glimpse a
ray of light that would at least prompt action, when every moment of
inaction was multiplying the odds against them!
There were the men who were watching his house at that moment on
Riverside Drive–he, as Larry the Bat, might in turn keep watch on
them.  He had though of that.  In time, perhaps, he might, by so
doing, discover the whereabouts of the Crime Club.  In time!  It was
just that–he had no time!  Forty-eight hours, the Tocsin insisted,
was all the time that he could count upon before they would become
suspicious of Jimmie Dale’s “illness,” before they would discover
that they were watching an empty house!
He might–though this was even more hazardous–make an attempt to
trace the wires that tapped those of his telephone through the
basement window that gave on the garage driveway.  And what then?
True, they could not lead very far away; but, even if successful,
what then?  They would not lead him to the Crime Club, but simply to
some confederate, to some man or woman playing the part of a
servant, perhaps, in the house next door, who, in turn, would have
to be shadowed and watched.
Jimmie Dale shook his head.  Better, of the two, to start in at once
and shadow those who were shadowing his house.  But that was not the
way!  He knew that intuitively.  He hated to eliminate it from
consideration, for he had no other move to take its place–but such
a move was almost suicide in itself.  Time, and time alone, was the
vital factor.  They, the Tocsin and he, must act quickly–and STRIKE
that night if they were to win.  His fingers, the grimy fingers,
dirty-nailed, of Larry the Bat, that none now would recognise as the
slim tapering, wonderfully sensitive fingers of Jimmie Dale, the
fingers that had made the name of the Gray Seal famous, whose tips
mocked at bars and safes and locks, and seemed to embody in
themselves all the human senses, tightened spasmodically on the edge
of the table.  Time!  Time!  Time!  It seemed to din in his ears.
And while he sat there powerless, impotent, the Crime Club was
moving heaven and earth to find what HE must find–that package–if
he was to save this woman here, the woman whom he loved, she who had
been forced, through the machinations of these hell fiends, to adopt
the life of a wretched hag, to exist among the dregs of the
underworld, whose squalour and vice and wantonness none knew better
than he!
Jimmie Dale’s face set grimly.  Somewhere–somewhere in the past
five years of this life of hers in which she had been fighting the
Crime Club, pitting that clever brain of hers against it, MUST lie a
clew.  She had told him her story only in baldest outline, with
scarcely a reference to her own personal acts, with barely a single
detail.  There must be something, something that perhaps she had
overlooked, something, just the merest hint of something that would
supply a starting point, give him a glimmer of light.
She came back from across the room, and sank down in her chair
again.  She did not speak–the question, that meant life and death
to them both, was in her eyes.
Jimmie answered the mute interrogation tersely.
“Not yet!” he said.  Then, almost curtly, in a quick, incisive way,
as the keen, alert brain began to delve and probe: “You say this man
Clarke never returned to the house after that night?”
She nodded her head quietly.
“You are sure of that?” he insisted.
“Yes,” she said.  “I am sure.”
“And you say that all these years you have kept a watch on the man
who is posing as your uncle, and that he never went anywhere, or
associated with any one, that would afford you a clew to this Crime
Club?”
“Yes,” she said again.
It was a moment before Jimmie Dale spoke.
“It’s very strange!” he said musingly, at last.  “So strange, in
fact, that it’s impossible.  He must have communicated with the
others, and communicated with them often.  The game they were
playing was too big, too full of details, to admit of any other
possibility.  And the telephone as an explanation isn’t good
enough.”
“And yet,” she said earnestly, “possible or impossible, it is
nevertheless true.  That he might have succeeded in eluding me on
occasions was perhaps to be expected; but that in all those years I
should not catch him once in what, if you are correct, must have
been many and repeated conferences with the same men is too
improbable to be thought of seriously.”
Jimmie Dale shook his head again.
“If you had been able to watch him night and day, that might be so,"
he said crisply.  “But, at best, you could only watch him a very
small portion of the time.”
She smiled at him a little wanly.
“Do you think, Jimmie, from what you, as the Gray Seal, know of me,
that I would have watched in any haphazard way like that?”
He glanced at her with a sudden start.
“What do you mean?” he asked quickly.
“Look at me!” she said quietly.  “Have you ever seen me before?  I
mean as I am now.”
“No,” he answered, after an instant.  “Not that I know of.”
“And yet"–she smiled wanly again–"you have not lived, or made the
place you hold in the underworld, without having heard of Silver
Mag.”
“You!” exclaimed Jimmie Dale.  “You–Silver Mag!”  He stared at her
wonderingly, as, crouch-shouldered now, the hair, gray-threaded,
straggling out from under the hood of a faded, dark-blue, seam-worn
cloak, she sat before him, a typical creature of the underworld, her
role an art in its conception, perfect in its execution.  Silver
Mag!  Yes, he had heard of Silver Mag–as every one in the Bad Lands
had heard of her.  Silver Mag and her pocketful of coin!  Always a
pocketful of silver, so they said, that was dispensed prodigally to
the wives and children temporarily deprived of support by husbands
and fathers unfortunate enough in their clashes with the law to be
doing “spaces” up the river–and therefore the underworld swore by
Silver Mag.  Always silver, never a bill; Silver Mag had never been
seen with a banknote–that was her eccentricity.  Much or little,
she gave or paid out of her pocketful of jangling silver.  She was
credited with being a sworn enemy of the police, and–yes, he
remembered, too–with having done “time” herself.  “I don’t quite
understand,” he said, in a puzzled way.  “I haven’t run across you
personally because you probably took care to see that I shouldn’t;
but–it’s no secret–every one says you’ve served a jail sentence
yourself.”
“That is simply enough explained,” she answered gravely.  “The story
is of my own making.  When I decided to adopt this life, both for my
own safety and as the best means of keeping a watch on that man, I
knew that I must win the confidence of the underworld, that I must
have help, and that in order to obtain that help I must have some
excuse for my enmity against the man known as Henry LaSalle.  To be
widely known in the underworld was of inestimable value–nothing, I
knew, could accomplish that as quickly as eccentricity.  You see now
how and why I became known as Silver Mag.  I gained the confidence
of every crook in New York through their wives and children.  I told
them the story of my jail sentence–while I swore vengeance on Henry
LaSalle.  I told them that he had had me arrested for something I
never stole while I was working for him as a charwoman, and that he
had had me railroaded to jail.  There wasn’t one but gave me credit
for the theft, perhaps; but equally, there wasn’t one but
understood, and my eccentricity helped this out, my wanting to ’get’
Henry LaSalle.  Well–do you see now, Jimmie?  I had money, I had
the confidence of the underworld, I had an excuse for my hatred of
Henry LaSalle, and so I had all the help I wanted.  Day and night
that man has been watched.  He receives no visitors–what social
life he has is, as you know, at the club.  There is not a house that
he has ever entered that, sooner or later, I have not entered after
him in the hope of finding the headquarters of the clique.  Even the
men and women, as far as human possibility could accomplish it, that
he has talked to on the streets have been shadowed, and their
identity satisfactorily established–and the net result has been
failure; utter, absolute, complete failure!”
Jimmie Dale’s eyes, that had held steadily on her face, shifted,
troubled and perplexed, to the table top.
“You are wonderful!” he said, under his breath.  “Wonderful!  And–
and that makes it all the more amazing, all the more
incomprehensible.  It is still impossible that he has not been in
close and constant touch with his accomplices.  He MUST have been!
We would be blind fools to argue against it!  It could not, on the
face of it, have been otherwise!”
“Then how, when, where has he done it?” she asked wearily.
“God knows!” he said bitterly.  “And if they have been clever enough
to escape you all these years, I’m almost inclined to say what you
said a little while ago–that we’re beaten.”
She watched him miserably, as he pushed back his chair impulsively
and, standing up, stared down at her.
“We’re against it–HARD!” he said, with a mirthless laugh.  Then,
his lips tightening: “But we’ll try another tack–the chauffeur–
Travers.  Though even here the Crime Club has a day’s start of us,
even if last night they knew no more about the whereabouts of that
package than we know now.  I’m afraid of it!  The chances are more
than even that they’ve already got it.  If they were able to catch
Travers as the chauffeur, they would have had something tangible to
work back from"–Jimmie Dale was talking more to himself than to the
Tocsin now, as though he were muttering his thoughts aloud.  “How
did they get track of him?  When?  Where?  What has it led to?  And
what in Heaven’s name,” he burst out suddenly, “is this box number
four-two-eight!”
“A safety-deposit vault, perhaps, that he has taken somewhere,” she
hazarded.
Jimmie Dale laughed mirthlessly again.
“That is the one definite thing I do know–that it isn’t!” he said
positively.  “It is nothing of that kind.  It was half-past ten
o’clock at night when I met him, and he said that he had intended
going back for the package if it had been safe to do so.  Deposit
vaults are not open at that hour.  The package is, or was, if they
have not already got it, readily accessible–and at any hour.  Now
go over everything again, every detail that passed between you and
Travers.  He let you know that he was back in New York by means of a
’personal,’ you said.  What else was in that ’personal’ besides the
telephone number and the hour you were to call him?  Anything?”
“Nothing that will help us any,” she replied colourlessly.  There
were simply the words ’northeast corner of Sixth Avenue and Waverly
Place,’ and the signature that we had agreed upon, the two first and
two last letters of the alphabet transposed–BAZY.”
“I see,” said Jimmie Dale quickly.  “And over the ’phone he
completed his message.  Clever enough!”
“Yes,” she said.  “In that way, if any one were listening, or
overhead the plan, there could be little harm come of it, for the
essential feature of all, the place of rendezvous, was not
mentioned.  It has not been Travers’ fault that this happened–and
in spite of every precaution it has cost him his life.  He wanted
nothing to give them a clew to my whereabouts; he was trying to
guard against the slightest evidence that would associate us one
with the other.  He even warned me over the ’phone not to tell him
how, where, or the mode of life I was living.  And naturally, he
dared give me no particulars about himself.  I was simply to select
a third party whom I could trust, and to follow out his
instructions, which were those that I sent to you in my letter.”
Jimmie Dale began to pace nervously up and down the room.
“Nothing else?” he queried, a little blankly.
“Nothing else,” she said monotonously.
“But since last night, since you knew that things had gone wrong,"
he persisted, “surely you traced that telephone number–the one you
called up?”
“Yes,” she said, and shrugged her shoulders in a tired way.
“Naturally I did that–but, like everything else, it amounted to
nothing.  He telephoned from Makoff’s pawnshop on that alley off
Thompson Street, and–”
“WHERE!” Jimmie Dale, suddenly stock-still, almost shouted the word.
“He telephoned from–where!  Say that again!”
She looked at him in amazement, half rising from her chair.
“Jimmie, what is it?” she cried.  “You don’t mean that–”
He was beside her now, his hands pressed upon her shoulders, his
face flushed.
“Box number four-two-eight!”  He laughed out hysterically in his
excitement.  “John Johansson–box number four-two-eight!  And like a
fool I never thought of it!  Don’t you see?  Don’t you know now
yourself?  THE UNDERGROUND POST OFFICE!”
She stood up, clinging to him; a wild relief, that was based on her
confidence in him, in her eyes and face, even while she shook her
head.
“No,” she said frantically.  “No–I do not know.  Tell me, Jimmie!
Tell me quickly!  You mean at Makoff’s?”
“No!  Not Makoff’s–at Spider Jack’s, on Thompson Street!"–he was
clipping off his words, still holding her tightly by the shoulders,
still staring into her eyes.  “You know Spider Jack!  Jack’s little
novelty store!  Ah, you have not learned all of the underworld yet!
Spider Jack is the craftiest ’fence’ in the Bad Lands–and Makoff is
his partner.  Spider buys the crooks’ stuff, and Makoff disposes of
it through the pawnshop–it’s only a step through the connecting
back yard from one to the other, and–”
“Yes–but,” she interrupted feverishly, “the package–you said–”
“Wait!” Jimmie Dale cried.  “I’m coming to that!  If Travers stood
in with Makoff, he stood in with Spider Jack.  For years Spider has
been a sort of clearing house for the underworld–for years he has
conducted, and profitably, too, his underground post office.  Crooks
from all over the country, let alone those in New York, communicate
with each other through Spider Jack.  These, for a fee, are
registered at Spider’s, and given a number–a box number he calls
it, though, of course, there are no actual boxes.  Letters come by
mail addressed to him–the sealed envelope within containing the
actually intended recipient’s name.  These Spider either forwards,
or delivers in person when they are called for.  Dozens of crooks,
too, unwilling, perhaps, to dispose of small ill-gotten articles at
ruinous ’fence’ prices, and finding it unhealthy for the moment to
keep them in their possession, use this means of depositing them
temporarily for safe-keeping.  You see now, don’t you?  It’s certain
that’s where Travers left the package.  He used the name of John
Johansson, not to hoodwink Spider Jack, I should say, but as an
added safeguard against the Crime Club.  Travers must have known
both Makoff and Spider Jack in the old days, and probably had
reason, and good reason, to trust them both–possibly, a crook then
himself, as he confessed, he may have acted in a legal capacity for
them in their frequent tangles with the police.”
“Then,” she said–and there was a glad, new note in her voice,
“then, Jimmie–Jimmie, we are safe!  You can get it, Jimmie!  It is
only a little thing for the Gray Seal to do–to get it now that we
know where it is.”
“Yes,” he said tersely.  “Yes–if it is still there.”
“Still there!"–she repeated the words quickly, nervously.  “Still
there!  What do you mean?”
“I mean if they, too, have not discovered that he was at Makoff’s–
if they have not got there first!” he said grimly.  “There seems to
be no limit to their cleverness, or their power.  They penetrated
his disguise as a chauffeur, and who knows what more they have
learned since last night?  We are fighting them in the dark, and–
WHAT’S THAT!” he whispered tensely, suddenly–and leaning forward
like a flash, as he whipped his automatic from his pocket, he blew
out the lamp.
The room was in darkness.  They stood there rigid, silent,
listening.  Her hand found and caught his arm.
And then it came again–a low sound, the sound of a stealthy
footstep just outside the window that faced on the storage yard.
Continue...

This eBook of The Adventures of Jimmie Dale by Frank L. Packard belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
