


Moving in and out of the Transcendentalist circles, in that great
generation preceding the Civil War, were a company of other
men–romancers, poets, essayists, historians–who shared in the
intellectual liberalism of the age, but who were more purely
artists in prose and verse than they were seekers after the
unattainable. Hawthorne, for example, sojourned at Concord and at
Brook Farm with some of the most extreme types of transcendental
extravagance. The movement interested him artistically and he
utilized it in his romances, but personally he maintained an
attitude of cool detachment from it. Longfellow was too much of
an artist to lose his head over philosophical abstractions;
Whittier, at his best, had a too genuine poetic instinct for the
concrete; and Lowell and Holmes had the saving gift of humor.
Cultivated Boston gentlemen like Prescott, Motley, and Parkman
preferred to keep their feet on the solid earth and write
admirable histories. So the mellow years went by. Most of the
widely-read American books were being produced within twenty
miles of the Boston State House. The slavery issue kept growling,
far away, but it was only now and then, as in the enforcement of
the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, that it was brought sharply home
to the North. The “golden forties” were as truly golden for New
England as for idle California. There was wealth, leisure, books,
a glow of harvest-time in the air, though the spirit of the
writers is the spirit of youth.
Nathaniel Hawthorne, our greatest writer of pure romance, was
Puritan by inheritance and temperament, though not in doctrine or
in sympathy. His literary affiliations were with the English and
German Romanticists, and he possessed, for professional use, the
ideas and vocabulary of his transcendental friends. Born in Salem
in 1804, he was descended from Judge Hawthorne of Salem
Witchcraft fame, and from a long line of sea-faring ancestors. He
inherited a morbid solitariness, redeemed in some measure by a
physical endowment of rare strength and beauty. He read Spenser,
Rousseau, and the “Newgate Calendar,” was graduated at Bowdoin,
with Longfellow, in the class of 1825, and returned to Salem for
thirteen brooding lonely years in which he tried to teach himself
the art of story-writing. His earliest tales, like Irving’s, are
essays in which characters emerge; he is absorbed in finding a
setting for a preconceived “moral"; he is in love with allegory
and parable. His own words about his first collection of stories,
“Twice-Told Tales,” have often been quoted: “They have the pale
tint of flowers that blossomed in too retired a shade.” Yet they
are for the most part exquisitely written. After a couple of
years in the Boston Custom-House, and a residence at the
socialistic community of Brook Farm, Hawthorne made the happiest
of marriages to Sophia Peabody, and for nearly four years dwelt
in the Old Manse at Concord. He described it in one of the ripest
of his essays, the Preface to “Mosses from an Old Manse,” his
second collection of stories. After three years in the
Custom-House at Salem, his dismissal in 1849 gave him leisure to
produce his masterpiece, “The Scarlet Letter,” published in 1850.
He was now forty-six. In 1851, he published “The House of the
Seven Gables,” “The Wonder-Book,” and “The Snow Image, and Other
Tales.” In 1852 came “The Blithedale Romance,” a rich ironical
story drawn from his Brook Farm experience. Four years in the
American Consulate at Liverpool and three subsequent years of
residence upon the Continent saw no literary harvest except
carefully filled notebooks and the deeply imaginative moral
romance, “The Marble Faun.” Hawthorne returned home in 1860 and
settled in the Wayside at Concord, busying himself with a new,
and, as was destined, a never completed story about the elixir of
immortality. But his vitality was ebbing, and in May, 1864, he
passed away in his sleep. He rests under the pines in Sleepy
Hollow, near the Alcotts and the Emersons.
It is difficult for contemporary Americans to assess the value of
such a man, who evidently did nothing except to write a few
books. His rare, delicate genius was scarcely touched by passing
events. Not many of his countrymen really love his writings, as
they love, for instance the writings of Dickens or Thackeray or
Stevenson. Everyone reads, at some time of his life, “The Scarlet
Letter,” and trembles at its passionate indictment of the sin of
concealment, at its agonized admonition, “Be true! Be true!"
Perhaps the happiest memories of Hawthorne’s readers, as of
Kipling’s readers, hover about his charming stories for children;
to have missed “The Wonder-Book” is like having grown old without
ever catching the sweetness of the green world at dawn. But our
public has learned to enjoy a wholly different kind of style,
taught by the daily journals, a nervous, graphic, sensational,
physical style fit for describing an automobile, a department
store, a steamship, a lynching party. It is the style of our day,
and judged by it Hawthorne, who wrote with severity, conscience,
and good taste, seems somewhat old-fashioned, like Irving or
Addison. He is perhaps too completely a New Englander to be
understood by men of other stock, and has never, like Poe and
Whitman, excited strong interest among European minds.
Yet no American is surer, generation after generation, of finding
a fit audience. Hawthorne’s genius was meditative rather than
dramatic. His artistic material was moral rather than physical;
he brooded over the soul of man as affected by this and that
condition and situation. The child of a new analytical age, he
thought out with rigid accuracy the precise circumstances
surrounding each one of his cases and modifying it. Many of his
sketches and short stories and most of his romances deal with
historical facts, moods, and atmospheres, and he knew the past of
New England as few men have ever known it. There is solid
historical and psychological stuff as the foundation of his
air-castles. His latent radicalism furnished him with a
touchstone of criticism as he interpreted the moral standards of
ancient communities; no reader of “The Scarlet Letter” can forget
Hawthorne’s implicit condemnation of the unimaginative harshness
of the Puritans. His own judgment upon the deep matters of the
human conscience was stern enough, but it was a universalized
judgment, and by no means the result of a Calvinism which he
hated. Over-fond as he was in his earlier tales of elaborate,
fanciful, decorative treatment of themes that promised to point a
moral, in his finest short stories, such as “The Ambitious
Guest,” “The Gentle Boy,” “Young Goodman Brown,” “The Snow
Image,"
“The Great Stone Face,” “Drowne’s Wooden Image,” “Rappacini’s
Daughter,” the moral, if there be one, is not obtruded. He loves
physical symbols for mental and moral states, and was poet and
Transcendentalist enough to retain his youthful affection for
parables; but his true field as a story-teller is the erring,
questing, aspiring, shadowed human heart.
“The Scarlet Letter,” for instance, is a study of a universal
theme, the problem of concealed sin, punishment, redemption. Only
the setting is provincial. The story cannot be rightly estimated,
it is true, without remembering the Puritan reverence for
physical purity, the Puritan reverence for the
magistrate-minister–differing so widely from the respect of
Latin countries for the priest–the Puritan preoccupation with
the
life of the soul, or, as more narrowly construed by Calvinism,
the problem of evil. The word Adultery, although suggestively
enough present in one of the finest symbolical titles ever
devised by a romancer, does not once occur in the book. The sins
dealt with are hypocrisy and revenge. Arthur Dimmesdale, Hester
Prynne, and Roger Chillingworth are developing, suffering, living
creatures, caught inextricably in the toils of a moral situation.
By an incomparable succession of pictures Hawthorne exhibits the
travail of their souls. In the greatest scene of all, that
between Hester and Arthur in the forest, the Puritan framework of
the story gives way beneath the weight of human passion, and we
seem on the verge of another and perhaps larger solution than was
actually worked out by the logic of succeeding events. But
though the book has been called Christless, prayerless, hopeless,
no mature person ever reads it without a deepened sense of the
impotence of all mechanistic theories of sin, and a new vision of
the intense reality of spiritual things. “The law we broke,” in
Dimmesdale’s ghostly words, was a more subtle law than can be
graven on tables of stone and numbered as the Seventh
Commandment.
The legacy of guilt is likewise the theme of “The House of the
Seven Gables,” which Hawthorne himself was inclined to think a
better book than “The Scarlet Letter.” Certainly this story of
old Salem is impeccably written and its subtle handling of tone
and atmosphere is beyond dispute. An ancestral curse, the
visitation of the sins of the fathers upon the children, the
gradual decay of a once sound stock, are motives that Ibsen might
have developed. But the Norseman would have failed to rival
Hawthorne’s delicate manipulation of his shadows, and the no less
masterly deftness of the ultimate mediation of a dark inheritance
through the love of the light-hearted Phoebe for the latest
descendant of the Maules. In “The Blithedale Romance” Hawthorne
stood for once, perhaps, too near his material to allow the rich
atmospheric effects which he prefers, and in spite of the
unforgetable portrait of Zenobia and powerful passages of
realistic description, the book is not quite focussed. In “The
Marble Faun” Hawthorne comes into his own again. Its central
problem is one of those dark insoluble ones that he loves: the
influence of a crime upon the development of a soul. Donatello,
the Faun, is a charming young creature of the natural sunshine
until his love for the somber Miriam tempts him to the commission
of murder: then begins the growth of his mind and character.
Perhaps the haunting power of the main theme of the book has
contributed less to its fame than the felicity of its
descriptions of Rome and Italy. For Hawthorne possessed, like
Byron, in spite of his defective training in the appreciation of
the arts, a gift of romantic discernment which makes “The Marble
Faun,” like “Childe Harold,” a glorified guide-book to the
Eternal City.
All of Hawthorne’s books, in short, have a central core of
psychological romance, and a rich surface finish of description.
His style, at its best, has a subdued splendor of coloring which
is only less wonderful than the spiritual perceptions with which
this magician was endowed. The gloom which haunts many of his
pages, as I have said elsewhere, is the long shadow cast by our
mortal destiny upon a sensitive soul. The mystery is our mystery,
perceived, and not created, by that finely endowed mind and
heart. The shadow is our shadow; the gleams of insight, the soft
radiance of truth and beauty, are his own.
A college classmate of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow summed up the
Portland boy’s character in one sentence: “It appeared easy for
him to avoid the unworthy.” Born in 1807, of Mayflower stock that
had distinguished itself for bravery and uprightness, the youth
was graduated from Bowdoin at eighteen. Like his classmate
Hawthorne, he had been a wide and secretly ambitious reader, and
had followed the successive numbers of Irving’s “Sketch Book,” he
tells us, “with ever increasing wonder and delight.” His college
offered him in 1826 a professorship of the modern languages, and
he spent three happy years in Europe in preparation. He taught
successfully at Bowdoin for five or six years, and for eighteen
years, 1836 to 1854, served as George Ticknor’s successor at
Harvard, ultimately surrendering the chair to Lowell. He early
published two prose volumes, “Hyperion” and “Outre-mer,"
Irvingesque romances of European travel. Then came, after ten
years of teaching and the death of his young wife, the sudden
impulse to write poetry, and he produced, “softly excited, I know
not why,” “The Reaper and the Flowers, a Psalm of Death.” From
that December morning in 1838 until his death in 1882 he was
Longfellow the Poet.
His outward life, like Hawthorne’s, was barren of dramatic
incident, save the one tragic accident by which his second wife,
the mother of his children, perished before his eyes in 1861. He
bore the calamity with the quiet courage of his race and
breeding. But otherwise his days ran softly and gently, enriched
with books and friendships, sheltered from the storms of
circumstance. He had leisure to grow ripe, to remember, and to
dream. But he never secluded himself, like Tennyson, from normal
contacts with his fellowmen. The owner of the Craigie House was a
good neighbor, approachable and deferential. He was even
interested in local Cambridge politics. On the larger political
issues of his day his Americanism was sound and loyal. “It is
disheartening,” he wrote in his Cambridge journal for 1851, “to
see how little sympathy there is in the hearts of the young men
here for freedom and great ideas.” But his own sympathy never
wavered. His linguistic talent helped him to penetrate the
secrets of alien ways of thought and speech. He understood Italy
and Spain, Holland and France and Germany. He had studied them on
the lips of their living men and women and in the books where
soldier and historian, priest and poet, had inscribed the record
of five hundred years. From the Revival of Learning to the middle
of the nineteenth century, Longfellow knew the soul of Europe as
few men have known it, and he helped to translate Europe to
America. His intellectual receptivity, his quick eye for color
and costume and landscape, his ear for folklore and ballad, his
own ripe mastery of words, made him the most resourceful of
international interpreters. And this lover of children, walking
in quiet ways, this refined and courteous host and gentleman,
scholar and poet, exemplified without self-advertisement the
richer qualities of his own people. When Couper’s statue of
Longfellow was dedicated in Washington, Hamilton Mabie said: “His
freedom from the sophistication of a more experienced country;
his simplicity, due in large measure to the absence of social
self-consciousness; his tranquil and deep-seated optimism, which
is the effluence of an unexhausted soil; his happy and confident
expectation, born of a sense of tremendous national vitality; his
love of simple things in normal relations to world-wide interests
of the mind; his courage in interpreting those deeper experiences
which craftsmen who know art but who do not know life call
commonplaces; the unaffected and beautiful democracy of his
spirit–these are the delicate flowers of our new world, and as
much a part of it as its stretches of wilderness and the
continental roll of its rivers.”
Longfellow’s poetic service to his countrymen has thus become a
national asset, and not merely because in his three best known
narrative poems, “Evangeline,” “Hiawatha,” and “The Courtship of
Miles Standish,” he selected his themes from our own history.
“The Building of the Ship,” written with full faith in the
troubled year of 1849, is a national anthem. “It is a wonderful
gift,” said Lincoln, as he listened to it, his eyes filled with
tears, “to be able to stir men like that.” “The Skeleton in
Armor,” “A Ballad of the French Fleet,” “Paul Revere’s Ride,"
“The Wreck of the Hesperus,” are ballads that stir men still. For
all of his skill in story-telling in verse–witness the “Tales of
a Wayside Inn"–Longfellow was not by nature a dramatist, and his
trilogy now published under the title of “Christus,” made up of
“The Divine Tragedy,” “The Golden Legend,” and “New England
Tragedies,” added little to a reputation won in other fields. His
sonnets, particularly those upon “Chaucer,” “Milton,” “The Divina
Commedia,” “A Nameless Grave,” “Felton,” “Sumner,” “Nature,” “My
Books,” are among the imperishable treasures of the English
language. In descriptive pieces like “Keramos” and “The Hanging
of the Crane,” in such personal and occasional verses as “The
Herons of Elmwood,” “The Fiftieth Birthday of Agassiz,” and the
noble “Morituri Salutamus” written for his classmates in 1875, he
exhibits his tenderness of affection and all the ripeness of his
technical skill. But it was as a lyric poet, after all, that he
won and held his immense audience throughout the English-speaking
world. Two of the most popular of all his early pieces, “The
Psalm of Life” and “Excelsior,” have paid the price of a too apt
adjustment to the ethical mood of an earnest moment in our
national life. We have passed beyond them. And many readers may
have outgrown their youthful pleasure in “Maidenhood,” “The Rainy
Day,” “The Bridge,” “The Day is Done,” verses whose simplicity
lent themselves temptingly to parody. Yet such poems as “The
Belfry of Bruges,” “Seaweed,” “The Fire of Driftwood,” “The
Arsenal at Springfield,” “My Lost Youth,” “The Children’s Hour,"
and many another lyric, lose nothing with the lapse of time.
There is fortunately infinite room for personal preference in
this whole matter of poetry, but the confession of a lack of
regard for Longfellow’s verse must often be recognized as a
confession of a lessening love for what is simple, graceful, and
refined. The current of contemporary American taste, especially
among consciously clever, half-trained persons, seems to be
running against Longfellow. How soon the tide may turn, no one
can say. Meanwhile he has his tranquil place in the Poet’s Corner
of Westminster Abbey. The Abbey must be a pleasant spot to wait
in, for the Portland boy.
Oddly enough, some of the over-sophisticated and
under-experienced people who affect to patronize Longfellow
assume toward John Greenleaf Whittier an air of deference. This
attitude would amuse the Quaker poet. One can almost see his dark
eyes twinkle and the grim lips tighten in that silent laughter in
which the old man so much resembled Cooper’s Leather-Stocking.
Whittier knew that his friend Longfellow was a better artist than
himself, and he also knew, by intimate experience as a maker of
public opinion, how variable are its judgments. Whittier
represents a stock different from that of the Longfellows, but
equally American, equally thoroughbred: the Essex County Quaker
farmer of Massachusetts. The homestead in which he was born in
1807, at East Haverhill, had been built by his
great-great-grandfather in 1688. Mount Vernon in Virginia and the
Craigie House in Cambridge are newer than this by two
generations. The house has been restored to the precise aspect it
had in Whittier’s boyhood: and the garden, lawn, and brook, even
the door-stone and bridle-post and the barn across the road are
witnesses to the fidelity of the descriptions in “Snow-Bound."
The neighborhood is still a lonely one. The youth grew up in
seclusion, yet in contact with a few great ideas, chief among
them Liberty. “My father,” he said, “was an old-fashioned
Democrat, and really believed in the Preamble of the Bill of
Rights which reaffirmed the Declaration of Independence.” The
taciturn father transmitted to his sons a hatred of kingcraft and
priestcraft, the inward moral freedom of the Quaker touched with
humanitarian passion. The spirit of a boyhood in this homestead
is veraciously told in “The Barefoot Boy,” “School-Days,"
“Snow-Bound,” “Ramoth Hill,” and “Telling the Bees.” It was a
chance copy of Burns that revealed to the farmer lad his own
desire and capacity for verse-writing. When he was nineteen, his
sister sent his “Exile’s Departure” to William Lloyd Garrison,
then twenty, and the editor of the “Newburyport Free Press.” The
neighbors liked it, and the tall frail author was rewarded with a
term at the Haverhill Academy, where he paid his way, in old
Essex County fashion, by making shoes.
He had little more formal schooling than this, was too poor to
enter college, but had what he modestly called a “knack at
rhyming,” and much facility in prose. He turned to journalism and
politics, for which he possessed a notable instinct. For a while
he thought he had “done with poetry and literature.” Then in
1833, at twenty-six, came Garrison’s stirring letter bidding him
enlist in the cause of Anti-Slavery. He obeyed the call, not
knowing that this new allegiance to the service of humanity was
to transform him from a facile local verse-writer into a national
poet. It was the ancient miracle of losing one’s life and finding
it. For the immediate sacrifice was very real to a youth trained
in quietism and non-resistance, and well aware, as a Whig
journalist, of the ostracism visited upon the active
Abolitionists. Whittier entered the fight with absolute courage
and with the shrewdest practical judgment of weapons and tactics.
He forgot himself. He turned aside from those pleasant fields of
New England legend and history to which he was destined to return
after his warfare was accomplished. He had read the prose of
Milton and of Burke. He perceived that negro emancipation in the
United States was only a single and immediate phase of a
universal movement of liberalism. The thought kindled his
imagination. He wrote, at white heat, political and social verse
that glowed with humanitarian passion: lyrics in praise of
fellow-workers, salutes to the dead, campaign songs, hymns,
satires against the clergy and the capitalists, superb sectional
poems like “Massachusetts to Virginia,” and, more nobly still,
poems embodying what Wordsworth called “the sensation and image
of country and the human race.”
Whittier had now “found himself” as a poet. It is true that his
style remained diffuse and his ear faulty, but his countrymen,
then as now uncritical of artistic form, overlooked the blemishes
of his verse, and thought only of his vibrant emotion, his scorn
of cowardice and evil, his prophetic exaltation. In 1847 came the
first general collection of his poems, and here were to be found
not merely controversial verses, but spirited “Songs of Labor,"
pictures of the lovely Merrimac countryside, legends written in
the mood of Hawthorne or Longfellow, and bright bits of foreign
lore and fancy. For though Whittier never went abroad, his quiet
life at Amesbury gave him leisure for varied reading, and he
followed contemporary European politics with the closest
interest. He emerged more and more from the atmosphere of faction
and section, and, though he retained to the last his Quaker
creed, he held its simple tenets in such undogmatic and winning
fashion that his hymns are sung today in all the churches.
When “The Atlantic Monthly” was established in 1857, Whittier was
fifty. He took his place among the contributors to the new
magazine not as a controversialist but as a man of letters, with
such poems as “Tritemius,” and “Skipper Ireson’s Ride."
Characteristic productions of this period are “My Psalm,"
“Cobbler Keezar’s Vision,” “Andrew Rykman’s Prayer,” “The Eternal
Goodness"–poems grave, sweet, and tender. But it was not until
the publication of “Snow-Bound” in 1866 that Whittier’s work
touched its widest popularity. He had never married, and the
deaths of his mother and sister Elizabeth set him brooding, in
the desolate Amesbury house, over memories of his birthplace, six
miles away in East Haverhill. The homestead had gone out of the
hands of the Whittiers, and the poet, nearing sixty, set himself
to compose an idyll descriptive of the vanished past. No artist
could have a theme more perfectly adapted to his mood and to his
powers. There are no novel ideas in “Snow-Bound,” nor is there
any need of them, but the thousands of annual pilgrims to the old
farmhouse can bear witness to the touching intimacy, the homely
charm, the unerring rightness of feeling with which Whittier’s
genius recreated his own lost youth and painted for all time a
true New England hearthside.
Whittier was still to write nearly two hundred more poems, for he
lived to be eighty-five, and he composed until the last. But his
creative period was now over. He rejoiced in the friendly
recognition of his work that came to him from every section of a
reunited country. His personal friends were loyal in their
devotion. He followed the intricacies of American politics with
the keen zest of a veteran in that game, for in his time he had
made and unmade governors and senators. “The greatest politician
I have ever met,” said James G. Blaine, who had certainly met
many. He had an income from his poems far in excess of his needs,
but retained the absolute simplicity of his earlier habits. When
his publishers first proposed the notable public dinner in honor
of his seventieth birthday he demurred, explaining to a member of
his family that he did not want the bother of “buying a new pair
of pants"–a petty anecdote, but somehow refreshing. So the
rustic, shrewd, gentle old man waited for the end. He had known
what it means to toil, to fight, to renounce, to eat his bread in
tears, and to see some of his dreams come true. We have had, and
shall have, more accomplished craftsmen in verse, but we have
never bred a more genuine man than Whittier, nor one who had more
kinship with the saints.
A few days before Whittier’s death, he wrote an affectionate poem
in celebration of the eighty-third birthday of his old friend of
the Saturday Club, Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes. This was in 1892.
The little Doctor, rather lonely in his latest years, composed
some tender obituary verses at Whittier’s passing. He had already
performed the same office for Lowell. He lingered himself until
the autumn of 1894, in his eighty-sixth year–"The Last Leaf,” in
truth, of New England’s richest springtime.
“No, my friends,” he had said in “The Autocrat of the Breakfast
Table,” “I go (always, other things being equal) for the man who
inherits family traditions and the cumulative humanities of at
least four or five generations.” The Doctor came naturally by his
preference for a “man of family,” being one himself. He was a
descendant of Anne Bradstreet, the poetess. “Dorothy Q.,” whom he
had made the most picturesque of the Quincys, was his
great-grandmother. Wendell Phillips was his cousin. His father,
the Rev. Abiel Holmes, a Yale graduate, was the minister of the
First Church in Cambridge, and it was in its “gambrel-roofed"
parsonage that Oliver Wendell was born in 1809.
“Know old Cambridge? Hope you do–
Born there? Don’t say so! I was, too.
Nicest place that was ever seen–
Colleges red and Common green.”
So he wrote, in scores of passages of filial devotion, concerning
the village of his boyhood and the city of Boston. His best-known
prose sentence is: “Boston State House is the hub of the Solar
System.” It is easy to smile, as indeed he did himself, at such
fond provinciality, but the fact remains that our literature as a
whole sadly needs this richness of local atmosphere. A nation of
restless immigrants, here today and “moved on” tomorrow, has the
fibres of its imagination uprooted, and its artists in their
eager quest of “local color” purchase brilliancy at the cost of
thinness of tone, poverty of association. Philadelphia and
Boston, almost alone among the larger American cities, yield the
sense of intimacy, or what the Autocrat would call “the
cumulative humanities. “
Young Holmes became the pet and the glory of his class of 1829 at
Harvard. It was only in 1838 that their reunions began, but
thereafter they held fifty-six meetings, of which Holmes attended
fifty and wrote poems for forty-three. Many of “the Boys” whom he
celebrated became famous in their own right, but they remain “the
Boys” to all lovers of Holmes’s verses. His own career as a poet
had begun during his single year in the Law School. His later
years brought him some additional skill in polishing his lines
and a riper human wisdom, but his native verse-making talent is
as completely revealed in “Old Ironsides,” published when he was
twenty-one, and in “The Last Leaf,” composed a year or two later,
as in anything he was to write during the next half-century. In
many respects he was a curious survival of the cumulative
humanities of the eighteenth century. He might have been, like
good Dr. Arbuthnot, an ornament of the Augustan age. He shared
with the English Augustans a liking for the rhymed couplet, an
instinctive social sense, a feeling for the presence of an
imaginary audience of congenial listeners. One still catches the
“Hear! Hear!” between his clever lines. In many of the traits of
his mind this “Yankee Frenchman” resembled such a typical
eighteenth century figure as Voltaire. Like Voltaire, he was
tolerant–except toward Calvinism and Homeopathy. In some of the
tricks of his prose style he is like a kindlier Sterne. His knack
for vers de societe was caught from Horace, but he would not have
been a child of his own age without the additional gift of
rhetoric and eloquence which is to be seen in his patriotic poems
and his hymns. For Holmes possessed, in spite of all his
limitations in poetic range, true devotion, patriotism, humor,
and pathos.
His poetry was in the best sense of the word “occasional,” and
his prose was only an incidental or accidental harvest of a long
career in which his chief duty was that of a professor of anatomy
in the Harvard Medical School. He had studied in Paris under
sound teachers, and after some years of private practice won the
appointment which he held, as active and emeritus professor, for
forty-seven years. He was a faithful, clear, and amusing
lecturer, and printed two or three notable medical essays, but
his chief Boston reputation, in the eighteen-fifties, was that of
a wit and diner-out and writer of verses for occasions. Then came
his great hour of good luck in 1857, when Lowell, the editor of
the newly-established “Atlantic Monthly,” persuaded him to write
“The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table.” It was the public’s luck
also, for whoever had been so unfortunate as not to be born in
Boston could now listen–as if across the table–to Boston’s best
talker. Few volumes of essays during the last sixty years have
given more pleasure to a greater variety of readers than is
yielded by “The Autocrat.” It gave the Doctor a reputation in
England which he naturally prized, and which contributed to his
triumphal English progress, many years later, recorded pleasantly
in “Our Hundred Days.” “The Professor at the Breakfast Table” and
“The Poet at the Breakfast Table” are less successful variations
of “The Autocrat.” Neither professors nor poets are at their best
at this meal. Holmes wrote three novels–of which “Elsie Venner,"
a somewhat too medical story, is the best remembered–memoirs of
his friends Emerson and Motley, and many miscellaneous essays.
His life was exceptionally happy, and his cheery good opinion of
himself is still contagious. To pronounce the words Doctor Holmes
in any company of intelligent Americans is the prologue to a
smile of recognition, comprehension, sympathy. The word Goldsmith
has now lost, alas, this provocative quality; the word Stevenson
still possesses it. The little Doctor, who died in the same year
as Stevenson, belonged like him to the genial race of friends of
mankind, and a few of his poems, and some gay warm-hearted pages
of his prose, will long preserve his memory. But the Boston which
he loved has vanished as utterly as Sam Johnson’s London.
James Russell Lowell was ten years younger than Holmes, and
though he died three years before the Doctor, he seems, for other
reasons than those of chronology, to belong more nearly to the
present. Although by birth as much of a New England Brahmin as
Holmes, and in his later years as much of a Boston and Cambridge
idol, he nevertheless touched our universal American life on many
sides, represented us worthily in foreign diplomacy, argued the
case of Democracy with convincing power, and embodied, as more
perfect artists like Hawthorne and Longfellow could never have
done, the subtleties and potencies of the national temperament.
He deserves and reveals the closest scrutiny, but his personality
is difficult to put on paper. Horace Scudder wrote his biography
with careful competence, and Ferris Greenslet has made him the
subject of a brilliant critical study. Yet readers differ widely
in their assessment of the value of his prose and verse, and in
their understanding of his personality.
The external facts of his career are easy to trace and must be
set down here with brevity. A minister’s son, and descended from
a very old and distinguished family, he was born at Elmwood in
Cambridge in 1819. After a somewhat turbulent course, he was
graduated from Harvard in 1838, the year of Emerson’s “Divinity
School Address.” He studied law, turned Abolitionist, wrote
poetry, married the beautiful and transcendental Maria White, and
did magazine work in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. He was
thought by his friends in the eighteen-fifties to be “the most
Shakespearian” man in America. When he was ten years out of
college, in 1848, he published “The Biglow Papers” (First
Series), “A Fable for Critics,” and “The Vision of Sir Launfal."
After a long visit to Europe and the death of his wife, he gave
some brilliant Lowell Institute lectures in Boston, and was
appointed Longfellow’s successor at Harvard. He went to Europe
again to prepare himself, and after entering upon his work as a
teacher made a happy second marriage, served for four years as
the first editor of “The Atlantic,” and helped his friend Charles
Eliot Norton edit “The North American Review.” The Civil War
inspired a second series of “Biglow Papers” and the magnificent
“Commemoration Ode” of 1865. Then came volume after volume of
literary essays, such as “Among My Books” and “My Study Windows,"
and an occasional book of verse. Again he made a long sojourn in
Europe, resigned his Harvard professorship, and in 1877 was
appointed Minister to Spain. After three years he was transferred
to the most important post in our diplomatic service, London. He
performed his duties with extraordinary skill and success until
1885, when he was relieved. His last years were spent in Elmwood,
the Cambridge house where he was born, and he was still writing,
in almost as rich a vein as ever, when the end came in 1891.
Here was certainly a full and varied life, responsive to many
personal moods and many tides of public feeling. Lowell drew
intellectual stimulus from enormously wide reading in classical
and modern literatures. Puritanically earnest by inheritance, he
seems also to have inherited a strain of levity which he could
not always control, and, through his mother’s family, a dash of
mysticism sometimes resembling second sight. His physical and
mental powers were not always in the happiest mutual adjustment:
he became easily the prey of moods and fancies, and knew the
alternations from wild gaiety of spirits to black despair. The
firm moral consistency of Puritanism was always his, yet his
playful remark about belonging in a hospital for incurable
children had a measure of truth in it also.
Both his poetry and his prose reveal a nature never quite
integrated into wholeness of structure, into harmony with itself.
His writing, at its best, is noble and delightful, full of human
charm, but it is difficult for him to master a certain
waywardness and to sustain any note steadily. This temperamental
flaw does not affect the winsomeness of his letters, unless to
add to it. It is lost to view, often, in the sincerity and pathos
of his lyrics, but it is felt in most of his longer efforts in
prose, and accounts for a certain dissatisfaction which many
grateful and loyal readers nevertheless feel in his criticism.
Lowell was more richly endowed by nature and by breadth of
reading than Matthew Arnold, for instance, but in the actual
performance of the critical function he was surpassed in method
by Arnold and perhaps in inerrant perception, in a limited field,
by Poe.
It was as a poet, however, that he first won his place in our
literature, and it is by means of certain passages in the “Biglow
Papers” and the “Commemoration Ode” that he has most moved his
countrymen. The effectiveness of The “Present Crisis” and “Sir
Launfal,” and of the “Memorial Odes,” particularly the “Ode to
Agassiz,” is likewise due to the passion, sweetness, and splendor
of certain strophes, rather than to the perfection of these poems
as artistic wholes. Lowell’s personal lyrics of sorrow, such as
“The Changeling,” “The First SnowFall,” “After the Burial,” have
touched many hearts.
His later lyrics are more subtle, weighted with thought, tinged
with autumnal melancholy. He was a most fertile composer, and,
like all the men of his time and group, produced too much. Yet
his patriotic verse was so admirable in feeling and is still so
inspiring to his readers that one cannot wish it less in
quantity; and in the field of political satire, such as the two
series of “Biglow Papers,” he had a theme and a method precisely
suited to his temperament. No American has approached Lowell’s
success in this difficult genre: the swift transitions from rural
Yankee humor to splendid scorn of evil and to noblest idealism
reveal the full powers of one of our most gifted men. The
preacher lurked in this Puritan from first to last, and the war
against Mexico and the Civil War stirred him to the depths.
His prose, likewise, is a school of loyalty. There was much of
Europe in his learning, as his memorable Dante essay shows, and
the traditions of great English literature were the daily
companions of his mind. He was bookish, as a bookman should be,
and sometimes the very richness and whimsicality of his bookish
fancies marred the simplicity and good taste of his pages. But
the fundamental texture of his thought and feeling was American,
and his most characteristic style has the raciness of our soil.
Nature lovers like to point out the freshness and delicacy of his
reaction to the New England scene. Thoreau himself, whom Lowell
did not like, was not more veracious an observer than the author
of “Sunthin’ in the Pastoral Line,” “Cambridge Thirty Years Ago,"
and “My Garden Acquaintance.” Yet he watched men as keenly as he
did “laylocks” and bobolinks, and no shrewder American essay has
been written than his “On a Certain Condescension in Foreigners."
Wit and humor and wisdom made him one of the best talkers of his
generation. These qualities pervade his essays and his letters,
and the latter in particular reveal those ardors and fidelities
of friendship which men like Emerson and Thoreau longed after
without ever quite experiencing. Lowell’s cosmopolitan
reputation, which was greatly enhanced in the last decade of his
life, seemed to his old associates of the Saturday Club only a
fit recognition of the learning, wit, and fine imagination which
had been familiar to them from the first. To hold the old friends
throughout his lifetime, and to win fresh ones of a new
generation through his books, is perhaps the greatest of Lowell’s
personal felicities.
While there are no other names in the literature of New England
quite comparable with those that have just been discussed, it
should be remembered that the immediate effectiveness and
popularity of these representative poets and prose writers were
dependent upon the existence of an intelligent and responsive
reading public. The lectures of Emerson, the speeches of Webster,
the stories of Hawthorne, the political verse of Whittier and
Lowell, presupposed a keen, reflecting audience, mentally and
morally exigent. The spread of the Lyceum system along the line
of westward emigration from New England as far as the Mississippi
is one tangible evidence of the high level of popular
intelligence. That there was much of the superficial and the
spread-eagle in the American life of the eighteen-forties is
apparent enough without the amusing comments of such English
travellers as Dickens, Miss Martineau, and Captain Basil Hall.
But there was also genuine intellectual curiosity and a general
reading habit which are evidenced not only by a steady growth of
newspapers and magazines but also by the demand for substantial
books. Biography and history began to be widely read, and it was
natural that the most notable productiveness in historical
writing should manifest itself in that section of the country
where there were libraries, wealth, leisure for the pursuits of
scholarship, a sense of intimate concern with the great issues
of the past, and a diffusion of intellectual tastes throughout
the community. It was no accident that Sparks and Ticknor,
Bancroft and Prescott, Motley and Parkman, were Massachusetts
men.
Jared Sparks, it is true, inherited neither wealth nor leisure.
He was a furious, unwearied toiler in the field of our national
history. Born in 1789, by profession a Unitarian minister, he
began collecting the papers of George Washington by 1825. John
Marshall, the great jurist, had published his five-volume life of
his fellow Virginian a score of years earlier. But Sparks
proceeded to write another biography of Washington and to edit
his writings. He also edited a “Library of American Biography,"
wrote lives of Franklin and Gouverneur Morris, was professor of
history and President of Harvard, and lived to be seventy-seven.
As editor of the writings of Franklin and Washington, he took
what we now consider unpardonable liberties in altering the text,
and this error of judgment has somewhat clouded his just
reputation as a pioneer in historical research.
George Bancroft, who was born in 1800, and died, a
horseback-riding sage, at ninety-one, inherited from his
clergyman father a taste for history. He studied in Germany after
leaving Harvard, turned schoolmaster, Democratic politician and
office-holder, served as Secretary of the Navy, Minister to
England and then to the German Empire, and won distinction in
each of his avocations, though the real passion of his life was
his “History of the United States,” which he succeeded in
bringing down to the adoption of the Constitution. The first
volume, which appeared in 1834, reads today like a stump speech
by a sturdy Democratic orator of the Jacksonian period. But there
was solid stuff in it, nevertheless, and as Bancroft proceeded,
decade after decade, he discarded some of his rhetoric and
philosophy of democracy and utilized increasingly the vast stores
of documents which his energy and his high political positions
had made it possible for him to obtain. Late in life he condensed
his ten great volumes to six. Posterity will doubtless condense
these in turn, as posterity has a way of doing, but Bancroft the
historian realized his own youthful ambition with a completeness
rare in the history of human effort and performed a monumental
service to his country. He was less of an artist, however, than
Prescott, the eldest and in some ways the finest figure of the
well-known Prescott-Motley-Parkman group of Boston historians.
All of these men, together with their friend George Ticknor, who
wrote the “History of Spanish Literature” and whose own “Life and
Letters” pictures a whole generation, had the professional
advantages of inherited wealth, and the opportunity to make
deliberate choice of a historical field which offered freshness
and picturesqueness of theme. All were tireless workers in spite
of every physical handicap; all enjoyed social security and the
rich reward of full recognition by their contemporaries. They had
their world as in their time, as Chaucer makes the Wife of Bath
say of herself, and it was a pleasant world to live in.
Grandson of “Prescott the Brave” of Bunker Hill, and son of the
rich Judge Prescott of Salem, William Hickling Prescott was born
in 1796, and was graduated from Harvard in 1814. An accident in
college destroyed the sight of one eye, and left him but a
precarious use of the other. Nevertheless he resolved to emulate
Gibbon, whose “Autobiography” had impressed him, and to make
himself “an historian in the best sense of the term.” He studied
arduously in Europe, with the help of secretaries, and by 1826,
after a long hesitation, decided upon a “History of the Reign of
Ferdinand and Isabella.” In ten years the three volumes were
finished. “Pursuing the work in this quiet, leisurely way,
without over-exertion or fatigue,” wrote Prescott, “or any sense
of obligation to complete it in a given time, I have found it a
continual source of pleasure.” It was published at his own
expense on Christmas Day, 1837, and met with instantaneous
success. “My market and my reputation rest principally with
England,” he wrote in 1838–a curious footnote, by the way, to
Emerson’s Phi Beta Kappa Address of the year before. But America
joined with England, in praising the new book. Then Prescott
turned to the “Conquest of Mexico,” the “Conquest of Peru,” and
finally to his unfinished “History of the Reign of Philip II.” He
had, as Dean Milman wrote him, “the judgment to choose noble
subjects.” He wrote with serenity and dignity, with fine balance
and proportion. Some of the Spanish documents upon which he
relied have been proved less trustworthy than he thought, but
this unsuspected defect in his materials scarcely impaired the
skill with which this unhasting, unresting painter filled his
great canvases. They need retouching, perhaps, but the younger
historians are incompetent for the task. Prescott died in 1859,
in the same year as Irving, and he already seems quite as remote
from the present hour.
His young friend Motley, of “Dutch Republic” fame, was another
Boston Brahmin, born in the year of Prescott’s graduation from
college. He attended George Bancroft’s school, went to Harvard in
due course, where he knew Holmes, Sumner, and Wendell Phillips,
and at Gottingen became a warm friend of a dog-lover and duelist
named Bismarck. Young Motley wrote a couple of unsuccessful
novels, dabbled in diplomacy, politics, and review-writing, and
finally, encouraged by Prescott, settled down upon Dutch history,
went to Europe to work up his material in 1851, and, after five
years, scored an immense triumph with his “Rise of the Dutch
Republic.” He was a brilliant partisan, hating Spaniards and
Calvinists; and wrote all the better for this bias. He was an
admirable sketcher of historical portraits, and had Macaulay’s
skill in composing special chapters devoted to the tendencies and
qualities of an epoch or to the characteristics of a dynasty.
Between 1860 and 1868 he produced the four volumes of the
“History of the United Netherlands.” During the Civil War he
served usefully as American minister to Vienna, and in 1869 was
appointed minister to London. Both of these appointments ended
unhappily for him. Dr. Holmes, his loyal admirer and biographer,
does not conceal the fact that a steadier, less excitable type of
public servant might have handled both the Vienna situation and
the London situation without incurring a recall. Motley continued
to live in England, where his daughters had married, and where,
in spite of his ardent Americanism, he felt socially at home. His
last book was “The Life and Death of John of Barneveld.” His
“Letters,” edited after his death in 1877 by George William
Curtis, give a fascinating picture of English life among the
cultivated and leisurely classes. The Boston merchant’s son was a
high-hearted gentleman, and his cosmopolitan experiences used to
make his stay-at-home friend, Oliver Wendell Holmes, feel rather
dull and provincial in comparison. Both were Sons of Liberty, but
Motley had had the luck to find in “brave little Holland” a
subject which captivated the interest of Europe and gave the
historian international fame. He had more eloquence than the
Doctor, and a far more varied range of prose, but there may be
here and there a Yankee guesser about the taste of future
generations who will bet on “The Autocrat,” after all.
The character and career of Francis Parkman afford curious
material to the student of New England’s golden age. In the
seventy years of his heroic life, from 1823 to 1893, all the
characteristic forces of the age reached their culmination and
decline, and his own personality indicates some of the violent
reactions produced by the over-strain of Transcendentalism. For
here was a descendant of John Cotton, and a clergyman’s son, who
detested Puritanism and the clergy; who, coming to manhood in the
eighteen-forties, hated the very words Transcendentalism,
Philosophy, Religion, Reform; an inheritor of property, trained
at Harvard, and an Overseer and Fellow of his University, who
disliked the ideals of culture and refinement; a member of the
Saturday Club who was bored with literary talk and literary
people; a staunch American who despised democracy as thoroughly
as Alexander Hamilton, and thought suffrage a failure; a
nineteenth century historian who cared nothing for philosophy,
science, or the larger lessons of history itself; a fascinating
realistic writer who admired Scott, Byron, and Cooper for their
tales of action, and despised Wordsworth and Thoreau as
effeminate sentimentalists who were preoccupied with themselves.
In Parkman “the wheel has come full circle,” and a movement that
began with expansion of self ended in hard Spartan repression,
even in inhibition of emotion.
Becoming “enamoured of the woods” at sixteen, Parkman chose his
life work at eighteen, and he was a man who could say proudly: “I
have not yet abandoned any plan which I ever formed.” “Before the
end of the sophomore year,” he wrote in his autobiography, “my
various schemes had crystallized into a plan of writing the story
of what was then known as the ’Old French War,’ that is, the war
that ended in the conquest of Canada, for here, as it seemed to
me, the forest drama was more stirring and the forest stage more
thronged with appropriate actors than in any other passage of our
history. It was not till some years later that I enlarged the
plan to include the whole course of the American conflict between
France and England, or, in other words, the history of the
American forest: for this was the light in which I regarded it.
My theme fascinated me, and I was haunted with wilderness images
day and night.” To understand “the history of the American
forest” young Parkman devoted his college vacations to long trips
in the wilderness, and in 1846, two years after graduation, he
made the epoch-making journey described in his first book, “The
Oregon Trail.”
“The Conspiracy of Pontiac,” a highly-colored narrative in two
volumes appearing in 1851, marks the first stage of his
historical writing. Then came the tragedy of shattered health,
and for fourteen years Parkman fought for life and sanity, and
produced practically nothing. He had had to struggle from his
college days with an obscure disorder of the brain, aggravated by
the hardships of his Oregon Trail journey, and by ill-considered
efforts to harden his bodily frame by over-exertion. His disease
took many forms–insomnia, arthritis, weakness of sight,
incapacity for sustained thought. His biographer Farnham says
that “he never saw a perfectly well day during his entire
literary career.” Even when aided by secretaries and copyists,
six lines a day was often the limit of his production. His own
Stoic words about the limitations of his eyesight are
characteristic: “By reading for one minute, and then resting for
an equal time, this alternate process may gradually be continued
for about half an hour. Then, after a sufficient interval, it may
be repeated, often three or four times in the course of the day.
By this means nearly the whole of the volume now offered has been
composed.” There is no more piteous or inspiring story of a fight
against odds in the history of literature.
For after his fortieth year the enemy gave way a little, and book
after book somehow got itself written. There they stand upon the
shelves, a dozen of them–"The Pioneers of France,” “The Jesuits
in North America,” “La Salle,” “The Old Regime,” “Frontenac,"
“Montcalm and Wolfe,” “A Half-Century of Conflict"–the boy’s
dream realized, the man’s long warfare accomplished. The history
of the forest, as Parkman saw it, was a pageant with the dark
wilderness for a background, and, for the actors, taciturn
savages, black-robed Jesuits, intrepid explorers, soldiers of
France–all struggling for a vast prize, all changing, passing,
with a pomp and color unknown to wearied Europe. It was a superb
theme, better after all for an American than the themes chosen by
Prescott and Ticknor and Motley, and precisely adapted to the
pictorial and narrative powers of the soldier-minded, soldier-
hearted author.
The quality which Parkman admired most in men–though he never
seems to have loved men deeply, even his own heroes–was strength
of will. That was the secret of his own power, and the sign, it
must be added, of the limitations of this group of historians who
came at the close of the golden age. Whatever a New England will
can accomplish was wrought manfully by such admirable men as
Prescott and Parkman. Trained intelligence, deliberate selection
of subject, skillful cultivation of appropriate story-telling and
picture-painting style, all these were theirs. But the “wild
ecstasy” that thrilled the young Emerson as he crossed the bare
Common at sunset, the “supernal beauty” of which Poe dreamed in
the Fordham cottage, the bay horse and hound and turtle-dove
which Thoreau lost long ago and could not find in his but at
Walden, these were something which our later Greeks of the New
England Athens esteemed as foolishness.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
