


The changes that have come over the inner spirit and the outward
expression of American life since Lincoln’s day are enough to
startle the curiosity of the dullest observer. Yet they have been
accomplished within the lifetime of a single man of letters. The
author of one of the many campaign biographies of Lincoln in 1860
was William Dean Howells, then an Ohio journalist of
twenty-three. In 1917, at the age of eighty, Mr. Howells is still
adding to his long row of charming and memorable books. Every
phase of American writing since the middle of the last century
has fallen under the keen and kindly scrutiny of this loyal
follower of the art of literature. As producer, editor, critic,
and friend of the foremost writers of his epoch, Mr. Howells has
known the books of our new national era as no one else could have
known them. Some future historian of the period may piece
together, from no other sources than Mr. Howells’s writings, an
unrivaled picture of our book-making during more than sixty
years. All that the present historian can attempt is to sketch
with bungling fingers a few men and a few tendencies which seem
to characterize the age.
One result of the Civil War was picturesquely set forth in
Emerson’s “Journal.” The War had unrolled a map of the Union, he
said, and hung it in every man’s house. There was a universal
shifting of attention, if not always from the province or section
to the image of the nation itself, at least a shift of focus from
one section to another. The clash of arms had meant many other
things besides the triumph of Union and the freedom of the
slaves. It had brought men from every state into rude jostling
contact with one another and had developed a new social and human
curiosity. It may serve as another illustration of Professor
Shaler’s law of tension and release. The one overshadowing issue
which had absorbed so much thought and imagination and energy had
suddenly disappeared. Other shadows were to gather, of course.
Reconstruction of the South was one of them, and the vast
economic and industrial changes that followed the opening of the
New West were to bring fresh problems almost as intricate as the
question of slavery had been. But for the moment no one thought
of these things. The South accepted defeat as superbly as she had
fought, and began to plough once more. The jubilant North went
back to work–to build transcontinental railroads, to organize
great industries, and to create new states.
The significant American literature of the first decade after the
close of the War is not in the books dealing directly with themes
involved in the War itself. It is rather the literature of this
new release of energy, the new curiosity as to hitherto unknown
sections, the new humor and romance. Fred Lewis Pattee, the
author of an admirable “History of American Literature since
1870,” uses scarcely too strong a phrase when he entitles this
period “The Second Discovery of America"; and he quotes
effectively from Mark Twain, who was himself one of these
discoverers: “The eight years in America from 1860 to 1868
uprooted institutions that were centuries old, changed the
politics of a people, transformed the social life of half the
country, and wrought so profoundly upon the entire national
character that the influence cannot be measured short of two or
three generations.”
Let us begin with the West, and with that joyous stage-coach
journey of young Samuel L. Clemens across the plains to Nevada in
1861, which he describes in “Roughing It.” Who was this Argonaut
of the new era, and what makes him representative of his
countrymen in the epoch of release? Born in Missouri in 1835, the
son of an impractical emigrant from Virginia, the youth had lived
from his fourth until his eighteenth year on the banks of the
Mississippi. He had learned the printer’s trade, had wandered
east and back again, had served for four years as a river-pilot
on the Mississippi, and had tried to enter the Confederate army.
Then came the six crowded years, chiefly as newspaper reporter,
in the boom times of Nevada and California. His fame began with
the publication in New York in 1867 of “The Celebrated Jumping
Frog of Calaveras County.” A newspaper now sent him to Europe to
record “what he sees with his own eyes.” He did so in “Innocents
Abroad,” and his countrymen shouted with laughter. This, then,
was “Europe” after all–another “fake” until this shrewd river
pilot who signed himself “Mark Twain” took its soundings! Then
came a series of far greater books–"Roughing It,” “Life on the
Mississippi,” “The Gilded Age (in collaboration ), and “Tom
Sawyer” and “Huckleberry Finn"–books that make our American
“Odyssey”, rich in the spirit of romance and revealing the magic
of the great river as no other pages can ever do again. Gradually
Mark Twain became a public character; he retrieved on the lecture
platform the loss of a fortune earned by his books; he enjoyed
his honorary D. Litt. from Oxford University. Every reader of
American periodicals came to recognize the photographs of that
thick shock of hair, those heavy eyebrows, the gallant drooping
little figure, the striking clothes, the inevitable cigar: all
these things seemed to go with the part of professional humorist,
to be like the caressing drawl of Mark’s voice. The force of
advertisement could no further go. But at bottom he was far other
than a mere maker of boisterous jokes for people with frontier
preferences in humor. He was a passionate, chivalric lover of
things fair and good, although too honest to pretend to see
beauty and goodness where he could not personally detect
them–and
an equally passionate hater of evil. Read “The Man Who Corrupted
Hadleyburg” and “The Mysterious Stranger.” In his last years,
torn by private sorrows, he turned as black a philosophical
pessimist as we have bred. He died at his new country seat in
Connecticut in 1910. Mr. Paine has written his life in three
great volumes, and there is a twenty-five volume edition of his
“Works.”
All the evidence seems to be in. Yet the verdict of the public
seems not quite made up. It is clear that Mark Twain the writer
of romance is gaining upon Mark Twain the humorist. The
inexhaustible American appetite for frontier types of humor
seizes upon each new variety, crunches it with huge satisfaction,
and then tosses it away. John Phoenix, Josh Billings, Jack
Downing, Bill Arp, Petroleum V. Nasby, Artemus Ward, Bill Nye–
these are already obsolescent names. If Clemens lacked something
of Artemus Ward’s whimsical delicacy and of Josh Billings’s
tested human wisdom, he surpassed all of his competitors in a
certain rude, healthy masculinity, the humor of river and
mining-camp and printing-office, where men speak without
censorship. His country-men liked exaggeration, and he
exaggerated; they liked irreverence, and he had turned iconoclast
in “Innocents Abroad.” As a professional humorist, he has paid
the obligatory tax for his extravagance, over-emphasis, and
undisciplined taste, but such faults are swiftly forgotten when
one turns to Huckleberry Finn and the negro Jim and Pudd’nhead
Wilson, when one feels Mark Twain’s power in sheer description
and episode, his magic in evoking landscape and atmosphere, his
blazing scorn at injustice and cruelty, his contempt for quacks.
Bret Harte, another discoverer of the West, wears less well than
Mark Twain as a personal figure, but has a sure place in the
evolution of the American short story, and he did for the
mining-camps of California what Clemens wrought for the
Mississippi River: he became their profane poet. Yet he was never
really of them. He was the clever outsider, with a prospector’s
eye, looking for literary material, and finding a whole rich mine
of it–a bigger and richer, in fact, than he was really qualified
to work. But he located a golden vein of it with an instinct that
did credit to his dash of Hebrew blood. Born in Albany, a
teacher’s son, brought up on books and in many cities, Harte
emigrated to California in 1854 at the age of sixteen. He became
in turn a drug-clerk, teacher, type-setter, editor, and even
Secretary of the California Mint–his nearest approach,
apparently, to the actual work of the mines. In 1868, while
editor of “The Overland Monthly,” he wrote the short story which
was destined to make him famous in the East and to release him
from California forever. It was “The Luck of Roaring Camp.” He
had been writing romantic sketches in prose and verse for years;
he had steeped himself in Dickens, like everybody else in the
eighteen-sixties; and now he saw his pay-gravel shining back into
his own shining eyes. It was a pocket, perhaps, rather than a
lead, but Bret Harte worked to the end of his career this
material furnished by the camps, this method of the short story.
He never returned to California after his joyous exit in 1871.
For a few years he tried living in New York, but from 1878 until
his death in 1902 Bret Harte lived in Europe, still turning out
California stories for an English and American public which
insisted upon that particular pattern.
That the pattern was arbitrary, theatrical, sentimental, somewhat
meretricious in design, in a word insincere like its inventor,
has been repeated at due intervals ever since 1868. The charge is
true; yet it is far from the whole truth concerning Bret Harte’s
artistry. In mastery of the technique of the short story he is
fairly comparable with Poe, though less original, for it was Poe
who formulated, when Bret Harte was a child of six, the
well-known theory of the unity of effect of the brief tale. This
unity Harte secured through a simplification, often an
insulation, of his theme, the omission of quarreling details, an
atmosphere none the less novel for its occasional theatricality,
and characters cunningly modulated to the one note they were
intended to strike. “Tennessee’s Partner,” “The Outcast of Poker
Flat,” and all the rest are triumphs of selective skill–as
bright nuggets as ever glistened in the pan at the end of a hard
day’s labor. That they do not adequately represent the actual
California of the fifties, as old Californians obstinately
insist, is doubtless true, but it is beside the point. Here is no
Tolstoi painting the soul of his race in a few pages: Harte is
simply a disciple of Poe and Dickens, turning the Poe
construction trick gracefully, with Dickensy characters and
consistently romantic action.
The West has been rediscovered many a time since that decade
which witnessed the first literary bonanza of Mark Twain and Bret
Harte. It will continue to be discovered, in its fresh sources of
appeal to the imagination, as long as Plains and Rockies and
Coast endure, as long as there is any glow upon a distant
horizon. It is not places that lose romantic interest: the
immemorial English counties and the Bay of Naples offer
themselves freely to the artist, generation after generation.
What is lost is the glamour of youth, the specific atmosphere of
a given historical epoch. Colonel W. F. Cody ("Buffalo Bill”) has
typified to millions of American boys the great period of the
Plains, with its Indian fighting, its slaughter of buffaloes, its
robbing of stage-coaches, its superb riders etched against the
sky. But the Wild West was retreating, even in the days of Daniel
Boone and Davy Crockett. The West of the cowboys, as Theodore
Roosevelt and Owen Wister knew it and wrote of it in the eighties
and nineties, has disappeared, though it lives on in fiction and
on the screen.
Jack London, born in California in 1876, was forced to find his
West in Alaska–and in alcohol. He was what he and his followers
liked to call the virile or red-blooded type, responsive to the
“Call of the Wild,” “living life naked and tensely.” In his talk
Jack London was simple and boyish, with plenty of humor over his
own literary and social foibles. His books are very uneven, but
he wrote many a hard-muscled, clean-cut page. If the Bret Harte
theory of the West was that each man is at bottom, a
sentimentalist, Jack London’s formula was that at bottom every
man is a brute. Each theory gave provender enough for a
short-story writer to carry on his back, but is hardly adequate,
by itself, for a very long voyage over human life.
“Joaquin” (Cincinnatus Heine) Miller, who was born in 1841 and
died in 1918, had even less of a formula for the West than Jack
London. He was a word-painter of its landscapes, a rider over its
surfaces. Cradled “in a covered wagon pointing West,” mingling
with wild frontier life from Alaska to Nicaragua, miner, Indian
fighter, hermit, poseur in London and Washington, then hermit
again in California, the author of “Songs of the Sierras” at
least knew his material. Byron, whom he adored and imitated,
could have invented nothing more romantic than Joaquin’s life;
but though Joaquin inherited Scotch intensity, he had nothing of
the close mental grip of the true Scot and nothing of his humor.
Vast stretches of his poetry are empty; some of it is grandiose,
elemental, and yet somehow artificial, as even the Grand Canyon
itself looks at certain times.
John Muir, another immigrant Scot who reached California in 1868,
had far more stuff in him than Joaquin Miller. He had studied
geology, botany, and chemistry at the new University of
Wisconsin, and then for years turned explorer of forests, peaks,
and glaciers, not writing, at first, except in his “Journal,” but
forever absorbing and worshiping sublimity and beauty with no
thought of literary schemes. Yet his every-day talk about his
favorite trees and glaciers had more of the glow of poetry in it
than any talk I have ever heard from men of letters, and his
books and “Journal” will long perpetuate this thrilling sense of
personal contact with wild, clean, uplifted things–blossoms in
giant tree-tops and snow-eddies blowing round the shoulders of
Alaskan peaks. Here is a West as far above Jack London’s and
Frank Norris’s as the snow-line is higher than the jungle.
The rediscovery of the South was not so much an exploration of
fresh or forgotten geographical territory, as it was a new
perception of the romantic human material offered by a peculiar
civilization. Political and social causes had long kept the South
in isolation. A few writers like Wirt, Kennedy, Longstreet,
Simms, had described various aspects of its life with grace or
vivacity, but the best picture of colonial Virginia had been
drawn, after all, by Thackeray, who had merely read about it in
books. Visitors like Fanny Kemble and Frederick Law Olmsted
sketched the South of the mid-nineteenth century more vividly
than did the sons of the soil. There was no real literary public
in the South for a native writer like Simms. He was as dependent
upon New York and the Northern market as a Virginian
tobacco-planter of 1740 had been upon London. But within a dozen
years after the close of the War and culminating in the
eighteen-nineties, there came a rich and varied harvest of
Southern writing, notably in the field of fiction. The public for
these stories, it is true, was still largely in the North and
West, and it was the magazines and publishing-houses of New York
and Boston that gave the Southern authors their chief stimulus
and support. It was one of the happy proofs of the solidarity of
the new nation.
The romance of the Spanish and French civilization of New
Orleans, as revealed in Mr. Cable’s fascinating “Old Creole
Days,” was recognized, not as something merely provincial in its
significance, but as contributing to the infinitely variegated
pattern of our national life. Irwin Russell, Joel Chandler
Harris, and Thomas Nelson Page portrayed in verse and prose the
humorous, pathetic, unique traits of the Southern negro, a type
hitherto chiefly sketched in caricature or by strangers. Page,
Hopkinson Smith, Grace King, and a score of other artists began
to draw affectionate pictures of the vanished Southern mansion of
plantation days, when all the women were beautiful and all the
men were brave, when the very horses were more spirited and the
dogs lazier and the honeysuckles sweeter and the moonlight more
entrancing than today. Miss Murfree ("C. E. Craddock”) charmed
city-dwellers and country-folk alike by her novels of the
Tennessee mountains. James Lane Allen painted lovingly the
hemp-fields and pastures of Kentucky. American magazines of the
decade from 1880 to 1890 show the complete triumph of dialect and
local color, and this movement, so full of interest to students
of the immense divergence of American types, owed much of its
vitality to the talent of Southern writers.
But the impulse spread far beyond the South. Early in the
seventies Edward Eggleston wrote “The Hoosier Schoolmaster” and
“The Circuit Rider,” faithful and moving presentations of genuine
pioneer types which were destined to pass with the frontier
settlements. Soon James Whitcomb Riley was to sing of the next
generation of Hoosiers, who frequented “The Old Swimmin’ Hole"
and rejoiced “When the Frost is on the Punkin.” It was the era of
Denman Thompson’s plays, “Joshua Whitcomb” and “The Old
Homestead.” Both the homely and the exotic marched under this
banner of local color: Hamlin Garland presented Iowa barnyards
and cornfields, Helen Hunt Jackson dreamed the romance of the
Mission Indian in “Ramona,” and Lafcadio Hearn, Irish and Greek
by blood, resident of New Orleans and not yet an adopted citizen
of Japan, tantalized American readers with his “Chinese Ghosts"
and “Chita.” A fascinating period it seems, as one looks back
upon it, and it lasted until about the end of the century, when
the suddenly discovered commercial value of the historical novel
and the ensuing competition in best sellers misled many a fine
artistic talent and coarsened the public taste. The New South
then played the literary market as recklessly as the New West.
Let us glance back to “the abandoned farm of literature,” as a
witty New Yorker once characterized New England. The last quarter
of the nineteenth century witnessed a decline in the direct
influence of that province over the country as a whole. Its
strength sapped by the emigration of its more vigorous sons, its
typical institutions sagging under the weight of immense
immigrations from Europe, its political importance growing more
and more negligible, that ancient promontory of ideas has
continued to lose its relative literary significance. In one
field of literature only has New England maintained its rank
since the Civil War, and that is in the local short story. Here
women have distinguished themselves beyond the proved capacity of
New England men. Mrs. Stowe and Rose Terry Cooke, women of
democratic humor, were the pioneers; then came Harriet Prescott
Spofford and Elizabeth Stuart Phelps, women with nerves; and
finally the three artists who have written, out of the material
offered by a decadent New England, as perfect short stories as
France or Russia can produce–Sarah Orne Jewett, Mary Wilkins
Freeman, and Alice Brown. These gifted writers portrayed, with
varying technique and with singular differences in their
instinctive choice of material, the dominant qualities of an
isolated, in-bred race, still proud in its decline; still
inquisitive and acquisitive, versatile yet stubborn, with thrift
passing over into avarice, and mental power degenerating into
smartness; cold and hard under long repression of emotion, yet
capable of passion and fanaticism; at worst, a mere trader, a
crank, a grim recluse; at best, endowed with an austere physical
and moral beauty. Miss Jewett preferred to touch graciously the
sunnier slopes of this provincial temperament, to linger in its
ancient dignities and serenities. Miss Brown has shown the pathos
of its thwarted desires, its hunger for a beauty and a happiness
denied. Mary Wilkins Freeman revealed its fundamental tragedies
of will.
Two of the best known writers of New England fiction in this
period were not natives of the soil, though they surpassed most
native New Englanders in their understanding of the type. They
were William Dean Howells and Henry James. Mr. Howells, who, in
his own words, “can reasonably suppose that it is because of the
mixture of Welsh, German, and Irish in me that I feel myself so
typically American,” came to “the Holy Land at Boston” as a
“passionate pilgrim from the West.” “A Boy’s Town,” “My Literary
Passions,” and “Years of my Youth” make clear the image of the
young poet-journalist who returned from his four years in Venice
and became assistant editor of “The Atlantic Monthly” in 1866. In
1871 he succeeded Fields in the editorship, but it was not until
after his resignation in 1881 that he could put his full strength
into those realistic novels of contemporary New England which
established his fame as a writer. “A Modern Instance” and “The
Rise of Silas Lapham” are perhaps the finest stories of this
group; and the latter novel may prove to be Mr. Howells’s chief
“visiting-card to posterity.” We cannot here follow him to New
York and to a new phase of novel writing, begun with “A Hazard of
New Fortunes,” nor can we discuss the now antiquated debate upon
realism which was waged in the eighteen-eighties over the books
of Howells and James. We must content ourselves with saying that
a knowledge of Mr. Howells’s work is essential to the student of
the American provincial novel, as it is also to the student of
our more generalized types of story-writing, and that he has
never in his long career written an insincere, a slovenly, or an
infelicitous page. “My Literary Friends and Acquaintance” gives
the most charming picture ever drawn of the elder Cambridge,
Concord, and Boston men who ruled over our literature when young
Howells came out of the West, and “My Mark Twain” is his
memorable portrait of another type of sovereign, perhaps the
dynasty that will rule the future.
Although Henry James, like Mr. Howells, wrote at one time acute
studies of New England character, he was never, in his relations
to that section, or, for that matter, to any locality save
possibly London, anything more than a “visiting mind.” His
grandfather was an Irish merchant in Albany. His father, Henry
James, was a philosopher and wit, a man of comfortable fortune,
who lived at times in Newport, Concord, and Boston, but who was
residing in New York when his son Henry was born in 1843. No
child was ever made the subject of a more complete theory of
deracination. Transplanted from city to city, from country to
country, without a family or a voting-place, without college or
church or creed or profession or responsibility of any kind save
to his own exigent ideals of truth and beauty, Henry James came
to be the very pattern of a cosmopolitan. Avoiding his native
country for nearly thirty years and then returning for a few
months to write some intricate pages about that “American Scene"
which he understood far less truly than the average immigrant, he
died in 1916 in London, having just renounced his American
citizenship and become a British subject in order to show his
sympathy with the Empire, then at war. It was the sole evidence
of political emotion in a lifetime of seventy-three years.
American writing men are justly proud, nevertheless, of this
expatriated craftsman. The American is inclined to admire good
workmanship of any kind, as far as he can understand the
mechanism of it. The task of really understanding Henry James has
been left chiefly to clever women and to a few critics, but ever
since “A Passionate Pilgrim” and “Roderick Hudson” appeared in,
1875, it has been recognized that here was a master, in his own
fashion. What that fashion is may now be known by anyone who will
take the pains to read the author’s prefaces to the New York
edition of his revised works. Never, not even in the Paris which
James loved, has an artist put his intentions and his
self-criticism more definitively upon paper. The secret of Henry
James is told plainly enough here: a specially equipped
intelligence, a freedom from normal responsibilities, a consuming
desire to create beautiful things, and, as life unfolded its
complexities and nuances before his vision, an increasing passion
to seek the beauty which lies entangled and betrayed, a beauty
often adumbrated rather than made plastic, stories that must be
hinted at rather than told, raptures that exist for the initiated
only. The much discussed early and middle and later manners of
James are only various campaigns of this one questing spirit,
changing his procedure as the elusive object of his search hid
itself by this or that device of protective coloration or swift
escape. It is as if a collector of rare butterflies had one
method of capturing them in Madagascar, another for the Orinoco,
and still another for Japan–though Henry James found his
Japan–and Orinoco and Madagascar all in London town!
No one who ever had the pleasure of hearing him discourse about
the art of fiction can forget the absolute seriousness of his
professional devotion; it was as though a shy celebrant were to
turn and explain, with mystical intensity and a mystic’s
involution and reversal of all the values of vulgar speech, the
ceremonial of some strange, high altar. His own power as a
creative artist was not always commensurate with his intellectual
endowment or with his desire after beauty, and his frank contempt
for the masses of men made it difficult for him to write English.
He preferred, as did Browning, who would have liked to reach the
masses, a dialect of his own, and he used it increasingly after
he was fifty. It was a dialect capable of infinite gradations of
tone, endless refinements of expression. In his threescore books
there are delicious poignant moments where the spirit of life
itself flutters like a wild creature, half-caught, half-escaping.
It is for the beauty and thrill of these moments that the pages
of Henry James will continue to be cherished by a few thousand
readers scattered throughout the Republic to which he was ever an
alien.
No poet of the new era has won the national recognition enjoyed
by the veterans. It will be recalled that Bryant survived until
1878, Longfellow and Emerson until 1882, Lowell until 1891,
Whittier and Whitman until 1892, and Holmes until 1894. Compared
with these men the younger writers of verse seemed overmatched.
The “National Ode” for the Centennial celebration in 1876 was
intrusted to Bayard Taylor, a hearty person, author of capital
books of travel, plentiful verse, and a skilful translation of
“Faust.” But an adequate “National Ode” was not in him. Sidney
Lanier, who was writing in that year his “Psalm of the West” and
was soon to compose “The Marshes of Glynn,” had far more of the
divine fire. He was a bookish Georgia youth who had served with
the Confederate army, and afterward, with broken health and in
dire poverty, gave his brief life to music and poetry. He had
rich capacities for both arts, but suffered in both from the lack
of discipline and from an impetuous, restless imagination which
drove him on to over-ambitious designs. Whatever the flaws in his
affluent verse, it has grown constantly in popular favor, and he
is, after Poe, the best known poet of the South. The late Edmund
Clarence Stedman, whose “American Anthology” and critical
articles upon American poets did so much to enhance the
reputation of other men, was himself a maker of ringing lyrics
and spirited narrative verse. His later days were given
increasingly to criticism, and his “Life and Letters” is a
storehouse of material bearing upon the growth of New York as a
literary market-place during half a century. Richard Watson
Gilder was another admirably fine figure, poet, editor, and
leader of public opinion in many a noble cause. His “Letters,"
likewise, give an intimate picture of literary New York from the
seventies to the present. Through his editorship of “Scribner’s
Monthly” and “The Century Magazine” his sound influence made
itself felt upon writers in every section. His own lyric vein had
an opaline intensity of fire, but in spite of its glow his verse
sometimes refused to sing.
The most perfect poetic craftsman of the period–and, many think,
our one faultless worker in verse–was Thomas Bailey Aldrich. His
first volume of juvenile verse had appeared in 1855, the year of
Whittier’s “Barefoot Boy” and Whitman’s “Leaves of Grass.” By
1865 his poems were printed in the then well-known Blue and Gold
edition, by Ticknor and Fields. In 1881 he succeeded Howells in
the editorship of the “Atlantic.” Aldrich had a versatile talent
that turned easily to adroit prose tales, but his heart was in
the filing of his verses. Nothing so daintily perfect as his
lighter pieces has been produced on this side of the Atlantic,
and the deeper notes and occasional darker questionings of his
later verse are embodied in lines of impeccable workmanship.
Aloof from the social and political conflicts of his day, he gave
himself to the fastidious creation of beautiful lines, believing
that the beautiful line is the surest road to Arcady, and that
Herrick, whom he idolized, had shown the way.
To some readers of these pages it may seem like profanation to
pass over poets like Sill, George Woodberry, Edith Thomas,
Richard Hovey, William Vaughn Moody, Madison Cawein–to mention
but half a dozen distinguished names out of a larger company–and
to suggest that James Whitcomb Riley, more completely than any
American poet since Longfellow, succeeded in expressing the
actual poetic feelings of the men and women who composed his
immense audience. Riley, like Aldrich, went to school to Herrick,
Keats, Tennyson, and Longfellow, but when he began writing
newspaper verse in his native Indiana he was guided by two
impulses which gave individuality to his work. “I was always
trying to write of the kind of people I knew, and especially to
write verse that I could read just as if it were spoken for the
first time.” The first impulse kept him close to the wholesome
Hoosier soil. The second is an anticipation of Robert Frost’s
theory of speech tones as the basis of verse, as well as a
revival of the bardic practice of reciting one’s own poems. For
Riley had much of the actor and platform-artist in him, and
comprehended that poetry might be made again a spoken art,
directed to the ear rather than to the eye. His vogue, which at
his death in 1915 far surpassed that of any living American poet,
is inexplicable to those persons only who forget the sentimental
traditions of our American literature and its frank appeal to the
emotions of juvenility, actual and recollected. Riley’s best
“holt” as a poet was his memory of his own boyhood and his
perception that the child-mind lingers in every adult reader.
Genius has often been called the gift of prolonged adolescence,
and in this sense, surely, there was genius in the warm and
gentle heart of this fortunate provincial who held that “old
Indianapolis” was “high Heaven’s sole and only understudy.” No
one has ever had the audacity to say that of New York.
We have had American drama for one hundred and fifty years,* but
much of it, like our popular fiction and poetry, has been
subliterary, more interesting to the student of social life and
national character than to literary criticism in the narrow sense
of that term. Few of our best known literary men have written for
the stage. The public has preferred melodrama to poetic tragedy,
although perhaps the greatest successes have been scored by plays
which are comedies of manners rather than melodrama, and
character studies of various American types, built up around the
known capabilities of a particular actor. The twentieth century
has witnessed a marked activity in play-writing, in the technical
study of the drama, and in experiment with dramatic production,
particularly with motion pictures and the out-of-doors pageant.
At no time since “The Prince of Parthia” was first acted in
Philadelphia in 1767 has such a large percentage of Americans
been artistically and commercially interested in the drama, but
as to the literary results of the new movement it is too soon to
speak.
* “Representative American Plays,” edited by Arthur Hobson Quinn,
N. Y., 1917.
Nor is it possible to forecast the effect of a still more
striking movement of contemporary taste, the revival of interest
in poetry and the experimentation with new poetical forms. Such
revival and experiment have often, in the past, been the preludes
of great epochs of poetical production. Living Americans have
certainly never seen such a widespread demand for contemporary
verse, such technical curiosity as to the possible forms of
poetry, or such variety of bold innovation. Imagism itself is
hardly as novel as its contemporary advocates appear to maintain;
and free verse goes back far in our English speech and song. But
the new generation believes that it has made a discovery in
reverting to sensations rather than thought, to the naive
reproduction of retinal and muscular impressions, as if this were
the end of the matter.
The self-conscious, self-defending side of the new poetic impulse
may soon pass, as it did in the case of Wordsworth and of Victor
Hugo. Whatever happens, we have already had fresh and exquisite
revelations of natural beauty, and, in volumes like “North of
Boston” and “A Spoon River Anthology,” judgments of life that run
very deep.
American fiction seems just now, on the contrary, to be marking
time and not to be getting noticeably forward. Few names unknown
ten years ago have won wide recognition in the domain of the
novel. The short story has made little technical advance since
the first successes of “O. Henry,” though the talent of many
observers has dealt with new material offered by the racial
characteristics of European immigrants and by new phases of
commerce and industry. The enormous commercial demand of the
five-cent weeklies for short stories of a few easily recognized
patterns has resulted too often in a substitution of
stencil-plate generalized types instead of delicately and
powerfully imagined individual characters. Short stories have
been assembled, like Ford cars, with amazing mechanical
expertness, but with little artistic advance in design. The same
temporary arrest of progress has been noted in France and
England, however, where different causes have been at work. No
one can tell, in truth, what makes some plants in the literary
garden wither at the same moment that others are outgrowing their
borders.
There is one plant in our own garden, however, whose flourishing
state will be denied by nobody–namely, that kind of
nature-writing identified with Thoreau and practised by Thomas
Wentworth Higginson, Starr King, John Burroughs, John Muir,
Clarence King, Bradford Torrey, Theodore Roosevelt, William J.
Long, Thompson-Seton, Stewart Edward White, and many others.
Their books represent, Professor Canby* believes, the adventures
of the American subconsciousness, the promptings of forgotten
memories, a racial tradition of contact with the wilderness, and
hence one of the most genuinely American traits of our
literature.
* “Back to Nature,” by H. S. Canby, “Yale Review,” July, 1917.
Other forms of essay writing, surely, have seemed in our own
generation less distinctive of our peculiar quality. While
admirable biographical and critical studies appear from time to
time, and here and there a whimsical or trenchant discursive
essay like those of Miss Repplier or Dr. Crothers, no one would
claim that we approach France or even England in the field of
criticism, literary history, memoirs, the bookish essay, and
biography. We may have race-memories of a pine-tree which help us
to write vigorously and poetically about it, but we write less
vitally as soon as we enter the library door. A Frenchman does
not, for he is better trained to perceive the continuity and
integrity of race-consciousness, in the whole field of its
manifestation. He does not feel, as many Americans do, that they
are turning their back on life when they turn to books.
Perhaps the truth is that although we are a reading people we are
not yet a book-loving people. The American newspaper and magazine
have been successful in making their readers fancy that newspaper
and magazine are an equivalent for books. Popular orators and
popular preachers confirm this impression, and colleges and
universities have often emphasized a vocational choice of
books–in other words, books that are not books at all, but
treatises. It is not, of course, that American journalism,
whether of the daily or monthly sort, has consciously set itself
to supplant the habit of book-reading. A thousand social and
economic factors enter into such a problem. But few observers
will question the assertion that the influence of the American
magazine, ever since its great period of national literary
service in the eighties and nineties, has been more marked in
the field of conduct and of artistic taste than in the
stimulation of a critical literary judgment: An American
schoolhouse of today owes its improvement in appearance over the
schoolhouse of fifty years ago largely to the popular diffusion,
through the illustrated magazines, of better standards of
artistic taste. But–whether the judgment of school-teachers and
schoolchildren upon a piece of literature is any better than it
was in the red schoolhouse of fifty years ago is a disputable
question.
But we must stop guessing, or we shall never have done. The
fundamental problem of our literature, as this book has attempted
to trace it, has been to obtain from a mixed population dwelling
in sections as widely separated as the peoples of Northern and
Southern Europe, an integral intellectual and spiritual activity
which could express, in obedience to the laws of beauty and
truth, the motions stimulated by our national life. It has been
assumed in the preceding chapters that American literature is
something different from English literature written in America.
Canadian and Australian literatures have indigenous qualities of
their own, but typically they belong to the colonial literature
of Great Britain. This can scarcely be said of the writings of
Franklin and Jefferson, and it certainly cannot be said of the
writings of Cooper, Hawthorne, Emerson, Thoreau, Whitman, Lowell,
Lincoln, Mark Twain, and Mr. Howells. In the pages of these men
and of hundreds of others less distinguished, there is a
revelation of a new national type. That the full energies of this
nation have been back of our books, giving them a range and
vitality and unity commensurate with the national existence, no
one would claim. There are other spheres of effort in which
American character has been more adequately expressed than in
words. Nevertheless the books are here, in spite of every defect
in national discipline, every flaw in national character; and
they deserve the closest attention from all those who are trying
to understand the American mind.
If the effort toward an expression of a peculiarly complex
national experience has been the problem of our literary past,
the literary problem of the future is the expression of the
adjustment of American ideals to the standards of civilization.
“Patriotism,” said the martyred Edith Cavell just before her
death, “is not enough.” Nationality and the instincts of national
separatism now seem essential to the preservation of the
political units of the world-state, precisely as a healthy
individualism must be the basis of all enduring social
fellowship. Yet it is clear that civilization is a larger, more
ultimate term than nationality. Chauvinism is nowhere more
repellent than in the things of the mind. It is difficult for
some Americans to think internationally even in political
affairs–to construe our national policy and duty in terms of
obligation to civilization. Nevertheless the task must be faced,
and we are slowly realizing it.
In the field of literature, likewise, Americanism is not a final
word either of blame or praise. It is a word of useful
characterization. Only American books, and not books written in
English in America, can adequately represent our national
contribution to the world’s thinking and feeling. So argued
Emerson and Whitman, long ago. But the younger of these two poets
came to realize in his old age that the New World and the Old
World are fundamentally one. The literature of the New World will
inevitably have an accent of its own, but it must speak the
mother-language of civilization, share in its culture, accept its
discipline.
It has been said disparagingly of Longfellow and his friends:
“The houses of the Brahmins had only eastern windows. The souls
of the whole school lived in the old lands of culture, and they
visited these lands as often as they could, and, returning,
brought back whole libraries of books which they eagerly
translated.” But even if Longfellow and his friends had been
nothing more than translators and diffusers of European culture,
their task would have been justified. They kept the ideals of
civilization from perishing in this new soil. Through those
eastern windows came in, and still comes in, the sunlight to
illumine the American spirit. To decry the literatures of the
Orient and of Greece and Rome as something now outgrown by
America, is simply to close the eastern windows, to narrow our
conception of civilization to merely national and contemporaneous
terms. It is as provincial to attempt this restriction in
literature as it would be in world-politics. We must have all the
windows open in our American writing, free access to ideas,
knowledge of universal standards, perception of universal law.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
