


If we turn, however, to the literature produced in America
between the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765 and the adoption of
the Constitution in 1787, we perceive that it is a literature of
discord and passion. Its spirit is not that of “one united
people.” Washington could indeed declare in his “Farewell
Address” of 1796, “With slight shades of difference, you have the
same religion, manners, habits, and political principles"; yet no
one knew better than Washington upon what a slender thread this
political unity had often hung, and how impossible it had been to
foresee the end from the beginning.
It is idle to look in the writings of the Revolutionary period
for the literature of beauty, for a quiet harmonious unfolding of
the deeper secrets of life. It was a time of swift and pitiless
change, of action rather than reflection, of the turning of many
separate currents into one headlong stream. “We must, indeed, all
hang together,” runs Franklin’s well-known witticism in
Independence Hall, “or, most assuredly, we shall all hang
separately.” Excellently spoken, Doctor! And that homely, cheery,
daring sentence gives the keynote of much of the Revolutionary
writing that has survived. It may be heard in the state papers of
Samuel Adams, the oratory of Patrick Henry, the pamphlets of
Thomas Paine, the satires of Freneau and Trumbull, and in the
subtle, insinuating, thrilling paragraphs of Thomas Jefferson.
We can only glance in passing at the literature of the Lost
Cause, the Loyalist or “Tory” pleadings for allegiance to
Britain. It was written by able and honest men, like Boucher and
Odell, Seabury, Leonard and Galloway. They distrusted what
Seabury called “our sovereign Lord the Mob.” They represented, in
John Adams’s opinion, nearly one-third of the people of the
colonies, and recent students believe that this estimate was too
low. In some colonies the Loyalists were clearly in the majority.
In all they were a menacing element, made up of the conservative,
the prosperous, the well-educated, with a mixture, of course, of
mere placemen and tuft-hunters. They composed weighty pamphlets,
eloquent sermons, and sparkling satire in praise of the old order
of things. When their cause was lost forever, they wrote gossipy
letters from their exile in London or pathetic verses in their
new home in Nova Scotia and Ontario. Their place in our national
life and literature has never been filled, and their talents and
virtues are never likely to receive adequate recognition. They
took the wrong fork of the road.
There were gentle spirits, too, in this period, endowed with
delicate literary gifts, but quite unsuited for the clash of
controversy–members, in Crevecoeur’s touching words, of the
“secret communion among good men throughout the world.” “I am a
lover of peace, what must I do?” asks Crevecoeur in his “Letters
from an American Farmer.” “I was happy before this unfortunate
Revolution. I feel that I am no longer so, therefore I regret the
change. My heart sometimes seems tired with beating, it wants
rest like my eyelids, which feel oppressed with so many
watchings.” Crevecoeur, an immigrant from Normandy, was certainly
no weakling, but he felt that the great idyllic American
adventure which he described so captivatingly in his chapter
entitled “What is an American"–was ending tragically in civil
war. Another whitesouled itinerant of that day was John Woolman
of New Jersey, whose “Journal,” praised by Charles Lamb and
Channing and edited by Whittier, is finding more readers in the
twentieth century than it won in the nineteenth. “A man
unlettered,” said Whittier, “but with natural refinement and
delicate sense of fitness, the purity of whose heart enters into
his language.” Woolman died at fifty-two in far-away York,
England, whither he had gone to attend a meeting of the Society
of Friends.
The three tall volumes of the Princeton edition of the poems of
Philip Freneau bear the sub-title, “Poet of the American
Revolution.” But our Revolution, in truth, never had an adequate
poet. The prose-men, such as Jefferson, rose nearer the height of
the great argument than did the men of rhyme. Here and there the
struggle inspired a brisk ballad like Francis Hopkinson’s “Battle
of the Kegs,” a Hudibrastic satire like Trumbull’s “McFingal,” or
a patriotic song like Timothy Dwight’s “Columbia.” Freneau
painted from his own experience the horrors of the British
prison-ship, and celebrated, in cadences learned from Gray and
Collins, the valor of the men who fell at Eutaw Springs. There
was patriotic verse in extraordinary profusion, but its literary
value is slight, and it reveals few moods of the American mind
that are not more perfectly conveyed through oratory, the
pamphlet, and the political essay. The immediate models of this
Revolutionary verse were the minor British bards of the
eighteenth century, a century greatly given to verse-writing, but
endowed by Heaven with the “prose-reason” mainly. The reader of
Burton E. Stevenson’s collection of “Poems of American History"
can easily compare the contemporary verse inspired by the events
of the Revolution with the modern verse upon the same historic
themes. He will see how slenderly equipped for song were most of
the later eighteenth-century Americans and how unfavorable to
poetry was the tone of that hour.
Freneau himself suffered, throughout his long career, from the
depressing indifference of his public to the true spirit of
poetry. “An old college mate of mine,” said James Madison–who
was by tradition Freneau’s roommate at Princeton in the class of
1771–"a poet and man of literary and refined tastes, knowing
nothing of the world.” When but three years out of college, the
cautious Madison wrote to another friend: “Poetry wit and
Criticism Romances Plays &c captivated me much: but I begin to
discover that they deserve but a moderate portion of a mortal’s
Time and that something more substantial more durable more
profitable befits our riper age.” Madison was then at the ripe
age of twenty-three! Professor Pattee, Freneau’s editor, quotes
these words to illustrate the “common sense” atmosphere of the
age which proved fatal to Freneau’s development. Yet the sturdy
young New Yorker, of Huguenot descent, is a charming figure, and
his later malevolence was shown only to his political foes. After
leaving Princeton he tries teaching, the law, the newspaper, the
sea; he is aflame with patriotic zeal; he writes, like most
American poets, far too much for his own reputation. As the
editor of the “National Gazette” in Philadelphia, he becomes
involved in the bitter quarrel between his chief, Jefferson, and
Alexander Hamilton. His attachment to the cause of the French
Revolution makes him publish baseless attacks upon Washington. By
and by he retires to a New Jersey farm, still toying with
journalism, still composing verses. He turns patriotic poet once
more in the War of 1812; but the public has now forgotten him. He
lives on in poverty and seclusion, and in his eightieth year
loses his way in a snowstorm and perishes miserably–this in
1832, the year of the death of the great Sir Walter Scott, who
once had complimented Freneau by borrowing one of his best lines
of poetry.
It is in the orations and pamphlets and state papers inspired by
the Revolutionary agitation that we find the most satisfactory
expression of the thought and feeling of that generation. Its
typical literature is civic rather than aesthetic, a sort of
writing which has been incidental to the accomplishing of some
political, social, or moral purpose, and which scarcely regards
itself as literature at all. James Otis’s argument against the
Writs of Assistance in Massachusetts in 1761, and Patrick Henry’s
speech in the Virginia House of Burgesses in 1765, mark epochs in
the emotional life of these communities. They were reported
imperfectly or not at all, but they can no more be ignored in an
assessment of our national experience than editorials, sermons,
or conversations which have expressed the deepest feelings of a
day and then have perished beyond resurrection.
Yet if natural orators like Otis and Henry be denied a strictly
“literary” rating because their surviving words are obviously
inadequate to account for the popular effect of their speeches,
it is still possible to measure the efficiency of the
pamphleteer. When John Adams tells us that “James Otis was Isaiah
and Ezekiel united,” we must take his word for the impression
which Otis’s oratory left upon his mind. But John Adams’s own
writings fill ten stout volumes which invite our judgment. The
“truculent and sarcastic splendor” of his hyperboles need not
blind us to his real literary excellencies, such as clearness,
candor, vigor of phrase, freshness of idea. A testy, rugged,
“difficult” person was John Adams, but he grew mellower with age,
and his latest letters and journals are full of whimsical charm.
John Adams’s cousin Samuel was not precisely a charming person.
Bigoted, tireless, secretive, this cunning manipulator of
political passions followed many tortuous paths. His ability for
adroit misstatement of an adversary’s position has been equaled
but once in our history. But to the casual reader of his four
volumes, Samuel Adams seems ever to be breathing the liberal air
of the town-meeting: everything is as plainly obvious as a good
citizen can make it. He has, too, the large utterance of the
European liberalism of his day. “Resolved,” read his Resolutions
of the House of Representatives of Massachusetts in 1765, “that
there are certain essential rights of the British constitution of
government which are founded in the law of God and nature and are
the common rights of mankind.” In his statement of the Rights of
the Colonists (1772) we are assured that “among the natural
rights of the colonists are these, First, a right to Life;
secondly to Liberty; thirdly to Property .... All men have a
Right to remain in a State of Nature as long as they please . . .
. When Men enter into Society, it is by voluntary consent."
Jean-Jacques himself could not be more bland, nor at heart more
fiercely demagogic.
“Tom” Paine would have been no match for “Sam” Adams in a
town-meeting, but he was an even greater pamphleteer. He had
arrived from England in 1774, at the age of thirty-eight, having
hitherto failed in most of his endeavors for a livelihood.
“Rebellious Staymaker; unkempt,” says Carlyle; but General
Charles Lee noted that there was “genius in his eyes,” and he
bore a letter of introduction from Franklin commending him as an
“ingenious, worthy young man,” which obtained for him a position
on the “Pennsylvania Magazine.” Before he had been a year on
American soil, Paine was writing the most famous pamphlet of our
political literature, “Common Sense,” which appeared in January,
1776. “A style hitherto unknown on this side of the Atlantic,"
wrote Edmund Randolph. Yet this style of familiar talk to the
crowd had been used seventy years earlier by Defoe and Swift, and
it was to be employed again by a gaunt American frontiersman who
was born in 1809, the year of Thomas Paine’s death. “The Crisis,"
a series of thirteen pamphlets, of which the first was issued in
December, 1776, seemed to justify the contemporary opinion that
the “American cause owed as much to the pen of Paine as to the
sword of Washington. “Paine, who was now serving in the army,
might have heard his own words, “These are the times that try
men’s souls,” read aloud, by Washington’s orders, to the ragged
troops just before they crossed the Delaware to win the victory
of Trenton. The best known productions of Paine’s subsequent
career, “The Rights of Man” and “The Age of Reason,” were written
in Europe, but they were read throughout America. The reputation
of the “rebellious Staymaker” has suffered from certain grimy
habits and from the ridiculous charge of atheism. He was no more
an atheist than Franklin or Jefferson. In no sense an original
thinker, he could impart to outworn shreds of deistic controversy
and to shallow generalizations about democracy a personal fervor
which transformed them and made his pages gay and bold and clear
as a trumpet.
Clear and bold and gay was Alexander Hamilton likewise; and his
literary services to the Revolution are less likely to be
underestimated than Thomas Paine’s. They began with that boyish
speech in “the Fields” of New York City in 1774 and with “The
Farmer Refuted,” a reply to Samuel Seabury’s “Westchester
Farmer.” They were continued in extraordinary letters, written
during Hamilton’s military career, upon the defects of the
Articles of Confederation and of the finances of the
Confederation. Hamilton contributed but little to the actual
structure of the new Constitution, but as a debater he fought
magnificently and triumphantly for its adoption by the Convention
of the State of New York in 1788. Together with Jay and Madison
he defended the fundamental principles of the Federal Union in
the remarkable series of papers known as the “Federalist.” These
eighty-five papers, appearing over the signature “Publius” in two
New York newspapers between October, 1787, and April, 1788, owed
their conception largely to Hamilton, who wrote more than half of
them himself. In manner they are not unlike the substantial Whig
literature of England, and in political theory they have little
in common with the Revolutionary literature which we have been
considering. The reasoning is close, the style vigorous but
neither warmed by passion nor colored by the individual emotions
of the author. The “Federalist” remains a classic example of the
civic quality of our post-Revolutionary American political
writing, broadly social in its outlook, well informed as to the
past, confident–but not reckless–of the future. Many Americans
still read it who would be shocked by Tom Paine and bored with
Edmund Burke. It has none of the literary genius of either of
those writers, but its formative influence upon successive
generations of political thinking has been steadying and sound.
In fact, our citizen literature cannot be understood aright if
one fails to observe that its effect has often turned, not upon
mere verbal skill, but upon the weight of character behind the
words. Thus the grave and reserved George Washington says of the
Constitution of 1787: “Let us raise a standard to which the wise
and the honest can repair; the event is in the hand of God.” The
whole personality of the great Virginian is back of that simple,
perfect sentence. It brings us to our feet, like a national
anthem.
One American, no doubt our most gifted man of letters of that
century, passed most of the Revolutionary period abroad, in the
service of his country. Benjamin Franklin was fifty-nine in the
year of the Stamp Act. When he returned from France in 1785 he
was seventy-nine, but he was still writing as admirably as ever
when he died at eighty-four. We cannot dismiss this singular,
varied, and fascinating American better than by quoting the
letter which George Washington wrote to him in September, 1789.
It has the dignity and formality of the eighteenth century, but
it is warm with tested friendship and it glows with deep human
feeling: “If to be venerated for benevolence, if to be admired
for talents, if to be esteemed for patriotism, if to be beloved
for philanthropy, can gratify the human mind, you must have the
pleasing consolation to know that you have not lived in vain. And
I flatter myself that it will not be ranked among the least
grateful occurrences of your life to be assured, that, so long as
I retain my memory, you will be recollected with respect,
veneration, and affection by your sincere friend, George
Washington.”
There remains another Virginian, the symbol of the Revolutionary
age, the author of words more widely known around the globe than
any other words penned by an American. “Thomas Jefferson,” writes
the latest of his successors in the Presidency, “was not a man of
the people, but he was a man of such singular insight that he saw
that all the roots of generous power come from the people.” On
his father’s side Jefferson came from sound yeoman stock, in
which Welsh blood ran. His mother was a Virginia Randolph. Born
in Albemarle County, near the “little
mountain"–Monticello–where he built a mansion for his bride and
where he lies buried, the tall, strong, red-haired, gray-eyed,
gifted boy was reputed the best shot, the best rider, the best
fiddle-player in the county. He studied hard at William and Mary
over his Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and Spanish, but he also
frequented the best society of the little capital. He learned to
call himself a Deist and to theorize about ideal commonwealths.
There was already in him that latent radicalism which made him
strike down, as soon as he had the power, two of the fundamental
principles of the society into which he was born, the principle
of entailed property and that of church establishment.
Such was the youth of twenty-two who was thrilled in 1765 by the
Stamp Act. In the ten years of passionate discussion which
followed, two things became clear: first, that there had long
existed among the colonists very radical theoretical notions of
political freedom; and second, that there was everywhere a spirit
of practical conservatism. Jefferson illustrates the union of
these two tendencies.
He took his seat in the Continental Congress in June, 1775. He
was only thirty-two, but he had already written, in the summer of
1774, “A Summary View of the Rights of British America” which had
been published in England by Burke, himself a judge of good
writing and sound politics. Jefferson had also prepared in 1775
the “Address of the Virginia House of Burgesses.” For these
reasons he was placed at the head of the Committee for drafting
the Declaration of Independence. We need not linger over the
familiar circumstances of its composition. Everybody knows how
Franklin and Adams made a few verbal alterations in the first
draft, how the committee of five then reported it to the
Congress, which proceeded to cut out about one-fourth of the
matter, while Franklin tried to comfort the writhing author with
his cheerful story about the sign of John Thompson the hatter.
Forty-seven years afterwards, in reply to the charge of lack of
originality brought against the Declaration by Timothy Pickering
and John Adams–charges which have been repeated at intervals
ever since–Jefferson replied philosophically: “Whether I
gathered my ideas from reading or reflection I do not know. I
know only that I turned neither to book nor pamphlet while
writing it. I did not consider it as any part of my charge to
invent new ideas altogether and to offer no sentiment which had
ever been expressed before.” O wise young man, and fundamentally
Anglo-Saxon young man, to turn his back, in that crisis, to the
devil of mere cleverness, and stick to recognized facts and
accepted sentiments! But his pen retains its cunning in spite of
him; and the drop of hot Welsh blood tells; and the cosmopolitan
reading and thinking tell; and they transform what Pickering
called a “commonplace compilation, its sentiments hackneyed in
Congress for two years before,” into an immortal manifesto to
mankind.
Its method is the simplest. The preamble is philosophical,
dealing with “self-evident” truths. Today the men who dislike or
doubt these truths dismiss the preamble as “theoretical,” or, to
use another term of derogation favored by reactionaries,
“French.” But if the preamble be French and philosophical, the
specific charges against the King are very English and practical.
Here are certain facts, presented no doubt with consummate
rhetorical skill, but facts, undeniably. The Anglo-Saxon in
Jefferson is basal, racial; the turn for academic philosophizing
after the French fashion is personal, acquired; but the range and
sweep and enduring vitality of this matchless state paper lie in
its illumination of stubborn facts by general principles, its
decent respect to the opinions of mankind, its stately and noble
utterance of national sentiments and national reasons to a
“candid world.”
It has long been the fashion, among a certain school of
half-hearted Americans–and unless I am mistaken, the teaching
has increased during the last decades–to minimize the value of
Jefferson’s “self-evident truths.” Rufus Choate, himself a
consummate rhetorician, sneered at those “glittering
generalities,” and countless college-bred men, some of them
occupying the highest positions, have echoed the sneer. The
essence of the objection to Jefferson’s platform lies of course
in his phrase, “all men are created equal,” with the subsidiary
phrase about governments “deriving their just powers from the
consent of the governed.” Editors and congressmen and even
college professors have proclaimed themselves unable to assent to
these phrases of the Declaration, and unable even to understand
them. These objectors belong partly, I think, in Jefferson’s
category of “nervous persons"–"anti-republicans,” as he goes on
to define them–"whose languid fibres have more analogy with a
passive than an active state of things.” Other objectors to the
phrase “all men are created equal” have had an obvious personal
or political motive for refusing assent to the proposition. But
“no intelligent man,” says one of Jefferson’s biographers, “has
ever misconstrued it [the Declaration] except intentionally.”
Nobody would claim today that Thomas Jefferson’s statement of the
sentiments and reasons for the independence of the thirteen
British colonies in 1776 was an adequate handbook of political
wisdom, fit for all the exigencies of contemporary American
democracy. It is not that. It is simply, in Lincoln’s phrase, one
of “the standard maxims of free society” which no democracy can
safely disregard.
Jefferson’s long life, so varied, so flexible, so responsive to
the touch of popular forces, illustrates the process by which the
Virginia mind of 1743 became the nationalized, unionized mind of
1826. It is needless here to dwell upon the traits of his
personal character: his sweetness of spirit, his
stout-heartedness in disaster, his scorn of money, his love for
the intellectual life. “I have no ambition to govern men,” he
wrote to Edward Rutledge. He was far happier talking about Greek
and Anglo-Saxon with Daniel Webster before the fire-place of
Monticello than he ever was in the presidential chair. His
correspondence was enormous. His writings fill twenty volumes. In
his theories of education he was fifty years ahead of his time;
in his absolute trust in humanity he was generations ahead of it.
“I am not one of those who fear the people,” he declared proudly.
It is because of this touching faith, this invincible and
matchless ardor, that Jefferson is today remembered. He
foreshadowed Lincoln. His belief in the inarticulate common
people is rewarded by their obstinate fidelity to his name as a
type and symbol. “I know of no safe depository of the ultimate
powers of society but the people themselves,” wrote Jefferson,
and with the people themselves is the depository of his fame.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
