


The United States of America has been from the beginning in a
perpetual change. The physical and mental restlessness of the
American and the temporary nature of many of his arrangements
are largely due to the experimental character of the exploration
and development of this continent. The new energies released by
the settlement of the colonies were indeed guided by stern
determination, wise forethought, and inventive skill; but no one
has ever really known the outcome of the experiment. It is a
story of faith, of
   Effort, and expectation, and desire,
   And something evermore about to be.
An Alexander Hamilton may urge with passionate force the adoption
of the Constitution, without any firm conviction as to its
permanence. The most clear-sighted American of the Civil War
period recognized this element of uncertainty in our American
adventure when he declared: “We are now testing whether this
nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long
endure.” More than fifty years have passed since that war rearmed
the binding force of the Constitution and apparently sealed the
perpetuity of the Union. Yet the gigantic economic and social
changes now in progress are serving to show that the United
States has its full share of the anxieties which beset all human
institutions in this daily altering world.
“We are but strangers in an inn, but passengers in a ship,” said
Roger Williams. This sense of the transiency of human effort, the
perishable nature of human institutions, was quick in the
consciousness of the gentleman adventurers and sober Puritan
citizens who emigrated from England to the New World. It had been
a familiar note in the poetry of that Elizabethan period which
had followed with such breathless interest the exploration of
America. It was a conception which could be shared alike by a
saint like John Cotton or a soldier of fortune like John Smith.
Men are tent-dwellers. Today they settle here, and tomorrow they
have struck camp and are gone. We are strangers and sojourners,
as all our fathers were.
This instinct of the camper has stamped itself upon American life
and thought. Venturesomeness, physical and moral daring,
resourcefulness in emergencies, indifference to negligible
details, wastefulness of materials, boundless hope and confidence
in the morrow, are characteristics of the American. It is
scarcely an exaggeration to say that the “good American” has been
he who has most resembled a good camper. He has had robust
health–unless or until he has abused it,–a tolerant
disposition, and an ability to apply his fingers or his brain to
many unrelated and unexpected tasks. He is disposed to blaze his
own trail. He has a touch of prodigality, and, withal, a knack of
keeping his tent or his affairs in better order than they seem.
Above all, he has been ever ready to break camp when he feels the
impulse to wander. He likes to be “foot-loose.” If he does not
build his roads as solidly as the Roman roads were built, nor his
houses like the English houses, it is because he feels that he is
here today and gone tomorrow. If he has squandered the physical
resources of his neighborhood, cutting the forests recklessly,
exhausting the soil, surrendering water power and minerals into a
few far-clutching fingers, he has done it because he expects,
like Voltaire’s Signor Pococurante, “to have a new garden
tomorrow, built on a nobler plan.” When New York State grew too
crowded for Cooper’s Leather-Stocking, he shouldered his pack,
whistled to his dog, glanced at the sun, and struck a bee-line
for the Mississippi. Nothing could be more typical of the first
three hundred years of American history.
The traits of the pioneer have thus been the characteristic
traits of the American in action. The memories of successive
generations have tended to stress these qualities to the neglect
of others. Everyone who has enjoyed the free life of the woods
will confess that his own judgment upon his casual summer
associates turns, quite naturally and almost exclusively, upon
their characteristics as woodsmen. Out of the woods, these
gentlemen may be more or less admirable divines, pedants, men of
affairs; but the verdict of their companions in the forest is
based chiefly upon the single question of their adaptability to
the environment of the camp. Are they quick of eye and foot,
skillful with rod and gun, cheerful on rainy days, ready to do a
little more than their share of drudgery? If so, memory holds
them.
Some such unconscious selection as this has been at work in the
classification of our representative men. The building of the
nation and the literary expression of its purpose and ideals are
tasks which have called forth the strength of a great variety of
individuals. Some of these men have proved to be peculiarly
fitted for a specific service, irrespective of the question of
their general intellectual powers, or their rank as judged by the
standard of European performance in the same field. Thus the
battle of New Orleans, in European eyes a mere bit of frontier
fighting, made Andrew Jackson a “hero” as indubitably as if he
had defeated Napoleon at Waterloo. It gave him the Presidency.
The analogy holds in literature. Certain expressions of American
sentiment or conviction have served to summarize or to clarify
the spirit of the nation. The authors of these productions have
frequently won the recognition and affection of their
contemporaries by means of prose and verse quite unsuited to
sustain the test of severe critical standards. Neither
Longfellow’s “Excelsior” nor Poe’s “Bells” nor Whittier’s “Maud
Muller” is among the best poems of the three writers in question,
yet there was something in each of these productions which caught
the fancy of a whole American generation. It expressed one phase
of the national mind in a given historical period.
The historian of literature is bound to take account of this
question of literary vogue, as it is highly significant of the
temper of successive generations in any country. But it is of
peculiar interest to the student of the literature produced in
the United States. Is this literature “American,” or is it
“English literature in America,” as Professor Wendell and other
scholars have preferred to call it? I should be one of the last
to minimize the enormous influence of England upon the mind and
the writing of all the English-speaking countries of the globe.
Yet it will be one of the purposes of the present book to
indicate the existence here, even in colonial times, of a point
of view differing from that of the mother country, and destined
to differ increasingly with the lapse of time. Since the
formation of our Federal Union, in particular, the books produced
in the United States have tended to exhibit certain
characteristics which differentiate them from the books produced
in other English speaking countries. We must beware, of course,
of what the late Charles Francis Adams once called the
“filiopietistic” fallacy. The “American” qualities of our
literature must be judged in connection with its conformity to
universal standards of excellence. Tested by any universal
standard, “The Scarlet Letter” is a notable romance. It has won a
secure place among the literature written by men of English blood
and speech. Yet to overlook the peculiarly local or provincial
characteristics of this remarkable story is to miss the secret of
its inspiration. It could have been written only by a New
Englander, in the atmosphere of a certain epoch.
Our task, then, in this rapid review of the chief interpreters of
the American spirit in literature, is a twofold one. We are
primarily concerned with a procession of men, each of whom is
interesting as an individual and as a writer. But we cannot watch
the individuals long without perceiving the general direction of
their march, the ideas that animate them, the common hopes and
loyalties that make up the life of their spirit. To become aware
of these general tendencies is to understand the “American” note
in our national writing.
Our historians have taught us that the history of the United
States is an evolution towards political unity. The separatist,
particularist movements are gradually thrust to one side. In
literary history, likewise, we best remember those authors who
fall into line with what we now perceive to have been the course
of our literary development. The erratic men and women, the
“sports” of the great experiment, are ultimately neglected by the
critics, unless, like the leaders of political insurrections,
those writing men and women have raised a notable standard of
revolt. No doubt the apparently unique literary specimens, if
clearly understood in their origins and surroundings, would be
found rooted in the general laws of literary evolution. But these
laws are not easy to codify and we must avoid the temptation to
discover, in any particular period, more of unity than there
actually was. And we must always remember that there will be
beautiful prose and verse unrelated to the main national
tendencies save as “the literature of escape.” We owe this lesson
to the genius of Edgar Allan Poe.
Let us test these principles by applying them to the earliest
colonists. The first book written on the soil of what is now the
United States was Captain John Smith’s “True Relation” of the
planting of the Virginia colony in 1607. It was published in
London in 1608. The Captain was a typical Elizabethan adventurer,
with a gift, like so many of his class, for picturesque
narrative. In what sense, if at all, may his writings on American
topics be classified as “American” literary productions? It is
clear that his experiences in the New World were only one phase
of the variegated life of this English soldier of fortune. But
the American imagination has persistently claimed him as
representing something peculiarly ours, namely, a kind of pioneer
hardihood, resourcefulness, leadership, which was essential to
the exploration and conquest of the wilderness. Most of Smith’s
companions were unfitted for the ordeal which he survived. They
perished miserably in the “starving time.” But he was of the
stuff from which triumphant immigrants have ever been made, and
it is our recognition of the presence of these qualities in the
Captain which makes us think of his books dealing with America as
if they were “American books.” There are other narratives by
colonists temporarily residing in the Virginia plantations which
gratify our historical curiosity, but which we no more consider a
part of American literature than the books written by Stevenson,
Kipling, and Wells during their casual visits to this country.
But Captain Smith’s “True Relation” impresses us, like Mark
Twain’s “Roughing It,” with being somehow true to type. In each
of these books the possible unveracities in detail are a
confirmation of their representative American character.
In other words, we have unconsciously formulated, in the course
of centuries, a general concept of “the pioneer.” Novelists,
poets, and historians have elaborated this conception. Nothing is
more inevitable than our reaching back to the beginning of the
seventeenth century and endeavoring to select, among the
thousands of Englishmen who emigrated or even thought of
emigrating to this country, those who possessed the genuine heart
and sinew of the permanent settler.
Oliver Cromwell, for instance, is said to have thought of
emigrating hither in 1637. If he had joined his friends John
Cotton and Roger Williams in New England, who can doubt that the
personal characteristics of “my brave Oliver” would today be
identified with the “American” qualities which we discover in
1637 on the shores of Massachusetts Bay? And what an American
settler Cromwell would have made!
If we turn from physical and moral daring to the field of
theological and political speculation, it is easy today to
select, among the writings of the earliest colonists, certain
radical utterances which seem to presage the very temper of the
late eighteenth century. Pastor John Robinson’s farewell address
to the Pilgrims at Leyden in 1620 contained the famous words:
“The Lord has more truth yet to break forth out of His holy Word.
I cannot sufficiently bewail the condition of the reformed
churches, who are come to a period in religion. . . . Luther and
Calvin were great and shining lights in their times, yet they
penetrated not into the whole counsel of God.” Now John Robinson,
like Oliver Cromwell, never set foot on American soil, but he is
identified, none the less, with the spirit of American liberalism
in religion.
In political discussion, the early emergence of that type of
independence familiar to the decade 1765-75 is equally striking.
In a letter written in 1818, John Adams insisted that “the
principles and feelings which produced the Revolution ought to be
traced back for two hundred years, and sought in the history of
the country from the first plantations in America.” “I have
always laughed,” he declared in an earlier letter, “at the
affectation of representing American independence as a novel
idea, as a modern discovery, as a late invention. The idea of it
as a possible thing, as a probable event, nay as a necessary and
unavoidable measure, in case Great Britain should assume an
unconstitutional authority over us, has been familiar to
Americans from the first settlement of the country.”
There is, then, a predisposition, a latent or potential
Americanism which existed long before the United States came into
being. Now that our political unity has become a fact, the
predisposition is certain to be regarded by our own and by future
generations as evidence of a state of mind which made our
separate national life inevitable. Yet to Thomas Hutchinson, a
sound historian and honest man, the last Royal Governor of
Massachusetts, a separate national life seemed in 1770 an
unspeakable error and calamity.
The seventeenth-century colonists were predominantly English, in
blood, in traditions, and in impulses. Whether we look at
Virginia or Plymouth or at the other colonies that were planted
in swift succession along the seaboard, it is clear that we are
dealing primarily with men of the English race. Most of them
would have declared, with as much emphasis as Francis Hopkinson a
century later, “We of America are in all respects Englishmen."
Professor Edward Channing thinks that it took a century of
exposure to colonial conditions to force the English in America
away from the traditions and ideals of those who continued to
live in the old land. But the student of literature must keep
constantly in mind that these English colonizers represented no
single type of the national character. There were many men of
many minds even within the contracted cabin of the Mayflower. The
“sifted wheat” was by no means all of the same variety.
For Old England was never more torn by divergent thought and
subversive act than in the period between the death of Elizabeth
in 1603 and the Revolution of 1688. In this distracted time who
could say what was really “English”? Was it James the First or
Raleigh? Archbishop Laud or John Cotton? Charles the First or
Cromwell? Charles the Second or William Penn? Was it Churchman,
Presbyterian, Independent, Separatist, Quaker? One is tempted to
say that the title of Ben Jonson’s comedy “Every Man in his
Humour” became the standard of action for two whole generations
of Englishmen, and that there is no common denominator for
emigrants of such varied pattern as Smith and Sandys of Virginia,
Morton of Merrymount, John Winthrop, “Sir” Christopher Gardiner
and Anne Hutchinson of Boston, and Roger Williams of Providence.
They seem as miscellaneous as “Kitchener’s Army.”
It is true that we can make certain distinctions. Virginia, as
has often been said, was more like a continuation of English
society, while New England represented a digression from English
society. There were then, as now, “stand-patters” and
“progressives.” It was the second class who, while retaining very
conservative notions about property, developed a fearless
intellectual radicalism which has written itself into the history
of the United States. But to the student of early American
literature all such generalizations are of limited value. He is
dealing with individual men, not with “Cavalier” or “Roundhead"
as such. He has learned from recent historians to distrust any
such facile classification of the first colonists. He knows by
this time that there were aristocrats in Massachusetts and
commoners in Virginia; that the Pilgrims of Plymouth were more
tolerant than the Puritans of Boston, and that Rhode Island was
more tolerant than either. Yet useful as these general
statements may be, the interpreter of men of letters must always
go back of the racial type or the social system to the individual
person. He recognizes, as a truth for him, that theory of
creative evolution which holds that in the ascending progress of
the race each thinking person becomes a species by himself.
While something is gained, then, by remembering that the racial
instincts and traditions of the first colonists were
overwhelmingly English, and that their political and ethical
views were the product of a turbulent and distraught time, it is
even more important to note how the physical situation of the
colonists affected their intellectual and moral, as well as their
political problems. Among the emigrants from England, as we have
seen, there were great varieties of social status, religious
opinion, individual motive. But at least they all possessed the
physical courage and moral hardihood to risk the dangerous
voyage, the fearful hardships, and the vast uncertainties of the
new life. To go out at all, under the pressure of any motive, was
to meet triumphantly a searching test. It was in truth a
“sifting,” and though a few picturesque rascals had the courage
to go into exile while a few saints may have been deterred, it is
a truism to say that the pioneers were made up of brave men and
braver women.
It cannot be asserted that their courage was the result of any
single, dominating motive, equally operative in all of the
colonies. Mrs. Hemans’s familiar line about seeking “freedom to
worship God” was measurably true of the Pilgrims of Plymouth,
about whom she was writing. But the far more important Puritan
emigration to Massachusetts under Winthrop aimed not so much at
“freedom” as at the establishment of a theocracy according to the
Scriptures. These men straightway denied freedom of worship, not
only to newcomers who sought to join them, but to those members
of their own company who developed independent ways of thinking.
The list of motives for emigration ran the whole gamut, from
missionary fervor for converting the savages, down through a
commendable desire for gain, to the perhaps no less praiseworthy
wish to escape a debtor’s prison or the pillory. A few of the
colonists were rich. Some were beggars or indentured servants.
Most of them belonged to the middle class. John Harvard was the
son of a butcher; Thomas Shepard, the son of a grocer; Roger
Williams, the son of a tailor. But all three were university bred
and were natural leaders of men.
Once arrived in the wilderness, the pioneer life common to all of
the colonists began instantly to exert its slow, irresistible
pressure upon their minds and to mould them into certain ways of
thinking and feeling. Without some perception of these modes of
thought and emotion a knowledge of the spirit of our literature
is impossible. Take, for instance, the mere physical situation of
the first colonists, encamped on the very beach of the wide ocean
with an illimitable forest in their rear. Their provisions were
scanty. They grew watchful of the strange soil, of the new skies,
of the unknown climate. Even upon the voyage over, John Winthrop
thought that “the declination of the pole star was much, even to
the view, beneath that it is in England,” and that “the new moon,
when it first appeared, was much smaller than at any time he had
seen it in England.” Here was a man evidently using his eyes with
a new interest in natural phenomena. Under these changed skies
the mind began gradually to change also.
At first the colonists felt themselves an outpost of Europe, a
forlorn hope of the Protestant Reformation. “We shall be as a
city upon a hill,” said Winthrop. “The eyes of all people are
upon us.” Their creed was Calvinism, then in its third generation
of dominion and a European doctrine which was not merely
theological but social and political. The emigrant Englishmen
were soon to discover that it contained a doctrine of human
rights based upon human needs. At the beginning of their novel
experience they were doubtless unaware of any alteration in their
theories. But they were facing a new situation, and that new
situation became an immense factor in their unconscious growth.
Their intellectual and moral problems shifted, as a boat shifts
her ballast when the wind blows from a new quarter. The John
Cotton preaching in a shed in the new Boston had come to “suffer
a sea-change” from the John Cotton who had been rector of St.
Botolph’s splendid church in Lincolnshire. The “church without a
bishop” and the “state without a king” became a different church
and state from the old, however loyally the ancient forms and
phrases were retained.
If the political problems of equality which were latent in
Calvinism now began to take on a different meaning under the
democratic conditions of pioneer life, the inner, spiritual
problems of that amazing creed were intensified. “Fallen” human
nature remained the same, whether in the crowded cosmopolitan
streets of Holland and London, or upon the desolate shores of
Cape Cod. But the moral strain of the old insoluble conflict
between “fixed fate” and “free will” was heightened by the
physical loneliness of the colonists. Each soul must fight its
own unaided, unending battle. In that moral solitude, as in the
physical solitude of the settlers upon the far northwestern
prairies of a later epoch, many a mind snapped. Unnatural tension
was succeeded by unnatural crimes. But for the stronger
intellects New England Calvinism became a potent spiritual
gymnastic, where, as in the Swedish system of bodily training,
one lifts imaginary and ever-increasing weights with imaginary
and ever-increasing effort, flexor and extensor muscles pulling
against one another, driven by the will. Calvinism bred athletes
as well as maniacs.
The new situation, again, turned many of the theoretical
speculations of the colonists into practical issues. Here, for
example, was the Indian. Was he truly a child of God, possessing
a soul, and, if so, had he partaken of the sin of Adam? These
questions perplexed the saintly Eliot and the generous Roger
Williams. But before many years the query as to whether a Pequot
warrior had a soul became suddenly less important than the
practical question as to whether the Pequot should be allowed any
further chances of taking the white man’s scalp. On this last
issue the colonists were unanimous in the negative.
It would be easy to multiply such instances of a gradual change
of view. But beneath all the changes and all the varieties of
individual behavior in the various colonies that began to dot the
seaboard, certain qualities demanded by the new surroundings are
felt in colonial life and in colonial writings. One of these is
the instinct for order, or at least that degree of order
essential to the existence of a camp. It was not in vain that
John Smith sought to correct the early laxness at Jamestown by
the stern edict: “He that will not work, neither shall he eat."
Dutch and Quaker colonies taught the same inexorable maxim of
thrift. Soon there was work enough for all, at good wages, but
the lesson had been taught. It gave Franklin’s “Poor Richard"
mottoes their flavor of homely, experienced truth.
Order in daily life led straight to political order, just as the
equality and resourcefulness of the frontier, stimulated by
isolation from Europe, led to political independence. The pioneer
learned to make things for himself instead of sending to London
for them, and by and by he grew as impatient of waiting for a
political edict from London as he would become in waiting for a
London plough. “This year,” wrote one colonist, “ye will go to
complain to the Parliament, and the next year they will send to
see how it is, and the third year the government is changed.” The
time was coming when no more complaints would be sent.
One of the most startling instances of this colonial instinct for
self-government is the case of Thomas Hooker. Trained in Emmanuel
College of the old Cambridge, he arrived in the new Cambridge in
1633. He grew restless under its theocratic government, being, it
was said, “a person who when he was doing his Master’s work,
would put a king into his pocket.” So he led the famous migration
of 1636 from Massachusetts to Hartford, and there helped to
create a federation of independent towns which made their own
constitution without mentioning any king, and became one of the
corner-stones of American democracy. In May, 1638, Hooker
declared in a sermon before the General Court “that the choice of
public magistrates belongs unto the people by God’s own
allowance,” and “that they who have the power to appoint officers
and magistrates, it is in their power, also, to set the bounds
and limitations of the power and place into which they call
them.” The reason of this is: “Because the foundation of
authority is laid, firstly, in the free consent of the people."
This high discourse antedates the famous pamphlets on liberty by
Milton. It is a half-century earlier than Locke’s “Treatise on
Government,” a century and a quarter earlier than Rousseau’s
“Contrat Social,” and it precedes by one hundred and thirty-eight
years the American Declaration of Independence.
But the slightest acquaintance with colonial writings will reveal
the fact that such political radicalism as Thomas Hooker’s was
accompanied by an equally striking conservatism in other
directions. One of these conservative traits was the pioneer’s
respect for property, and particularly for the land cleared by
his own toil. Gladstone once spoke of possession of the soil as
the most important and most operative of all social facts.
Free-footed as the pioneer colonist was, he was disinclined to
part with his land without a substantial price for it. The land
at his disposal was practically illimitable, but he showed a very
English tenacity in safeguarding his hold upon his own portion.
Very English, likewise, was his attachment to the old country as
“home.” The lighter and the more serious writings of the
colonists are alike in their respect for the past. In the New
England settlements, although not at first in Virginia, there was
respect for learning and for an educated clergy. The colonists
revered the Bible. They maintained a stubborn regard for the
Common Law of England. Even amid all the excitement of a
successful rebellion from the mother country, this Common Law
still held the Americans to the experience of the inescapable
past.
Indeed, as the reader of today lifts his eyes from the pages of
the books written in America during the seventeenth century, and
tries to meditate upon the general difference between them and
the English books written during the same period, he will be
aware of the firmness with which the conservative forces held on
this side of the Atlantic. It was only one hundred years from the
Great Armada of 1588 to the flight of James Second, the last of
the Stuart Kings. With that Revolution of 1688 the struggles
characteristic of the seventeenth century in England came to an
end. A new working basis is found for thought, politics, society,
literature. But while those vast changes had been shaking
England, two generations of American colonists had cleared their
forests, fought the savages, organized their townships and their
trade, put money in their purses, and lived, though as yet hardly
suspecting it, a life that was beginning to differentiate them
from the men of the Old World. We must now glance at the various
aspects of this isolated life of theirs, as it is revealed in
their books.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
