


“There is what I call the American idea,” declared Theodore
Parker in the Anti-Slavery Convention of 1850. “This idea
demands, as the proximate organization thereof, a democracy–that
is, a government of all the people, by all the people, for all
the people; of course, a government on the principle of eternal
justice, the unchanging law of God; for shortness’ sake, I will
call it the idea of Freedom.”
These are noble words, and they are thought to have suggested a
familiar phrase of Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address, thirteen years
later. Yet students of literature, no less than students of
politics, recognize the difficulty of summarizing in words a
national “idea.” Precisely what was the Greek “idea”? What is
today the French “idea”? No single formula is adequate to express
such a complex of fact, theories, moods–not even the famous
“Liberty, Fraternity, Equality.” The existence of a truly
national life and literature presupposes a certain degree of
unity, an integration of race, language, political institutions,
and social ideals. It is obvious that this problem of national
integration meets peculiar obstacles in the United States.
Divergencies of race, tradition, and social theory, and clashing
interests of different sections have been felt from the beginning
of the nation’s life. There was well-nigh complete solidarity in
the single province of New England during a portion of the
seventeenth century, and under the leadership of the great
Virginians there was sufficient national fusion to make the
Revolution successful. But early in the nineteenth century, the
opening of the new West, and the increasing economic importance
of Slavery as a peculiar institution of the South, provoked again
the ominous question of the possibility of an enduring Union.
>From 1820 until the end of the Civil War, it was the chief
political issue of the United States. The aim of the present
chapter is to show how the theme of Union and Liberty affected
our literature.
To appreciate the significance of this theme we must remind
ourselves again of what many persons have called the civic note
in our national writing. Franklin exemplified it in his day. It
is far removed from the pure literary art of a Poe, a Hawthorne,
a Henry James. It aims at action rather than beauty. It seeks to
persuade, to convince, to bring things to pass. We shall observe
it in the oratory of Clay and Webster, as they pleaded for
compromise; in the editorials of Garrison, a foe to compromise
and like Calhoun an advocate, if necessary, of disunion; in the
epochmaking novel of Harriet Beecher Stowe; in the speeches of
Wendell Phillips, in verse white-hot with political passion, and
sermons blazing with the fury of attack and defense of principles
dear to the human heart. We must glance, at least, at the lyrics
produced by the war itself, and finally, we shall observe how
Abraham Lincoln, the inheritor of the ideas of Jefferson, Clay,
and Webster, perceives and maintains, in the noblest tones of our
civic speech, the sole conditions of our continuance as a nation.
Let us begin with oratory, an American habit, and, as many
besides Dickens have thought, an American defect. We cannot argue
that question adequately here. It is sufficient to say that in
the pioneer stages of our existence oratory was necessary as a
stimulus to communal thought and feeling. The speeches of Patrick
Henry and Samuel Adams were as essential to our winning
independence as the sessions of statesmen and the armed conflicts
in the field. And in that new West which came so swiftly and
dramatically into existence at the close of the Revolution, the
orator came to be regarded as the normal type of intellectual
leadership. The stump grew more potent than schoolhouse and
church and bench.
The very pattern, and, if one likes, the tragic victim of this
glorification of oratory was Henry Clay, “Harry of the West,” the
glamour of whose name and the wonderful tones of whose voice
became for a while a part of the political system of the United
States. Union and Liberty were the master-passions of Clay’s
life, but the greater of these was Union. The half-educated young
immigrant from Virginia hazarded his career at the outset by
championing Anti-Slavery in the Kentucky Constitutional
Convention; the last notable act of his life was his successful
management, at the age of seventy-three, of the futile Compromise
of 1850. All his life long he fought for national issues; for the
War of 1812, for a protective tariff and an “American system,"
for the Missouri Compromise of 1820 as a measure for national
safety; and he had plead generously for the young South American
republics and for struggling Greece. He had become the perpetual
candidate of his party for the Presidency, and had gone down
again and again in unforeseen and heart-rending defeat. Yet he
could say honorably: “If any one desires to know the leading and
paramount object of my public life, the preservation of this
union will furnish him the key.” One could wish that the speeches
of this fascinating American were more readable today. They seem
thin, facile, full of phrases–such adroit phrases as would catch
the ear of a listening, applauding audience. Straight, hard
thinking was not the road to political preferment in Clay’s day.
Calhoun had that power, as Lincoln had it. Webster had the
capacity for it, although he was too indolent to employ his great
gifts steadily. Yet it was Webster who analyzed kindly and a
little sadly, for he was talking during Clay’s last illness and
just before his own, his old rival’s defect in literary quality:
“He was never a man of books . . . . I could never imagine him
sitting comfortably in his library and reading quietly out of the
great books of the past. He has been too fond of excitement–he
has lived upon it; he has been too fond of company, not enough
alone; and has had few resources within himself.” Were the
limitations of a typical oratorical temperament ever touched more
unerringly than in these words?
When Webster himself thundered, at the close of his reply to
Hayne in 1830, “Union AND Liberty, now and forever, one and
inseparable,” the words sank deeper into the consciousness of the
American people than any similar sentiment uttered by Henry Clay.
For Webster’s was the richer, fuller nature, nurtured by “the
great books of the past,” brooding, as Lincoln was to brood
later, over the seemingly insoluble problem of preserving a union
of States half slave, half free. On the fateful seventh of March,
1850, Webster, like Clay, cast the immense weight of his
personality and prestige upon the side of compromise. It was the
ruin of his political fortune, for the mood of the North was
changing, and the South preferred other candidates for the
Presidency. Yet the worst that can fairly be said against that
speech today is that it lacked moral imagination to visualize, as
Mrs. Stowe was soon to visualize, the human results of slavery.
As a plea for the transcendent necessity of maintaining the old
Union it was consistent with Webster’s whole development of
political thought.
What were the secrets of that power that held Webster’s hearers
literally spellbound, and made the North think of him, after that
alienation of 1850, as a fallen angel? No one can say fully, for
we touch here the mysteries of personality and of the spoken
word. But enough survives from the Webster legend, from his
correspondence and political and legal oratory, to bring us into
the presence of a superman. The dark Titan face, painted by such
masters as Carlyle, Hawthorne, and Emerson; the magical voice,
remembered now but by a few old men; the bodily presence, with
its leonine suggestion of sleepy power only half put forth–these
aided Webster to awe men or allure them into personal idolatry.
Yet outside of New England he was admired rather than loved.
There is still universal recognition of the mental capacity of
this foremost lawyer and foremost statesman of his time. He was
unsurpassed in his skill for direct, simple, limpid statement;
but he could rise at will to a high Roman stateliness of diction,
a splendid sonorousness of cadence. His greatest public
appearances were in the Dartmouth College Case before the Supreme
Court, the Plymouth, Bunker Hill, and Adams-Jefferson
commemorative orations, the Reply to Hayne, and the Seventh of
March speeches in the Senate. Though he exhibited in his private
life something of the prodigal recklessness of the pioneer, his
mental operations were conservative, constructive. His lifelong
antagonist Calhoun declared that “The United States are not a
nation.” Webster, in opposition to this theory of a confederation
of states, devoted his superb talents to the demonstration of the
thesis that the United States “IS,” not “are.” Thus he came to be
known as the typical expounder of the Constitution. When he
reached, in 1850, the turning point of his career, his countrymen
knew by heart his personal and political history, the New
Hampshire boyhood and education, the rise to mastery at the New
England bar, the service in the House of Representatives and the
Senate and as Secretary of State. His speeches were already in
the schoolbooks, and for twenty years boys had been declaiming
his arguments against nullification. He had helped to teach
America to think and to feel. Indeed it was through his oratory
that many of his fellow-citizens had gained their highest
conception of the beauty, the potency, and the dignity of human
speech. And in truth he never exhibited his logical power and
demonstrative skill more superbly than in the plea of the seventh
of March for the preservation of the status quo, for the
avoidance of mutual recrimination between North and South, for
obedience to the law of the land. It was his supreme effort to
reconcile an irreconcilable situation.
It failed, as we know. Whittier, Emerson, Theodore Parker, and
indeed most of the voters of New England, believed that Webster
had bartered his private convictions in the hope of securing the
Presidential nomination in 1852. They assailed him savagely, and
Webster died, a broken man, in the autumn of the Presidential
year. “I have given my life to law and politics,” he wrote to
Professor Silliman. “Law is uncertain and politics are utterly
vain.” The dispassionate judgment of the present hour frees him
from the charge of conscious treachery to principle. He was
rather a martyr to his own conception of the obligations imposed
by nationality. When these obligations run counter to human
realities, the theories of statesmen must give way. Emerson could
not refute that logic of Webster’s argument for the Fugitive
Slave Law, but he could at least record in his private Journal:
“I WILL NOT OBEY IT, BY GOD!” So said hundreds of thousands of
obscure men in the North, but Webster did not or could not hear
them.
While no other orator of that period was so richly endowed as
Daniel Webster, the struggle for Union and Liberty enlisted on
both sides many eloquent men. John C. Calhoun’s acute, ingenious,
masterly political theorizing can still be studied in speeches
that have lost little of their effectiveness through the lapse of
time. The years have dealt roughly with Edward Everett, once
thought to be the pattern of oratorical gifts and graces. In
commemorative oratory, indeed, he ranked with Webster, but the
dust is settling upon his learned and ornate pages. Rufus Choate,
another conservative Whig in politics, and a leader, like Wirt
and Pinkney, at the bar, had an exotic, almost Oriental fancy, a
gorgeousness of diction, and an intensity of emotion unrivaled
among his contemporaries. His Dartmouth College eulogy of Webster
in 1853 shows him at his best. The Anti-Slavery orators, on the
other hand, had the advantage of a specific moral issue in which
they led the attack. Wendell Phillips was the most polished, the
most consummate in his air of informality, and his example did
much to puncture the American tradition of high-flown oratory. He
was an expert in virulent denunciation, passionately unfair
beneath his mask of conversational decorum, an aristocratic
demagogue. He is still distrusted and hated by the Brahmin class
of his own city, still adored by the children and grandchildren
of slaves. Charles Sumner, like Edward Everett, seems sinking
into popular oblivion, in spite of the statues and portraits and
massive volumes of erudite and caustic and high-minded orations.
He may be seen at his best in such books as Longfellow’s “Journal
and Correspondence” and the “Life and Letters” of George Ticknor.
There one has a pleasant picture of a booklover, traveler, and
friend. But in his public speech he was arrogant, unsympathetic,
domineering. “Sumner is my idea of a bishop,” said Lincoln
tentatively. There are bishops and bishops, however, and if Henry
Ward Beecher, whom Lincoln and hosts of other Americans admired,
had only belonged to the Church of England, what an admirable
Victorian bishop he might have made! Perhaps his best service to
the cause of union was rendered by his speeches in England, where
he fairly mobbed the mob and won them by his wit, courage, and by
his appeal to the instinct of fair play. Beecher’s oratory, in
and out of the pulpit, was temperamental, sentimental in the
better sense, and admirably human in all its instincts. He had an
immense following, not only in political and humanitarian fields,
but as a lovable type of the everyday American who can say
undisputed things not only solemnly, if need be, but by
preference with an infectious smile. The people who loved Mr.
Beecher are the people who understand Mr. Bryan.
Foremost among the journalists of the great debate were William
Lloyd Garrison and Horace Greeley. Garrison was a perfect example
of the successful journalist as described by Zola–the man who
keeps on pounding at a single idea until he has driven it into
the head of the public. Everyone knows at least the sentence from
his salutatory editorial in “The Liberator” on January 1, 1831:
“I am in earnest–I will not retreat a single inch–AND I WILL BE
HEARD.” He kept this vow, and he also kept the accompanying and
highly characteristic promise: “I will be as harsh as truth and
as uncompromising as justice. On this subject, I do not wish to
think, or write, or speak, with moderation.” But there would be
little political literature in the world if its production were
entrusted to the moderate type of man, and the files of “The
Liberator,” though certainly harsh and full of all
uncharitableness towards slave-owners, make excellent reading for
the twentieth century American who perceives that in spite of the
triumph of emancipation, in which Garrison had his fair share of
glory, many aspects of our race-problem remain unsolved. Horace
Greeley, the founder and editor of the “New York Tribune” was a
farmer’s boy who learned early to speak and write the vocabulary
of the plain people. Always interested in new ideas, even in
Transcendentalism and Fourierism, his courage and energy and
journalistic vigor gave him leadership in the later phases of the
movement for enfranchisement. He did not hesitate to offer
unasked advice to Lincoln on many occasions, and Lincoln enriched
our literature by his replies. Greeley had his share of faults
and fatuities, but in his best days he had an impressively loyal
following among both rural and city-bred readers of his paper,
and he remains one of the best examples of that obsolescent
personal journalism which is destined to disappear under modern
conditions of newspaper production. Readers really used to care
for “what Greeley said” and “Dana said” and “Sam Bowles said,"
and all of these men, with scores of others, have left their
stamp upon the phrases and the tone of our political writing.
In the concrete issue of Slavery, however, it must be admitted
that the most remarkable literary victory was scored, not by any
orator or journalist, but by an almost unknown little woman, the
author of “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” No American novel has had so
curious a history and so great or so immediate an influence in
this country and in Europe. In spite of all that has been written
about it, its author’s purpose is still widely misunderstood,
particularly in the South, and the controversy over this one
epoch-making novel has tended to obscure the literary reputation
which Mrs. Stowe won by her other books.
Harriet Beecher, the daughter and the sister of famous clergymen,
was born in Litchfield, Connecticut, in 1811. For seventeen
years, from 1832 to 1849, she lived in the border city of
Cincinnati, within sight of slave territory, and in daily contact
with victims of the slave system. While her sympathies, like
those of her father Lyman Beecher, were anti-slavery, she was not
an Abolitionist in the Garrisonian sense of that word. At twenty
five she had married a widowed professor, Calvin Stowe, to whom
she bore many children. She had written a few sketches of New
England life, and her family thought her a woman of genius. Such
was the situation in the winter of 1849-1850, when the Stowes
migrated to Brunswick, Maine, where the husband had been
appointed to a chair at Bowdoin. Pitiably poor, and distracted by
household cares which she had to face single-handed–for the
Professor was a “feckless body"–Mrs. Stowe nevertheless could
not be indifferent to the national crisis over the Fugitive Slave
Law. She had seen its working. When her sister-in-law wrote to
her: “If I could use a pen as you can, I would write something
that would make this whole nation feel what an accursed thing
slavery is,” Mrs. Stowe exclaimed: “God helping me, I will write
something; I will if I live.”
“Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” begun in the spring of 1850, was a woman’s
answer to Webster’s seventh of March speech. Its object was
plainly stated to be “to awaken sympathy and feeling for the
African race; to show, their wrongs and sorrows, under a system
so necessarily cruel and unjust as to defeat and do away the good
effects of all that can be attempted for them, by their best
friends under it.” The book was permeated with what we now call
the 1848 anti-aristocratic sentiment, the direct heritage of the
French Revolution. “There is a dies irae coming on, sooner or
later,” admits St. Clare in the story. “The same thing is
working, in Europe, in England, and in this country.” There was
no sectional hostility in Mrs. Stowe’s heart. “The people of the
free states have defended, encouraged, and participated [in
slavery]; and are more guilty for it, before God, than the South,
in that they have NOT the apology of education or custom. If the
mothers of the free states had all felt as they should in times
past, the sons of the free states would not have been the
holders, and proverbially the hardest masters, of slaves; the
sons of the free states would not have connived at the extension
of slavery in our national body.” “Your book is going to be the
great pacificator,” wrote a friend of Mrs. Stowe; “it will unite
North and South.” But the distinctly Christian and fraternal
intention of the book was swiftly forgotten in the storm of
controversy that followed its appearance. It had been written
hastily, fervidly, in the intervals of domestic toil at
Brunswick, had been printed as a serial in “The National Era"
without attracting much attention, and was issued in book form in
March, 1852. Its sudden and amazing success was not confined to
this country. The story ran in three Paris newspapers at once,
was promptly dramatized, and has held the stage in France ever
since. It was placed upon the “Index” in Italy, as being
subversive of established authority. Millions of copies were sold
in Europe, and “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” more than any other cause,
held the English working men in sympathy with the North in the
English cotton crisis of our Civil War.
It is easy to see the faults of this masterpiece and impossible
not to recognize its excellencies. “If our art has not scope
enough to include a book of this kind,” said Madame George Sand,
“we had better stretch the terms of our art a little.” For the
book proved to be, as its author had hoped, a “living dramatic
reality.” Topsy, Chloe, Sam and Andy, Miss Ophelia and Legree are
alive. Mrs. St. Clare might have been one of Balzac’s indolent,
sensuous women. Uncle Tom himself is a bit too good to be true,
and readers no longer weep over the death of little Eva–nor, for
that matter, over the death of Dickens’s little Nell. There is
some melodrama, some religiosity, and there are some absurd
recognition scenes at the close. Nevertheless with an instinctive
genius which Zola would have envied, Mrs. Stowe embodies in men
and women the vast and ominous system of slavery. All the tragic
forces of necessity, blindness, sacrifice, and retribution are
here: neither Shelby, nor Eliza, nor the tall Kentuckian who aids
her, nor John Bird, nor Uncle Tom himself in the final act of his
drama, can help himself. For good or evil they are the products
and results of the system; and yet they have and they give the
illusion of volition.
Mrs. Stowe lived to write many another novel and short story,
among them “Dred,” “The Minister’s Wooing,” “Oldtown Folks,"
“Oldtown Fireside Stories.” In the local short story she deserves
the honors due to one of the pioneers, and her keen affectionate
observation, her humor, and her humanity, would have given her a
literary reputation quite independent of her masterpiece. But she
is likely to pay the penalty of that astounding success, and to
go down to posterity as the author of a single book. She would
not mind this fate.
The poetry of the idea of Freedom and of the sectional struggle
which was necessary before that idea could be realized in
national policy is on the whole not commensurate with the
significance of the issue itself. Any collection of American
political verse produced during this period exhibits spirited and
sincere writing, but the combination of mature literary art and
impressive general ideas is comparatively rare. There are single
poems of Whittier, Lowell, and Whitman which meet every test of
effective political and social verse, but the main body of
poetry, both sectional and national, written during the thirty
years ending with 1865 lacks breadth, power, imaginative daring.
The continental spaciousness and energy which foreign critics
thought they discovered in Whitman is not characteristic of our
poetry as a whole. Victor Hugo and Shelley and Swinburne have
written far more magnificent republican poetry than ours. The
passion for freedom has been very real upon this side of the
Atlantic; it pulsed in the local loyalty of the men who sang
“Dixie” as well as in their antagonists who chanted “John Brown’s
Body” and “The Battle Hymn of the Republic;” but this passion has
not yet lifted and ennobled any notable mass of American verse.
Even the sentiment of union was more adequately voiced in
editorials and sermons and orations, even in a short
story–Edward Everett Hale’s “Man Without a Country"–than by
most
of the poets who attempted to glorify that theme.
Nevertheless the verse of these thirty years is rich in
provincial and sectional loyalties. It has earnestness and
pathos. We have, indeed, no adequate national anthem, even yet,
for neither the words nor the music of “The Star-Spangled Banner"
fully express what we feel while we are trying to sing it, as the
“Marseillaise,” for example, does express the very spirit of
revolutionary republicanism. But in true pioneer fashion we get
along with a makeshift until something better turns up. The lyric
and narrative verse of the Civil War itself was great in
quantity, and not more inferior in quality than the war verse of
other nations has often proved to be when read after the
immediate occasion for it has passed. Single lyrics by Timrod and
Paul Hayne, Boker, H. H. Brownell, Read, Stedman, and other men
are still full of fire. Yet Mrs. Howe’s “Battle Hymn,” scribbled
hastily in the gray dawn, interpreted, as no other lyric of the
war quite succeeded in interpreting, the mystical glory of
sacrifice for Freedom. Soldiers sang it in camp; women read it
with tears; children repeated it in school, vaguely but truly
perceiving in it, as their fathers had perceived in Webster’s
“Reply to Hayne” thirty years before, the idea of union made
“simple, sensuous, passionate.” No American poem has had a more
dramatic and intense life in the quick breathing imagination of
men.
More and more, however, the instinct of our people is turning to
the words of Abraham Lincoln as the truest embodiment in
language, as his life was the truest embodiment in action, of our
national ideal. It is a curious reversal of contemporary
judgments that thus discovers in the homely phrases of a frontier
lawyer the most perfect literary expression of the deeper spirit
of his time. “How knoweth this man letters, having never
learned?” asked the critical East. The answer is that he had
learned in a better school than the East afforded. The story of
Lincoln’s life is happily too familiar to need retelling here,
but some of the elements in his growth in the mastery of speech
may at least be summarized.
Lincoln had a slow, tireless mind, capable of intense
concentration. It was characteristic of him that he rarely took
notes when trying a law case, saying that the notes distracted
his attention. When his partner Herndon was asked when Lincoln
had found time to study out the constitutional history of the
United States, Herndon expressed the opinion that it was when
Lincoln was lying on his back on the office sofa, apparently
watching the flies upon the ceiling. This combination of bodily
repose with intense mental and spiritual activity is familiar to
those who have studied the biography of some of the great
mystics. Walter Pater pointed it out in the case of Wordsworth.
In recalling the poverty and restriction of Lincoln’s boyhood and
his infrequent contact with schoolhouses, it is well to remember
that he managed nevertheless to read every book within twenty
miles of him. These were not many, it is true, but they included
“The Bible,” “Aesop’s Fables,” “Pilgrim’s Progress,” “Robinson
Crusoe,” and, a little later, Burns and Shakespeare. Better food
than this for the mind of a boy has never been found. Then he
came to the history of his own country since the Declaration of
Independence and mastered it. “I am tolerably well acquainted
with the history of the country,” he remarked in his Chicago
speech of 1858; and in the Cooper Union speech of 1860 he
exhibited a familiarity with the theory and history of the
Constitution which amazed the young lawyers who prepared an
annotated edition of the address. “He has wit, facts, dates,"
said Douglas, in extenuation of his own disinclination to enter
upon the famous joint debates, and, when Douglas returned to
Washington after the debates were over, he confessed to the young
Henry Watterson that “he is the greatest debater I have ever met,
either here or anywhere else.” Douglas had won the senatorship
and could afford to be generous, but he knew well enough that his
opponent’s facts and dates had been unanswerable. Lincoln’s
mental grip, indeed, was the grip of a born wrestler. “I’ve got
him,” he had exclaimed toward the end of the first debate, and
the Protean Little Giant, as Douglas was called, had turned and
twisted in vain, caught by “that long-armed creature from
Illinois.” He would indeed win the election of 1858, but he had
been forced into an interpretation of the Dred Scott decision
which cost him the Presidency in 1860.
Lincoln’s keen interest in words and definitions, his patience in
searching the dictionary, is known to every student of his life.
Part of his singular discrimination in the use of language is due
to his legal training, but his style was never professionalized.
Neither did it have anything of that frontier glibness and
banality which was the curse of popular oratory in the West and
South. Words were weapons in the hands of this self-taught
fighter for ideas: he kept their edges sharp, and could if
necessary use them with deadly accuracy. He framed the “Freeport
dilemma” for the unwary feet of Douglas as cunningly as a
fox-hunter lays his trap. “Gentlemen,” he had said of an earlier
effort, “Judge Douglas informed you that this speech of mine was
probably carefully prepared. I ADMIT THAT IT WAS.”
The story, too, was a weapon of attack and defense for this
master fabulist. Sometimes it was a readier mode of argument than
any syllogism; sometimes it gave him, like the traditional
diplomatist’s pinch of snuff, an excuse for pausing while he
studied his adversary or made up his own mind; sometimes, with
the instinct of a poetic soul, he invented a parable and gravely
gave it a historic setting “over in Sangamon County.” For
although upon his intellectual side the man was a subtle and
severe logician, on his emotional side he was a lover of the
concrete and human. He was always, like John Bunyan, dreaming and
seeing “a man” who symbolized something apposite to the occasion.
Thus even his invented stories aided his marvelous capacity for
statement, for specific illustration of a general law. Lincoln’s
destiny was to be that of an explainer, at first to a local
audience in store or tavern or courtroom, then to upturned
serious faces of Illinois farmers who wished to hear national
issues made clear to them, then to a listening nation in the
agony of civil war, and ultimately to a world which looks to
Lincoln as an exponent and interpreter of the essence of
democracy.
As the audience increased, the style took on beauty and breadth,
as if the man’s soul were looking through wider and wider windows
at the world. But it always remained the simplest of styles. In
an offhand reply to a serenade by an Indiana regiment, or in
answering a visiting deputation of clergymen at the White House,
Lincoln could summarize and clarify a complicated national
situation with an ease and orderliness and fascination that are
the despair of professional historians. He never wasted a word.
“Go to work is the only cure for your case,” he wrote to John D.
Johnston. There are ten words in that sentence and none of over
four letters. The “Gettysburg Address” contains but two hundred
and seventy words, in ten sentences. “It is a flat failure,” said
Lincoln despondently; but Edward Everett, who had delivered “the"
oration of that day, wrote to the President: “I should be glad if
I could flatter myself that I came as near to the central idea of
the occasion in two hours as you did in two minutes.” Today the
“Address” reads as if Lincoln knew that it would ultimately be
stamped in bronze.
Yet the real test of Lincoln’s supremacy in our distinctly civic
literature lies not so much in his skill in the manipulation of
language, consummate as that was, but rather in those large
elements of his nature which enabled him to perceive the true
quality and ideal of American citizenship and its significance to
the world. There was melancholy in that nature, else there had
been a less rich humor; there was mysticism and a sense of
religion which steadily deepened as his responsibilities
increased. There was friendliness, magnanimity, pity for the
sorrowful, patience for the slow of brain and heart, and an
expectation for the future of humanity which may best be
described in the old phrase “waiting for the Kingdom of God.” His
recurrent dream of the ship coming into port under full sail,
which preluded many important events in his own life–he had it
the night before he was assassinated–is significant not only of
that triumph of a free nation which he helped to make possible,
but also of the victory of what he loved to call “the whole
family of man.” “That is the real issue,” he had declared in
closing the debates with Douglas; “that is the issue that will
continue in this country when these poor tongues of Judge Douglas
and myself shall be silent. It is the eternal struggle between
these two principles–right and wrong–throughout the world. They
are the two principles that have stood face to face from the
beginning of time; and will ever continue to struggle. The one is
the common right of humanity, and the other the divine right of
kings.”
For this representative Anglo-Saxon man, developed under purely
American conditions, maturing slowly, keeping close to facts,
dying, like the old English saint, while he was “still learning,"
had none of the typical hardness and selfishness of the
Anglo-Saxon. A brooder and idealist, he was one of those
“prophetic souls of the wide world dreaming on things to come,"
with sympathies and imagination that reached out beyond the
immediate urgencies of his race and nation to comprehend the
universal task and discipline of the sons of men. In true
fraternity and democracy this Westerner was not only far in
advance of his own day, but he is also far in advance of ours
which raises statues to his memory. Yet he was used to loneliness
and to the long view, and even across the welter of the World War
of the twentieth century Lincoln would be tall enough to see that
ship coming into the harbor under full sail.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
