


The Fourth of July orator for 1826 in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
was Edward Everett. Although only thirty-two he was already a
distinguished speaker. In the course of his oration he
apostrophized John Adams and Thomas Jefferson as venerable
survivors of that momentous day, fifty years earlier, which had
witnessed our Declaration of Independence. But even as Everett
was speaking, the aged author of the Declaration breathed his
last at Monticello, and in the afternoon of that same day Adams
died also, murmuring, it is said, with his latest breath, and as
if with the whimsical obstinacy of an old man who hated to be
beaten by his ancient rival, “Thomas Jefferson still lives.” But
Jefferson was already gone.
On the first of August, Everett commemorated the career of the
two Revolutionary leaders, and on the following day a greater
than Everett, Daniel Webster, pronounced the famous eulogy in
Faneuil Hall. Never were the thoughts and emotions of a whole
country more adequately voiced than in this commemorative
oratory. Its pulse was high with national pride over the
accomplishments of half a century. “I ask,” Everett declared,
“whether more has not been done to extend the domain of
civilization, in fifty years, since the Declaration of
Independence, than would have been done in five centuries of
continued colonial subjection?” Webster asserted in his
peroration: “It cannot be denied, but by those who would dispute
against the sun, that with America, and in America, a new era
commences in human affairs. This era is distinguished by free
representative governments, by entire religious liberty, by
improved systems of national intercourse, by a newly awakened and
an unconquerable spirit of free enquiry, and by a diffusion of
knowledge through the community such as has been before
altogether unknown and unheard of.”
Was this merely the “tall talk” then so characteristic of
American oratory and soon to be satirized in “Martin Chuzzlewit”?
Or was it prompted by a deep and true instinct for the
significance of the vast changes that had come over American life
since 1776? The external changes were familiar enough to
Webster’s auditors: the opening of seemingly illimitable
territory through the Louisiana Purchase, the development of
roads, canals, and manufactures; a rapid increase in wealth and
population; a shifting of political power due to the rise of the
new West–in a word, the evidences of irrepressible national
energy. But this energy was inadequately expressed by the
national literature. The more cultivated Americans were quite
aware of this deficiency. It was confessed by the pessimistic
Fisher Ames and by the ardent young men who in 1815 founded “The
North American Review.” British critics in “The Edinburgh” and
“The Quarterly,” commenting upon recent works of travel in
America, pointed out the literary poverty of the American soil.
Sydney Smith, by no means the most offensive of these critics,
declared in 1820: “During the thirty or forty years of their
independence they have done absolutely nothing for the sciences,
for the arts, for literature . . . . In the four quarters of the
globe, who reads an American book? or goes to an American play?
or looks at an American picture or statue?”
Sydney Smith’s question “Who reads an American book?” has
outlived all of his own clever volumes. Even while he was asking
it, London was eagerly reading Irving’s “Sketch Book.” In 1821
came Fenimore Cooper’s Spy and Bryant’s “Poems,” and by 1826,
when Webster was announcing in his rolling orotund that Adams and
Jefferson were no more, the London and Paris booksellers were
covering their stalls with Cooper’s “The Last of the Mohicans."
Irving, Cooper, and Bryant are thus the pioneers in a new phase
of American literary activity, often called, for convenience in
labeling, the Knickerbocker Group because of the identification
of these men with New York. And close behind these leaders come a
younger company, destined likewise, in the shy boyish words of
Hawthorne, one of the number, “to write books that would be read
in England.” For by 1826 Hawthorne and Longfellow were out of
college and were trying to learn to write. Ticknor, Prescott, and
Bancroft, somewhat older men, were settling to their great tasks.
Emerson was entering upon his duties as a minister. Edgar Allan
Poe, at that University of Virginia which Jefferson had just
founded, was doubtless revising “Tamerlane and Other Poems” which
he was to publish in Boston in the following year. Holmes was a
Harvard undergraduate. Garrison had just printed Whittier’s first
published poem in the Newburyport “Free Press.” Walt Whitman was
a barefooted boy on Long Island, and Lowell, likewise seven years
of age, was watching the birds in the treetops of Elmwood. But it
was Washington Irving who showed all of these men that nineteenth
century England would be interested in American books.
The very word Knickerbocker is one evidence of the vitality of
Irving’s happy imaginings. In 1809 he had invented a mythical
Dutch historian of New York named Diedrich Knickerbocker and
fathered upon him a witty parody of Dr. Mitchill’s grave “Picture
of New York.” To read Irving’s chapters today is to witness one
of the rarest and most agreeable of phenomena, namely, the actual
beginning of a legend which the world is unwilling to let die.
The book made Sir Walter Scott’s sides ache with laughter, and
reminded him of the humor of Swift and Sterne. But certain New
Yorkers were slow to see the joke.
Irving was himself a New Yorker, born just at the close of the
Revolution, of a Scotch father and English mother. His youth was
pleasantly idle, with a little random education, much
theater-going, and plentiful rambles with a gun along the Hudson
River. In 1804 he went abroad for his health, returned and helped
to write the light social satire of the “Salmagundi Papers,” and
became, after the publication of the “Knickerbocker History,” a
local celebrity. Sailing for England in 1815 on business, he
stayed until 1832 as a roving man of letters in England and Spain
and then as Secretary of the American Legation in London. “The
Sketch Book,” “Bracebridge Hall,” and “Tales of a Traveler” are
the best known productions of Irving’s fruitful residence in
England. The “Life of Columbus,” the “Conquest of Granada,” and
“The Alhambra” represent his first sojourn in Spain. After his
return to America he became fascinated with the Great West, made
the travels described in his “Tour of the Prairies,” and told the
story of roving trappers and the fur trade in “Captain
Bonneville” and “Astoria.” For four years he returned to Spain as
American Minister. In his last tranquil years at Sunnyside on the
Hudson, where he died in 1859, he wrote graceful lives of
Goldsmith and of Washington.
Such a glance at the shelf containing Irving’s books suggests but
little of that personal quality to which he owes his significance
as an interpreter of America to the Old World. This son of a
narrow, hard, Scotch dealer in cutlery, this drifter about town
when New York was only a big slovenly village, this light-hearted
scribbler of satire and sentiment, was a gentleman born. His
boyhood and youth were passed in that period of
Post-Revolutionary reaction which exhibits the United States in
some of its most unlovely aspects. Historians like Henry Adams
and McMaster have painted in detail the low estate of education,
religion, and art as the new century began. The bitter feeling of
the nascent nation toward Great Britain was intensified by the
War of 1812. The Napoleonic Wars had threatened to break the last
threads of our friendship for France, and suspicion of the Holy
Alliance led to an era of national self-assertion of which the
Monroe Doctrine was only one expression. The raw Jacksonism of
the West seemed to be gaining upon the older civilizations
represented by Virginia and Massachusetts. The self-made type of
man began to pose as the genuine American. And at this moment
came forward a man of natural lucidity and serenity of mind, of
perfect poise and good temper, who knew both Europe and America
and felt that they ought to know one another better and to like
one another more. That was Irving’s service as an international
mediator. He diffused sweetness and light in an era marked by
bitterness and obscuration. It was a triumph of character as well
as of literary skill.
But the skill was very noticeable also. Irving’s prose is not
that of the Defoe-Swift-Franklin-Paine type of plain talk to the
crowd. It is rather an inheritance from that other eighteenth
century tradition, the conversation of the select circle. Its
accents were heard in Steele and Addison and were continued in
Goldsmith, Sterne, Cowper, and Charles Lamb. Among Irving’s
successors, George William Curtis and Charles Dudley Warner and
William Dean Howells have been masters of it likewise. It is
mellow human talk, delicate, regardful, capable of exquisite
modulation. With instinctive artistic taste, Irving used this old
and sound style upon fresh American material. In “Rip van Winkle"
and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” he portrayed his native valley
of the Hudson, and for a hundred years connoisseurs of style have
perceived the exquisite fitness of the language to the images and
ideas which Irving desired to convey. To render the Far West of
that epoch this style is perhaps not “big” and broad enough, but
when used as Irving uses it in describing Stratford and
Westminster Abbey and an Old English Christmas, it becomes again
a perfect medium. Hawthorne adopted it for “Our Old Home,” and
Englishmen recognized it at once as a part of their own
inheritance, enriched, like certain wines, by the voyage across
the Atlantic and home again. Irving wrote of England, Mr. Warner
once said, as Englishmen would have liked to write about it. When
he described the Alhambra and Granada and the Moors, it was the
style, rich both in physical sensation and in dreamlike reverie,
which revealed to the world the quick American appreciation of
foreign scenes and characters. Its key is sympathy.
Irving’s popularity has endured in England. It suffered during
the middle of the century in his own country, for the strongest
New England authors taught the public to demand more thought and
passion than were in Irving’s nature. Possibly the nervous,
journalistic style of the twentieth century allows too scanty
leisure of mind for the full enjoyment of the Knickerbocker
flavor. Yet such changes as these in literary fashion scarcely
affect the permanent service of Irving to our literature. He
immortalized a local type–the New York Dutchman–and local
legends, like that of Rip van Winkle; he used the framework of
the narrative essay to create something almost like the perfected
short story of Poe and Hawthorne; he wrote prose with unfailing
charm in an age when charm was lacking; and, if he had no
message, it should be remembered that some of the most useful
ambassadors have had none save to reveal, with delicacy and tact
and humorous kindness, the truth that foreign persons have
feelings precisely like our own.
Readers of Sir Walter Scott’s “Journal” may remember his account
of an evening party in Paris in 1826 where he met Fenimore
Cooper, then in the height of his European reputation. “So the
Scotch and American lions took the field together,” wrote Sir
Walter, who loved to be generous. “The Last of the Mohicans,"
then just published, threatened to eclipse the fame of “Ivanhoe."
Cooper, born in 1789, was eighteen years younger than the Wizard
of the North, and was more deeply indebted to him than he knew.
For it was Scott who had created the immense nineteenth century
audience for prose fiction, and who had evolved a kind of formula
for the novel, ready for Cooper’s use. Both men were natural
story-tellers. Scott had the richer mind and the more fully
developed historical imagination. Both were out-of-doors men,
lovers of manly adventure and of natural beauty. But the American
had the good fortune to be able to utilize in his books his
personal experiences of forest and sea and to reveal to Europe
the real romance of the American wilderness.
That Cooper was the first to perceive the artistic possibilities
of this romance, no one would claim. Brockden Brown, a Quaker
youth of Philadelphia, a disciple of the English Godwin, had
tried his hand at the very end of the eighteenth century upon
American variations of the Gothic romance then popular in
England. Brown had a keen eye for the values of the American
landscape and even of the American Indian. He had a knack for
passages of ghastly power, as his descriptions of maniacs,
murderers, sleep-walkers, and solitaries abundantly prove. But he
had read too much and lived too little to rival the masters of
the art of fiction. And there was a traveled Frenchman,
Chateaubriand, surely an expert in the art of eloquent prose, who
had transferred to the pages of his American Indian stories,
“Atala” and “Rene,” the mystery and enchantment of our dark
forests
and endless rivers. But Chateaubriand, like Brockden Brown, is
feverish. A taint of old-world eroticism and despair hovers like
a miasma over his magnificent panorama of the wilderness. Cooper,
like Scott, is masculine.
He was a Knickerbocker only by adoption. Born in New Jersey, his
childhood was spent in the then remote settlement of Cooperstown
in Central New York. He had a little schooling at Albany, and a
brief and inglorious career at Yale with the class of 1806. He
went to sea for two years, and then served for three years in the
United States Navy upon Lakes Ontario and Champlain, the very
scene of some of his best stories. In 1811 he married, resigned
from the Navy, and settled upon a little estate in Westchester
County, near New York. Until the age of thirty, he was not in the
least a bookman, but a healthy, man of action. Then, as the
well-known anecdote goes, he exclaims to his wife, after reading
a stupid English novel, “I believe I could write a better story
myself.” “Precaution” (1820) was the result, but whether it was
better than the unknown English book, no one can now say. It was
bad enough. Yet the next year Cooper published “The Spy,” one of
the finest of his novels, which was instantly welcomed in England
and translated in France. Then came, in swift succession, “The
Pioneers,” the first Leather-Stocking tale in order of
composition, and “The Pilot,” to show that Scott’s “Pirate” was
written by a landsman! “Lionel Lincoln” and “The Last of the
Mohicans” followed. The next seven years were spent in Europe,
mainly in France, where “The Prairie” and “The Red Rover” were
written. Cooper now looked back upon his countrymen with eyes of
critical detachment, and made ready to tell them some of their
faults. He came home to Cooperstown in 1833, the year after
Irving’s return to America. He had won, deservedly, a great fame,
which he proceeded to imperil by his combativeness with his
neighbors and his harsh strictures upon the national character,
due mainly to his lofty conception of the ideal America. He
continued to spin yarns of sea and shore, and to write naval
history. The tide of fashion set against him in the
eighteen-forties when Bulwer and Dickens rode into favor, but the
stouthearted old pioneer could afford to bide his time. He died
in 1851, just as Mrs. Stowe was writing “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.”
Two generations have passed since then, and Cooper’s place in our
literature remains secure. To have written our first historical
novel, “The Spy,” our first sea-story, “The Pilot,” and to have
created the Leather-Stocking series, is glory enough. In his
perception of masculine character, Cooper ranks with Fielding.
His sailors, his scouts and spies, his good and bad Indians, are
as veritable human figures as Squire Western. Long Tom Coffin,
Harvey Birch, Hawk-Eye, and Chingachgook are physically and
morally true to life itself. Read the Leather-Stocking books in
the order of the events described, beginning with “The
Deerslayer,” then “The Last of the Mohicans,” “The Pathfinder,"
“The Pioneers”, and ending with the vast darkening horizon of
“The Prairie” and the death of the trapper, and one will feel how
natural and inevitable are the fates of the personages and the
alterations in the life of the frontier. These books vary in
their poetic quality and in the degree of their realism, but to
watch the evolution of the leading figure is to see human life in
its actual texture.
Clever persons and pedantic persons have united to find fault
with certain elements of Cooper’s art. Mark Twain, in one of his
least inspired moments, selected Cooper’s novels for attack.
Every grammar school teacher is ready to point out that his style
is often prolix and his sentences are sometimes ungrammatical.
Amateurs even criticize Cooper’s seamanship, although it seemed
impeccable to Admiral Mahan. No doubt one must admit the
“helplessness, propriety, and incapacity” of most of Cooper’s
women, and the dreadfulness of his bores, particularly the
Scotchmen, the doctors, and the naturalists. Like Sir Walter,
Cooper seems to have taken but little pains in the deliberate
planning of his plots. Frequently he accepts a ready-made formula
of villain and hero, predicament and escape, renewed crisis and
rescue, mystification and explanation, worthy of a third-rate
novelist. His salvation lies in his genius for action, the beauty
and grandeur of his landscapes, the primitive veracity of his
children of nature. Cooper was an elemental man, and he
comprehended, by means of something deeper than mere artistic
instinct, the feelings of elemental humanity in the presence of
the wide ocean or of the deep woods. He is as healthy and sane as
Fielding, and he possesses an additional quality which all of the
purely English novelists lack. It was the result of his youthful
sojourn in the wilderness. Let us call it the survival in him of
an aboriginal imagination. Cooper reminds one somehow of a
moose–an ungraceful creature perhaps, but indubitably big, as
many a hunter has suddenly realized when he has come unexpectedly
upon a moose that whirled to face him in the twilight silence of
a northern wood.
Something of this far-off and gigantic primitivism inheres also
in the poetry of William Cullen Bryant. His portrait, with the
sweeping white beard and the dark folds of the cloak, suggests
the Bard as the Druids might have known him. But in the
eighteen-thirties and forties, Mr. Bryant’s alert, clean-shaven
face, and energetic gait as he strode down Broadway to the
“Evening Post” office, suggested little more than a vigorous and
somewhat radical editor of an increasingly prosperous Democratic
newspaper. There was nothing of the Fringed Gentian or Yellow
Violet about him. Like so many of the Knickerbockers, Bryant was
an immigrant to New York; in fact, none of her adopted men of
letters have represented so perfectly the inherited traits of the
New England Puritan. To understand his long, and honorable public
life it is necessary to know something of the city of his choice,
but to enter into the spirit of his poetry one must go back to
the hills of western Massachusetts.
Bryant had a right to his cold-weather mind. He came from
Mayflower stock. His father, Dr. Peter Bryant of Cummington, was
a sound country physician, with liberal preferences in theology,
Federalist views in politics, and a library of seven hundred
volumes, rich in poetry. The poet’s mother records his birth in
her diary in terse words which have the true Spartan tang: “Nov.
3, 1794. Stormy, wind N. E. Churned. Seven in the evening a son
born.” Two days later the November wind shifted. “Nov. 5, 1794.
Clear, wind N. W. Made Austin a coat. Sat up all day. Went into
the kitchen.” The baby, it appears, had an abnormally large head
and was dipped, day after day, in rude hydropathy, into an icy
spring. A precocious childhood was followed by a stern, somewhat
unhappy, but aspiring boyhood. The little fellow, lying prone
with his brothers before the firelight of the kitchen, reading
English poetry from his father’s library, used to pray that he
too might become a poet. At thirteen he produced a satire on
Jefferson, “The Embargo,” which his proud Federalist father
printed
at Boston in 1808. The youth had nearly one year at Williams
College, over the mountain ranges to the west. He wished to
continue his education at Yale, but his father had no money for
this greater venture, and the son remained at home. There, in the
autumn of 1811, on the bleak hills, he composed the first draft
of “Thanatopsis.” He was seventeen, and he had been reading
Blair’s “Grave” and the poems of the consumptive Henry Kirke
White.
He hid his verses in a drawer, and five years later his father
found them, shed tears over them, and sent them to the “North
American Review,” where they were published in September, 1817.
In the meantime the young man had studied law, though with
dislike of it, and with the confession that he sometimes read
“The Lyrical Ballads” when he might have been reading Blackstone.
One December afternoon in 1815, he was walking from Cummington to
Plainfield–aged twenty-one, and looking for a place in which to
settle as a lawyer. Across the vivid sunset flew a black duck, as
solitary and homeless as himself. The bird seemed an image of his
own soul, “lone wandering but not lost.” Before he slept that
night he had composed the poem “To a Waterfowl.” No more
authentic inspiration ever visited a poet, and though Bryant
wrote verse for more than sixty years after that crimson sky had
paled into chill December twilight, his lines never again
vibrated with such communicative passion.
Bryant’s ensuing career revealed the steady purpose, the
stoicism, the reticence of the Puritan. It was highly successful,
judged even by material standards. “Thanatopsis” had been
instantly regarded in 1817 as the finest poem yet produced in
America. The author was invited to contribute to the “North
American Review” an essay on American poetry, and this, like all
of Bryant’s prose work, was admirably written. He delivered his
Harvard Phi Beta Kappa poem, “The Ages,” in 1821, the year of
Emerson’s graduation. After a brief practice of the law in Great
Barrington, he entered in 1826 into the unpromising field of
journalism in New York. While other young Knickerbockers wasted
their literary strength on trifles and dissipated their moral
energies, Bryant held steadily to his daily task. His life in
town was sternly ascetic, but he allowed himself long walks in
the country, and he continued to meditate a somewhat thankless
Muse. In 1832 he visited his brothers on the Illinois prairies,
and stopped one day to chat with a “tall awkward uncouth lad” of
racy conversational powers, who was leading his company of
volunteers into the Black Hawk War. The two men were destined to
meet again in 1860, when Bryant presided at that Cooper Union
address of Lincoln’s which revealed to New York and to the
country that the former captain of volunteers was now a king of
men. Lincoln was embarrassed on that occasion, it is said, by
Bryant’s fastidious, dignified presence. Not so Nathaniel
Hawthorne, who had seen the poet in Rome, two years before.
“There was a weary look in his face,” wrote Hawthorne, “as if he
were tired of seeing things and doing things. . . .He uttered
neither passion nor poetry, but excellent good sense, and
accurate information, on whatever subject transpired; a very
pleasant man to associate with, but rather cold, I should
imagine, if one should seek to touch his heart with one’s own."
Such was the impression Bryant made upon less gifted men than
Hawthorne, as he lived out his long and useful life in the
Knickerbocker city. Toward the close of it he was in great demand
for public occasions; and it was after delivering a speech
dedicating a statue to Mazzini in Central Park in 1878, when
Bryant was eighty-four, that a fit of dizziness caused a fall
which proved fatal to the venerable poet. It was just seventy
years since Dr. Peter Bryant had published his boy’s verses on
“The Embargo.”
Although Bryant’s poetry has never roused any vociferous
excitement, it has enduring qualities. The spiritual
preoccupations of many a voiceless generation of New England
Puritans found a tongue at last in this late-born son of theirs.
The determining mood of his best poems, from boyhood to old age,
was precisely that thought of transiency, “the eternal flow of
things,” which colored the imaginations of the first colonists.
This is the central motive of “Thanatopsis,” “To a Waterfowl,"
“The Rivulet,” “A Forest Hymn,” “An Evening Revery,” “The Crowded
Street,” “The Flood of Years.” All of these tell the same story
of endless change and of endless abiding, of varying eddies in
the same mighty stream of human existence. Bryant faced the
thought as calmly, as majestically, at seventeen as when he wrote
“The Flood of Years” at eighty-two. He is a master of
description, though he has slight gift for narrative or drama,
and he rarely sounds the clear lyric note. But everywhere in his
verse there is that cold purity of the winter hills in Western
Massachusetts, something austere and elemental which reaches
kindred spirits below the surface on which intellect and passion
have their play, something more primitive, indeed, than human
intellect or passion and belonging to another mode of being,
something “rock-ribbed and ancient as the sun.”
A picture of the Knickerbocker era is not complete without its
portraits of the minor figures in the literary life of New York
up to the time of the Civil War. But the scope of the present
volume does not permit sketches of Paulding and Verplanck, of
Halleck and his friend Drake, of N. P. Willis and Morris and
Woodworth. Some of these are today only “single-poem” men, like
Payne, the author of “Home Sweet Home,” just as Key, the author
of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” is today a “single-poem” man of an
earlier generation. Their names will be found in such limbos of
the dead as Griswold’s “Poets and Poetry of America” and Poe’s
“Literati.” They knew “the town” in their day, and pleased its
very easily pleased taste. The short-lived literary magazines of
the eighteen-forties gave them their hour of glory. As
representatives of passing phases of the literary history of New
York their careers are not without sentimental interest, but few
of them spoke to or for the country as a whole. Two figures,
indeed, stand out in sharp contrast with those habitual strollers
on Broadway and frequenters of literary gatherings, though each
of them was for a while a part of Knickerbocker New York. To all
appearances they were only two more Bohemians like the rest, but
the curiosity of the twentieth century sets them apart from their
forgotten contemporaries. They are two of the unluckiest–and yet
luckiest–authors who ever tried to sell a manuscript along
Broadway. One of them is Edgar Allan Poe and the other is Walt
Whitman. They shall have a chapter to themselves.
But before turning to that chapter, we must look back to New
England once more and observe the blossoming-time of its ancient
commonwealths. During the thirty years preceding the Civil War
New England awoke to a new life of the spirit. So varied and rich
was her literary productiveness in this era that it still remains
her greatest period, and so completely did New England writers of
this epoch voice the ideals of the nation that the great majority
of Americans, even today, regard these New Englanders as the
truest literary exponents of the mind and soul of the United
States. We must take a look at them.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
