


When the eighteenth century opened, many signs of change were in
the air. The third generation of native-born Americans was
becoming secularized. The theocracy of New England had failed. In
the height of the tragic folly over the supposed “witchcraft” in
Salem, Increase Mather and his son Cotton had held up the hands
of the judges in their implacable work. But before five years had
passed, Judge Sewall does public penance in church for his share
of the awful blunder, desiring “to take the shame and blame of
it.” Robert Calef’s cool pamphlet exposing the weakness of the
prosecutors’ case is indeed burned by Increase Mather in the
Harvard Yard, but the liberal party are soon to force Mather from
the Presidency and to refuse that office to his son. In the town
of Boston, once hermetically sealed against heresy, there are
Baptist and Episcopal churches–and a dancing-master. Young
Benjamin Franklin, born in 1706, professes a high respect for the
Mathers, but he does not go to church, “Sunday being my studying
day,” and neither the clerical nor the secular arm of Boston is
long enough and strong enough to compel that industrious
apprentice into piety.
If such was the state of New England, the laxity of New York and
Virginia needs little evidence. Contemporary travelers found the
New Yorkers singularly attached to the things of this present
world. Philadelphia was prosperous and therewith content.
Virginia was a paradise with no forbidden fruit. Hugh Jones,
writing of it in 1724, considers North Carolina “the refuge of
runaways,” and South Carolina “the delight of buccaneers and
pirates,” but Virginia “the happy retreat of true Britons and
true Churchmen.” Unluckily these Virginians, well nourished “by
the plenty of the country,” have “contemptible notions of
England!” We shall hear from them again. In the meantime the
witty William Byrd of Westover describes for us his amusing
survey of the Dismal Swamp, and his excursions into North
Carolina and to Governor Spotswood’s iron mines, where he reads
aloud to the Widow Fleming, on a rainy autumn day, three acts of
the “Beggars’ Opera,” just over from London. So runs the world
away, south of the Potomac. Thackeray paints it once for all, no
doubt, in the opening chapters of “The Virginians.”
To discover any ambitious literary effort in this period, we must
turn northward again. In the middle colonies, and especially in
Philadelphia, which had now outgrown Boston in population, there
was a quickened interest in education and science. But the New
Englanders were still the chief makers of books. Three great
names will sufficiently represent the age: Cotton Mather, a
prodigy of learning whose eyes turn back fondly to the provincial
past; Jonathan Edwards, perhaps the most consummate intellect of
the eighteenth century; and Benjamin Franklin, certainly the most
perfect exponent of its many-sided life.
When Cotton Mather was graduated from Harvard in 1678, in his
sixteenth year, he was publicly complimented by President Oakes,
in fulsome Latin, as the grandson of Richard Mather and John
Cotton. This atmosphere of flattery, this consciousness of
continuing in his own person the famous local dynasty, surrounded
and sustained him to the end. He had a less commanding
personality than his father Increase. His nervous sensibility was
excessive. His natural vanity was never subdued, though it was
often chastened by trial and bitter disappointment. But, like his
father, he was an omnivorous reader and a facile producer of
books, carrying daily such burdens of mental and spiritual
excitement as would have crushed a normal man. Increase Mather
published some one hundred and fifty books and pamphlets: Cotton
Mather not less than four hundred. The Rev. John Norton, in his
sketch of John Cotton, remarks that “the hen, which brings not
forth without uncessant sitting night and day, is an apt emblem
of students.” Certainly the hen is an apt emblem of the
“uncessant” sitter, the credulous scratcher, the fussy cackler
who produced the “Magnalia.”
Yet he had certain elements of greatness. His tribal loyalty was
perfect. His ascetic devotion to his conception of religious
truth was absolute. His Diary, which has recently been published
in full, records his concern for the chief political events in
Europe in his day, no less than his brooding solicitude for the
welfare of his townspeople, and his agony of spirit over the
lapses of his wayward eldest son. A “sincere” man, then, as
Carlyle would say, at bottom; but overlaid with such “Jewish old
clothes,” such professional robings and personal plumage as makes
it difficult, save in the revealing “Diary,” to see the man
himself.
The “Magnalia Christi Americana,” treating the history of New
England from 1620 to 1698, was published in a tall London folio
of nearly 800 pages in 1702. It is divided into seven books, and
proceeds, by methods entirely unique, to tell of Pilgrim and
Puritan divines and governors, of Harvard College, of the
churches of New England, of marvelous events, of Indian wars; and
in general to justify, as only a member of the Mather dynasty
could justify, the ways of God to Boston men. Hawthorne and
Whittier, Longfellow and Lowell knew this book well and found
much honey in the vast carcass. To have had four such readers and
a biographer like Barrett Wendell must be gratifying to Cotton
Mather in Paradise.
The “Diary” of Mather’s fellow-townsman Judge Samuel Sewall has
been read more generally in recent years than anything written by
Mather himself. It was begun in 1673, nine years earlier than the
first entry in Mather’s “Diary,” and it ends in 1729, while
Mather’s closes in 1724. As a picture of everyday happenings in
New England, Sewall’s “Diary” is as far superior to Mather’s as
Pepys’s “Diary” is to George Fox’s “Journal” in painting the
England of the Restoration. Samuel Sewall was an admirably solid
figure, keen, forceful, honest. Most readers of his “Diary"
believe that he really was in luck when he was rejected by the
Widow Winthrop on that fateful November day when his eye
noted–in spite of his infatuation–that “her dress was not so
clean as sometime it had been. Jehovah Jireh!”
One pictures Cotton Mather as looking instinctively backward to
the Heroic Age of New England with pious nervous exaltation, and
Samuel Sewall as doing the day’s work uprightly without taking
anxious thought of either past or future. But Jonathan Edwards is
set apart from these and other men. He is a lonely seeker after
spiritual perfection, in quest of that city “far on the world’s
rim,” as Masefield says of it, the city whose builder and maker
is God.
The story of Edwards’s career has the simplicity and dignity of
tragedy. Born in a parsonage in the quiet Connecticut valley in
1703–the year of John Wesley’s birth–he is writing at the age
of ten to disprove the doctrine of the materiality of the soul.
At twelve he is studying “the wondrous way of the working of the
spider,” with a precision and enthusiasm which would have made
him a great naturalist. At fourteen he begins his notes on “The
Mind” and on “Natural Science.” He is graduated from Yale in
1720, studies theology, and at twenty-four becomes the colleague
of his famous grandfather, Solomon Stoddard, in the church at
Northampton. He marries the beautiful Sarah Pierrepont, whom he
describes in his journal in a prose rhapsody which, like his
mystical rhapsodies on religion in the same youthful period,
glows with a clear unearthly beauty unmatched in any English
prose of that century. For twenty-three years he serves the
Northampton church, and his sermons win him the rank of the
foremost preacher in New England. John Wesley reads at Oxford his
account of the great revival of 1735. Whitefield comes to visit
him at Northampton. Then, in 1750, the ascetic preacher alienates
his church over issues pertaining to discipline and to the
administration of the sacrament. He is dismissed. He preaches his
“farewell sermon,” like Wesley, like Emerson, like Newman, and
many another still unborn. He removes to Stockbridge, then a
hamlet in the wilderness, preaches to the Indians, and writes
treatises on theology and metaphysics, among them the world
famous “Freedom of the Will.” In 1757, upon the death of his
son-in-law, President Aaron Burr of Princeton, Edwards is called
to the vacant Presidency. He is reluctant to go, for though he is
only fifty-four, his health has never been robust, and he has his
great book on the “History of Redemption” still to write. But he
accepts, finds the smallpox raging in Princeton upon his arrival
in January, 1758, is inoculated, and dies of the disease in
March–his dreams unfulfilled, his life-work once more thwarted.
Close by the tomb of this saint is the tomb of his grandson,
Aaron Burr, who killed Hamilton.
The literary reputation of Jonathan Edwards has turned, like the
vicissitudes of his life, upon factors that could not be
foreseen. His contemporary fame was chiefly as a preacher, and
was due to sermons like those upon “God Glorified in Man’s
Dependence” and “The Reality of Spiritual Life,” rather than to
such discourses as the Enfield sermon, “Sinners in the Hands of
an Angry God,” which in our own day is the best known of his
deliverances. Legends have grown up around this terrific Enfield
sermon. Its fearful power over its immediate hearers cannot be
gainsaid, and it will long continue to be quoted as an example of
the length to which a Calvinistic logician of genius was
compelled by his own scheme to go. We still see the tall,
sweet-faced man, worn by his daily twelve hours of intense mental
toil, leaning on one elbow in the pulpit and reading from
manuscript, without even raising his gentle voice, those words
which smote his congregation into spasms of terror and which seem
to us sheer blasphemy.
Yet the “Farewell Sermon of 1750” gives a more characteristic
view of Edwards’s mind and heart, and conveys an ineffaceable
impression of his nobility of soul. His diction, like
Wordsworth’s, is usually plain almost to bareness; the formal
framework of his discourses is obtruded; and he hunts objections
to their last hiding place with wearisome pertinacity. Yet his
logic is incandescent. Steel sometimes burns to the touch like
this, in the bitter winters of New England, and one wonders
whether Edwards’s brain was not of ice, so pitiless does it seem.
His treatise denying the freedom of the will has given him a
European reputation comparable with that enjoyed by Franklin in
science and Jefferson in political propaganda. It was really a
polemic demonstrating the sovereignty of God, rather than pure
theology or metaphysics. Edwards goes beyond Augustine and Calvin
in asserting the arbitrary will of the Most High and in “denying
to the human will any self-determining power.” He has been
refuted by events and tendencies, such as the growth of
historical criticism and the widespread acceptance of the
doctrine of evolution, rather than by the might of any single
antagonist. So, too, the Dred Scott decision of Chief Justice
Taney, holding that the slave was not a citizen, was not so much
answered by opponents as it was superseded by the arbitrament of
war. But the idealism of this lonely thinker has entered deeply
and permanently into the spiritual life of his countrymen, and he
will continue to be read by a few of those who still read Plato
and Dante.
“My mother grieves,” wrote Benjamin Franklin to his father in
1738, “that one of her sons is an Arian, another an Arminian.
What an Arminian or an Arian is, I cannot say that I very well
know. The truth is I make such distinctions very little my
study.” To understand Franklin’s indifference to such
distinctions, we must realize how completely he represents the
secularizing tendencies of his age. What a drama of worldly
adventure it all was, this roving life of the tallow-chandler’s
son, who runs away from home, walks the streets of Philadelphia
with the famous loaves of bread under his arm, is diligent in
business, slips over to London, where he gives lessons in
swimming and in total abstinence, slips back to Philadelphia and
becomes its leading citizen, fights the long battle of the
American colonies in London, sits in the Continental Congress,
sails to Europe to arrange that French Alliance which brought our
Revolution to a successful issue, and comes home at last, full of
years and honors, to a bland and philosophical exit from the
stage!
He broke with every Puritan tradition. The Franklins were
relatively late comers to New England. They sprang from a long
line of blacksmiths at Ecton in Northamptonshire. The seat of the
Washingtons was not far away, and Franklin’s latest biographer
points out that the pink-coated huntsmen of the Washington gentry
may often have stopped at Ecton to have their horses shod at the
Franklin smithy. Benjamin’s father came out in 1685, more than
fifty years after the most notable Puritan emigration. Young
Benjamin, born in 1706, was as untouched by the ardors of that
elder generation as he would have been by the visions of
Dante–an author, by the way, whom he never mentions, even as he
never mentions Shakespeare. He had no reverence for Puritan New
England. To its moral beauty, its fine severity, he was wholly
blind. As a boy he thriftily sold his Pilgrim’s “Progress.” He
became, in the new fashion of that day, a Deist. Like a true
child of the eighteenth century, his attitude toward the
seventeenth was that of amused or contemptuous superiority.
Thackeray has somewhere a charming phrase about his own love for
the back seat of the stage-coach, the seat which, in the old
coaching days, gave one a view of the receding landscape.
Thackeray, like Burke before him, loved historical associations,
historical sentiment, the backward look over the long road which
humanity has traveled. But Franklin faced the other way. He would
have endorsed his friend Jefferson’s scornful sentence, “The dead
have no rights.” He joined himself wholly to that eighteenth
century in which his own lot was cast, and, alike in his
qualities and in his defects, he became one of its most perfect
representatives.
To catch the full spirit of that age, turn for an instant to the
London of 1724–the year of Franklin’s arrival. Thirty-six years
have elapsed since the glorious Revolution of 1688; the Whig
principles, then triumphant, have been tacitly accepted by both
political parties; the Jacobite revolt of 1715 has proved a
fiasco; the country has accepted the House of Hanover and a
government by party leadership of the House of Commons, and it
does not care whether Sir Robert Walpole buys a few rotten
boroughs, so long as he maintains peace with Europe and
prosperity at home. England is weary of seventeenth century
“enthusiasm,” weary of conflict, sick of idealism. She has found
in the accepted Whig principles a satisfactory compromise, a
working theory of society, a modus vivendi which nobody supposes
is perfect but which will answer the prayer appointed to be read
in all the churches, “Grant us peace in our time, O Lord.” The
theories to which men gave their lives in the seventeenth century
seem ghostly in their unreality; but the prize turnips on Sir
Robert’s Norfolk farm, and the wines in his cellar, and the
offices at his disposal–these are very real indeed. London
merchants are making money; the squire and the parson are
tranquilly ruling the country parishes; the philosophy of John
Locke is everywhere triumphant. Mr. Pope is the poet of the hour,
and his “Essay on Man,” counseling acceptance of our mortal
situation, is considered to be the last word of human wisdom and
of poetical elegance. In prose, the style of the “Spectator"
rules–an admirable style, Franklin thought, and he imitated it
patiently until its ease and urbanity had become his own. And
indeed, how much of that London of the third decade of the
century passed into the mind of the inquisitive, roving,
loose-living printer’s apprentice from Philadelphia! It taught
him that the tangible world is the real world, and that nothing
succeeds like success; but it never even whispered to him that
sometimes nothing damns like success.
In his limitations, no less than in his power of assimilation,
Franklin was the representative man of his era. He had no
artistic interests, no liking for metaphysics after his brief
devotion, in early manhood, to the dialogues of Plato. He taught
himself some Latin, but he came to believe that the classics had
little significance and that they should be superseded by the
modern languages. For the mediaeval world he had no patience or
understanding. To these defects of his century we must add some
failings of his own. He was not always truthful. He had an
indelible streak of coarseness. His conception of the “art of
virtue” was mechanical. When Carlyle called Franklin the “father
of all the Yankees,” we must remember that the Scotch prophet
hated Yankees and believed that Franklin’s smooth, plausible,
trader type of morality was only a broad way to the everlasting
bonfire.
But it is folly to linger over the limitations of the tallow-
chandler’s son. The catalogue of his beneficent activity is a
vast one. Balzac once characterized him as the man who invented
the lightning-rod, the hoax, and the republic. His contributions
to science have to do with electricity, earthquakes, geology,
meteorology, physics, chemistry, astronomy, mathematics,
navigation of air and water, agriculture, medicine, and hygiene.
In some of these fields he did pioneer work of lasting
significance. His teachings of thrift and prudence, as formulated
in the maxims of Poor Richard, gave him a world-wide reputation.
He attacked war, like Voltaire, not so much for its wickedness as
for its folly, and cheerfully gave up many years of a long life
to the effort to promote a better understanding among the nations
of the world.
It is perhaps needless to add what all persons who love good
writing know, that Benjamin Franklin was a most delightful
writer. His letters cover an amusing and extraordinary variety of
topics. He ranges from balloons to summer hats, and from the
advantages of deep ploughing to bifocal glasses, which, by the
way, he invented. He argues for sharp razors and cold baths, and
for fresh air in the sleeping-room. He discusses the morals of
the game of chess, the art of swimming, the evils of smoky
chimneys, the need of reformed spelling. Indeed, his passion for
improvement led him not only to try his hand upon an abridgment
of the Book of Common Prayer, but to go even so far as to propose
seriously a new rendering of the Lord’s Prayer. His famous
proposal for a new version of the Bible, however, which Matthew
Arnold solemnly held up to reprobation, was only a joke which
Matthew Arnold did not see-the new version of Job being, in fact,
a clever bit of political satire against party leadership in
England. Even more brilliant examples of his skill in political
satire are his imaginary “Edict of the King of Prussia against
England,” and his famous “Rules for Reducing a Great Empire to a
Small One."But I must not try to call the roll of all the good
things in Franklin’s ten volumes. I will simply say that those
who know Franklin only in his “Autobiography,” charming as that
classic production is, have made but an imperfect acquaintance
with the range, the vitality, the vigor of this admirable
craftsman who chose a style “smooth, clear, and short,” and made
it serve every purpose of his versatile and beneficent mind.
When the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765 startled the American
colonies out of their provincial sense of security and made them
aware of their real attitude toward the mother country, Franklin
was in London. Eleven years earlier, in 1754, he had offered a
plan for the “Union of the Colonies,” but this had not
contemplated separation from England. It was rather what we
should call a scheme for imperial federation under the British
Crown. We may use his word union, however, in a different field
from that of politics. How much union of sentiment, of mental and
moral life, of literary, educational, and scientific endeavor,
was there in the colonies when the hour of self-examination came?
Only the briefest summary may be attempted here. As to race,
these men of the third and fourth generation since the planting
of the colonies were by no means so purely English as the first
settlers. The 1,600,000 colonists in 1760 were mingled of many
stocks, the largest non-English elements being German and
Scotch-Irish–that is, Scotch who had settled for a while in
Ulster before emigrating to America. “About one-third of the
colonists in 1760,” says Professor Channing, “were born outside
of America.” Crevecoeur’s “Letters from an American Farmer” thus
defined the Americans: “They are a mixture of English, Scotch,
Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes. From this promiscuous
breed that race now called Americans has arisen.” The Atlantic
seaboard, with a narrow strip inland, was fairly well covered by
local communities, differing in blood, in religion, in political
organization–a congeries of separate experiments or young
utopias, waiting for that most utopian experiment of all, a
federal union. But the dominant language of the “promiscuous
breed” was English, and in the few real centers of intellectual
life the English tradition was almost absolute.
The merest glance at colonial journalism will confirm this
estimate. The “Boston News-Letter,” begun in 1704, was the first
of the journals, if we omit the single issue of “Publick
Occurrences” in the same town in 1690. By 1765 there were nearly
fifty colonial newspapers and several magazines. Their influence
made for union, in Franklin’s sense of that word, and their
literary models, like their paper, type, and even ink, were found
in London. The “New England Courant,” established in Boston in
1721 by James Franklin, is full of imitations of the “Tatler,"
“Spectator,” and “Guardian.” What is more, the “Courant” boasted
of its office collection of books, including Shakespeare, Milton,
the “Spectator,” and Swift’s “Tale of a Tub."* This was in 1722.
If we remember that no allusion to Shakespeare has been
discovered in the colonial literature of the seventeenth century,
and scarcely an allusion to the Puritan poet Milton, and that the
Harvard College Library in 1723 had nothing of Addison, Steele,
Bolingbroke, Dryden, Pope, and Swift, and had only recently
obtained copies of Milton and Shakespeare, we can appreciate the
value of James Franklin’s apprenticeship in London. Perhaps we
can even forgive him for that attack upon the Mathers which threw
the conduct of the “Courant,” for a brief period, into the hands
of his brother Benjamin, whose turn at a London apprenticeship
was soon to come.
* Cook, E. C. “Literary Influences in Colonial Newspapers,
1704-1750.” N. Y., 1912.
If we follow this younger brother to Philadelphia and to
Bradford’s “American Mercury” or to Franklin’s own “Pennsylvania
Gazette,” or if we study the “Gazettes” of Maryland, Virginia,
and South Carolina, the impression is still the same. The
literary news is still chiefly from London, from two months to a
year late. London books are imported and reprinted. Franklin
reprints Pamela, and his Library Company of Philadelphia has two
copies of “Paradise Lost “for circulation in 1741, whereas there
had been no copy of that work in the great library of Cotton
Mather. American journalism then, as now, owed its vitality to a
secular spirit of curiosity about the actual world. It followed
England as its model, but it was beginning to develop a temper of
its own.
Colonial education and colonial science were likewise chiefly
indebted to London, but by 1751 Franklin’s papers on electricity
began to repay the loan. A university club in New York in 1745
could have had but fifteen members at most, for these were all
the “academics” in town. Yet Harvard had then been sending forth
her graduates for more than a century. William and Mary was
founded in 1693, Yale in 1701, Princeton in 1746, King’s (now
Columbia) in 1754, the University of Pennsylvania in 1755, and
Brown in 1764. These colonial colleges were mainly in the hands
of clergymen. They tended to reproduce a type of scholarship
based upon the ancient languages. The curriculum varied but
little in the different colonies, and this fact helped to produce
a feeling of fellowship among all members of the republic of
letters. The men who debated the Stamp Act were, with a few
striking exceptions, men trained in Latin and Greek, familiar
with the great outlines of human history, accustomed to the
discipline of academic disputation. They knew the ideas and the
vocabulary of cultivated Europe and were conscious of no
provincial inferiority. In the study of the physical sciences,
likewise, the colonials were but little behind the mother
country. The Royal Society had its distinguished members here.
The Mathers, the Dudleys, John Winthrop of Connecticut, John
Bartram, James Logan, James Godfrey, Cadwallader Colden, and
above all, Franklin himself, were winning the respect of European
students, and were teaching Americans to use their eyes and their
minds not merely upon the records of the past but in searching
out the inexhaustible meanings of the present. There is no more
fascinating story than that of the beginnings of American science
in and outside of the colleges, and this movement, like the
influence of journalism and of the higher education, counted for
colonial union.
Professor Tyler, our foremost literary student of the period,
summarizes the characteristics of colonial literature in these
words: “Before the year 1765, we find in this country, not one
American people, but many American peoples . . . . No cohesive
principle prevailed, no centralizing life; each little nation was
working out its own destiny in its own fashion.” But he adds that
with that year the colonial isolation came to an end, and that
the student must thereafter “deal with the literature of one
multitudinous people, variegated, indeed, in personal traits, but
single in its commanding ideas and in its national destinies.” It
is easy to be wise after the event. Yet there was living in
London in 1765, as the agent for Pennsylvania, a shrewd and bland
Colonial–an honorary M. A. from both Harvard and Yale, a D.C.L.
of Oxford and an LL.D. of St. Andrews who was by no means sure
that the Stamp Act meant the end of Colonialism. And Franklin’s
uncertainty was shared by Washington. When the tall Virginian
took command of the Continental Army as late as 1775, he
“abhorred the idea of independence.” Nevertheless John Jay,
writing the second number of the “Federalist” in 1787, only
twelve years later, could say: “Providence has been pleased to
give this one connected country to one united people; a people
descended from the same ancestors, speaking the same language,
professing the same religion, attached to the same principles of
government.”
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
