


To understand the literary leadership of New England during the
thirty years immediately preceding the Civil War it is necessary
to recall the characteristics of a somewhat isolated and peculiar
people. The mental and moral traits of the New England colonists,
already glanced at in an earlier chapter, had suffered little
essential modification in two hundred years. The original racial
stock was still dominant. As compared with the middle and
southern colonies, there was relatively little immigration, and
this was easily assimilated. The physical remoteness of New
England from other sections of the country, and the stubborn
loyalty with which its inhabitants maintained their own standards
of life, alike contributed to their sense of separateness. It is
true, of course, that their mode of thinking and feeling had
undergone certain changes. They were among the earliest theorists
of political independence from Great Britain, and had done their
share, and more, in the Revolution. The rigors of their early
creed had somewhat relaxed, as we have seen, by the end of the
seventeenth century, and throughout the eighteenth there was a
gradual progress toward religious liberalism. The population
steadily increased, and New England’s unremitting struggle with a
not too friendly soil, her hardihood upon the seas, and her
keenness in trade, became proverbial throughout the country. Her
seaport towns were wealthy. The general standards of living
remained frugal, but extreme poverty was rare. Her people still
made, as in the earliest days of the colonies, silent and
unquestioned sacrifices for education, and her chief seats of
learning, Harvard and Yale, remained the foremost educational
centers of America. But there was still scant leisure for the
quest of beauty, and slender material reward for any practitioner
of the fine arts. Oratory alone, among the arts of expression,
commanded popular interest and applause. Daniel Webster’s
audiences at Plymouth in 1820 and at Bunker Hill in 1825 were not
inferior to similar audiences of today in intelligence and in
responsiveness. Perhaps they were superior. Appreciation of the
spoken word was natural to men trained by generations of
thoughtful listening to “painful” preaching and by participation
in the discussions of town-meeting. Yet appreciation of secular
literature was rare, and interest in the other arts was almost
non-existent.
Then, beginning in the eighteen-twenties, and developing rapidly
after 1830, came a change, a change so startling as to warrant
the term of “the Renascence of New England.” No single cause is
sufficient to account for this “new birth.” It is a good
illustration of that law of “tension and release,” which the late
Professor Shaler liked to demonstrate in all organic life. A long
period of strain was followed by an age of expansion, freedom,
release of energy. As far as the mental life of New England was
concerned, something of the new stimulus was due directly to the
influence of Europe. Just as the wandering scholars from Italy
had brought the New Learning, which was a revival of the old
learning, into England in the sixteenth century, so now young New
England college men like Edward Everett and George Ticknor
brought home from the Continent the riches of German and French
scholarship. Emerson’s description of the impression made by
Everett’s lectures in 1820, after his return from Germany, gives
a vivid picture of the new thirst for foreign culture. “The North
American Review” and other periodicals, while persistently urging
the need of a distinctively national literature, insisted also
upon the value of a deeper knowledge of the literature of the
Continent. This was the burden of Channing’s once famous article
on “A National Literature” in 1823: it was a plea for an
independent American school of writers, but these writers should
know the best that Europe had to teach.
The purely literary movement was connected, as the great name of
Channing suggests, with a new sense of freedom in philosophy and
religion. Calvinism had mainly done its work in New England. It
had bred an extraordinary type of men and women, it had, helped
to lay some of the permanent foundations of our democracy, and it
was still destined to have a long life in the new West and in the
South. But in that stern section of the country where its
influence had been most marked there was now an increasingly
sharp reaction against its determinism and its pessimism. Early
in the nineteenth century the most ancient and influential
churches in Boston and the leading professors at Harvard had
accepted the new form of religious liberalism known as
Unitarianism. The movement spread throughout Eastern
Massachusetts and made its way to other States. Orthodox and
liberal Congregational churches split apart, and when Channing
preached the ordination sermon for Jared Sparks in Baltimore in
1819, the word Unitarian, accepted by the liberals with some
misgiving, became the recognized motto of the new creed. It is
only with its literary influence that we are here concerned, yet
that literary influence became so potent that there is scarcely a
New England writer of the first rank, from Bryant onward, who
remained untouched by it.
The most interesting and peculiar phase of the new liberalism has
little directly to do with the specific tenets of theological
Unitarianism, and in fact marked a revolt against the more
prosaic and conventional pattern of English and American
Unitarian thought. But this movement, known as Transcendentalism,
would have been impossible without a preliminary and liberalizing
stirring of the soil. It was a fascinating moment of release for
some of the most brilliant and radical minds of New England. Its
foremost representative in our literature was Ralph Waldo
Emerson, as its chief exponents in England were Coleridge and
Carlyle. We must understand its meaning if we would perceive the
quality of much of the most noble and beautiful writing produced
in New England during the Golden Age.
What then is the significance of the word Transcendental?
Disregarding for the moment the technical development of this
term as used by German and English philosophers, it meant for
Emerson and his friends simply this: whatever transcends or goes
beyond the experience of the senses. It stressed intuition rather
than sensation, direct perception of ultimate truth rather than
the processes of logic. It believed in man’s ability to apprehend
the absolute ideas of Truth, Rectitude, Goodness. It resembled
the Inner Light of the Quaker, though the Quaker traced this to a
supernatural illumination of the Holy Spirit, while the
Transcendentalist believed that a vision of the eternal realities
was a natural endowment of the human mind. It had only to be
trusted. Stated in this form, it is evident that we have here a
very ancient doctrine, well known in the literature of India and
of Greece. It has been held by countless persons who have never
heard of the word Transcendentalism. We need go no further back
than Alexander Pope, a Roman Catholic, whom we find declaring: “I
am so certain of the soul’s being immortal that I seem to feel it
within me, as it were by intuition.” Pope’s friend Swift, a dean
of the Church of England and assuredly no Transcendentalist,
defined vision as seeing the things that are invisible.
Now turn to some of the New England men. Dr. C. A. Bartol, a
disciple of Emerson, maintained that “the mistake is to make the
everlasting things subjects of argument instead of sight."
Theodore Parker declared to his congregation:
“From the primitive facts of consciousness given by the power of
instinctive intuition, I endeavored to deduce the true notion of
God, of justice and futurity . . . . I found most help in the
works of Immanuel Kant, one of the profoundest thinkers of the
world, though one of the worst writers, even in Germany; if he
did not always furnish conclusions I could rest in, he yet gave
me the true method, and put me on the right road. I found certain
great primal Intuitions of Human Nature, which depend on no
logical process of demonstration, but are rather facts of
consciousness given by the instinctive action of human nature
itself. I will mention only the three most important which
pertain to Religion. 1. The Instinctive Intuition of the Divine,
the consciousness that there is a God. 2. The Instinctive
Intuition of the Just and Right, a consciousness that there is a
Moral Law, independent of our will, which we ought to keep. 3.
The Instinctive Intuition of the Immortal, a consciousness that
the Essential Element of man, the principle of Individuality,
never dies.”
This passage dates from 1859, and readers of Bergson may like to
compare it with the contemporary Frenchman’s saying: “The
analytical faculties can give us no realities.”
Let us next hear Emerson himself, first in an early letter to his
brother Edward: “Do you draw the distinction of Milton,
Coleridge, and the Germans between Reason and Understanding? I
think it a philosophy itself, and, like all truth, very
practical. Reason is the highest faculty of the soul, what we
mean often by the soul itself: it never reasons, never proves, it
simply perceives, it is vision. The understanding toils all the
time, compares, contrives, adds, argues; near-sighted, but
strong-sighted, dwelling in the present, the expedient, the
customary.” And in 1833, after he had left the Unitarian pulpit,
Emerson made in his diary this curious attempt to reconcile the
scriptural language of his ancestral profession to the new
vocabulary of Transcendentalism: “Jesus Christ was a minister of
the pure Reason. The beatitudes of the Sermon on the Mount are
all utterances of the mind contemning the phenomenal world . . .
. The understanding can make nothing of it. ’Tis all nonsense.
The Reason affirms its absolute verity . . . . St. Paul marks the
distinction by the terms natural man and spiritual man. When
Novalis says, ’It is the instinct of the Understanding to
contradict the Reason,’ he only translates into a scientific
formula the doctrine of St. Paul, ’The Carnal Mind is enmity
against God.’”
One more quotation must suffice. It is from a poem by a forgotten
Transcendentalist, F. G. Tuckerman.
“No more thy meaning seek, thine anguish plead;
But, leaving straining thought and stammering word,
Across the barren azure pass to God;
Shooting the void in silence, like a bird–
A bird that shuts his wings for better speed!”
It is obvious that this “contemning the phenomenal world,” this
“revulsion against the intellect as the sole source of truth,” is
highly dangerous to second-class minds. If one habitually prints
the words Insight, Instinct, Intuition, Consciousness with
capitals, and relegates equally useful words like senses,
experience, fact, logic to lower-case type, one may do it because
he is a Carlyle or an Emerson, but the chances are that he is
neither. Transcendentalism, like all idealistic movements, had
its “lunatic fringe,” its camp-followers of excitable, unstable
visionaries. The very name, like the name Methodist, was probably
bestowed upon it in mockery, and this whole perturbation of staid
New England had its humorous side. Witness the career of Bronson
Alcott. It is also true that the glorious affirmations of these
seers can be neither proved nor disproved. They made no
examination and they sought no validation of consciousness. An
explorer in search of the North Pole must bring back proofs of
his journey, but when a Transcendentalist affirms that he has
reached the far heights of human experience and even caught sight
of the gods sitting on their thrones, you and I are obliged to
take his word for it. Sometimes we hear such a man gladly, but it
depends upon the man, not upon the trustworthiness of the method.
Finally it should be observed that the Transcendental movement
was an exceedingly complex one, being both literary, philosophic,
and religious; related also to the subtle thought of the Orient,
to mediaeval mysticism, and to the English Platonists; touched
throughout by the French Revolutionary theories, by the Romantic
spirit, by the new zeal for science and pseudo-science, and by
the unrest of a fermenting age.
Our present concern is with the impact of this cosmopolitan
current upon the mind and character of a few New England writers.
Channing and Theodore Parker, Margaret Fuller and Alcott, Thoreau
and Emerson, are all representative of the best thought and the
noblest ethical impulses of their generation. Let us choose first
the greatest name: a sunward-gazing spirit, and, it may be, one
of the very Sun-Gods.
The pilgrim to Concord who stops for a moment in the village
library to study French’s statue of Emerson will notice the
asymmetrical face. On one side it is the face of a keen Yankee
farmer, but seen from the other side it is the countenance of a
seer, a world’s man. This contrast between the parochial Emerson
and the greater Emerson interprets many a puzzle in his career.
Half a mile beyond the village green to the north, close to the
“rude bridge” of the famous Concord fight in 1775, is the Old
Manse, once tenanted and described by Hawthorne. It was built by
Emerson’s grandfather, a patriot chaplain in the Revolution, who
died of camp-fever at Ticonderoga. His widow married Dr. Ezra
Ripley, and here Ralph Waldo Emerson and his brothers passed many
a summer in their childhood. Half a mile east of the village, on
the Cambridge turnpike, is Emerson’s own house, still sheltered
by the pines which Thoreau helped him to plant in 1838. Within
the house everything is unchanged: here are the worn books, pen
and inkstand, the favorite pictures upon the wall. Over the ridge
to the north lies the Sleepy Hollow cemetery where the poet
rests, with the gravestones of Hawthorne and the Alcotts, Thoreau
and William James close by.
But although Concord is the Emerson shrine, he was born in
Boston, in 1803. His father, named William like the grandfather,
was also, like the Emerson ancestors for many generations, a
clergyman–eloquent, liberal, fond of books and music, highly
honored by his alma mater Harvard and by the town of Boston,
where he ministered to the First Church. His premature death in
1811 left his widow with five sons–one of them feebleminded–and
a daughter to struggle hard with poverty. With her husband’s
sister, the Calvinistic “Aunt Mary Moody” Emerson, she held,
however, that these orphaned boys had been “born to be educated."
Arid educated the “eager blushing boys” were, at the Boston Latin
School and at Harvard College, on a regimen of “toil and want and
truth and mutual faith.” There are many worse systems of pedagogy
than this. Ralph was thought less persistent than his steady
older brother William, and far less brilliant than his gifted,
short-lived younger brothers, Edward and Charles. He had an
undistinguished career at Harvard, where he was graduated in
1821, ranking thirtieth in a class of fifty-nine. Lovers of irony
like to remember that he was the seventh choice of his classmates
for the position of class poet. After some desultory teaching to
help his brothers, he passed irregularly through the Divinity
School, his studies often interrupted by serious ill-health. “If
they had examined me,” he said afterward of the kindly professors
in the Divinity School, “they never would have passed me.” But
approve him they did, in 1826, and he entered decorously upon the
profession of his ancestors, as associate minister of the Second
Church in Boston. His “Journals,” which are a priceless record of
his inner life, at this and later periods, reveal the rigid
self-scrutiny, the tender idealism, with which he began his
ministerial career.
But as a scheme of life for Ralph Waldo Emerson this vocation
would not satisfy. The sexton of the Second Church thought that
the young man was not at his best at funerals. Father Taylor, the
eccentric Methodist, whom Emerson assisted at a sailor’s Bethel
near Long Wharf, considered him “one of the sweetest souls God
ever made,” but as ignorant of the principles of the New
Testament as Balaam’s ass was of Hebrew grammar. By and by came
an open difference with his congregation over the question of
administering the Communion. “I am not interested in it,” Emerson
admitted, and he wrote in his “Journal” the noble words: “It is
my desire, in the office of a Christian minister, to do nothing
which I cannot do with my whole heart.” His resignation was
accepted in 1832. His young wife had died of consumption in the
same year. He now sailed for Italy, France, and England, a
memorable journey which gave him an acquaintance with Landor,
Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Carlyle, but which was even more
significant in sending him, as he says, back to himself, to the
resources of his own nature. “When shows break up,” wrote Whitman
afterward, “what but oneself is sure?” In 1834 and 1835 we find
Emerson occupying a room in the Old Manse at Concord, strolling
in the quiet fields, lecturing or preaching if he were invited to
do so, but chiefly absorbed in a little book which he was
beginning to write–a new utterance of a new man.
This book, the now famous “Nature” of 1836, contains the essence
of Emerson’s message to his generation. It is a prose essay, but
written in the ecstatic mood of a poet. The theme of its
meditation is the soul as related to Nature and to God. The soul
is primal; Nature, in all its bountiful and beautiful
commodities, exists for the training of the soul; it is the
soul’s shadow. And every soul has immediate access to Deity. Thus
the utility and beauty and discipline of Nature lift the soul
Godward. The typical sentence of the book is this: “The sun
shines today also"; that is to say: the world is still alive and
fair; let us lift up our hearts! Only a few Americans of 1836
bought this singular volume, but Emerson went serenely forward.
He had found his path.
In 1837 he delivered the well-known Phi Beta Kappa oration at
Harvard on “The American Scholar.” Emerson was now thirty-four;
he had married a second time, had bought a house of his own in
Concord, and purposed to make a living by lecturing and writing.
His address in Cambridge, though it contained no reference to
himself, was after all a justification of the way of life he had
chosen: a declaration of intellectual independence for himself
and his countrymen, an exhortation of self-trust to the
individual thinking man. “If the single man plant himself
indomitably on his instincts and there abide, the huge world will
come round to him.” Such advice to cut loose from the moorings of
the past was not unknown in Phi Beta Kappa orations, though it
had never been so brilliantly phrased; but when Emerson applied
precisely the same doctrine, in 1838, to the graduating class at
the Harvard Divinity School, he roused a storm of disapproval. “A
tempest in our washbowl,” he wrote coolly to Carlyle, but it was
more than that. The great sentence of the Divinity School
address, “God is, not was; he speaketh, not spake,” was the
emphasis of a superb rhetorician upon the immediacy of the soul’s
access to God. It has been the burden of a thousand prophets in
all religions. The young priests of the Divinity School, their
eyes wearied with Hebrew and Greek, seem to have enjoyed
Emerson’s injunction to turn away from past records and
historical authorities and to drink from the living fountain of
the divine within themselves; but to the professors, “the stern
old war-gods,” this relative belittlement of historical
Christianity seemed blasphemy. A generation passed before Emerson
was again welcomed by his alma mater.
The reader who has mastered those three utterances by the Concord
Transcendentalist in 1836, 1837, and 1838 has the key to Emerson.
He was a seer, not a system-maker. The constitution of his mind
forbade formal, consecutive, logical thought. He was not a
philosopher in the accepted sense, though he was always
philosophizing, nor a metaphysician in spite of his curious
searchings in the realm of metaphysics. He sauntered in books as
he sauntered by Walden Pond, in quest of what interested him; he
“fished in Montaigne,” he said, as he fished in Plato and Goethe.
He basketed the day’s luck, good or bad as it might be, into the
pages of his private “Journal,” which he called his savings-bank,
because from this source he drew most of the material for his
books. The “Journal” has recently been printed, in ten volumes.
No American writing rewards the reader more richly. It must be
remembered that Emerson’s “Essays,” the first volume of which
appeared in 1841, and the last volumes after his death in 1882,
represent practically three stages of composition: first the
detached thoughts of the “Journal;” second, the rearrangement of
this material for use upon the lecture platform; and finally, the
essays in their present form. The oral method thus predominates:
a series of oracular thoughts has been shaped for oratorical
utterance, not oratorical in the bombastic, popular American
sense, but cunningly designed, by a master of rhetoric, to
capture the ear and then the mind of the auditor.
Emerson’s work as a lecturer coincided with the rise of that
Lyceum system which brought most of the American authors, for
more than a generation, into intimate contact with the public,
and which proved an important factor in the aesthetic and moral
cultivation of our people. No lecturer could have had a more
auspicious influence than Emerson, with his quiet dignity, his
serene spiritual presence, his tonic and often electrifying
force. But if he gave his audiences precious gifts, he also
learned much from them. For thirty years his lecturing trips to
the West brought him, more widely than any New England man of
letters, into contact with the new, virile America of the great
Mississippi valley. Unlike many of his friends, he was not
repelled by the “Jacksonism of the West"; he rated it a
wholesome, vivifying force in our national thought and life. The
“Journal” reveals the essential soundness of his Americanism.
Though surrounded all his life by reformers, he was himself
scarcely a reformer, save upon the single issue of anti-slavery.
Perhaps he was at bottom too much of a radical to be swept off
his feet by any reform.
To our generation, of course, Emerson presents himself as an
author of books, and primarily as an essayist, rather than as a
winning, entrancing speaker. His essays have a greater variety of
tone than is commonly recognized. Many of them, like “Manners,"
“Farming,” “Books,” “Eloquence,” “Old Age,” exhibit a shrewd
prudential wisdom, a sort of Yankee instinct for “the milk in the
pan,” that reminds one of Ben Franklin. Like most of the greater
New England writers, he could be, on occasion, an admirable local
historian. See his essays on “Life and Letters in New England,"
“New England Reformers,” “Politics,” and the successive entries
in his “Journal" relating to Daniel Webster. He had the happiest
gift of portraiture, as is witnessed by his sketches of
Montaigne, of Napoleon, of Socrates (in the essay on Plato), of
his aunt Mary Moody Emerson, of Thoreau, and of various types of
Englishmen in his “English Traits.” But the great essays, no
doubt, are those like “Self-Reliance,” “Compensation,” “The
Over-Soul,” “Fate,” “Power,” “Culture,” “Worship,” and
“Illusions.” These will puzzle no one who has read carefully that
first book on “Nature.” They all preach the gospel of intuition,
instinctive trust in the Universe, faith in the ecstatic moment
of vision into the things that are unseen by the physical eye.
Self-reliance, as Emerson’s son has pointed out, means really
God-reliance; the Over-Soul–always a stumbling-block to
Philistines–means that high spiritual life into which all men
may enter and in which they share the life of Deity. Emerson is
stern enough in expounding the laws of compensation that run
through the universe, but to him the chief law is the law of the
ever-ascending, victorious soul.
This radiant optimism permeates his poems. By temperament a
singer as well as a seer and sayer, Emerson was nevertheless
deficient in the singing voice. He composed no one great poem,
his verse presents no ideas that are not found in his prose. In
metre and rhyme he is harsh and willful. Yet he has marvelous
single phrases and cadences. He ejaculates transports and
ecstasies, and though he cannot organize and construct in verse,
he is capable here and there of the true miracle of transforming
fact and thought into true beauty. Aldrich used to say that he
would rather have written Emerson’s “Bacchus” than any American
poem.
That the pure, high, and tonic mind of Emerson was universal in
its survey of human forces, no one would claim. Certain
limitations in interest and sympathy are obvious. “That horrid
burden and impediment of the soul which the churches call sin,"
to use John Morley’s words, occupied his attention but little.
Like a mountain climber in a perilous pass, he preferred to look
up rather than down. He does not stress particularly those old
human words, service and sacrifice. “Anti-scientific, antisocial,
anti-Christian” are the terms applied to him by one of his most
penetrating critics. Yet I should prefer to say “un-scientific,"
“unsocial,” and “non-Christian,” in the sense in which Plato and
Isaiah are non-Christian. Perhaps it would be still nearer the
truth to say, as Mrs. Lincoln said of her husband, “He was not a
technical Christian.” He tends to underestimate institutions of
every kind; history, except as a storehouse of anecdote, and
culture as a steady mental discipline. This is the price he pays
for his transcendental insistence upon the supreme value of the
Now, the moment of insight. But after all these limitations are
properly set down, the personality of Ralph Waldo Emerson remains
a priceless possession to his countrymen. The austere serenity of
his life, and the perfection with which he represents the highest
type of his province and his era, will ultimately become blended
with the thought of his true Americanism. A democrat and
liberator, like Lincoln, he seems also destined like Lincoln to
become increasingly a world’s figure, a friend and guide to
aspiring spirits everywhere. Differences of race and creed are
negligible in the presence of such superb confidence in God and
the soul.
Citizens of Concord in May, 1862, hearing that Henry Thoreau, the
eccentric bachelor, had just died of consumption in his mother’s
house on Main Street, in his forty-fifth year, would have smiled
cannily at the notion that after fifty years their townsman’s
literary works would be published in a sumptuous twenty-volume
edition, and that critics in his own country and in Europe would
rank him with Ralph Waldo Emerson. Yet that is precisely what has
happened. Our literature has no more curious story than the
evolution of this local crank into his rightful place of
mastership. In his lifetime he printed only two books, “A Week on
the Concord and Merrimac Rivers"–which was even more completely
neglected by the public than Emerson’s “Nature"–and “Walden,"
now one of the classics, but only beginning to be talked about
when its shy, proud author penned his last line and died with the
words “moose” and “Indian” on his lips.
Thoreau, like all thinkers who reach below the surface of human
life, means many different things to men of various temperaments.
Collectors of human novelties, like Stevenson, rejoice in his
uniqueness of flavor; critics, like Lowell, place him, not
without impatient rigor. To some readers he is primarily a
naturalist, an observer, of the White of Selborne school; to
others an elemental man, a lover of the wild, a hermit of the
woods. He has been called the poet-naturalist, to indicate that
his powers of observation were accompanied, like Wordsworth’s, by
a gift of emotional interpretation of the meaning of phenomena.
Lovers of literature celebrate his sheer force and penetration of
phrase. But to the student of American thought Thoreau’s prime
value lies in the courage and consistency with which he
endeavored to realize the gospel of Transcendentalism in his own
inner life.
Lovers of racial traits like to remember that Thoreau’s
grandfather was an immigrant Frenchman from the island of Jersey,
and that his grandmother was Scotch and Quaker. His father made
lead pencils and ground plumbago in his own house in Concord. The
mother was from New Hampshire. It was a high-minded family. All
the four children taught school and were good talkers. Henry,
born in 1817, was duly baptized by good Dr. Ripley of the Old
Manse, studied Greek and Latin, and was graduated at Harvard in
1837, the year of Emerson’s Phi Beta Kappa address. Even in
college the young man was a trifle difficult. “Cold and
unimpressible,” wrote a classmate. “The touch of his hand was
moist and indifferent. He did not care for people.” “An
unfavorable opinion has been entertained of his disposition to
exert himself,” wrote President Quincy confidentially to Emerson
in 1837, although the kindly President, a year later, in
recommending Thoreau as a school-teacher, certified that “his
rank was high as a scholar in all the branches and his morals and
general conduct unexceptionable and exemplary.”
Ten years passed. The young man gave up school-keeping, thinking
it a loss of time. He learned pencil-making, surveying, and farm
work, and found that by manual labor for six weeks in the year he
could meet all the expenses of living. He haunted the woods and
pastures, explored rivers and ponds, built the famous hut on
Emerson’s wood-lot with the famous axe borrowed from Alcott, was
put in jail for refusal to pay his polltax, and, to sum up much
in little, “signed off” from social obligations. “I, Henry D.
Thoreau, have signed off, and do not hold myself responsible to
your multifarious uncivil chaos named Civil Government.” When his
college class held its tenth reunion in 1847, and each man was
asked to send to the secretary a record of achievement, Thoreau
wrote: “My steadiest employment, if such it can be called, is to
keep myself at the top of my condition and ready for whatever may
turn up in heaven or on earth.” There is the motto of
Transcendentalism, stamped upon a single coin.
For “to be ready for whatever may turn up” is Thoreau’s racier,
homelier version of Emerson’s “endless seeker"; and Thoreau, more
easily than Emerson, could venture to stake everything upon the
quest. The elder man had announced the programme, but by 1847 he
was himself almost what Thoreau would call a “committed man,"
with family and household responsibilities, with a living to
earn, and bound, like every professional writer and speaker, to
have some measure of regard for his public. But Thoreau was ready
to travel lightly and alone. If he should fail in the great
adventure for spiritual perfection, it was his own affair. He had
no intimates, no confidant save the multitudinous pages of his
“Journal,” from which–and here again he followed Emerson’s
example–his future books were to be compiled. Many of his most
loyal admirers will admit that such a quest is bound, by the very
conditions of the problem, to be futile. Hawthorne allegorized it
in “Ethan Brand,” and his quaint illustration of the folly of
romantic expansion of the self apart from the common interests of
human kind is the picture of a dog chasing its own tail. “It is
time now that I begin to live,” notes Thoreau in the “Journal,"
and he continued to say it in a hundred different ways until the
end of all his journalizing, but he never quite captured the
fugitive felicity. The haunting pathos of his own allegory has
moved every reader of “Walden:” “I long ago lost a hound, a bay
horse, and a turtle-dove, and am still on their trail.” Precisely
what he meant it is now impossible to say, but surely he betrays
a doubt in the ultimate efficacy of his own system of life. He
bends doggedly to the trail, for Henry Thoreau is no quitter, but
the trail leads nowhere, and in the latest volumes of the
“Journals” he seems to realize that he has been pursuing a
phantom. He dived fearlessly and deep into himself, but somehow
he failed to grasp that pearl of great price which all the
transcendental prophets assured him was to be had at the cost of
diving.
This is not to say that this austere and strenuous athlete came
up quite empty-handed. Far from it. The byproducts of his toil
were enough to have enriched many lesser men, and they have given
Thoreau a secure fame. From his boyhood he longed to make himself
a writer, and an admirable writer he became. “For along time,” he
says in “Walden,” “I was reporter to a journal, of no very wide
circulation, whose editor has never seen fit to print the bulk of
my contributions, and, as is too common with writers, I got only
my labor for my pains. However, in this case my pains were their
reward.” Like so many solitaries, he experienced the joy of
intense, long-continued effort in composition, and he was artist
enough to know that his pages, carefully assembled from his note
books, had pungency, form, atmosphere. No man of his day, not
even Lowell the “last of the bookmen,” abandoned himself more
unreservedly to the delight of reading. Thoreau was an
accomplished scholar in the Greek and Roman classics, as his
translations attest. He had some acquaintance with several modern
languages, and at one time possessed the best collection of books
on Oriental literature to be found in America. He was drenched in
the English poetry of the seventeenth century. His critical
essays in the “Dial,” his letters and the bookish allusions
throughout his writings, are evidence of rich harvesting in the
records of the past. He left some three thousand manuscript pages
of notes on the American Indians, whose history and character had
fascinated him from boyhood. Even his antiquarian hobbies gave
him durable satisfaction. Then, too, he had deep delight in his
life-long studies in natural history, in his meticulous
measurements of river currents, in his notes upon the annual
flowering of plants and the migration of birds. The more
thoroughly trained naturalists of our own day detect him now and
again in error as to his birds and plants, just as specialists in
Maine woodcraft discover that he made amusing, and for him
unaccountable, blunders when he climbed Katahdin. But if he was
not impeccable as a naturalist or woodsman, who has ever had more
fun out of his enthusiasm than Thoreau, and who has ever
stimulated as many men and women in the happy use of their eyes?
He would have had slight patience with much of the sentimental
nature study of our generation, and certainly an intellectual
contempt for much that we read and write about the call of the
wild; but no reader of his books can escape his infection for the
freedom of the woods, for the stark and elemental in nature.
Thoreau’s passion for this aspect of life may have been selfish,
wolflike, but it is still communicative.
Once, toward the close of his too brief life, Thoreau “signed on"
again to an American ideal, and no man could have signed more
nobly. It was the cause of Freedom, as represented by John Brown
of Harper’s Ferry. The French and Scotch blood in the furtive
hermit suddenly grew hot. Instead of renouncing in disgust the
“uncivil chaos called Civil Government,” Thoreau challenged it to
a fight. Indeed he had already thrown down the gauntlet in
“Slavery in Massachusetts,” which Garrison had published in the
“Liberator” in 1854. And now the death upon the scaffold of the
old fanatic of Ossawatomie changed Thoreau into a complete
citizen, arguing the case and glorifying to his neighbors the
dead hero. “It seems as if no man had ever died in America
before; for in order to die you must first have lived . . . . I
hear a good many pretend that they are going to die . . . .
Nonsense! I’ll defy them to do it. They haven’t got life enough
in them. They’ll deliquesce like fungi, and keep a hundred
eulogists mopping the spot where they left off. Only half a dozen
or so have died since the world began.” Such passages as this
reveal a very different Thoreau from the Thoreau who is supposed
to have spent his days in the company of swamp-blackbirds and
woodchucks. He had, in fact, one of the highest qualifications
for human society, an absolute honesty of mind. “We select
granite,” he says, “for the underpinning of our houses and barns;
we build fences of stone; but we do not ourselves rest on an
underpinning of granite truth, the lowest primitive rock. Our
sills are rotten . . . . In proportion as our inward life fails,
we go more constantly and desperately to the postoffice. You may
depend upon it, that the poor fellow who walks away with the
greatest number of letters, proud of his extensive
correspondence, has not heard from himself this long time.”
This hard, basic individualism was for Thoreau the foundation of
all enduring social relations, and the dullest observer of
twentieth century America can see that Thoreau’s doctrine is
needed as much as ever. His sharp-edged personality provokes
curiosity and pricks the reader into dissent or emulation as the
case may be, but its chief ethical value to our generation lies
in the fact that here was a Transcendentalist who stressed, not
the life of the senses, though he was well aware of their
seductiveness, but the stubborn energy of the will.
The scope of the present book prevents more than a glimpse at the
other members of the New England Transcendental group. They are a
very mixed company, noble, whimsical, queer, impossible. “The
good Alcott,” wrote Carlyle, “with his long, lean face and
figure, with his gray worn temples and mild radiant eyes; all
bent on saving the world by a return to acorns and the golden
age; he comes before one like a venerable Don Quixote, whom
nobody can laugh at without loving.” These words paint a whole
company, as well as a single man. The good Alcott still awaits an
adequate biographer. Connecticut Yankee, peddler in the South,
school-teacher in Boston and elsewhere, he descended upon
Concord, flitted to the queer community of Fruitlands, was
starved back to Concord, inspired and bored the patient Emerson,
talked endlessly, wrote ineffective books, and had at last his
apotheosis in the Concord School of Philosophy, but was chiefly
known for the twenty years before his death in 1888 as the father
of the Louisa Alcott who wrote “Little Women.” “A tedious
archangel,” was Emerson’s verdict, and it is likely to stand.
Margaret Fuller, though sketched by Hawthorne, analyzed by
Emerson, and painted at full length by Thomas Wentworth
Higginson, is now a fading figure–a remarkable woman, no doubt,
one of the first of American feminists, suggesting George Eliot
in her physical unattractiveness, her clear brain, her touch of
sensuousness. She was an early-ripe, over-crammed scholar in the
classics and in modern European languages. She did loyal, unpaid
work as the editor of the “Dial,” which from 1840 to 1844 was the
organ of Transcendentalism. She joined the community at Brook
Farm, whose story has been so well told by Lindsay Swift. For a
while she served as literary editor of the “New York Tribune"
under Horace Greeley. Then she went abroad, touched Rousseau’s
manuscripts at Paris with trembling, adoring fingers, made a
secret marriage in Italy with the young Marquis Ossoli, and
perished by shipwreck, with her husband and child, off Fire
Island in 1850.
Theodore Parker, like Alcott and “Margaret,” an admirable Greek
scholar, an idealist and reformer, still lives in Chadwick’s
biography, in Colonel Higginson’s delightful essay, and in the
memories of a few liberal Bostonians who remember his tremendous
sermons on the platform of the old Music Hall. He was a Lexington
farmer’s son, with the temperament of a blacksmith, with
enormous, restless energy, a good hater, a passionate lover of
all excellent things save meekness. He died at fifty, worn out,
in Italy.
But while these three figures were, after Emerson and Thoreau,
the most representative of the group, the student of the
Transcendental period will be equally interested in watching its
influence upon many other types of young men: upon future
journalists and publicists like George William Curtis, Charles A.
Dana, and George Ripley; upon religionists like Orestes Brownson,
Father Hecker, and James Freeman Clarke; and upon poets like
Jones Very, Christopher. P. Cranch, and Ellery Channing. There
was a sunny side of the whole movement, as T. W. Higginson and F.
B. Sanborn, two of the latest survivors of the ferment, loved to
emphasize in their talk and in their books; and it was shadowed
also by tragedy and the pathos of unfulfilled desires. But as one
looks back at it, in the perspective of three-quarters of a
century, it seems chiefly something touchingly fine. For all
these men and women tried to hitch their wagon to a star.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
