


Enter now two egotists, who have little in common save their
egotism, two outsiders who upset most of the conventional
American rules for winning the literary race, two men of genius,
in short, about whom we are still quarreling, and whose
distinctive quality is more accurately perceived in Europe than
it has ever been in the United States.
Both Poe and Whitman were Romanticists by temperament. Both
shared in the tradition and influence of European Romanticism.
But they were also late comers, and they were caught in the more
morbid and extravagant phases of the great European movement
while its current was beginning to ebb. Their acquaintance with
its literature was mainly at second-hand and through the medium
of British and American periodicals. Poe, who was older than
Whitman by ten years, was fifteen when Byron died, in 1824. He
was untouched by the nobler mood of Byron, though his verse was
colored by the influence of Byron, Moore, and Shelley. His prose
models were De Quincey, Disraeli, and Bulwer. Yet he owed more to
Coleridge than to any of the Romantics. He was himself a sort of
Coleridge without the piety, with the same keen penetrating
critical intelligence, the same lovely opium-shadowed dreams,
and, alas, with something of the same reputation as a deadbeat.
A child of strolling players, Poe happened to be born in Boston,
but he hated “Frog-Pondium"–his favorite name for the city of
his nativity–as much as Whistler hated his native town of
Lowell. His father died early of tuberculosis, and his mother,
after a pitiful struggle with disease and poverty, soon followed
her husband to the grave. The boy, by physical inheritance a
neurasthenic, though with marked bodily activity in youth, was
adopted by the Allans, a kindly family in Richmond, Virginia. Poe
liked to think of himself as a Southerner. He was sent to school
in England, and in 1826, at seventeen, he attended for nearly a
year the newly founded University of Virginia. He was a dark,
short, bow-legged boy, with the face of his own Roderick Usher.
He made a good record in French and Latin, read, wrote and
recited poetry, tramped on the Ragged Mountains, and did not
notably exceed his companions in drinking and gambling. But his
Scotch foster-father disapproved of his conduct and withdrew him
from the University. A period of wandering followed. He enlisted
in the army and was stationed in Boston in 1827, when his first
volume, “Tamerlane,” was published. In 1829 he was in Fortress
Monroe, and published “Al Aaraf” at Baltimore. He entered West
Point in 1830, and was surely, except Whistler, the strangest of
all possible cadets. When he was dismissed in 1831, he had
written the marvellous lines “To Helen,” “Israfel,” and “The City
in the Sea.” That is enough to have in one’s knapsack at the age
of twenty-two.
In the eighteen years from 1831 to 1849, when Poe’s unhappy life
came to an end in a Baltimore hospital, his literary activity was
chiefly that of a journalist, critic, and short story writer. He
lived in Baltimore, Richmond, Philadelphia, and New York. Authors
who now exploit their fat bargains with their publishers may have
forgotten that letter which Poe wrote back to Philadelphia the
morning after he arrived with his child-wife in New York: “We are
both in excellent spirits . . . . We have now got four dollars
and a half left. To-morrow I am going to try and borrow three
dollars, so that I may have a fortnight to go upon.” When the
child-wife died in the shabby cottage at Fordham, her wasted body
was covered with the old army overcoat which Poe had brought from
West Point. If Poe met some of the tests of practical life
inadequately, it must be remembered that his health failed at
twenty-five, that he was pitiably poor, and that the slightest
indulgence in drink set his overwrought nerves jangling.
Ferguson, the former office-boy of the “Literary Messenger,"
judged this man of letters with an office-boy’s firm and
experienced eye: “Mr. Poe was a fine gentleman when he was sober.
He was ever kind and courtly, and at such times everyone liked
him. But when he was drinking he was about one of the most
disagreeable men I have ever met.” “I am sorry for him,” wrote C.
F. Briggs to Lowell. “He has some good points, but taken
altogether, he is badly made up.” “Badly made up,” no doubt, both
in body and mind, but all respectable and prosperous Pharisees
should be reminded that Poe did not make himself; or rather, that
he could not make himself over. Very few men can. Given Poe’s
temperament, and the problem is insoluble. He wrote to Lowell in
1844: “I have been too deeply conscious of the mutability and
evanescence of temporal things to give any continuous effort to
anything–to be consistent in anything. My life has been
WHIM–impulse–passion–a longing for solitude–a scorn of all
things present in an earnest desire for the future.” It is the
pathetic confession of a dreamer. Yet this dreamer was also a
keen analyzer, a tireless creator of beautiful things. In them he
sought and found a refuge from actuality. The marvel of his
career is, as I have said elsewhere, that this solitary,
embittered craftsman, out of such hopeless material as negations
and abstractions, shadows and superstitions, out of disordered
fancies and dreams of physical horror and strange crime, should
have wrought structures of imperishable beauty.
Let us notice the critical instinct which he brought to the task
of creation. His theory of verse is simple, in fact too simple to
account for all of the facts. The aim of poetry, according to
Poe, is not truth but pleasure–the rhythmical creation of
beauty. Poetry should be brief, indefinite, and musical. Its
chief instrument is sound. A certain quaintness or grotesqueness
of tone is a means for satisfying the thirst for supernal beauty.
Hence the musical lyric is to Poe the only true type of poetry; a
long poem does not exist. Readers who respond more readily to
auditory than to visual or motor stimulus are therefore Poe’s
chosen audience. For them he executes, like Paganini, marvels
upon his single string. He has easily recognizable devices: the
dominant note, the refrain, the “repetend,” that is to say the
phrase which echoes, with some variation, a phrase or line
already used. In such poems as “To Helen,” “Israfel,” “The
Haunted Palace,” “Annabel Lee,” the theme, the tone, the melody
all weave their magic spell; it is like listening to a
lute-player in a dream.
That the device often turns into a trick is equally true. In “The
Bells” and “The Raven” we detect the prestidigitator. It is
jugglery, though such juggling as only a master-musician can
perform. In “Ulalume” and other showpieces the wires get crossed
and the charm snaps, scattering tinsel fragments of nonsense
verse. Such are the dangers of the technical temperament
unenriched by wide and deep contact with human feeling.
Poe’s theory of the art of the short story is now familiar
enough. The power of a tale, he thought, turned chiefly if not
solely upon its unity, its harmony of effect. This is illustrated
in all of his finest stories. In “The Fall of the House of Usher"
the theme is Fear; the opening sentence strikes the key and the
closing sentence contains the climax. In the whole composition
every sentence is modulated to the one end in view. The autumn
landscape tones with the melancholy house; the somber chamber
frames the cadaverous face of Roderick Usher; the face is an
index of the tumultuous agitation of a mind wrestling with the
grim phantom Fear and awaiting the cumulative horror of the final
moment. In “Ligeia,” which Poe sometimes thought the best of all
his tales, the theme is the ceaseless life of the will, the
potency of the spirit of the beloved and departed woman. The
unity of effect is absolute, the workmanship consummate. So with
the theme of revenge in “The Cask of Amontillado,” the theme of
mysterious intrigue in “The Assignation.” In Poe’s detective
stories, or tales of ratiocination as he preferred to call them,
he takes to pieces for our amusement a puzzle which he has
cunningly put together. “The Gold Bug” is the best known of
these, “The Purloined Letter” the most perfect, “The Murders in
the Rue Morgue” the most sensational. Then there are the tales
upon scientific subjects or displaying the pretence of scientific
knowledge, where the narrator loves to pose as a man without
imagination and with “habits of rigid thought.” And there are
tales of conscience, of which “The Black Cat” is the most fearful
and “William Wilson” the most subtle; and there are landscape
sketches and fantasies and extravaganzas, most of these poor
stuff.
It is ungrateful and perhaps unnecessary to dwell upon Poe’s
limitations. His scornful glance caught certain aspects of the
human drama with camera-like precision. Other aspects of life,
and nobler, he never seemed to perceive. The human comedy
sometimes moved him to laughter, but his humor is impish and his
wit malign. His imagination fled from the daylight; he dwelt in
the twilight among the tombs. He closed his eyes to dream, and
could not see the green sunlit earth, seed-time and harvest, man
going forth to his toil and returning to his hearthstone, the
America that laughs as it labors. He wore upon his finger the
magic ring and the genii did his bidding. But we could wish that
the palaces they reared for him were not in such a somber land,
with such infernal lights gleaming in their windows, and crowded
with such horror-haunted forms. We could wish that his
imagination dealt less often with those primitive terrors that
belong to the childhood of our race. Yet when his spell is upon
us we lapse back by a sort of atavism into primal savagery and
shudder with a recrudescence of long forgotten fears. No doubt
Poe was ignorant of life, in the highest sense. He was caged in
by his ignorance, Yet he had beautiful dusky wings that bruised
themselves against his prison.
Poe was a tireless critic of his own work, and both his standards
of workmanship and his critical precepts have been of great
service to his careless countrymen. He turned out between four
and five short stories a year, was poorly paid for them, and
indeed found difficulty in selling them at all. Yet he was
constantly correcting them for the better. His best poems were
likewise his latest. He was tantalized with the desire for
artistic perfection. He became the pathbreaker for a long file of
men in France, Italy, England, and America. He found the way and
they brought back the glory and the cash.
I have sometimes imagined Poe, with four other men and one woman,
seated at a dinner-table laid for six, and talking of their art
and of themselves. What would the others think of Poe? I fancy
that Thackeray would chat with him courteously, but would not
greatly care for him. George Eliot, woman-like, would pity him.
Hawthorne would watch him with those inscrutable eyes and
understand him better than the rest. But Stevenson would be
immensely interested; he would begin an essay on Poe before he
went to sleep. And Mr. Kipling would look sharply at him: he has
seen that man before, in “The Gate of a Hundred Sorrows.” All of
them would find in him something to praise, a great deal to
marvel at, and perhaps not much to love. And the sensitive,
shabby, lonely Poe–what would he think of them? He might not
care much for the other guests, but I think he would say to
himself with a thrill of pride: “I belong at this table.” And he
does.
Walt Whitman, whom his friend O’Connor dubbed the “good gray
poet,” offers a bizarre contrast to Edgar Allan Poe. There was
nothing distinctively American about Poe except his ingenuity; he
had no interest in American history or in American ideas; he was
a timeless, placeless embodiment of technical artistry. But
Whitman had a passion for his native soil; he was hypnotized by
the word America; he spent much of his mature life in brooding
over the question, “What, after all, is an American, and what
should an American poet be in our age of science and democracy?"
It is true that he was as untypical as Poe of the average citizen
of “these states.” His personality is unique. In many respects he
still baffles our curiosity. He repels many of his countrymen
without arousing the pity which adds to their romantic interest
in Poe. Whatever our literary students may feel, and whatever
foreign critics may assert, it must be acknowledged that to the
vast majority of American men and women “good old Walt” is still
an outsider.
Let us try to see first the type of mind with which we are
dealing. It is fundamentally religious, perceiving the unity and
kinship and glory of all created things. It is this passion of
worship which inspired St. Francis of Assisi’s “Canticle to the
Sun.” It cries, “Benedicite, Omnia opera Domini: All ye Green
Things upon the Earth, bless ye the Lord!” That is the real motto
for Whitman’s “Leaves of Grass.” Like St. Francis, and like his
own immediate master, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Whitman is a mystic.
He cannot argue the ultimate questions; he asserts them. Instead
of marshaling and sifting the proofs for immortality, he chants
“I know I am deathless.” Like Emerson again, Whitman shares that
peculiarly American type of mysticism known as Transcendentalism,
but he came at the end of this movement instead of at the
beginning of it. In his Romanticism, likewise, he is an end of an
era figure. His affiliations with Victor Hugo are significant;
and a volume of Scott’s poems which he owned at the age of
sixteen became his “inexhaustible mine and treasury for more than
sixty years.” Finally, and quite as uncompromisingly as Emerson,
Thoreau, and Poe, Whitman is an individualist. He represents the
assertive, Jacksonian period of our national existence. In a
thousand similes he makes a declaration of independence for the
separate person, the “single man” of Emerson’s Phi Beta Kappa
address. “I wear my hat as I please, indoors and out.” Sometimes
this is mere swagger. Sometimes it is superb.
So much for the type. Let us turn next to the story of Whitman’s
life. It must here be told in the briefest fashion, for Whitman’s
own prose and poetry relate the essentials of his biography. He
was born on Long Island, of New England and Dutch ancestry, in
1819. Lowell, W. W. Story, and Charles A. Dana were born in that
year, as was also George Eliot. Whitman’s father was a carpenter,
who “leaned to the Quakers.” There were many children. When
little “Walt"–as he was called, to distinguish him from his
father, Walter–was four, the family moved to Brooklyn. The boy
had scanty schooling, and by the time he was twenty had tried
typesetting, teaching, and editing a country newspaper on Long
Island. He was a big, dark-haired fellow, sensitive, emotional,
extraordinarily impressible.
The next sixteen years were full of happy vagrancy. At twenty-two
he was editing a paper in New York, and furnishing short stories
to the “Democratic Review,” a literary journal which numbered
Bryant, Longfellow, Whittier, Poe, Hawthorne, and Thoreau among
its contributors. He wrote a novel on temperance, “mostly in the
reading-room of Tammany Hall,” and tried here and there an
experiment in free verse. He was in love with the pavements of
New York and the Brooklyn ferryboats, in love with Italian opera
and with long tramps over Long Island. He left his position on
“The Brooklyn Eagle” and wandered south to New Orleans. By and by
he drifted back to New York, tried lecturing, worked at the
carpenter’s trade with his father, and brooded over a book–"a
book of new things.”
This was the famous “Leaves of Grass.” He set the type himself,
in a Brooklyn printing-office, and printed about eight hundred
copies. The book had a portrait of the author–a meditative,
gray-bearded poet in workman’s clothes–and a confused preface on
America as a field for the true poet. Then followed the new
gospel, “I celebrate myself,” chanted in long lines of free
verse, whose patterns perplexed contemporary readers. For the
most part it was passionate speech rather than song, a
rhapsodical declamation in hybrid rhythms. Very few people bought
the book or pretended to understand what it was all about. Some
were startled by the frank sexuality of certain poems. But
Emerson wrote to Whitman from Concord: “I find it the most
extraordinary piece of wit and wisdom that America has yet
contributed.”
Until the Civil War was half over, Whitman remained in Brooklyn,
patiently composing new poems for successive printings of his
book. Then he went to the front to care for a wounded brother,
and finally settled down in a Washington garret to spend his
strength as an army hospital nurse. He wrote “Drum Taps” and
other magnificent poems about the War, culminating in his
threnody on Lincoln’s death, “When Lilacs last in the Dooryard
Bloomed.” Swinburne called this “the most sonorous nocturn ever
chanted in the church of the world.” After the war had ended,
Whitman stayed on in Washington as a government clerk, and saw
much of John Burroughs and W. D. O’Connor. John Hay was a staunch
friend. Some of the best known poets and critics of England and
the Continent now began to recognize his genius. But his health
had been permanently shattered by his heroic service as a nurse,
and in 1873 he suffered a paralytic stroke which forced him to
resign his position in Washington and remove to his brother’s
home in Camden, New Jersey.
He was only fifty-four, but his best work was already done, and
his remaining years, until his death in 1892, were those of
patient and serene invalidism. He wrote some fascinating prose in
this final period, and his cluttered chamber in Camden became the
shrine of many a literary pilgrim, among them some of the
foremost men of letters of this country and of Europe. He was
cared for by loyal friends. Occasionally he appeared in public, a
magnificent gray figure of a man. And then, at seventy-three, the
“Dark mother always gliding near” enfolded him.
There are puzzling things in the physical and moral constitution
of Walt Whitman, and the obstinate questions involved in his
theory of poetry and in his actual poetical performance are still
far from solution. But a few points concerning him are by this
time fairly clear. They must be swiftly summarized.
The first obstacle to the popular acceptance of Walt Whitman is
the formlessness or alleged formlessness of “Leaves of Grass."
This is a highly technical question, involving a more accurate
notation than has thus far been made of the patterns and tunes of
free verse and of emotional prose. Whitman’s “new and national
declamatory expression,” as he termed it, cannot receive a final
technical valuation until we have made more scientific progress
in the analysis of rhythms. As regards the contents of his verse,
it is plain that he included much material unfused and
untransformed by emotion. These elements foreign to the nature of
poetry clog many of his lines. The enumerated objects in his
catalogue or inventory poems often remain inert objects only.
Like many mystics, he was hypnotized by external phenomena, and
he often fails to communicate to his reader the trancelike
emotion which he himself experienced. This imperfect transfusion
of his material is a far more significant defect in Whitman’s
poetry than the relatively few passages of unashamed sexuality
which shocked the American public in 1855.
The gospel or burden of “Leaves of Grass” is no more difficult of
comprehension than the general drift of Emerson’s essays, which
helped to inspire it. The starting point of the book is a
mystical illumination regarding the unity and blessedness of the
universe, an insight passing understanding, but based upon the
revelatory experience of love. In the light of this experience,
all created things are recognized as divine. The starting-point
and center of the Whitman world is the individual man, the
“strong person,” imperturbable in mind, athletic in body,
unconquerable, and immortal. Such individuals meet in
comradeship, and pass together along the open roads of the world.
No one is excluded because of his poverty or his sins; there is
room in the ideal America for everybody except the doubter and
sceptic. Whitman does not linger over the smaller groups of human
society, like the family. He is not a fireside poet. He passes
directly from his strong persons, meeting freely on the open
road, to his conception of “these States.” One of his typical
visions of the breadth and depth and height of America will be
found in “By Blue Ontario’s Shore.” In this and in many similar
rhapsodies Whitman holds obstinately to what may be termed the
three points of his national creed. The first is the newness of
America, and its expression is in his well-known chant of
“Pioneers, O Pioneers.” Yet this new America is subtly related to
the past; and in Whitman’s later poems, such as “Passage to
India,” the spiritual kinship of orient and occident is
emphasized. The second article of the creed is the unity of
America. Here he voices the conceptions of Hamilton, Clay,
Webster, and Lincoln. In spite of all diversity in external
aspects the republic is “one and indivisible.” This unity, in
Whitman’s view, was cemented forever by the issue of the Civil
War. Lincoln, the “Captain,” dies indeed on the deck of the
“victor ship,” but the ship comes into the harbor “with object
won.” Third and finally, Whitman insists upon the solidarity of
America with all countries of the globe. Particularly in his
yearning and thoughtful old age, the poet perceived that humanity
has but one heart and that it should have but one will. No
American poet has ever prophesied so directly and powerfully
concerning the final issue involved in that World War which he
did not live to see.
Whitman, like Poe, had defects of character and defects of art.
His life and work raise many problems which will long continue to
fascinate and to baffle the critics. But after all of them have
had their say, it will remain true that he was a seer and a
prophet, far in advance of his own time, like Lincoln, and like
Lincoln, an inspired interpreter of the soul of this republic.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
