


The simplest and oldest group of colonial writings is made up of
records of exploration and adventure. They are like the letters
written from California in 1849 to the “folks back East."
Addressed to home-keeping Englishmen across the sea, they
describe the new world, explain the present situation of the
colonists, and express their hopes for the future. Captain John
Smith’s “True Relation,” already alluded to, is the typical
production of this class: a swift marching book, full of eager
energy, of bluff and breezy picturesqueness, and of triumphant
instinct for the main chance. Like most of the Elizabethans, he
cannot help poetizing in his prose. Codfishing is to him a
“sport"; “and what sport doth yeald a more pleasing content, and
lesse hurt or charge then angling with a hooke, and crossing the
sweete ayre from Isle to Isle, over the silent streams of a calme
Sea?” But the gallant Captain is also capable of very plain
speech, Cromwellian in its simplicity, as when he writes back to
the London stockholders of the Virginia Company: “When you send
again, I entreat you rather send but thirty carpenters,
husbandmen, gardeners, fishermen, blacksmiths, masons, and
diggers up of trees’ roots, well provided, than a thousand of
such as we have.”
America was but an episode in the wide wanderings of Captain
Smith, but he owes his place in human memory today to the
physical and mental energy with which he met the demands of a new
situation, and to the vividness with which he dashed down in
words whatever his eyes had seen. Whether, in that agreeable
passage about Pocahontas, he was guilty of romancing a little, no
one really knows, but the Captain, as the first teller of this
peculiarly American type of story, will continue to have an
indulgent audience.
But other exiles in Virginia were skillful with the pen. William
Strachey’s “True Reportory of the Wrack of Sir Thomas Gates, Kt.,
vpon and from the islands of the Bermudas” may or may not have
given a hint to Shakespeare for the storm-scene in “The Tempest."
In either case it is admirable writing, flexible, sensitive,
shrewdly observant. Whitaker, the apostle of Virginia, mingles,
like many a missionary of the present day, the style of an
exhorter with a keen discernment of the traits of the savage
mind. George Percy, fresh from Northumberland, tells in a
language as simple as Defoe’s the piteous tale of five months of
illness and starvation, watched by “those wild and cruel Pagans."
John Pory, of “the strong potations,” who thinks that “good
company is the soul of this life,” nevertheless comforts himself
in his solitude among the “crystal rivers and odoriferous woods"
by reflecting that he is escaping envy and expense. George
Sandys, scholar and poet, finds his solace during a Virginia
exile in continuing his translation of Ovid’s “Metamorphoses."
Colonel Norwood, an adventurer who belongs to a somewhat later
day, since he speaks of having “read Mr. Smith’s travels,” draws
the long bow of narrative quite as powerfully as the redoubtable
Smith, and far more smoothly, as witness his accounts of
starvation on shipboard and cannibalism on shore. This Colonel is
an artist who would have delighted Stevenson.
All of these early tellers of Virginia tales were Englishmen, and
most of them returned to England, where their books were printed
and their remaining lives were passed. But far to the north east
of Virginia there were two colonies of men who earned the right
to say, in William Bradford’s quiet words, “It is not with us as
with other men, whom small things can discourage, or small
discontentments cause to wish themselves at home again.” One was
the colony of Pilgrims at Plymouth, headed by Bradford himself.
The other was the Puritan colony of Massachusetts Bay, with John
Winthrop as governor.
Bradford and Winthrop have left journals which are more than
chronicles of adventure. They record the growth and government of
a commonwealth. Both Bradford and Winthrop were natural leaders
of men, grave, dignified, solid, endowed with a spirit that bred
confidence. Each was learned. Winthrop, a lawyer and man of
property, had a higher social standing than Bradford, who was one
of the Separatists of Robinson’s flock at Leyden. But the Pilgrim
of the Mayflower and the well-to-do Puritan of the Bay Colony
both wrote their annals like gentlemen and scholars. Bradford’s
“History of Plymouth Plantation” runs from 1620 to 1647.
Winthrop’s diary, now printed as the “History of New England,"
begins with his voyage in 1630 and closes in the year of his
death, 1649. As records of an Anglo-Saxon experiment in
self-government under pioneer conditions these books are
priceless; as human documents, they illuminate the Puritan
character; as for “literary" value in the narrow sense of that
word, neither Bradford nor Winthrop seems to have thought of
literary effect. Yet the leader of the Pilgrims has passages of
grave sweetness and charm, and his sketch of his associate, Elder
Brewster, will bear comparison with the best English biographical
writing of that century. Winthrop is perhaps more varied in tone,
as he is in matter, but he writes throughout as a ruler of men
should write, with “decent plainness and manly freedom.” His best
known pages, justly praised by Tyler and other historians of
American thought, contain his speech before the General Court in
1645 on the nature of true liberty. No paragraphs written in
America previous to the Revolution would have given more pleasure
to Abraham Lincoln, but it is to be feared that Lincoln never saw
Governor Winthrop’s book, though his own ancestor, Samuel Lincoln
of Hingham, lived under Winthrop’s jurisdiction.
The theory of government held by the dominant party of the first
two generations of New England pioneers has often been called a
“theocracy,” that is to say, a government according to the Word
of God as expounded and enforced by the clergy. The experiment
was
doomed to ultimate failure, for it ran counter to some of the
noblest instincts of human nature. But its administration was in
the hands of able men. The power of the clergy was well-nigh
absolute. The political organization of the township depended
upon the ecclesiastical organization as long as the right to vote
was confined to church members. How sacrosanct and awful was the
position of the clergyman may be perceived from Hawthorne’s “The
Minister’s Black Veil” and “The Scarlet Letter.”
Yet it must be said that men like Hooker and Cotton, Shepard and
Norton, had every instinct and capacity for leadership. With the
notable exception of Hooker, such men were aristocrats, holding
John Winthrop’s opinion that “Democracy is, among most civil
nations, accounted the meanest and worst form of government."
They were fiercely intolerant. The precise reason for the Hooker
migration from Cambridge to Hartford in 1636–the very year of
the founding of Harvard–was prudently withheld, but it is now
thought to be the instinct of escape from the clerical architects
of the Cambridge Platform. Yet no one would today call Thomas
Hooker a liberal in religion, pioneer in political liberty though
he proved to be. His extant sermons have the steady stroke of a
great hammer; smiting at the mind and heart. “Others because they
have felt the heavy hand of God . . . upon these grounds they
build their hopes: ’I have had my hell in this life, and I hope
to have heaven in the world to come; I hope the worst is over.’"
Not so, thunders the preacher in reply: “Sodom and Gomorrah they
burnt in brimstone and they shall burn in hell.” One of Hooker’s
successors has called him “a son of thunder and a son of
consolation by turns.” The same may be said of Thomas Shepard,
another graduate of Emmanuel College in the old Cambridge, who
became the “soul-melting preacher” of the newer Cambridge by the
Charles. Pure, ravishing notes of spiritual devotion still sing
themselves in his pages. He is wholly Calvinist. He thinks “the
truth is a poor mean thing in itself” and that the human reason
cannot be “the last resolution of all doubts,” which must be
sought only in the written Word of God. He holds it “a tough
work, a wonderful hard matter to be saved.” “Jesus Christ is not
got with a wet finger.” Yet, like so many mystics, he yearns to
be “covered with God, as with a cloud,” to be “drowned, plunged,
and swallowed up with God.” One hundred years later we shall find
this same rhapsodic ecstasy in the meditations of Jonathan
Edwards.
John Cotton, the third of the mighty men in the early Colonial
pulpit, owes his fame more to his social and political influence
than to his literary power. Yet even that was thought commanding.
Trained, like Hooker and Shepard, at Emmanuel College, and fresh
from the rectorship of St. Botolph’s in the Lincolnshire Boston,
John Cotton dominated that new Boston which was named in his
honor. He became the Pope of the theocracy; a clever Pope and not
an unkindly one. He seems to have shared some of the opinions of
Anne Hutchinson, though he “pronounced the sentence of
admonition” against her, says Winthrop, with much zeal and
detestation of her errors. Hawthorne, in one of his ironic moods,
might have done justice to this scene. Cotton was at heart too
liberal for his role of Primate, and fate led him to persecute a
man whose very name has become a symbol of victorious tolerance,
Roger Williams.
Williams, known today as a friend of Cromwell, Milton, and Sir
Harry Vane, had been exiled from Massachusetts for maintaining
that the civil power had no jurisdiction over conscience. This
doctrine was fatal to the existence of a theocratic state
dominated by the church. John Cotton was perfectly logical in
“enlarging” Roger Williams into the wilderness, but he showed
less than his usual discretion in attacking the quick-tempered
Welshman in pamphlets. It was like asking Hotspur if he would
kindly consent to fight. Back and forth the books fly, for
Williams loves this game. His “Bloody Tenet of Persecution for
Cause of Conscience” calls forth Mr. Cotton’s “Bloody Tenet
washed and made white in the Blood of the Lamb;” and this in turn
provokes the torrential flood of Williams’s masterpiece, “The
Bloody Tenet yet more Bloody, by Mr. Cotton’s endeavor to wash it
white in the Blood of the Lamb.” There is glorious writing here,
and its effect cannot be suggested by quoting sentences. But
there is one sentence in a letter written by Williams in his old
age to his fellow-townsmen of Providence which points the whole
moral of the terrible mistake made by the men who sought
spiritual liberty in America for themselves, only to deny that
same liberty to others. “I have only one motion and petition,"
begs this veteran pioneer who had forded many a swollen stream
and built many a rude bridge in the Plantations: “it is this,
that after you have got over the black brook of some soul bondage
yourselves, you tear not down the bridge after you.”
It is for such wise and humane counsels as this that Roger
Williams is remembered. His opponents had mightier intellects
than his, but the world has long since decided against them.
Colonial sermon literature is read today chiefly by antiquarians
who have no sympathy for the creed which once gave it vitality.
Its theology, like the theology of “Paradise Lost or the Divine
Comedy,” has sunk to the bottom of the black brook. But we cannot
judge fairly the contemporary effect of this pulpit literature
without remembering the passionate faith that made pulpit and
pews copartners in a supreme spiritual struggle. Historians
properly insist upon the aesthetic poverty of the New England
Puritans; that their rule of life cut them off from an enjoyment
of the dramatic literature of their race, then just closing its
most splendid epoch; that they had little poetry or music and no
architecture and plastic art. But we must never forget that to
men of their creed the Sunday sermons and the week-day “lectures"
served as oratory, poetry, and drama. These outpourings of the
mind and heart of their spiritual leaders were the very stuff of
human passion in its intensest forms. Puritan churchgoers,
passing hours upon hours every week in rapt absorption with the
noblest of all poetry and prose in the pages of their chief book,
the Bible, were at least as sensitive to the beauty of words and
the sweep of emotions as our contemporaries upon whose
book-shelves Spenser and Milton stand unread.
It is only by entering into the psychology of the period that we
can estimate its attitude towards the poetry written by the
pioneers themselves. The “Bay Psalm Book” (1640), the first book
printed in the colonies, is a wretched doggerel arrangement of
the magnificent King James Version of the Psalms, designed to be
sung in churches. Few of the New England churches could sing more
than half-a-dozen tunes, and a pitch-pipe was for a long time the
only musical instrument allowed. Judged as hymnology or poetry,
the Bay “Psalm Book” provokes a smile. But the men and women who
used it as a handbook of devotion sang it with their hearts
aflame. In judging such a popular seventeenth-century poem as
Wigglesworth’s “Day of Doom” one must strip oneself quite free
from the twentieth century, and pretend to be sitting in the
chimney-corner of a Puritan kitchen, reading aloud by that
firelight which, as Lowell once humorously suggested, may have
added a “livelier relish” to the poet’s “premonitions of eternal
combustion.” Lowell could afford to laugh about it, having
crossed that particular black brook. But for several generations
the boys and girls of New England had read the “Day of Doom” as
if Mr. Wigglesworth, the gentle and somewhat sickly minister of
Malden, had veritably peeped into Hell. It is the present fashion
to underestimate the power of Wigglesworth’s verse. At its best
it has a trampling, clattering shock like a charge of cavalry and
a sound like clanging steel. Mr. Kipling and other cunning
ballad-makers have imitated the peculiar rhyme structure chosen
by the nervous little parson. But no living poet can move his
readers to the fascinated horror once felt by the Puritans as
they followed Wigglesworth’s relentless gaze into the future of
the soul’s destiny.
Historical curiosity may still linger, of course, over other
verse-writers of the period. Anne Bradstreet’s poems, for
instance, are not without grace and womanly sweetness, in spite
of their didactic themes and portentous length. But this lady,
born in England, the daughter of Governor Dudley and later the
wife of Governor Bradstreet, chose to imitate the more fantastic
of the moralizing poets of England and France. There is little in
her hundreds of pages which seems today the inevitable outcome of
her own experience in the New World. For readers who like roughly
mischievous satire, of a type initiated in England by Bishop Hall
and Donne, there is “The Simple Cobbler of Agawam” written by the
roving clergyman Nathaniel Ward. But he lived only a dozen years
in Massachusetts, and his satirical pictures are scarcely more
“American” than the satire upon German professors in “Sartor
Resartus” is “German.” Like Charles Dickens’s “American Notes,"
Ward’s give the reaction of a born Englishman in the presence of
the sights and the talk and the personages of the transatlantic
world.
Of all the colonial writings of the seventeenth century, those
that have lost least of their interest through the lapse of years
are narratives of struggles with the Indians. The image of the
“bloody savage” has always hovered in the background of the
American imagination. Our boys and girls have “played Indian"
from the beginning, and the actual Indian is still found, as for
three hundred years past, upon the frontier fringe of our
civilization. Novelists like Cooper, historians like Parkman,
poets like Longfellow, have dealt with the rich material offered
by the life of the aborigines, but the long series begins with
the scribbled story of colonists. Here are comedy and tragedy,
plain narratives of trading and travel, missionary zeal and
triumphs; then the inevitable alienation of the two races and the
doom of the native.
The “noble savage” note may be found in John Rolfe, the husband
of Pocahontas, with whom, poor fellow, his “best thoughts are so
intangled and enthralled.” Other Virginians, like Smith,
Strachey, and Percy, show close naturalistic observation, touched
with the abounding Elizabethan zest for novelties. To Alexander
Whitaker, however, these “naked slaves of the devil” were “not so
simple as some have supposed.” He yearned and labored over their
souls, as did John Eliot and Roger Williams and Daniel Gookin of
New England. In the Pequot War of 1637 the grim settlers resolved
to be rid of that tribe once for all, and the narratives of
Captain Edward Johnson and Captain John Mason, who led in the
storming and slaughter at the Indians’ Mystic Fort, are as
piously relentless as anything in the Old Testament. Cromwell at
Drogheda, not long after, had soldiers no more merciless than
these exterminating Puritans, who wished to plough their fields
henceforth in peace. A generation later the storm broke again in
King Philip’s War. Its tales of massacre, captivity, and
single-handed fighting linger in the American imagination still.
Typical pamphlets are Mary Rowlandson’s thrilling tale of the
Lancaster massacre and her subsequent captivity, and the
loud-voiced Captain Church’s unvarnished description of King
Philip’s death. The King, shot down like a wearied bull-moose in
the deep swamp, “fell upon his face in the mud and water, with
his gun under him.” They “drew him through the mud to the upland;
and a doleful, great, naked dirty beast he looked like.” The head
brought only thirty shillings at Plymouth: “scanty reward and
poor encouragement,” thought Captain Church. William Hubbard, the
minister of Ipswich, wrote a comprehensive “Narrative of the
Troubles with the Indians in New England,” bringing the history
down to 1677. Under the better known title of “Indian Wars,” this
fervid and dramatic tale, penned in a quiet parsonage, has
stirred the pulses of every succeeding generation. The close of
King Philip’s War, 1676, coinciding as it does with Bacon’s
Rebellion in Virginia, marks an era in the development of our
independent life. The events of that year, in the words of
Professor Tyler, “established two very considerable facts,
namely, that English colonists in America could be so provoked as
to make physical resistance to the authority of England, and,
second, that English colonists in America could, in the last
resort, put down any combination of Indians that might be formed
against them. In other words, it was then made evident that
English colonists would certainly be safe in the new world, and
also that they would not always be colonists.”
While the end of an historical or literary era cannot always be
thus conveniently indicated by a date, there is no doubt that the
final quarter of the seventeenth century witnessed deep changes
in the outward life and the inner temper of the colonists. The
“first fine careless rapture” was over. Only a few aged men could
recall the memory of the first settlements. Between the founding
of Jamestown and the rebellion under the leadership of Nathaniel
Bacon almost seventy years had intervened, an interval
corresponding to that which separates us from the Mexican War.
Roger Williams ended his much-enduring and beneficent life in the
flourishing town of Providence in 1684. He had already outlived
Cotton and Hooker, Shepard and Winthrop, by more than thirty
years. Inevitably men began, toward the end of the century, to
take stock of the great venture of colonization, to scrutinize
their own history and present position, to ask searching
questions of themselves. “You have better food and raiment than
was in former times,” wrote the aged Roger Clark, in 1676; “but
have you better hearts than your forefathers had?” Thomas
Walley’s “Languishing Commonwealth” maintains that “Faith is
dead, and Love is cold, and Zeal is gone.” Urian Oakes’s election
sermon of 1670 in Cambridge is a condemnation of the prevalent
worldliness and ostentation. This period of critical inquiry and
assessment, however, also gives grounds for just pride. History,
biography, eulogy, are flourishing. The reader is reminded of
that epoch, one hundred and fifty years later, when the deaths of
John Adams and of Thomas Jefferson, falling upon the same
anniversary day, the Fourth of July, 1826, stirred all Americans
to a fresh recognition of the services wrought by the Fathers of
the Republic. So it was in the colonies at the close of the
seventeenth century. Old England, in one final paroxysm of
political disgust, cast out the last Stuart in 1688. That
Revolution marks, as we have seen, the close of a long and tragic
struggle which began in the autocratic theories of James the
First and in the absolutism of Charles. Almost every phase of
that momentous conflict had its reverberation across the
Atlantic, as the history of the granting and withdrawal of
colonial charters witnesses abundantly. The American pioneers
were quite aware of what was going on in England, and they
praised God or grumbled, thriftily profited by the results or
quietly nullified them, as the case might be. But all the time,
while England was rocked to its foundations, the colonists struck
steadily forward into their own independent life.
Continue...

This full text of
The American Spirit in Literature, A Chronicle of Great Interpreters, by Bliss Perry, is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The American Spirit in LiteratureBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
