



A feature of the times was the remarkably personal character of
the wars, and the apparent utter indifference to humble popular
interests; Quidquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi; stress
is laid upon this point by the democratic philosopher Lao-tsz, who,
however, in his book (be it genuine or not), is wise enough never
to name a person or place; probably that prudence saved it from
the flames in 213 B.C.
In 684 B.C. the ruler of Ts’ai (imperial clan) treated very rudely
his own wife’s sister, married to a petty prince (imperial clan)
close by; the sister was simply passing through as a traveller;
the result was that this petty prince, her husband, induced Ts’u
to make war upon Ts’ai, whose reigning prince was captured, and
died a prisoner. In 657 the ruler of Ts’ai had a sister
married in Ts’i. The First Protector, offended at some act of
playful disobedience, sent her back, but without actually
divorcing her. Her brother was so angry that he found her another
husband. On this Ts’i declared war, and captured the brother, who,
however, at the intercession of the other vassal princes, was
restored to his kingdom. In 509 and 506 B.C. Ts’ai induces Tsin to
make war on Ts’u, and also assists Wu in her hostilities against
Ts’u, because a Ts’u minister had detained the ruler of Ts’ai for
refusing to part with a handsome fur coat. It is like the stealing
of the Golden Fleece by Jason, and similar Greek squabbles. In 675
B.C. the Emperor, for the third time, had to fly from his capital,
the immediate cause of the trouble being an attempt on his part to
seize a vassal’s rice-field for including in his own park–a
Chinese version of the Naboth’s vineyard dispute. Nothing could
better prove the pettiness of the ancient state-horizon; no busily
active great power could find time for such trifles.
When the Second Protector came to the throne, the orthodox states
of Wei, Ts’ao, and Cheng (all of the imperial clan), which had
treated him scurvily as a wanderer, had all three of them to pay
dearly for their meanness. In 632, when the Protector had secured
the Tsin throne, the ruler of Ts’ao was promptly captured, and
part of his territory was given to Sung (where the wanderer had
been well treated). The same year Tsin wished to assist Sung, and
accordingly asked right of way through the state of Wei, which was
curtly refused; the Tsin army therefore crossed the Yellow River
to the south of Wei: as a punishment for this refusal, and also
for the previous rude treatment, Wei also had to give part of her
territory to the favoured Sung. In 630 Tsin induced Ts’in to join
in an attack upon Cheng, the object being, of course, to revenge
similar personal rudenesses; however, Cheng diplomacy was
successful in inducing Ts’in to abandon Tsin in the nick of time:
this was one of the very few cases in which Ts’in interfered, or
was about to interfere, in “orthodox” affairs. In 592 Tsin sent a
hunchback envoy to Ts’i; it so happened that at the same time Lu
sent one who was lame, and Wei a third who was blind of one eye.
The Ts’i ruler thereupon appointed an officer mutilated in some
other way to do the duties of host to this sorry trio. The Tsin
envoy swore: “If I do not revenge this upon Ts’i, may the God of
the Yellow River take note of it!” Reaching his own country, he
tried to induce the ruler to make war on Ts’i; but the prince
said: “Your personal pique should hardly suffice for ground to
trouble the whole country”: and he refused.
The principle of the divinity that doth hedge a king was early
established, but there are certainly more numerous evidences of
royal absolutism in Ts’u than in orthodox China, where responsibility
of rulers before Heaven and the People (symbolical of Heaven also)
was an accepted axiom. For instance, in 522 B.C., an officer, knowing
that the King of Ts’u was sending for him in order to kill him, said to his
brother: “As the king orders it, one of us two must go, but you can
avenge me later on.” When the next Ts’u king was a fugitive, and it
was a question in a subject’s mind of killing him because his father
had taken a brother’s life, it was objected: “No! if the king slays one
of his officers, who can avenge it? His commands emanate from Heaven.
It is unpardonable to cut off the ancestral sacrifice of a whole house
in this way.”
In still more ancient times, when the last Emperor of the Shang
dynasty was being warned of the rising popular feeling in favour
of the rising Chou power, he remarked: “Have I not Heaven’s
mandate? What can they do to me?” When the Martial King achieved
his conquest, he smeared the god of the soil with the sacrificial
victims’ blood, and announced the crimes of the dead tyrant to
Heaven. In the war of 589 between Tsin and Ts’i, the ruler of
Ts’i, who had changed places with his charioteer in order to
escape detection, was hotly pursued; but his chariot caught in a
tree. Seeing this, the Tsin captain prostrated himself before the
chariot, and said: “My princely master’s orders are to assist the
states of Lu and Wei” (i.e. not to attack your person). Meanwhile
the disguised charioteer ordered the disguised king to fetch a
drink of water, and the king thus escaped even the humiliation of
a favour from his generous victor. When in 548 a worthless Ts’i
ruler was assassinated, the philosopher Yen-tsz said: “When the
ruler dies or is exiled for the gods of the land and its harvests,
one dies or is exiled with him; but if he dies or is exiled for
private reasons, then only his personal friends die with him.” He
therefore contented himself with wailing, and with laying his head
on the royal body. The same Tsin captain who was so tender to the
Ts’i duke in 589 had an opportunity fourteen years later of taking
prisoner the ruler of CHENG in battle; but he said: “Evil cometh
to him who toucheth a crowned head! I have already committed
sacrilege once against the ruler of Ts’i; preserve me from
committing this crime a second time!” And he turned promptly back.
During the same fight, the King of Ts’u’s body-guard was attacked
by the Tsin generalissimo, who, when he discerned the king in the
centre of the guards, got out of his chariot, doffed his helmet,
and fled in horror, “such was his respect for the person of
royalty.” It was a ritual rule in China for the distinguished men
not to remove the official head-covering in death; for instance,
in 481, when one of Confucius’ pupils was killed in war, his last
patriotic act was to tie his hat-strings tighter. Though rulers
were supposed to owe duties to the gods in general, yet the power
of the gods was limited. Thus when Tsz-ch’an of CHENG was sent as
envoy to Tsin in 541, the sick Tsin ruler asked him: “How can the
two gods who, they say, are responsible for my malady, be
conjured?” Tsz-ch’an replied: “These particular gods cannot injure
you; we sacrifice to them in connection with natural phenomena,
such as drought, flood, or other disaster; just as in matters of
snow, hail, rain, or wind we sacrifice to the gods of the sun,
moon, planets, and constellations. Your illness is the result of
drink, over-feeding, women, passionate anger, excessive pleasure."
Shuh Hiang approved this common-sense view of the situation.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
