



We propose to say a few words now about peculiar customs which had
vogue all over or in certain parts of China; of course some of
them may be traced back to the “Rites of Chou,” and to what is
prescribed therein; but general administrative schemes representing
in general terms things as they ought to be, or as the Chou federal
and feudal oligarchy would have liked them to be, do not give us
such a life-like picture of ancient China as specific accounts of
definite events which really did happen. Take, for instance, the
peculiar formalities connected with abject surrender.
After a great defeat in 699 B.C., just when Ts’u was beginning to
emerge from its narrow confines between the Han and Yang-tsz
Rivers, the defeated Ts’u generals had themselves bound in
fetters, or with ropes, in order to await their king’s pleasure.
In 654, when Ts’u had one of the small orthodox states (in the Ho
Nan nucleus) at its mercy, the baron presented himself with his
hands tied behind, a piece of jade in his mouth, followed by his
suite in mourning, carrying his coffin. It is evident that at this
date Ts’u was still “barbarous,” for the king had to ask what it
all meant. It was explained to him that, when the Chou founder
conquered China, and mutilated the last Shang dynasty emperor,
that emperor’s elder brother by an inferior mother had presented
himself before the founder half naked, with his hands tied behind
his back, his left hand leading a ram (or goat), and his right
carrying sedge for wrapping round the sacrificial victim; he was
enfeoffed as Duke of Sung. In 537 the same thing happened to a
later King of Ts’u in connection with another petty principality,
and the king had to be reminded of the 654 precedent. Thus there
must have been records of some kind in Ts’u at an early date. In
645 B.C., when the ruler of Ts’in took prisoner his brother-in-
law, the ruler of Tsin, and was seriously contemplating the
annexation of Tsin, together with the duty of discharging Tsin
sacrifices, his own sister, with bare feet, wearing mourning, and
bound with a mourning belt, intercedes successfully for her
husband. In 597 B.C. the ruler of the important orthodox state of
Cheng went through the form of dragging along, with the upper part
of his own body uncovered, a ram or goat into the presence of the
King of Ts’u. In 511, when the ruler of Lu had to fly the country
and throw himself upon the generosity of Tsin, in order to escape
from the dangerous machinations of the intriguing great families
of Lu, the six Tsin statesmen (who were themselves at that moment,
as heads of great private clans, gradually undermining their own
prince’s rights) sent for the arch-intriguer, and called upon him
to explain his conduct. At that time Lu was coquetting between its
two powerful neighbours, Tsin and Ts’i. The conspirator duly
presented himself before the Areopagus of Tsin grandees, barefoot
and attired in common cloth (i.e. not of silk, but of hemp), in order
to explain to them the circumstances of the duke’s exile: it is
characteristic of the times, and also of the frankness of history, to
find it added that he succeeded in bribing the grandees to give an
unjust decision. When the Kings of Yueeh and Wu were in turn at
each other’s mercy, in 494 and 473 respectively, their envoys, in
offering submission, in each case advanced to the conqueror “walking
on the knees,” with bust bared: this knee-walking suggests Annamese,
Siamese, and possibly Japanese forms rather than Chinese. The Wu
servants at dinner are said to have “waited” on their knees. The third
and last August Emperor in 207 submitted to the conquering Han
dynasty seated in an unadorned chariot, drawn by a white horse
(with signs of mourning), carrying his seal-sash round his neck
(figurative of hanging or strangling himself), and offered the seals of
the Son of Heaven to the Prince of Han.
Something has already been said about the rules of succession in
Ts’u and Ts’in. When the Duke of Sung just mentioned died, in 1078
B.C., he was succeeded by his younger brother because his own son
was dead; this was in accordance with the Shang dynasty’s ritual
laws. Even the Warrior King himself, founder of the Chou dynasty,
was not the eldest son of his father, the (posthumously) Civilian
King; the latter had set aside the elder of the two sons; and it
will be remembered that, several generations before that, two of
the royal Chou brothers had voluntarily retired to colonize the Wu
Jungle country, in order that their younger brother, father of the
future Civilian King, might succeed to the then extremely limited
vassal state of Chou. Later on, in 729, a Duke of Sung on his
death-bed bequeathed the succession to his younger brother instead
of to his own son, on the ground that the rule is, “son to father,
younger to elder brother"–a “universal rule” approved by Mencius
in later times. The younger brother in this case thrice refused
the kingly crown, but at last accepted, and Confucius in his
history censures the act, which, it is considered, contributed to
Sung’s ultimate downfall. (It must be remembered that Confucius’
ancestors were themselves of royal Sung extraction.) In 652 the
younger brother by the superior spouse wished, at his father’s
death-bed, to cede his right to the succession of Sung to his
elder brother by an inferior wife; the dying father commended the
spirit, but forbade the proposed sacrifice of prior right, and the
elder therefore served the younger as counsellor. In 493 a Duke of
Sung, irritated on account of his eldest son having left the
country, nominated a younger son as successor, and after his death
his wife confirmed by decree her late husband’s nomination; but
the younger brother firmly declined, on the ground that the rule
of succession was a fixed one, and that he was unworthy to perform
the sacrifices to the gods of the land and grain. It is a curious
coincidence that the question of status in wives affects the
present rulers of both China and Japan. Though the dowager was
Empress-Mother, she always ceded the pas to the senior dowager,
who had no children. And as to the Mikado’s mother, who died last
October, she was, it seems, never officially considered as an
Empress.
In 817 B.C. the Emperor himself is censured by history for having,
“contrary to rule,” wished to set up as ruler of Lu a second son
in preference to the elder son; he repeated the act in 796, as has
already been explained in Chapter XX., when a few other instances
were cited to illustrate the general rule in China. At this time
the waning power of the emperors still evidently flickered. In
608, through the meddlesome political interference of Ts’i, a
concubine’s son succeeded to the Lu throne in preference to the
legitimate wife’s son; curiously enough, the legitimate wife was a
Ts’i princess. The result of this irregularity was that the “three
powerful families” of Lu (themselves descendants of the ruling
family) grew restless, and the state began to decline. On the
death of a King of Ts’u in 516, it was proposed to put on the
throne, instead of the king’s young son, the king’s younger
brother by an inferior mother, on the ground that the mother of
the young son in question was the wife obtained from Ts’in by the
king for marriage to his eldest son (who had since joined the
king’s enemies), which young lady the king had subsequently
decided to marry himself. Even under this irregular and
complicated family tangle, the proposed succession was disapproved
by the counsellors, on the ground that irregular successions
invariably produced trouble in the state. In the year 450 B.C. the
ruler of Ts’i insisted, against advice, on the succession of a
younger son by a favourite concubine in preference to his elder
sons by superior mothers, including the first and most dignified
spouse. But here, again, the powerful families intervened; one of
the elder sons, who had fled to Lu, was brought back secretly in a
sack; the wrongful successor was murdered, and the “powerful
family” which took the lead in state affairs soon afterwards, to
the horror of Confucius, by intrigue and by further assassination,
secured the Ts’i throne for itself. It will thus be noticed that
all the great states except Ts’in had their full share of
succession troubles.
There were several customs practised in warfare which are worthy
of short notice. In 633 B.C. a Ts’u general, in the interests of
discipline, flogged several military men, and “had the ears of
others pierced by arrows, according to military regulation.” In
639 this same king had sent as a present to some princesses of
other states, who had congratulated him on his victory over Sung,
“a pile of the enemy’s left ears.” As the historians express their
disgust at this indelicate act, it was presumably not an orthodox
practice, at all events in this particular form. In 607 there were
captured from Sung 450 war-chariots and 250 soldiers; the latter
had their left ears cut off; in this case the victors were CHENG
troops, acting under Ts’u’s orders, and it is presumed that CHENG
officers cut off the ears under Ts’u’s commands. A few years later
two or three Ts’u generals were discussing what the ancients did
when they challenged for a battle; it was decided that the best
“form” was to rush up to the entrenchments, cut off an enemy’s
left ear, carry him away in your chariot, and rush back to your
own camp. As there is a special Chinese character or pictograph
for “ears cut off in battle,” it thus appears that to a certain
extent even the orthodox Chinese practised the “scalping” art,
which was doubtless intended to furnish easy proof of claims for
reward based upon prowess; in fact, even in modern official
Chinese, a decapitated head is called a “head-step,” an expression
evidently dating from the time when a step in rank was given for
each head or group of heads taken.
Rulers, whether the Emperor or vassals, faced south in the
exercise of their sovereign powers. Thus, when the Duke of Chou,
after the death of his brother the Martial King, acted as Regent
pending the minority of the Martial King’s son, his own nephew, he
faced south; but he faced north once more when he resumed his
status of subject. It has already been mentioned, in Chapter XX.,
that in 640 B.C. the state of Lu made the south gate of the Lu
capital the Law Gate, because it was by the south gates that all
rulers’ commands emanated. In 546 a counsellor of Ts’u explained
to the king how, since Tsin influence had predominated in the
orthodox state of CHENG, this last had ceased to “face south
towards its former protector.” Thus, though the Emperor faces
south towards the sun, and his subjects in turn face north in his
honour, those subjects face their other protector in whatever
direction he may lie, supposing the Emperor’s protection to be
inadequate. It is evidently the same principle as “bowing towards
the east,” and “turning towards Mecca,” both of which formalities
must be modified according to place. In 315 B.C., when Yen (the
Peking plain) had become one of the six independent kingdoms, a
usurper (to whom the King of Yen had foolishly committed full
powers) “turned south” to perform acts of sovereignty in the
king’s name. In 700 B.C., in the orthodox state of Wei, we hear of
“princes of the left and right,” which is explained to mean “sons
of mothers whose official place is left or right of the principal
spouse.” Right used to be more honourable than left in China, but
left now takes precedence of right. Thus the provinces of Shan
Tung and Shan Si are also called “Left of the Mountains” and
“Right of the Mountains,” because the Emperor faces south.
Notwithstanding, the ancient phraseology sometimes survives; for
instance, “stands right of him” means “is better than he is,” and
“to left him” means “to prove him wrong or worse.” All yamens
in China face south; there are rare exceptions, usually owing to
building difficulties. Once, in the province of Kwei Chou, I was
officially invited by the mandarin to take my seat on his right instead of
on his left, because, as he explained, his yamen door did not
face south, but west; and, he added, it was more honourable
for me, as an official guest,  to sit north, facing west, than to sit
south, facing west. In Canton,  the Viceroy used out of courtesy to sit
south, facing north, and  make his own interpreter sit north, facing south;
the consul sat east,  facing west, and the consul’s interpreter sat west,
facing east. But the consul could not have presumed to occupy the
north seat thus given to an inferior on the principle of de minimis
non curat lex; nor was the Viceroy willing to assert his “command"
to a guest. In 436 the armies  of Yiieh marching north through Ho Nan
called the Chinese places  lying to their west the “left” towns; but that
was perhaps because  Yiieh came marching from the south. In 221 B.C.,
when for the first time South China to the sea became part of the imperial
dominions, the Emperor’s territory was described as extending
southward to the “north-facing houses.” Hong Kong and Canton are
just on the tropical line; but the island of Hainan, and also
Tonquin, are actually in the tropics. Whether the houses there do
really face north–which I have never noticed–or whether the
expression is merely symbolical, I cannot say; but the idea is “to
the regions where, when the sun is on the tropic, you have to turn
north to see him.”
A point of honour in China was not to make war on an enemy who was
in mourning, but this rule seems to have been honoured in the
breach as much as in the observance thereof. Two centuries before
the Chou dynasty came into power, an emperor of the Shang dynasty
distinguished himself by not speaking at all during the three
years he occupied the mourning hut near the grave. As we have
seen, the first rulers of Lu (as a Chou fief) modified existing
customs, and introduced the three years’ mourning rule there. In
connection with a Sung funeral in 651 B.C., it is explained that
the bier lay between the two front pillars, and not, as with the
Chou dynasty, on the top of the west side steps; it will be
remembered that Sung represented the sacrifices of the extinct
Shang dynasty. That same year the future Second Protector (then a
refugee among the Tartars) declined to put in a claim to the Tsin
succession against his brothers “because he had not been in
mourning whilst a fugitive.” In 642 Sung and her allies made war
on Ts’i, which was then mourning for the First Protector; by a
just Nemesis the Tartars came to the rescue and saved Ts’i. In
627, after the Second Protector’s death, Ts’in declared war,
whilst Tsin was mourning, upon a petty orthodox principality
belonging to the same clan as Tsin and the Emperor, and belonging
also to the Tsin vassal system. This so enraged the new ruler of
Tsin that he dyed his white mourning clothes black, so as to
avenge the insult, and yet not to outrage the rites: moreover,
white was unlucky in warfare: victorious over Ts’in, he then
proceeded to mourn for his father, and ever after that black was
adopted, by way of memento, as the national colour of Tsin. In 626
and 622 the Emperor sent high officers to represent him at Lu
funerals, and to carry gems to place in deceased’s mouth, “to show
that he (the Emperor) had not the heart to leave the deceased
unsupplied with food.” In 581 the ruler of Lu, being on a visit to
Tsin, was forcibly detained by Tsin, in order to swell the
importance of a Tsin ruler’s funeral. Lu (like the petty orthodox
states of Wei, Sung, CHENG, etc., further south) was nearly always
under the rival political constraint of either Ts’i, Tsin, or
Ts’u; and this factor must accordingly also be taken into account
in explaining Confucius’ longing for the good old days of imperial
predominance. In 572 Tsin attacked Cheng, though of the same clan
as itself, whilst in mourning; but in 567 semi-barbarian Ts’u set
a good example to orthodox Tsin by withdrawing its troops out of
deference to a later official mourning then in force in Cheng: in
564 the King of Ts’u withdrew his armies home altogether on
account of the mourning due to his own deceased mother. In 560
barbarian Wu attacked Ts’u whilst in mourning for the above king
(the one who first conquered the Canton region for Ts’u); but,
here again, by a just Nemesis, Wu’s army was cut to pieces, and
Wu’s own ally, Tsin, censured her for having done such an improper
thing. In 544 the prime minister of Tsin mourned for his Ts’u co-
signatory of the celebrated Peace Conference Treaty of 546; and
this graceful act is explained to be in accordance with the rites.
In 544 Ts’u herself was in mourning, and in accordance with the
terms of the Peace Conference Treaty, under which the Tsin vassals
and the Ts’u vassals were to pay their respects to Ts’u and Tsin
respectively–Ts’in and Ts’i, as great powers, being excused, or,
rather, discreetly left alone–Ts’u put great pressure on Lu to
secure the personal presence of the Lu ruler at the Ts’u funeral.
The orthodox duke did not at all like this “truckling to a
barbarian"; but one of his counsellors suggested behaving before
the corpse as he would behave to a vassal of his own: this was
done, and the unsophisticated Ts’u was none the wiser at the time,
though, later on, the king discovered the pious fraud. In 514 B.C.
Wu wished to attack Ts’u while, mourning, and the virtuous Ki-
chah was promptly sent by Wu to sound Tsin about the facheuse
situation. At a Lu funeral in 509, it was explained that the
new duke could only mount the throne after the burial was over; it
was added “even the Son of Heaven’s commands do not run in Lu
during this critical period; a fortiori is the duke not
capable of transacting his own subjects’ business.” But long
before this, when the First Protector died, in 643, his body lay
for sixty-seven days in the coffin unattended, whilst his five
sons were wrangling about the succession; in fact, the worms were
observed crawling out of the coffin. These painful details have a
powerful historical interest, for when (as mentioned on p. 209)
his tomb was opened nearly 1000 years later, dogs had to be sent
in ahead to test the air, as the stench was so great. In 492 an
unpopular prince of Wei was in Tsin, which state had an interest
in placing him on the throne. There happened to be in Tsin at that
moment a scoundrel who had fled to Tsin from Lu, because he had
found Confucius too strong for him in Lu; and this man suggested
to Tsin that it would be a good plan to send seventy Wei men back
to Wei in mourning clothes and sash, so as to make the Wei people
think that the prince was dead, and thus gain an opportunity to
“run him in” by surprise, and set him up as ruler. In 489, when
the King of Ts’u died in the field of battle, his three brothers,
all of whom had declined his offer of the throne, but one of whom
had at last accepted in order to give the dying man peace, decided
to conceal the king’s death from the army whilst they sent for his
son by a Yiieh mother, pleading that the king had been non
compos mentis when he proposed an irregular succession, and
that the promise made to him was, therefore, of no avail. In 485
Lu and Wu joined in an attack upon Ts’i during the latter’s
mourning–a particularly disgraceful political combination: no
wonder Confucius was hastily sent for from the state of CH’EN,
whither he had previously retired in disgust at the corruption of
his native land. In 481 a conspiracy which was going on in Ts’i
was delayed because one of the chief actors, being in mourning,
could not attend to public business of any kind. In 332 B.C. Ts’i
took ten towns from Yen by successfully attacking her whilst in
mourning; one of the travelling diplomats and intriguers so common
in China at that period insisted upon the towns being restored.
This was at the exact moment when the philosopher Mencius, who
seems to have also been a great political dilettante, was
circulating to and fro between such monarchs as the Kings of Ts’i
and Ngwei, alias Liang, as is fully explained in the still
extant book of Mencius.
All the above quaint instances, novel though they may be in
detail, strongly recall to us in principle our own “rules” of
international law, which are always liable to unexpected
“construction” according to the exigencies of war and the power
wielded by the “constructor.” Inter arma leges silent. As
usual in these ritual matters, Ts’in is distinguished by total
absence of mention.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
