



Treaties were always very solemn functions, invariably accompanied
by the sacrifice of a victim. A part of the victim, or of its
blood, was thrown into a ditch, in order that the Spirit of the
Earth might bear witness to the deed; the rest of the blood was
rubbed upon the lips of the parties concerned, and also scattered
upon the documents, by way of imprecation; sometimes, however, the
imprecations, instead of being uttered, were specially written at
the end of the treaty. Just as we now say “the ink was scarcely
dry before, etc., etc.,” the Chinese used to say “the blood of the
victim was scarcely dry on their lips, before, etc., etc.” When
the barbarian King of Wu succeeded for a short period in
“durbaring” the federal Chinese princes, a dispute took place (as
narrated in Chapter XIV.) between Tsin and Wu as to who should rub
the lips with blood first–in other words, have precedence. In
the year 541 B.C., sixty years before the above event, Tsin and
Ts’u had agreed to waive the ceremony of smearing the lips with
blood, to choose a victim in common, and to lay the text of the
treaty upon the victim after a solemn reading of its contents.
This modification was evidently made in consequence of the
disagreement between Tsin and Ts’u at the Peace Conference of 546,
when a dispute had arisen (page 47), as to which should smear the
lips first. This was the occasion on which the famous Tsin
statesman, Shuh Hiang, in the face of seventeen states’
representatives, all present, had the courage to ignore Ts’u’s
treachery in concealing cuirasses under the soldiers’ clothes. He
said: “Tsin holds her pre-eminent position as Protector by her
innate good qualities, which will always command the adhesion of
other states; why need we care if Ts’u smears first, or if she
injures herself by being detected in treachery?” It has already
been mentioned that Confucius glosses over or falsifies both the
above cases, and gives the victory in each instance to Tsin.
Though these little historical peccadilloes on the part of the
saint homme are considered even by orthodox critics to be
objectionable, it must be remembered that it was very risky work
writing history at all in those despotic times: even in
comparatively democratic days (100 B.C.), the “father of Chinese
history” was castrated for criticizing the reigning Emperor in the
course of issuing his great work; and so late as the fifth century
A.D. an almost equally great historian was put to death “with his
three generations” for composing a “true history” of the Tartars
then ruling as Emperors of North China; i.e. for disclosing their
obscure and barbarous origin, Moreover, foreigners who fix upon
these trifling specific and admitted discrepancies, in order to
discredit the general truth of all Chinese history, must remember
that the Chinese critics, from the very beginning, have always,
even when manifestly biased, been careful to expose errors; the
very discrepancies themselves, indeed, tend to prove the
substantial truth of the events recorded; and the fact that
admittedly erroneous texts still stand unaltered proves the
reverent care of the Chinese as a nation to preserve their
defective annals, with all faults, in their original condition.
At this treaty conference of 546 B.C., held at the Sung capital,
the host alone had no vote, being held superior (as host) to all;
and, further, out of respect for his independence, the treaty had
to be signed outside his gates: the existence of the Emperor was
totally ignored.
A generation before this (579) another important treaty between
the two great rivals, Tsin and Ts’u, had been signed by the high
contracting parties outside the walls of Sung. The articles
provided for community of interest in success or failure; mutual
aid in every thing, more especially in war; free use of roads so
long as relations remained peaceful; joint action in face of
menace from other powers; punishment of those neglecting to come
to court. The imprecation ran: “Of him who breaks this, let the
armies be dispersed and the kingdom be lost; moreover, let the
spirits chastise him.” Although both orthodox powers professed
their anxiety to “protect” the imperial throne, yet, seeing that
the Emperor was quietly shelved in all these conventions, the
reference to “court duty” probably refers to the duty of Cheng and
the other small orthodox states to render homage to Tsin or Ts’u
(as the case might be) as settled by this and previous treaties.
In fact, at the Peace Conference of 546, it was agreed between the
two mesne lords that the vassals of Ts’u should pay their respects
to Tsin, and vice versa. But, during the negotiations, a
zealous Tsin representative went on to propose that the informal
allies of the chief contracting powers should also be dragged in:
“If Ts’in will pay us a visit, I will try and induce Ts’i to visit
T’su.” These two powers had ententes, Ts’i with Tsin, and
Ts’u with Ts’in, but recognized no one’s hegemony over them. It
was this surprise sprung upon the Ts’u delegates that necessitated
an express messenger to the king, as recounted at the end of
Chapter XVI. The King of Ts’u sent word: “Let Ts’in and Ts’i
alone; let the others visit our respective capitals.” Accordingly
it was understood that Tsin and Ts’u should both be Protectors,
but that neither Ts’in nor Ts’i should recognize their status to
the point of subordinating themselves to the joint hegemons. This
was Ts’u’s first appearance as effective hegemon, but her official
debut alone did not take place till 538. Ts’i and Ts’in had
both approved, in principle, the terms of peace, but Ts’in sent no
representative, whilst Ts’i sent two. It is very remarkable that
Sz-ma Ts’ien (the great historian of 100 B.C., who was castrated)
does not mention this important meeting in his great work, either
under the heading of Ts’i, or of Tsin, or under the headings of
Sung and Ts’u. It seems, however, really to have had good effect
for several generations; but there was some thing behind it which
shows that love for humanity was not the leading motive of the
chief parties. Two years later it was that the philosophical
brother of the King of Wu went his rounds among the Chinese
princes, and it is evident that Ts’u only desired peace with North
China whilst she tackled this formidable new enemy on the coast.
Tsin, on the other hand, was in trouble with the “six great
families” (the survivors of the “eleven great families"
conciliated by the Second Protector), who were gradually
undermining the princely authority in Tsin to their own private
aggrandisement. In 572 B.C., when the legitimate ruler of Tsin,
who had been superseded by irregular successors, was fetched back
from the Emperor’s court, to which he had gone for a quiet asylum,
he drew up a treaty of conditions with his own ministers, and
immolated a chicken as sanction; this idea is still occasionally
perpetuated in British courts of justice, where Chinese, probably
without knowing it, draw upon ancient history when asked by the
court how they are accustomed to sanction an oath; cocks are often
also carried about by modern Chinese boatmen for purposes of
sacrifice. In the year 504, after Wu had captured the Ts’u
capital, one of the petty orthodox Chinese states taken by Ts’u–
the first to be so taken by barbarians–in 684, but left by Ts’u
internally independent, declined to render any assistance to Wu,
unless she could prove her competence to hold permanently the Ts’u
territory thus conquered. The King of Ts’u was so grateful for
this that he drew some blood from the breast of his own half-
brother, and on the spot made a treaty with the vassal prince. It
662, even in a love vow, the ruler of Lu cut his own arm and
exchanged drops of blood with his lady-love. In 481 the people of
Wei (the small orthodox state on the middle Yellow River between
Tsin and Lu) forced one of their politicians to swear allegiance
to the desired successor under the sanction of a sacrificial pig.
The great Kwan-tsz insisted on his prince carrying out a treaty
which had been extorted in times of stress; but, as a rule, the
most opportunistic principles were laid down, even by Confucius
himself when he was placed under personal stress: “Treaties
obtained by force are of no value, as the spirits could not then
have really been present.” In 589 Ts’u invaded the state of Wei,
just mentioned, and menaced the adjoining state of Lu, compelling
the execution of a treaty. Confucius, who once broke a treaty
himself, naturally retrospectively considered this ducal treaty of
no effect, and he even goes so far as to avoid mentioning in his
annals some of the important persons who were present; he
especially “burkes” two Chinese ruling princes, who were shameless
enough to ride in the same chariot with the King of Ts’u, under
whose predominancy they were, and who were therefore themselves
under a kind of stress. In 482 one of Confucius’ pupils made the
following casuistical reply to the government of Wu on their
application for renewal of a treaty with her: “It is only fidelity
that gives solidity to treaties; they are determined by mutual
consent, and it is with sacrifices that they are laid before our
ancestors; the written words give expression to them, and the
spirits guarantee them. A treaty once concluded cannot be changed:
otherwise it were vain to make a new one. Remember the proverb:
“What needs warming up more may just as well be eaten cold.” The
ordinary rough-and-ready form of oath or vow between individuals
was: “If I break this, may I be as this river"; or, “may the river
god be witness.” There were many other similar forms, and it was
often customary to throw something valuable into the river as a
symbol.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
