



There are singularly few descriptions of cities in ancient Chinese
history, but here again we may safely assume that most of them
were in principle, if only on a small scale, very much what they
are now, mere inartistic, badly built collections of hovels. Soul,
the quaint capital of Corea, as it appeared in its virgin
condition to its European discoverers twenty-five years ago,
probably then closely resembled an ancient vassal Chinese prince’s
capital of the very best kind. Modern trade is responsible for the
wealthy commercial streets now to be found in all large Chinese
cities; but a small hien city in the interior–and it must
be remembered that a hien circuit or district corresponds
to an old marquisate or feudal principality of the vassal unit
type–is often a poor, dusty, dirty, depressing, ramshackle
agglomeration of villages or hamlets, surrounded by a disproportionately
pretentious wall, the cubic contents of which wall alone would more
than suffice to build in superior style the whole mud city within; for half
the area of the interior is apt to be waste land or stagnant puddles: it
was so even in Peking forty years ago, and possibly is so still except
in the “Legation quarter.”
In 745 B.C., when the Tsin marquess foolishly divided his
patrimony with a collateral branch, the capital town of this
subdivided state is stated to have been a greater place than the
old capital. They are both of them still in existence as
insignificant towns, situated quite close together on the same
branch of the River Fen (the only navigable river) in South Shan
Si; marked with their old names, too; that is to say, K’iih-wuh
and Yih-CH’ENg. It was only after the younger branch annexed the
elder in 679 that Tsin became powerful and began to expand; and it
was only when a policy of “home rule” and disintegration set in,
involving the splitting up of Tsin’s orthodox power into three
royal states of doubtful orthodoxy, that China fell a prey to
Ts’in ambition. Absit omen to us.
In 560, when the deformed philosopher Yen-tsz visited Ts’u, and
entertained that semi-barbarous court with his witticisms, he took
the opportunity boastfully to enlarge upon the magnificence of
Lin-tsz (still so marked), the capital of Ts’i. “It is,” said he,
“surrounded by a hundred villages; the parasols of the walkers
obscure the sky, whose perspiration runs in such streams as to
cause rain; their shoulders and heels touch together, so closely
are they packed.” The assembled Ts’u court, with mouths open, but
inclined for sport at the cost of their visitor, said: “If it is
such a grand place, why do they select you?” Yen-tsz played a
trump card when he replied: “Because I am such a mean-looking
fellow,"–meaning, as explained in Chapter IX., that “any pitiful
rascal is good enough to send to Ts’u.” Exaggerations apart,
however, there is every reason to believe that the statesman-
philosopher Kwan-tsz, a century before that date, had really
organized a magnificent city. A full description of how he
reconstructed the economic life of both city and people is given
in the Kwoh-yue (see Chapter XVII.), the authenticity of
which work, though not free from question, is, after all, only
subject to the same class of criticism as Renan lavishes upon one
or two of the Gospels, the general tenor of which, be says, must
none the less be accepted, with all faults, as the bonafide
attempt of some one, more or less contemporary, to represent what
was then generally supposed to be the truth.
Ts’u itself must have had something considerable to show in the
way of public buildings, for in the year 542 B.C. after paying a
visit to that country in accordance with the provisions of the
Peace Conference of 546, the ruler of Lu built himself a palace in
imitation of one he saw there. The original capital of Wu (see
Chapter VII.) was a poor place, and is described as having
consisted of low houses in narrow streets, with a vulgar palace;
this was in 523. In 513 a new king moved to the site now occupied
by Soochow, and he seems to have made of it the magnificent city
it has remained ever since–the place, of course it will be
remembered, where General Gordon and Li Hung-chang had their
celebrated quarrel about decapitating surrendered rebels. There
were eight gates, besides eight water-gates for boats; it was
eight English miles in circuit, and contained the palace, several
towers (pagodas, being Buddhist, were then naturally unknown),
kiosks, ponds, and duck preserves. The extensive arsenal and ship-
yard was quite separate from the main town. No city in the
orthodox part of China is so closely described as this one, nor is
it likely that there were many of them so vast in extent.
Judging by the frequency with which Ts’in moved its capitals (but
always within a limited area in the Wei valley, between that river
and its tributary the K’ien), they cannot have been very important
or substantial places; in fact, there are no descriptions of early
Ts’in economic life at all; and, for all we know to the contrary,
the headquarters of Duke Muh, when he entered upon his reforms in
the seventh century B.C., may have resembled a Tartar encampment.
The Kwoh-yue has no Chapter devoted to Ts’in, which (as indeed
stated) for 500 years lived a quite isolated life of its own. In later
times, especially after the reforms introduced by the celebrated
Chinese princely adventurer, Wei Yang, during the period 360–340,
the land administration was reconstituted, the capital was finally moved
to Hien-yang, and every effort was made to develop all the resources
of the country. Ts’in then possessed 41 hien, those with a
population of under 10,000 having a governor with a lower title than
the governors of the larger towns, Probably the total population of
Ts’in by this time reached 3,000,000. A century later, when the First
August Emperor was conquering China, armies of half a million men
on each side were not at all uncommon. When his conquests were
complete, he set about building palaces on both banks of the Wei in
most lavish style, as narrated in the last Chapter. It is said of him that,
“as he conquered each vassal prince, he had a sketch made of his
palace buildings,” and, with these before him as models, he lined
the river with rows of beautiful edifices,–evidently, from the
description given, much resembling those lying along the Golden
Horn at Constantinople; if not in quality, at least in general
spectacular arrangement.
As to the minor orthodox states grouped along the Yellow River,
they seem to have shifted their capitals on very slight
provocation; scarcely one of them remained from first to last in
the same place. To take one as an instance, the state of Hu, an
orthodox state belonging to the same clan name as Ts’i. The
history of this petty principality or barony is only exactly known
from the time when Confucius’ history begins, and it was
continually being oppressed by Cheng and Ts’u, its more powerful
neighbours; in 576, 533, 524 and onwards from that, there were
incessant removals, so that even the native commentators say: “it
was just like shifting a village, so superficial an affair was
it.” The accepted belles lettres style (see p. 78) of saying
“my country” is still the ancient pi-yih or “unworthy village”:
the Empress of China once (about 190 B.C.) used this expression,
even after the whole of China had been united, in order to reject
politely the offer of marriage conveyed to her by a powerful Tartar
king. The expression is particularly interesting, inasmuch as it recalls,
as we have already pointed out, a time when the “country” of each
feudal chief was simply his mud village and the few square miles of
fields around it, which were naturally divided off from the next chief’s
territory by hills and streams. On the Burmo-Chinese frontier there are
at this moment many Kakhyen “kings” of this kind, each of them ruling
over his mountain or valley, and supreme in his own domain.
That there were walled cities in China (apart from the Emperor’s,
which, of course, would be “the city” par excellence) is
plain from the language used at durbars, which were always held
“outside the walls.” In the loess plains there could not
have been any stone whatever for building purposes, and there is
little, if any, specific mention of brick. Probably the walls were
of adobe, i.e. of mud, beaten down between two rigid planks,
removed higher as the wall dries below. This is the way most of
the houses are still built in modern Peking, and perhaps also in
most parts of China, at least where stone (or brick) is not
cheaper; the “barbarian” parts of China are still the best built;
for instance, CH’ENg-tu in Sz Ch’wan, Canton in the south. Hankow
(Ts’u) is a comparatively poor place; Peking the dingiest of all.
Chinkiang is a purely loess country.
At the time of the unification of China, during the middle of the
third century B.C., the Ts’in armies found it necessary to flood
Ta-liang or “Great Liang,” the capital of Ngwei (otherwise called
Liang), corresponding to the modern K’ai-feng Fu, the Jewish
centre in Ho Nan province: the waters of the Yellow River were
allowed to flood the country (this was again done by the Tai-p’ing
rebels fifty years ago, when the Jews suffered like other people,
and lost their synagogue), the walls of which collapsed. It is
evident that the ancient city walls could not have been such
solid, brick-faced walls as we now see round Peking and Nanking,
but simply mud ramparts.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
