



The emperors of the dynasty of Chou, which came formally into
power in 1122 B.C., we have seen took no other title than that of
wang, which is usually considered by Europeans to mean “king"; in
modern times it is applied to the rulers of (what until recently
were) tributary states, such as Loochoo, Annam, and Corea; to
foreign rulers (unless they insist on a higher title); and to
Manchu and Mongol princes of the blood, and mediatized princes.
Confucius in his history at first always alludes to the Emperor
whilst living as t’ien-wang, or “the heavenly king"; it is
not until in speaking of the year 583 that he uses the old term
t’ien-tsz, or “Son of Heaven,” in alluding to the reigning
Emperor. After an emperor’s death he is spoken of by his
posthumous name; as, for instance, Wu Wang, the “Warrior King,"
and so on: these posthumous names were only introduced (as a
regular system) by the Chou dynasty.
The monarchs of the two dynasties Hia (2205-1767) and Shang (1766-
1123) which preceded that of Chou, and also the somewhat mythical
rulers who preceded those two dynasties, were called Ti, a
word commonly translated by Western nations as “Emperor.” For many
generations past the Japanese, in order better to assert vis-a-
vis of China their international rank, have accordingly made
use of the hybrid expression “Ti-state,” by which they seek
to convey the European idea of an “empire,” or a state ruled over
by a monarch in some way superior to a mere king, which is the
highest title China has ever willingly accorded to a foreign
prince; this royal functionary in her eyes is, or was, almost
synonymous with “tributary prince.” Curiously enough, this “dog-
Chinese” (Japanese) expression is now being reimported into
Chinese political literature, together with many other excruciating
combinations, a few of European, but mostly of Japanese manufacture,
intended to represent such Western ideas as “executive and legislative,"
“constitutional,” “ministerial responsibility,” “party,” “political view,"
and so on. But we ourselves must not forget, in dealing with the particular
word “imperial,” that the Romans first extended the military title of
imperator to the permanent holder of the “command,” simply because
the ancient and haughty word of “king” was, after the expulsion of
the kings, viewed with such jealousy by the people of Rome that
even of Caesar it is said that he did thrice refuse the title, So
the ancient Chinese Ti, standing alone, was at first applied both
to Shang Ti or “God” and to his Vicar on Earth, the Ti or Supreme
Ruler of the Chinese world. Even Lao-tsz (sixth century B.C.), in
his revolutionary philosophy, considers the “king” or “emperor” as
one of the moral forces of nature, on a par with “heaven,"
“earth,” and “Tao (or Providence).” When we reflect what petty
“worlds” the Assyrian, Egyptian, and Greek worlds were, we can
hardly blame the Chinese, who had probably been settled in Ho Nan
just as long as the Western ruling races had been in Assyria and
Egypt respectively, for imagining that they, the sole recorders of
events amongst surrounding inferiors, were the world; and that the
incoherent tribes rushing aimlessly from all sides to attack them,
were the unreclaimed fringe of the world.
It does not appear clearly why the Chou dynasty took the new title
of wang, which does not seem to occur in any titular sense
previous to their accession: the Chinese attempts to furnish
etymological explanation are too crude to be worth discussing. No
feudal Chinese prince presumed to use it during the Chou
regime and if the semi-barbarous rulers of Ts’u, Wu, and
Yiieh did so in their own dominions (as the Hwang Ti, or “august
emperor,” of Annam was in recent times tacitly allowed to do),
their federal title in orthodox China never went beyond that of
viscount. When in the fourth century B.C. all the powers styled
themselves wang, and were recognized as such by the insignificant
emperors, the situation was very much the same as that produced in
Europe when first local Caesars, who, to begin with, had been
“associates” of the Augustus (or two rival Augusti), asserted their
independence of the feeble central Augustus, and then set themselves
up as Augusti pure and simple, until at last the only “Roman Emperor"
left in Rome was the Emperor of Germany.
It is not explained precisely on what grounds, when the first Chou
emperors distributed their fiefs, some of the feudal rulers, as
explained in Chapter VII., were made dukes; others marquesses,
earls, viscounts, and barons. Of course these translated terms are
mere makeshifts, simply because the Chinese had five ranks, and so
have we. In creating their new nobility, the Japanese have again
made use of the five old Chinese titles, except that for some
reason they call Duke Ito and Duke Yamagata “Prince” in English.
The size of the fiefs had something to do with it in China; the
pedigree of the feoffees probably more; imperial clandom perhaps
most of all. The sole state ruled by a duke in his own intrinsic
right from the first was Sung, a small principality on the
northernmost head-waters of the River Hwai, corresponding to the
modern Kwei-t&h Fu: probably it was because this duke fulfilled
the sacrificial and continuity duties of the destroyed dynasty of
Shang that he received extraordinary rank; just as, in very much
later days, the Confucius family was the only non-Manchu to
possess “ducal” rank, or, as the Japanese seem to hold in German
style, “princely” rank. But it must be remembered that the Chou
emperors had imperial dukes within their own appanage, precisely
as cardinals, or “princes of the Church,” are as common around
Rome as they are scarce among the spiritually “feudal” princes of
Europe; for feudal they once practically were.
Confucius’ petty state of Lu was founded by the Duke of Chou,
brother of the founder posthumously called the Wu Wang, or the
“Warrior King”: for many generations those Dukes of Lu seem to
have resided at or near the metropolis, and to have assisted the
Emperors with their advice as counsellors on the spot, as well as
to have visited at intervals and ruled their own distant state,
which was separated from Sung by the River Sz and by the marsh or
lakes through which that river ran. Yet Lu as a state had only the
rank of a marquisate ruled by a marquess.
Another close and influential relative of the founder or “Warrior
King” was the Duke of Shao, who was infeoffed in Yen (the Peking
plain), and whose descendants, like those of the Duke of Chou,
seem to have done double duty at the metropolis and in their own
feudal appanage. Confucius’ history scarcely records anything of
an international kind about Yen, which was a petty, feeble region,
dovetailed in between Tsin and Ts’i, quite isolated, and occupied
in civilizing some of the various Tartar and Corean barbarians;
but it must have gradually increased in wealth and resources like
all the other Chinese states; for, as we have seen in the last
Chapter, the Earls of Yen blossomed out into Kings at the
beginning of the fourth century B.C., and the philosopher Mencius,
when advising the King of Ts’i, even strongly recommended him to
make war on the rising Yen power. The founder of Ts’i was the
chief adviser of the Chou founder, but was not of his family name;
his ancestors–also the ancestors later on claimed by certain
Tartar rulers of China–go back to one of the ultra-mythical
Emperors of China; his descendants bore, under the Chou dynasty,
the dignity of marquess, and reigned without a break until, as
already related, the T’ien or Ch’en family, emanating from the
orthodox state of Ch’en, usurped the throne. Ts’i was always a
powerful and highly civilized state; on one occasion, in 589 B.C.,
as mentioned in Chapter VI., its capital was desecrated by Tsin;
and on another, a century later, the overbearing King of Wu
invaded the country. After the title of king was taken in 378
B.C., the court of Ts’i became quite a fashionable centre, and the
gay resort of literary men, scientists, and philosophers of all
kinds, Taoists included.
Tsin, like Ts’i, was of marquess rank, and though its ruling
family was occasionally largely impregnated with Tartar blood by
marriage, it was not much more so than the imperial family itself
had sometimes been, The Chinese have never objected to Tartars
qua Tartars, except as persons who “let their hair fly,"
“button their coats on the wrong side,” and do not practise the
orthodox rites; so soon as these defects are remedied, they are
eligible for citizenship on equal terms. There has never been any
race question or colour question in China, perhaps because the
skin is yellow in whichever direction you turn; but it is
difficult to conceive of the African races being clothed with
Chinese citizenship.
Wei was a small state lying between the Yellow River as it now is
and the same river as it then was: it was given to a brother of
the founder of the Chou dynasty, and his subjects, like those of
the Sung duke, consisted largely of the remains of the Shang
dynasty; from which circumstance we may conclude that the so-
called “dynasties,” including that of Chou, were simply different
ruling clans of one and the same people, very much like the
different Jewish tribes, of which the tribe of Levi was the most
“spiritual”: that peculiarity may account for the universal
unreadiness to cut off sacrifices and destroy tombs, an outrage we
only hear of between barbarians, as, for instance, when Wu sacked
the capital of Ts’u. We have seen in Chapter XII. that a reigning
duke even respected at least some of the sacrificial rights of a
traitor subject.
The important state of CHENG, lying to the eastward of the
imperial reserve, was only founded in the ninth century B.C. by
one of the then Emperor’s sons; to get across to each other, the
great states north and south of the orthodox nucleus had usually
to “beg road” of CHENG, which territory, therefore, became a
favourite fighting-ground; the rulers were earls. Ts’ao (earls)
and Ts’ai (marquesses) were small states to the north and south of
CHENG, both of the imperial family name. The state of CH’EN was
ruled by the descendants of the Emperor Shun, the monarch who
preceded the Hia dynasty, and who, as stated before, is supposed
to have been buried in the (modern) province of Hu Nan, south of
the Yang-tsz River: they were marquesses. These three last-named
states were always bones of contention between Tsin and Ts’u, on
the one hand, and between Ts’i and Ts’u on the other. The
remaining feudal states are scarcely worth special mention as
active participators in the story of how China fought her way from
feudalism to centralization; most of their rulers were viscounts
or barons in status, and seem to have owed, or at least been
obliged to pay, more duty to the nearest great feudatory than
direct to the Emperor.
No matter what the rank of the ruler, so soon as he had been
supplied with a posthumous name (expressing, in guarded style, his
personal character) he was known to history as “the Duke So-and-
So.” Even one of the Rings of Ts’u, is courteously called “the
Duke Chwang” after his death, because as a federal prince he had
done honour to the courtesy title of viscount. Princes or rulers
not enjoying any of the five ranks were, if orthodox sovereign
princes over never so small a tract, still called posthumously,
“the Duke X.”
Hence Western writers, in describing Confucius’ master and the
rulers of other feudal states, often speak of “the Duke of Lu,” or
“of Tsin"; but this is only an accurate form of speech when taken
subject to the above reserves.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
