



In the spring of the year 536 B.C., Tsz-ch’an, one of the leading
statesmen in the Chinese Federal Union, decided to publish for
popular information the Criminal Law which had hitherto been
simply “declared” by the various rulers and their officers
according to the circumstances of each case. At this time the
different premiers and ministers used to visit each other freely,
generally in the suite of the reigning prince who happened to be
either receiving or paying a visit from or to some other vassal
prince. The Emperor himself, now shorn of his power, was only
primus inter pares amongst these princes. Shuh Hiang, one
of the ministers at the neighbouring court of Tsin, addressed the
following remarkable letter to the colleague above mentioned who
had introduced the legal innovation. It is published in
exteso in Confucius’ own history of the times, as expanded
by one of his pupils:–
“At first I used to regard you as a guide, but now all this is at
an end. Our monarchs in past times were wont to decide matters by
specific ordinance, and had no prepared statutes, fearing lest the
people should grow contentious. Yet even so it was impossible to
suppress wrong-doing; for which reason they employed justice as a
preventive, administration to bring things into line, external
formality to secure respect, good faith as an abiding principle,
and kindness in actual treatment. They appointed certain ranks and
emoluments with a view to encouraging their officers to follow the
course thus sketched out for them, and they fixed certain stern
punishments and fines in order to fill these officers with a dread
of arbitrariness, fearing that otherwise they might fail in their
duty. Thus admonition was given with every loyalty; fear was
inspired by personal example; instruction was conveyed as occasion
required; employment in service was accompanied by suavity;
contact with inferiors was marked by a respectful demeanour; the
executive arm was firmly applied; and decisions were carried out
with virility. Yet, with all this, it was never too easy to secure
wise and saintly (vassal) princes, clever and discriminating
ministers, loyal and trusty officials, or kind and affectionate
instructors. Under these circumstances, however, it was possible
to set the people going, and China was at least free from
revolution and misery.
“But when the people themselves become cognizant of a written law,
they will cease to fear their superiors, and, moreover, they will
acquire a contentious spirit. Having book to refer to, they will
employ every device to elude the letter of the law. This will not
do at all. It was only in times of anarchical rule that the
founders of the Hia and Shang dynasties (2200 B.C. and 1760 B.C.)
found it necessary to issue (to their officers) the collections of
laws which still bear their two respective names; and it was also
only in anarchical times (1000 B.C.) that one Emperor of our
present dynasty found it necessary to publish (for his officers)
the so-called Nine Laws. In other words, the advent of written law
has on all three occasions connoted a decay in government. You,
sir, are the chief minister of CHENG state (part of modern
Ho Nan); you made a few years ago some new regulations about the
parcelling of land; next you placed the system of your taxation on
a fresh basis; and you now proceed to embody the three special
collections just cited in a new popular code, which you have had
cast in metal characters. If you are doing it with a view to
pacify the people, surely you will not find this an easy matter?
The ’Book of Odes’ says: ’King Wen (the virtual founder,
2200 B.C., of the then reigning Chou dynasty) took virtue as his
guide, and thus gradually pacified the four quarters of the
world.’ It also says: ’The methods of King Wu (son of the
virtual founder) secured the confidence of all the other
countries.’ Where were the written laws in those times? When
people begin to get the contentious spirit upon them, they will
have done with the principles of propriety, and only stickle for
the letter; they will haggle upon every tiny point accessible to
knife’s edge or awl’s tip. We shall witness a flood of litigious
accusations; bribery and corruption will be rampant. Do you think
the state of Cheng will last out your life? I have heard it
said: ’When a country is about to collapse, there are many
conflicting administrative changes.’ Will this apply to present
conditions?”
The reply returned was:-
“With regard to what my honourable friend has been pleased to say,
I am afraid my humble capacities are not sufficiently great to
take the interests of posterity; my action has been taken in the
interests of the state as I find it, and as I have to govern it.
Though, therefore, I cannot accept tour commands, I shall be
careful not to forget your kindness in proffering advice.”
Though the exact words of the above-mentioned Code in Brass have
not come down to us, they are (like the Twelve Tables of Rome,
eighty years later in date, were in relation to Roman jurisprudence)
the foundation of Chinese Criminal Law as it exists to-day, modified,
of course, dynasty by dynasty. At this time Confucius was a mere
youth; but later on, as minister of a third vassal state, that of Lu, he
also expressed his disapproval of a written code, much though he
respected the author, whom he knew personally. Shuh Hiang’s letter
is of interest as showing the pitch of philosophy, common-sense, and
international courtesy to which the statesmen of China had attained
2400 years ago.
In 539 B.C. the Ts’i statesman and philosopher Yen-tsz was sent on
a mission to Tsin in order to negotiate a political marriage. At
this period Han K’i, also called Han Suean-tsz, was the premier of
Tsin, and he despatched the minister Shuh Hiang with a complimentary
message to the Ts’i envoy, accepting the offer of a suitable wife. At
this time the diplomatic relations of the Chinese states were particularly
interesting, because, apart from the fact that intellectual premiers ruled
all the great states, most of them were personal friends, acquaintances,
or correspondents of Confucius, who has left on record his judgment
upon each. After the official marriage negotiations were over, Shuh
Hiang ordered refreshments, and he and Yen-tsz sat down to a nice
quiet little chat by themselves.
Shuh Hiang. How is Ts’i going on?
Yen-tsz. These are bad times. I don’t know what I can say
about Ts’i, except that it appears to be falling into the hands of
the CH’EN family. The prince neglects his people, and consequently
they turn to the CH’EN family for protection. In former times Ts’i
had three grain measures, each a four multiple of the other–etc.
four pints, sixteen pints, sixty-four pints–and finally there was
a large measure containing ten times the last, or 640 pints (or
litres); but the three measures of the CH’EN family have each been
raised by one unit, so that three successive fives multiplied by
ten give 800 pints, and their plan is to make loans of grain with
their private 8oo-pint measure, and then to take back payments in
the prince’s measure. The wood from the mountains is sold in the
market-place as cheaply as on the mountains; fish, salt, clams,
and cockles are sold in the market-place as cheaply as on the
shore. On the other hand, two-thirds of the produce of the
people’s labour go to the prince, whilst only one-third remains
for the sustenance of the producers. The prince’s stores rot away,
whilst our old men die of starvation. False feet are cheaper than
shoes in the market-place (owing to the number of people punished
with amputation of a foot); the people are smarting with a sense
of wrong, and are longing for the advent (of the CH’EN family),
whom they love as a parent, and towards whom they tend, just as
water runs downhill. Under these circumstances, even if they did
not want to gain the people over, how can they avoid it? The last
surviving member of that branch of the CH’EN family who traced his
descent to previous dynasties has still left his spirit in the
land of Ts’i, though the representatives of the family are
nominally subjects of Ts’i.
Shuh Hiang. Yes. And even our ruling house of Tsin has
fallen on degenerate times. Armies are no longer equipped, and our
statesmen are not ready for war. There is no one to lead the
chariots, and our battalions have no competent commanders. The
common people are utterly exhausted, whilst the extravagance of
the palace is unbounded. The starving folk line the roads, whilst
money is squandered upon female favourites. The commands of the
prince are received by the people as though they longed to escape
the clutches of a bandit. The representatives of the eight leading
families who have served the state so long and faithfully are
reduced to the most insignificant offices. Government is
administered in certain private interests, and the people have no
one to whom to appeal. The ruler shows no sign of amendment, and
endeavours to drown his cares in excessive indulgence. When did
the ruling house ever before reach the low depths of to-day? The
warning oracle inscribed on the tripod says: “However early you
may get to zealous work, your descendants may be lazy.” How much
more, in the case of a man who will not reform, is disaster likely
to be impending soon!
Yen-tsz. What do you propose to do?
Shuh Hiang. The ruling house of Tsin is about exhausted. I
have heard it said that when a ruling house is about to fall, its
family members drop off first, like the branches and leaves of a
stricken tree; and the ruler himself, like the trunk, follows
suit. Take my own stock, for instance, which formerly contained
eleven family or clan names. The Sheepstongue (cf, English
Sheepshanks) clan is my clan, and the only one now left; and I
myself have no son fit to be my heir. The ruling house is
arbitrary and capricious, so that, even if I am fortunate enough
to die in my bed myself, I shall have no one to perform the
sacra for me.
In 513 B.C. two generals of the Tsin state carried their arms into
the Luh-hun reservation (in modern Ho Nan province), whither, in
638 B.C., the Tartar tribe of that name had been brought to settle
by agreement between the two Chinese powers whose territories
(Ts’in and Tsin) ran with the Tartars; “and then they drew upon
Tsin state for four cwt. of iron, in order to cast a punishment
tripod upon which to inscribe the law-book composed by Fan Suean-
tsz (a minister).” Confucius said:–
“It looks as though Tsin were about to perish, as it has made a
mistake in its calculations. The state of Tsin ought to govern its
people by maintaining the ancient laws and ordinances received by
their ancestor who was first enfeoffed there (in 1120 B.C.), when
the officers of state would each observe the same in their degree.
Thus the people would know how to respect their superiors, and the
ruling classes would be in a position to maintain their
patrimonies. The proper balance between superior classes and
commoners is what we call ’ordinance.’ The ruling prince W&n (who
assumed the Protectorship of China in 632 B.C.) for this reason
established an official body of dignitaries, and organized the
annual spring revision of the laws of his ancestors as Representative
Federal Prince. Now Tsin abandons this system, and makes a tripod,
which tripod–will henceforth govern the people’s acts. How can they
now respect their superiors (having book to go by)? How can the
superiors maintain their patrimonies? If superiors and commoners
confuse degree, how can the state go on? Moreover, Suean-tsz’s
punishments date from the spring revision (of 621 B.C.), when confusion
and change was going on in Tsin state; how can they take this as a
fit precedent?”
About twenty-five centuries ago–in 546 B.C., to be precise–the
Chinese Powers had a “Hague Conference” with a view to the
reduction of armaments. This is how Confucius’ pupil, Tso K’iu-
ming, tells the story in the “Tso Chwan,” or expanded version of
Confucius’ “Springs and Autumns” (for convenience the names of the
ancient States are changed to those of the modern provinces
corresponding with them):–
“A statesman of Ho Nan, being on friendly terms with his
colleagues of Shan Si and Hu P&h, conceived the idea of making a
name for himself by proposing a cessation of armaments. He went
first to Shan Si, and interviewed the Premier there; the Premier
consulted his colleagues in the Shan Si ministry, and one of them
said: ’War is ruinous to the people, and a fearful waste of
wealth; it is the curse of the smaller Powers. Although the idea
will come to nothing, we must consent to a conference; otherwise
Hu P&h will consent to it first, in order to gain favour with the
Powers, and thus we shall lose the predominant position we now
occupy.’ So Shan Si consented.
“Then (the narrative continues) Hu Peh was visited, and also
consented. Then Shan Tung (the German sphere now). Shan Tung did
not like the idea; but one of the Shan Tung Ministers said: ’Shan
Si and Hu P&h have agreed, and we have no help for it. Besides,
the world will say that there would be a cessation of armaments
were it not for our refusal, and thus our own people will vote
against us. What is the use of that?’ So Shan Tung consented. Next
Shen Si was notified. Shen Si also consented. Then the whole four
great Powers notified the minor States, and a great durbar (of
fourteen States) was held at a minor court in Ho Nan.”
The curious part of it all is that the representative of the
Emperor (whose political position was not unlike that of the Popes
in Europe since 1870) did not appear at the Conference at all,
though all the Great Powers maintained the fiction of granting
precedence to the Emperor and his nuncios, and even went through
the form of accepting investiture from him and taking tribute
presents to the Imperial Court-when it suited them.
This celebrated Peace Conference closed the seventy-two years of
almost incessant war that had been going on between Tsin and Ts’in
(Shan Si and Shen Si), apart from the subsidiary war between Tsin
and Ts’u (Hu Peh).
 

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
