



We have just seen that, when a military expedition started out,
the event was notified, with sacrifice, to the ancestors of the
person most concerned: it was also the practice to carry to
battle, on a special chariot, the tablet of the last ancestor
removed from the ancestral hall, in order that, under his aegis so
to speak, the tactics of the battle might be successful. Ancestral
halls varied according to rank, the Emperor alone having seven
shrines; vassal rulers five; and first-class ministers three;
courtiers or second-class ministers had only two; that is to say,
no one beyond the living subject’s grandfather was in these last
cases worshipped at all. From this we may assume that the ordinary
folk could not pretend to any shrine, unless perhaps the house-
altar, which one may see still any day in the streets of Canton.
In 645 B.C. a first-class minister’s temple was struck by
lightning, and the commentator observes: “Thus we see that all,
from the Emperor down to the courtiers, had ancestral shrines”,–a
statement which proves that already at the beginning of our
Christian era such matters had to be explained to the general
public. The shrines were disposed in the following fashion:–To
the left (on entrance) was the shrine of the living subject’s
father; to the right his grandfather; above these two, to the left
and right again, the great-grandfather and great-great-
grandfather; opposite, in the centre, was that of the founder,
whose tablet or effigy was never moved; but as each living
individual died, his successor of course regarded him in the light
of father, and, five being the maximum allowed, one tablet had to
be removed at each decease, and it was placed in the more general
ancestral hall belonging to the clan or gens rather than to the
specific family: it was therefore the, tablet or effigy of the
great-great-grandfather that was usually carried about in war. The
Emperor alone had two special chapels beyond the five shrines,
each chapel containing the odds (left) and evens (right) of those
higher up in ascent than the great and great-great-grandfathers
respectively. The King of Ts’u who died in 560 B.C. said on his
death-bed: “I now take my place in the ancestral temple to receive
sacrifices in the spring and autumn of each year.” In the year
597, after a great victory over Tsin, the King of Ts’u had been
advised to build a trophy over the collected corpses of the enemy;
but, being apparently rather a high-minded man, after a little
reflection, he said: “No! I will simply erect there a temple to my
ancestors, thanking them for the success.” After the death in 210
B.C. of the First August Emperor, a discussion arose as to what
honours should be paid to his temple shrine: it was explained that
“for a thousand years without any change the rule has been seven
shrines for the Son of Heaven, five for vassal princes, and three
for ministers.” In the year 253, after the conquest of the
miserable Chou Emperor’s limited territory, the same Ts’in
conqueror “personally laid the matter before the Emperor Above in
the suburb sacrifice";–which means that he took over charge of
the world as Vicar of God. The Temple of Heaven (outside the
Peking South Gate), occupied in 1900 by the British troops, is
practically the “suburb sacrifice” place of ancient times. It was
not until the year 221 B.C. that the King of Ts’in, after that
date First August Emperor, formally annexed the whole empire:
“thanks to the shrines in the ancestral temple,” or “thanks to the
spiritual help of my ancestors’ shrines the Under-Heaven (i.e.
Empire) is now first settled.” These expressions have been
perpetuated dynasty by dynasty, and were indeed again used but
yesterday in the various announcements of victory made to Heaven
and his ancestors by the Japanese Tenshi, or Mikado; that
is by the “Son of Heaven,” or T’ien-tsz of the ancient Chinese,
from whom the Japanese Shinto ritual was borrowed in whole or in
part.
In the year 572 B.C., on the accession of a Tsin ruler after
various irregular interruptions in the lineal succession, he says:
“Thanks to the supernatural assistance of my ancestors–and to
your assistance, my lords–I can now carry out the Tsin
sacrifices.” In the year 548 the wretched ruler of Ts’i, victim of
a palace intrigue, begged the eunuch who was charged with the task
of assassinating him at least “to grant me permission to commit
suicide in my ancestral hall.” The wooden tablet representing the
ancestor is defined as being “that on which the spirit reclines";
and the temple “that place where the ancestral spiritual
consciousness doth dwell.” Each tablet was placed on its own
altar: the tablet was square, with a hole in the centre, “in order
to leave free access on all four sides.” The Emperor’s was twelve
inches, those of vassal princes one foot (i.e. ten inches) in
length, and no doubt the inscription was daubed on in varnish
(before writing on silk became general, and before the hair-brush
and ink came into use about 200 B.C.). The rulers of Lu, being
lineal descendants of the Duke of Chou, brother of the first
Emperor of the Chou dynasty (1122 B.C.) had special privileges in
sacrificial matters, such as the right to use the imperial music
of all past dynasties; the right to sacrifice to the father of the
Duke of Chou and the founder; the right to imperial rites, to
suburban sacrifice, and so on; besides the custody of certain
ancient symbolic objects presented by the first Chou Emperors, and
mentioned on page 22.
Of course no punishment could be spiritually greater than the
destruction of ancestral temples: thus on two occasions, notably
in 575 B.C. when a first-class minister traitorously fled his
country, his prince, the Marquess of Lu, as a special act of
grace, simply “swept his ancestral temple, but did not cut off the
sacrifices.” The second instance was also in Lu, in 550: the Wei
friend with whom Confucius lived seventy years later, when
wandering in Wei, retrospectively gave his ritual opinion on the
case–a proof of the solidarity in sympathy that existed between
the statesmen of the orthodox principalities. In the bloodthirsty
wars between the semi-barbarous southern states of Wu and Ts’u,
the capital of the latter was taken by storm in the year 506, the
ancestral temple of Ts’u was totally destroyed, and the renegade
Ts’u ministers who accompanied the Wu armies even flogged the
corpse of the previous Ts’u king, their former master, against
whom they had a grievance. This mutilation of the dead (in cases
where the guilty rulers have contravened the laws of nature and
heaven) was practised even in imperial China; for (see page 57)
the founder of the dynasty, on taking possession of the last Shang
Emperor’s palace, deliberately fired several arrows into the body
of the suicide Emperor. Decapitating corpses and desecrating tombs
of great criminals have frequently been practised by the existing
Manchu government, in criticizing whom we must not forget the
treatment of Cromwell’s body at the Restoration. In the year 285
B.C., when the Ts’i capital was taken possession of by the allied
royal powers then united against Ts’i, the ancestral temple was
burnt. In 249 B.C. Ts’u extinguished the state of Lu, “which thus
witnessed the interruption of its ancestral sacrifices.”
Frequent instances occur, throughout this troublous period, of the
Emperor’s sending presents of meat used in ancestral sacrifices to
the vassal princes; this was intended as a special mark of honour,
something akin to the “orders” or decorations distributed in
Europe. Thus in 671 the new King of Ts’u who had just murdered his
predecessor, which predecessor had for the first time set the bad
example of annexing petty orthodox Chinese principalities,
received this compliment of sacrificial meat from the Emperor,
together with a mild hint to “attack the barbarians such as Yiieh,
but always to let the Chinese princes alone.” Ts’i, Lu, Ts’in, and
Yiieh on different occasions between that date and the fourth
century B.C. received similar donations, usually, evidently, more
propitiatory than patronizing. In 472 the barbarous King of Yiieh
was even nominated Protector along with his present of meat; this
was after his total destruction of Wu, when he was marching north
to threaten North China. Presents of private family sacrificial
meat are still in vogue between friends in China.
Fasting and purification were necessary before undertaking solemn
sacrifice of any kind. Thus the King of Ts’u in 690 B.C. did this
before announcing a proposed war to his ancestors; and an envoy
starting from Ts’u to Lu in 618 reported the circumstance to his
own particular ancestors, who may or may not have been (as many
high officers were) of the reigning caste. On another occasion the
ruler of Lu was assassinated whilst purifying himself in the
enclosure dedicated to the god of the soil, previous to
sacrificing to the manes of an individual who had once
saved his life. Practically all this is maintained in modern
Chinese usage.
A curious distinction is mentioned in connection with official
mourning tidings in the highly ritual state of Lu. If the deceased
were of a totally different family name, the Marquess of Lu wept
outside his capital, turning towards deceased’s native place, or
place of death; if of the same name, then in the ancestral temple:
if the deceased was a descendant of the same founder, then in the
founder’s temple; if of the same family branch, then in the
paternal temple. All these refinements are naturally tedious and
obscure to us Westerners; but it is only by collating specific
facts that we can arrive at any general principle or rule.
[Illustration: MAP
1. Ts’u’s five capitals, in order of date, are marked. In 504 B.C.
the king had to leave the Yang-tsz for good in order to escape Wu
attacks. In 278 B.C. Ts’in captured No. 4, and then the ancient
Ch’ta capital (No. 5, already annexed by Ts’u) became the Ts’u
capital (see maps showing Ch’en’s position). Ts’u was now a Hwai
River power instead of being a Han River and Yang-tsz power. Shuh
and Pa are modern Sz Ch’wan, both inaccessible from the Han
system. The Han system to its north was separated from the Wei
system and the country of Ts’in by a common watershed.
2. Wu seems to have been the only power besides Ts’u possessing
any knowledge of the Yang-tsz River, and Wu was originally part
of, or vassal to Ts’u. 3. Pa had relations with Ts’u so early as
600 B.C. Later Pa princesses married Ts’u kings.]
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
