



So far as it is possible to judge from the concrete instances in
which women are mentioned, it appears that in ancient Chinese
times their confinement and seclusion was neither nominally nor
actively so strict as it has been in later days, and they seem to
have been much more companionable to men than they have been ever
since the ridiculous foot-squeezing fashion came into vogue over a
thousand years ago. When the Martial King addressed his semi-
barbarous western allies, as he prepared his march upon the last
Shang Emperor in 1122 B.C., he observed: “The ancient proverb says
the hen crows not in the morn; when she does, the house will
fall"–in allusion to the interference of the debauched Emperor’s
favourite concubine in public affairs; and we have seen, under the
heading of Law in Chapter XX., how one of the imperial statutes,
proclaimed or read regularly in the vassal kingdoms, prohibited
the meddling of women in public business. But, in spite of this,
so far as promoting the succession rights and political interests
of their own children goes, wives and concubines certainly exerted
considerable influence, whether legitimate or not, in all the
states. The murder of an Emperor and flight of his successor in
771 B.C. was in its inception owing to the intrigues of women
about Court. A few years only after that event, we find the
orthodox ruler of Wei marrying a beautiful Ts’i princess (her
beauty is a matter of history, and is celebrated in the Odes,
which are themselves a popular form of history); and then, because
she had no children, further marrying a princess of Ch’en. This
princess unfortunately lost her offspring; but her sister also
enjoyed the prince’s favour, and her son was, after her death,
given in adoption to the first childless Ts’i wife. This son
succeeded to the Wei throne, but was ultimately murdered by a
younger brother born of a concubine, who was next succeeded by
still another younger brother, whose queen had also been one of
his father’s concubines. Thus in the most orthodox states (Wei was
of the imperial clan), the rites often seem not to have counted
for much in practice.–This book, it must here be repeated, deals
with specific recorded facts, and not with civilization as it
ought to have been under the Rites of Chou.–So, even in
comparatively modern China, 1500 years later, the third emperor of the
T’ang dynasty married his father’s concubine, and she ultimately
reigned as empress in her own right, which is in itself an outrage
upon the “rites.”
In 694 B.C. the ruler of Lu (also of the imperial clan) married a
Ts’i princess, who, as has been stated in Chapter XXXIV., not only
had incestuous relations with her brother of Ts’i, but led that
brother to procure the murder of her husband. In connection with
this woman’s further visit to Ts’i two years later, the rule is
cited: “Women, when once married, should not recross the
frontier.” The same rule is quoted in 655 when a Lu princess, who
had married a petty mesne-vassal of Lu in 670, recrossed the Lu
frontier in order to visit her son in Lu.
The Second Protector, during his wanderings, we know, married
first a Tartar wife and then a Ts’i wife, both of whom showed
disinterested affection for him, and genuine regard for his rights
to the Tsin succession, Yet the ruler of Ts’in supplied him with
five more royal girls, of whom one had already been married to the
Second Protector’s predecessor and nephew, the Marquess of Tsin.
It is but fair to the memory of this uxorious Tsin ruler to say
that he only took her over under protest, and under the immediate
stress of political urgencies; he ultimately made her his
principal spouse at the expressed desire of his ally the Ts’in
ruler. He must have later married a daughter of the Emperor too,
for, after the succession of a son and grandson, another of his
sons named “Black Buttocks,” being the youngest, and also “son of
a Chou mother,” came to the throne. Thus in those troublous times
the honour of imperial princesses evidently did not count for very
much at the great vassal courts. The readiness of Ts’in to induce
the Tsin ruler to take over his nephew’s wife (being a Ts’in
princess) accentuates the semi-Tartar civilization of Ts’in at
least, if not of Tsin too; for both Hiung-nu (200 B.C.) and Turks
(A.D. 500) had a fixed rule that a Khan successor should take over
all his predecessor’s women, with the single exception of his own
natural mother. In the year 630 the King of Ts’u married or
carried off two CHENG sisters (of the imperial clan). The ruler of
CHENG had been insolent to the future Second Protector during his
wanderings in the year 637, and, in order to avoid that
Protector’s vengeance, had been subsequently obliged to throw
himself under Ts’u protection. “This ignoring of the rites by the
King of Ts’u will result in his failing to secure the Protectorship,” it
was said. However, these princesses, though of the imperial Ki
clan by marriage into it, were really daughters  of a CHENG ruler by
two separate Ts’i and Ts’u wives: moreover,  previous to the accession
of the Hia dynasty (in 2205 B.C.), a Chinese elective Emperor had
married the two daughters of his predecessor,  whose own son was
unworthy to succeed: and, generally, apart from this precedent, the
rule against marrying two sisters, even if it  existed, seems to have been
loosely applied (cf. Chapter XXXIII.).
In connection with the Cheng succession in 629, it is mentioned
that “the wife’s sons being all dead, X, being wisest of the
secondary wives’ or concubines’ sons, is most eligible"
(cf. Chapter XXXVII.).
Great political complications arose in connection with a clever
and beautiful princess of Cheng who had had various liaisons
with high personages in the state of Ch’en and elsewhere; in the end
she was carried off in 589 by a treacherous Ts’u statesman to Tsin;
and indirectly this adventure led to his being charged by Tsin with a
mission to Wu; to the subsequent entry of Wu into the conclave of
federal princes; and to the ultimate sacking of the Ts’u capital by
the King of Wu in 506: it is easy to read between the lines that
the Kings of Ts’u were considered unusually arbitrary and tyrannical
rulers; over and over again we find that their most capable statesmen
took service with powers inimical to Ts’u. In 581 the ruler of Cheng,
being forcibly detained in Tsin whilst on a political visit there, was
temporarily replaced in Cheng by his elder brother, born of an
inferior wife.
A marriage between the two states of Sung and Lu having been
arranged, the imperial clan states of Lu and Wei had certain
duties to perform at the wedding, which took place in 583; and it
is recorded that the latter sent “handmaids” The explanation given
is a little involved, but it seems to throw some light on the
marriage of sisters question. It seems that the legitimate spouse
and her “left and right handmaids” were each entitled to three
“cousins or younger sisters” of the same clan-name as themselves,
“thus making a total of nine girls, the idea being to broaden the
base of succession.” Not content with this, Lu sent a special
envoy to Sung the next year to “lecture” the princess. It is
explained that “women at home are under the power of their father;
married, under that of their husbands.” Tsin also sent handmaids
this year. It is further explained that “handmaids are a trifling
matter, and they are only mentioned in this Lu princess case
because her marriage turned out so badly.” The following year Ts’i
despatched handmaids, but, “being of a different clan-name, Ts’i
was not ritual in doing so.”
The precise functions of these paranymphs, or under-studies of
wives, together with the rules governing their selection, are
doubtless clearly enough described in the Rites of Chou;
but we are only dealing here with concrete facts as recorded.
In 526 B.C., when Ts’in gave a princess in marriage to the Ts’u
heir, the Ts’u king decided to keep her for himself (see p. 234).
Only a few years before that, Ts’u had given a princess of her own
in marriage to the heir-apparent of one of the petty orthodox
states (imperial clan), and the reigning father had had improper
relations with her, which in the end led to his murder by his son;
thus Ts’u, however delinquent, had already been given a bad
example by the imperial clan.
After his humiliating defeat by the King of Wu in 494 B.C., the
King of Yiieh introduced a veritable Lex Julia into his
dominions, in order to increase the population more quickly, and
to prepare for his great revenge. Robust men were forbidden to
marry old women, and old men to marry robust women. Parents were
punished if girls were not married by the time they were
seventeen, and if boys were not married by twenty. Enceinte
women had to be placed under the care of public midwives. For
every boy born, a royal bounty of two pots of wine and a dog were
given: for every girl born, two pots of wine and a sucking-pig;–
the dog, it is explained, being figurative of outdoor, the pig of
internal economy. Triplets were to be suckled at the public
expense; twins to be fed, when big enough, at the public expense.
The chief wife’s son must be mourned, with absence from official
duty, for three years; other sons for two; and both kinds of son
were to be equally buried with weeping and wailing. Orphans, and
the sons of sick or poor widows, were to receive official
employment. Distinguished sons were to have their apartments
cleansed for them, and had to be well fed and handsomely clothed.
Learned men from other states were to be officially welcomed in
the ancestral temple. With reference to this curious law, which is
totally un-Chinese in its startling originality, it may be
mentioned that it seems to have gradually led to that laxity of
morals in ancient Yiieh which is still proverbial in those parts;
for, when the First August Emperor was touring over his new empire
in 212 B.C., he left an inscription (still on record) at the old
Yiieh capital, denouncing the “pig-like adultery” of the region,
and, more especially, the remarrying of widows already in
possession of children. Only a few years ago, proclamations
appeared in this region denouncing the pernicious custom of
forcing widows to remarry. Although Kwan-tsz is supposed to have
“invented” the Babylonian woman for Ts’i, nothing is said in any
ancient Chinese history about common prostitution; nor is female
infanticide ever mentioned. In 502 B.C. the Lu revolutionary,
already mentioned in Chapter XXXVII., who was driven to Tsin by
Confucius’ astute measures, had, before leaving Lu, formed a plot
to murder all the sons, by wives, of the three “powerful families"
who were intriguing against the ducal rights, and to put concubine
sons-being creatures of his own-in their place; thus the
succession principles applied not only to ruling families, but
also to private houses; though, as a matter of fact, these three
were all, in their origin, descended from previous ruling dukes.
As explained in Chapters XII. and XXXIII., after five generations
a fresh “family” is supposed to spring out of the common clan.
In spite of Wu’s barbarism, the fact of its belonging, by remote
origin, to the imperial clan (through its first: ruler having
magnanimously migrated from Chou before Chou conquered China in
1122), made it technically incest for Lu to intermarry with Wu;
thus, when in 482 B.C., a Wu princess (evidently forced for
political purposes upon Lu) died, her husband, the ruler of Lu,
was obliged to refrain from a public burial, as has been explained
in Chapter XXXIII. on Names.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
