



Whatever may be the reason why details of interstate movement are
lacking up to 842 B.C., it is certain that, from the date of the
Emperor’s flight eastwards in 771, the utmost activity prevailed
between state and state within the narrow area to which, as we
have seen, the federated Chinese empire was confined. Confucius’
history, covering the 250-year period subsequent to 722, consists
largely of statements that this duke visited that country, or
returned from it, or drew up a treaty with it, or negotiated a
marriage with it. “Society,” in a political sense, consisted of
the four great powers, Ts’in, Tsin, Ts’i, and Ts’u, surrounding
the purely Chinese enclave; and of the innumerable petty Chinese
states, mostly of noble and ancient lineage, only half a dozen of
them of any size, which formed the enclave in question, and were
surrounded by Ts’in, Tsin, Ts’i, and Ts’u, to the west, north,
east, and south. Secondary states in extent and in military power,
like Lu, CHENG, and Wei, whilst having orthodox and in some cases
barbarian sub-vassals of their own, were themselves, if not
vassals to, at all events under the predominant influence of, one
or the other of the four great powers. Thus Lu was at first nearly
always a handmaid of Ts’i, but later fell under the influence of
Tsin, Ts’u, and Wu; Cheng always coquetted between Tsin and Ts’u,
not out of love for either, but in order to protect her own
independence; and so on with the rest. If we inquire what a really
small state meant in those days, the answer is that the modern
walled city, with its district of several hundred square miles
lying around it, was (and usually still is) the equivalent of the
ancient principality; and proof of that lies in the fact that one
of the literary designations of what we now term a “district
magistrate” is still “city marquess.” Another proof is that in
ancient times “your state” was a recognized way of saying “your
capital town"; and “my poor town” was the polite way of saying
“our country"; both expressions still used in elegant diplomatic
composition.
This being so, and it having besides been the practice for a
visiting duke always to take along with him a “minister in
attendance,” small wonder that prominent Chinese statesmen from
the orthodox states were all personal friends, or at least
correspondents and acquaintances, who had thus frequent
opportunity of comparing political notes. To this day there are no
serious dialect differences whatever in the ancient central area
described in the first Chapter, nor is there any reason to suppose
that the statesmen and scholars who thus often met in conclave had
any difficulty in making themselves mutually understood. The
“dialects"’ of which we hear so much in modern times (which, none
the less, are all of them pure Chinese, except that the syllables
differ, just as coeur, cuore, and corazon, coracao, differ from
cor), all belong to the southern coasts, which were practically
unknown to imperial China in Confucius’ time. The Chinese word which
we translate “mandarin” also means “public” or “common,” and
“mandarin dialect” really means “current” or “common speech,"
such as is, and was, spoken with no very serious modifications all
over the enclave; and also in those parts of Ts’in, Tsin, Ts’i, and
Ts’u, which immediately impinged upon the enclave, in the ratio
of their proximity. Finally, Shen Si, Shan Si, Shan Tung, and Hu
Kwang are still called Ts’in, Tsin, Ts’i, and Ts’u in high-class official
correspondence; and so with all other place-names. China has never
lost touch with antiquity.
There is record for nearly every thing: the only difficulty is to
separate what is relevant from what is irrelevant in the mass of
confused data.
Another matter must be considered. Although the Chinese never had
a caste system in the Hindoo sense, there is, as we have stated
once before, every reason to believe that the ruling classes and
the educated classes were nearly all nobles, in the sense that
they were all lineal or branch descendants, whether by first-
class wife or by concubine, of either the ruling dynastic family
or of some previous imperial dynastic family. Some families were
by custom destined for hereditary ministers, others for hereditary
envoys, others again for hereditary soldiers; not, it is true, by
strict rule, but because the ancient social idea favoured the
descent of office, or land, or trade, or craft from father to son.
This, indeed, was part of the celebrated Kwan-tsz’s economic
philosophy. Thus generation after generation of statesmen and
scholars kept in steady touch with one another, exactly as our
modern scientists of the first rank, each as a link, form an
unbroken intimate chain from Newton down to Lord Kelvin, outside
which pale the ordinary layman stands a comparative stranger to
the arcana within.
Kwan-tsz, the statesman-philosopher of Ts’i, and in a sense the
founder of Chinese economic science, was himself a scion of the
imperial Chou clan; every writer on political economy subsequent
to 643 B.C. quotes his writings, precisely as every European
philosophical writer cites Bacon. Quite a galaxy of brilliant
statesmen and writers, a century after Kwan-tsz, shed lustre upon
the Confucian age (550-480), and nearly all of them were personal
friends either of Confucius or of each other, or of both. Thus
Tsz-ch’an of CHENG, senior to Confucius, but beloved and admired
by him, was son of a reigning duke, and a prince of the ducal
CHENG family, which again was descended from a son of the Emperor
who fled in 842 B.C.
If Tsz-ch’an had written works on philosophy and politics, it is
possible that he might have been China’s greatest man in the place
of Confucius; for he based his ideas of government, as did
Confucius, who probably copied much from him, entirely upon
“fitting conduct,” or “natural propriety"; in addition to which he
was a great lawyer, entirely free from superstition and hypocrisy;
a kind, just, and considerate ruler; a consummate diplomat; and a
bold, original statesman, economist, and administrator. The
anecdotes and sayings of Tsz-ch’an are as numerous and as
practical as those about Julius Caesar or Marcus Aurelius.
Another great pillar of the state praised by Confucius was Shuh
Hiang of Tsin, whose reputation as a sort of Chinese Cicero is not
far below that of Tsz-ch’an. He belonged to one of the great
private families of Tsin, of whom it was said in Ts’u that “any of
them could bring 100 war-chariots into the field.” Nothing could
be more interesting than the interviews and letters (see Appendix
No. 1) between these two friends and their colleagues of Ts’i,
Ts’u, Lu, and Sung.
Yen-tsz of Ts’i almost ranks with Kwan-tsz as an administrator,
philosopher, economist, author, and statesman. Confucius has a
good word for him too, though Yen-tsz’s own opinion of Confucius’
merits was by no means so high. The two men had to “spar” with
each other behind their respective rulers like Bismarck and
Gortschakoff did. Yen-tsz’s interview with Shuh Hiang, when the
pair discussed the vices of their respective dukes, is almost as
amusing as a “patter” scene in the pantomime, a sort of by-play
which takes place whilst the curtain is down in preparation for
the next formal act (see Appendix No. 2).
[Illustration: K’ung Ling-i, the hereditary Yen-sheng Kung,
or “Propagating Holiness Duke"; 76th in descent from K’ung K’iu,
alias K’ung Chung-ni, the original philosopher, 551–479
B.C.
This portrait was presented to “the priest P’eng” (Father Tschepe,
S.J.), on the occasion of his visit last autumn (7th moon, 33rd
year).]
Confucius himself had descended in the direct line from the ducal
family of Sung; but Sung, like the other states, was cursed with
the “great family” nuisance, and one of his ancestors, having
incurred a grandee’s hostility, had met with his death in a palace
intrigue, in consequence of which the Confucian family, despairing
of justice, had migrated to Lu. When we read of Confucius’
extensive wanderings (which are treated of more at length in a
subsequent Chapter), the matter takes a very different complexion
from what is usually supposed, especially if it be recollected
what a limited area was really covered. He never got even so far
as Tsin, though part of Tsin touched the Lu frontier, and it is
doubtful if he was ever 300 miles, as the crow flies, from his own
house in Lu; true, he visited the fringe of Ts’u, but it must be
remembered that the place he visited was only in modern Ho Nan
province, and was one of the recent conquests of Ts’u, belonging
to the Hwai River system. As we explained in the last Chapter,
Ts’u’s policy then was to work up eastwards to the river Sz; that
is, to the Grand Canal of to-day. Confucius, it is plain, was no
mere pedant; for we have seen how, in the year 500, when he first
enjoyed high political power, he displayed conspicuously great
strategical and diplomatic ability in defeating the treacherous
schemes of the ruler of Ts’i, who had been endeavouring to filch
Lu territory, and who was dreadfully afraid lest Lu should,
through Wu’s favour, acquire the hegemony or protectorship. He
could even be humorous, for when the barbarian King of Wu put in a
demand for a “handsome hat,” Confucius contemptuously observed
that the gorgeousness of a hat’s trimmings appealed to this
ignorant monarch more than the emblem of rank distinguishing one
hat from another.
Sung provided one distinguished statesman in Hiang Suh, whose fame
is bound up with a kind of Hague Disarmament or Peace Conference,
which he successfully engineered in 546 B.C. (see Appendix No. 3).
In the year 558 he had been sent on a marriage mission to Lu. Ki-
chah of Wu, who died at the ripe age of 90, was quite entitled to
be king of that country, but he repeatedly waived his claims in
favour of his brothers. K’ue-peh-yueh of Wei, is mentioned in the
Book of Rites, and in many other works. With him Confucius lodged
on the two occasions of long sojourn in Wei: he is the man
mentioned in Chapter XII who gave his authoritative “ritual"
opinion about traitors. Ts’in never seems to have produced a
native literary statesman on its own soil. During this 500-year
period of isolated development, and also during the later period
of conquest in the third century B.C., all its statesmen were
borrowed from Tsin, or from some orthodox state of China proper;
in military genius, however, Ts’in was unrivalled, and a special
Chapter will be devoted to her huge battues. The literary
reputation of Ts’u was high at a comparatively early date, and
even now the “Elegies of Ts’u” include some of the very finest of
the Chinese poems and belles lettres; but in Confucius’
time no Ts’u man, except possibly Lao-tsz, had any reputation at
all; and Lao-tsz, being a mere archive keeper, not entrusted with
any influential office, naturally lacked opportunity to emerge
from the chrysalis stage. Moreover, the imperial dynasty, which
Lao-tsz served, had no political influence at all: it was an
ironical saying of the times; “the best civilians are Ts’u’s, but
they all serve other states,” (meaning that the Ts’u rule was too
capricious to attract talent). Hence, apart from the fact that
Confucius doubted the wisdom of Lao-tsz’s novel philosophy,
Confucius had no occasion whatever to mention the secluded, self-
contained old man in his political history, or, rather, in his
bald annals of royal-movements.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
