



The history of China may be for our present purposes accordingly
summed up as follows. The pure Chinese race from time immemorial
had been confined to the flat lands of the Yellow River, and its
one tributary on the south, the River Loh, the Tartars possessing
most of the left bank from the Desert to the sea. However, from
the beginning of really historical times the Chinese had been in
unmistakable part-possession of the valleys of the Yellow River’s
two great tributaries towards the west and north, the Wei (in Shen
Si) and the Fen (in Shan Si). Little, if any, Chinese colonizing
was done much before the Ts’in conquests in any other parts of
Tartarland; none in Sz Ch’wan that we know of; little, if any,
along the coasts, except perhaps from Ts’i and Lu (in Shan Tung),
both of which states seem to have always been open to the sea,
though many barbarian coast tribes still required gathering into
the Chinese fold. The advance of Chinese civilization had been
first down the Yellow River; then down the River Han towards the
Middle Yang-tsz; and lastly, down the canals and the Hwai network
of streams to the Shanghai coast. Old colonies of Chinese had,
many centuries before the conquest of China by the Chou dynasty,
evidently set out to subdue or to conciliate the southern tribes:
these adventurous leaders had naturally taken Chinese ideas with
them, but had usually found it easier for their own safety
and success to adopt barbarian customs in whole or in part. These
mixed or semi-Chinese states of the navigable Yang-tsz Valley,
from the Ich’ang gorges to the sea, had generally developed in
isolation and obscurity, and only appeared in force as formidable
competitors with orthodox Chinese when the imperial power began to
collapse after 771 B.C. The isolation of half-Roman Britain for
several centuries after the first Roman conquest, and the
departure of the last Roman legions, may be fitly compared with
the position of the half-Chinese states. Ts’u, Wu, and Yueeh all
had pedigrees, more or less genuine, vying in antiquity with the
pedigree of the imperial Chou family; and therefore they did not
see why they also should not aspire to the overlordship when it
appeared to be going a-begging. Even orthodox Tsin and Ts’i in
the north and north-east were in a sense colonial extensions,
inasmuch as they were governed by new families appointed thereto
by the Chou dynasty in 1122 B.C., in place of the old races of
rulers, presumably more or less barbarian, who had previously to
1122 B.C. been vassal–in name at least–to the earlier imperial
Hia and Shang dynasties: but these two great states were never
considered barbarian under Chou sway; and, indeed, some of the
most ancient mythological Chinese emperors anterior to the Hia
dynasty had their capitals in Tsin and Lu, on the River Fen and
the River Sz.
It is not easy to define the exact amount of “foreignness” in
Ts’u. One unmistakable non-Chinese expression is given; that is
kou-u-du, or “suckled by a tigress.” Then, again, the syllable
ngao occurs phonetically in many titles and in native personal
names, such as jo-ngao, tu-ngao, kia-ngao, mo-ngao.
There are no Ts’u songs in the Odes as edited by Confucius,  and
the Ts’u music is historically spoken of as being “in the southern
sound"; which may refer, it is true, to the accent, but also possibly
to a strange language. The Ts’u name for “Annals,” or history, was
quite different from the terms used in Tsin and Lu, respectively;
and the Ts’u word for a peculiar form of lameness, or locomotor
ataxy, is said to differ from the expressions used in either Wei and
Ts’i. So far aspossible, all Ts’u dignities were kept in the royal family,
and the king’s uncle was usually premier. The premier of Ts’u was
called Zing-yin, a term unknown to federal China; and Ts’u
considered the left-hand side more honourable than the right,
which at that time was not the case in China proper, though it is
now. The “Borough-English” rule of succession in Ts’u was to give
it to one of the younger sons; this statement is repeated in
positive terms by Shuh Hiang, the luminous statesman of Tsin, and
will be further illustrated when we come to treat of that subject
specially. The Lu rule was “son after father; or, if none, then
younger after eldest brother; if the legitimate heir dies, then
next son by the same mother; failing which, the eldest son by any
mother; if equal claims, then the wisest; if equally wise, cast
lots”: Lu rules would probably hold good for all federal China,
because the Duke of Chou, founder of Lu, was the chief moral force
in the original Chou administration. In the year 587 Lu, when
coquetting between Tsin and Ts’u, was at last persuaded not to
abandon Tsin for Ts’u, “who is not of our family, and can never
have any real affection.” Once in Tsin it was asked, about a
prisoner: “Who is that southernhatted fellow?” It was explained
that he was a Ts’u man. They then handed him a guitar, and made
him sing some “national songs.” In 597 a Ts’u envoy to the Tsin
military durbar said: “My prince is not formed for the fine and
delicate manners of the Chinese”: here is distinct evidence of
social if not ethnological cleaving. The Ts’u men had beards,
whilst those of Wu were not hirsute: this statement proves that
the two barbarian populations differed between themselves. In 635
the King of Ts’u spoke of himself as “the unvirtuous” and the
“royal old man"–designations both appropriate only to barbarians
under Chinese ritual. In 880 B.C., when the imperial power was
already waning, and the first really historical King of Ts’u was
beginning to bring under his authority the people between the Han
and the Yang-tsz, he said: “I am a barbarian savage, and do not
concern myself with Chinese titles, living or posthumous.” In 706,
when the reigning king made his first conquest of a petty Chinese
principality (North Hu Peh), he said again: “I am a barbarian
savage; all the vassals are in rebellion and attacking each other;
I want with my poor armaments to see for myself how Chou governs,
and to get a higher title.” On being refused, he said: “Do you
forget my ancestor’s services to the father of the Chou founder?"
Later on, as has already been mentioned, he put in a claim for the
Nine Tripods because of the services his ancestor, “living in rags
in the Jungle, exposed to the weather,” had rendered to the
founder himself. In 637, when the future Second Protector and
ruler of Tsin visited Ts’u as a wanderer, the King of Ts’u
received him with all the hospitalities “under the Chou rites,"
which fact shows at least an effort to adopt Chinese civilization.
In 634 Lu asked Ts’u’s aid against Ts’i, a proceeding condemned by
the historical critics on the ground that Ts’u was a “barbarian
savage” state. On the other hand, by the year 560 the dying King
of Ts’u was eulogized as a man who had successfully subdued the
barbarian savages. But against this, again, in 544 the ruler of Lu
expressed his content at having got safely back from his visit to
Ts’u, i.e. his visit to such an uncouth and distant court. Thus
Ts’u’s emancipation from “savagery” was gradual and of uncertain
date. In 489 the King of Ts’u declined to sacrifice to the Yellow
River, on the ground that his ancestors had never presumed to
concern themselves with anything beyond the Han and Yang-tsz
valleys. Even Confucius, (then on his wanderings in the petty
state of CH’EN) declared his admiration at this, and said: “The
King of Ts’u is a sage, and understands the Great Way (tao)."
On the other hand, only fifty years before this, when in 538 Ts’u,
with Tsin’s approval, first tried her hand at durbar work, the king
was horrified to hear from a fussy chamberlain (evidently orthodox)
that there were six different ways of receiving visitors according to
their rank; so that Ts’u’s ritual decorum could not have been of
very long standing. The following year (537) a Tsin princess is
given in marriage to Ts’u– a decidedly orthodox feather in Ts’u’s
cap. Confucius affects a particular style in his history when he speaks
of barbarians; thus an orthodox prince “beats” a barbarian, but “battles"
with an orthodox equal. However, in 525, Ts’u and Wu “battle” together,
the commentator explaining that Ts’u is now “promoted” to battle
rank, though the strict rule is that two barbarians, or China and
one barbarian, “beat” rather than “battle.” In 591 Confucius had
already announced the “end” of the King of Ts’u, not as such, but
as federal viscount. Under ordinary circumstances “death” would
have been good enough: it is only in speaking of his own ruler’s
death that the honorific word “collapse” is used. All these fine
distinctions, and many others like them, hold good for modern
Chinese. These (apparently to us) childish gradations in mere
wording run throughout Confucius’ book; but we must remember that
his necessarily timid object was to “talk at” the wicked, and to
“hint” at retribution. Even a German recorder of events would
shrink from applying the word haben to the royal act of a
Hottentot King, for whom hat is more than good enough, without
the allergnaedigst. And we all remember Bismarck’s story of the
way mouth-washes and finger-bowls were treated at Frankfurt by those
above and below the grade of serene highness. Toutes les vices et
toutes les moeurs sont respectables.
In 531 the barbarian King of Ts’u is honoured by being “named” for
enticing and murdering a “ruler of the central kingdoms.” The
pedants are much exercised over this, but as the federal prince in
question was a parricide, he had a lupinum caput, and so
even a savage could without outraging orthodox feelings wreak the
law on him. On the other hand, in 526, when Ts’u enticed and
killed a mere barbarian prince, the honour of “naming” was
withheld. This delicate question will be further elucidated in the
Chapter on “Names.”
It will be observed that none of the testimony brought forward
here to show that Ts’u was, in some undefined way, a non-Chinese
state is either clear or conclusive: its cumulative effect,
however, certainly leaves a very distinct impression that ’there
was a profound difference of some sort both in race and in
manners, though we are as yet quite unable to say whether the bulk
of the Ts’u population was Annamese, Shan, or Siamese; Lolo or
Nosu; Miao-tsz, Tibetan, or what. There is really no use in
attempting to advance one step beyond the point to which we are
carried by specific evidence, either in this or in other matters.
It has been said that no great discovery was ever made without
imagination, which may be true; but evidence and imagination must
be kept rigidly separate. What we may reasonably hope is that, by
gradually ascertaining and sifting definite facts and data
touching ancient Chinese history, we shall at least avoid coming
to wrong positive conclusions, even if the right negative ones are
pretty clearly indicated. It is better to leave unexplained
matters in suspense than to base conclusions upon speculative
substructures which will not carry the weight set upon them.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
