



It was a fixed rule in ancient China that envoys should be treated
with courtesy, and that their persons should be held sacred,
whether at residential courts, in durbar, or on the road through a
third state. During the wars of the sixth century B.C. between
Tsin in the north and Ts’u in the south, when these two powers
were rival aspirants to the Protectorate of the original and
orthodox group of principalities lying between them, and were
alternately imposing their will on the important and diplomatic
minor Chinese state of CHENG (still the name of a territory in Ho
Nan), there were furnished many illustrations of this recognized
rule. The chief reason for thus making a fighting-ground of the
old Chinese principalities was that it was almost impossible for
Ts’u to get conveniently at any of the three great northern
powers, and equally difficult for Ts’in, Tsin, and Ts’i to reach
Ts’u, without passing through one or more Chinese states, mostly
bearing the imperial clan name, and permission had to be asked for
an army to pass through, unless the said Chinese state was under
the predominancy of (for instance) Tsin or Ts’u. It was like
Germany and Italy with Switzerland between them, or Germany and
Spain with France between them. Another important old Chinese
state was Sung, lying to the east of CHENG. Both these states were
of the highest caste, the Earl of CHENG being a close relative of
the Chou Emperor, and the Duke of Sung being the representative or
religious heir of the remains of the Shang dynasty ousted by the
Chou family in I 122 B.C., magnanimously reinfeoffed “in order
that the family sacrifices might not be entirely cut off” together
with the loss of imperial sway. In the year 595 B.C. Sung went so
far as to put a Ts’u envoy to death, naturally much to the wrath
of the rising southern power. Ts’u in turn arrested the Tsin envoy
on his way to Sung, and tried in vain to force him to betray his
trust. In 582 Tsin, in a fit of anger, detained the CHENG envoy,
and finally put him to death for his impudence in coming
officially to visit Tsin after coquetting with Tsin’s rival Ts’u.
All these irregular cases are severely blamed by the historians.
In 562 Ts’u turned the tables upon Tsin by putting the CHENG envoy
to death after the latter had concluded a treaty with Tsin.
Confucius joins, retrospectively of course, in the chorus of
universal reprobation. In 560 Ts’u tried to play upon the Ts’i
envoy a trick which in its futility reminds us strongly of the
analogous petty humiliations until recently imposed by China,
whenever convenient occasion offered, upon foreign officials
accredited to her. The Ts’i envoy, who was somewhat deformed in
person, was no less an individual than the celebrated philosopher
Yen-tsz, a respected acquaintance of Confucius (though, of course,
much his senior), and second only to Kwan-tsz amongst the great
administrative statesmen of Ts’i. The half-barbarous King of Ts’u
concocted with his obsequious courtiers a nice little scheme for
humiliating the northern envoy by indicating to him the small door
provided for his entry into the presence, such as the Grand
Seigneurs in their hey-day used to provide for the Christian
ambassadors to Turkey. Yen-tsz, of course, at once saw through
this contemptible insult and said: “My master had his own reasons
for selecting so unworthy an individual as myself for this
mission; yet if he had sent me on a mission to a dog-court, I
should have obeyed orders and entered by a dog-gate: however, it
so happens that I am here on a mission to the King of Ts’u, and of
course I expect to enter by a gate befitting the status of that
ruler.” Still another prank was tried by the foolish king: a
“variety entertainment” was got up, in which one scene represented
a famished wretch who was being belaboured for some reason.
Naturally every one asked: “What is that?” The answer was: “A Ts’i
man who has been detected in thieving.”  Yen-tsz said: “I
understand that the best fruits come from Ts’u, and they say we
northern men cannot come near the quality of their peaches. We are
honest simpletons, too, and do not look natural on the variety
stage as thieves. The true rogue, like the true peach, is a
southern speciality. I did see rogues on the stage, it is true,
but none of them looked like a Ts’i man; hence I asked, ’What is
it?’” The king laughed sheepishly, and, for a time at least, gave
up taking liberties with Yen-tsz.
In 545, when Ts’u for the moment had the predominant say over
CHENG’s political action, it was insisted that the ruler of CHENG
should come in person to pay his respects: this was after a great
Peace Conference, held at Sung, on which occasion Tsin and Ts’u
arranged a modus operandi for their respective subordinate
or allied vassals. There was no help for it, and the Earl
accordingly went. The minister in attendance was Tsz-ch’an-a very
great name indeed in Chinese history; he was a lawyer, statesman,
“democratic conservative,” sceptic, and philosopher, deeply
lamented on his death alike by the people of CHENG, and by his
friend or correspondent Confucius of Lu state. The Chinese
diplomats then, as now, had the most roundabout ways of pointing a
moral or delicately insinuating an innuendo. On arrival at the
outskirts of the capital, instead of building the usual dais for
formalities and sacrifices, Tsz-ch’an threw up a mean hut for the
accommodation of his mission, saying: “Altars are built by great
states when they visit small ones as a symbol of benefits
accorded, and by way of exhortation to continue in virtuous ways."
Four years later Ts’u sent a mission of menacing size to CHENG,
ostensibly to complete the carrying out of a marriage agreed upon
by treaty between Ts’u and CHENG. Tsz-ch’an insisted that the bows
and arrows carried by the escort should be left outside the city
walls, adding: “Our poor state is too small to bear the full
honour of such an escort; erect your altar dais outside the wall
for the service of the ancestral sacrifices, and we will there
await your commands about the marriage.”
In 538, when Ts’u was, for the first time, holding a durbar as
recognized Protector, being at the time, however, on hostile terms
with her former vassal, Wu, the King of Ts’u committed the gross
outrage of seizing the ruler of a petty state, who was then
present at the durbar, because that ruler had married (being
himself of eastern barbarian descent) a princess of Wu. The
following year, when two very distinguished statesmen from the
territory of his secular enemy Tsin came on a political mission,
the King of Ts’u consulted his premier about the advisability of
castrating the one for a harem eunuch, and cutting off the feet of
the other for a door-porter. “Your Majesty can do it, certainly,"
was the reply, “but how about the consequences?” This was the
occasion, mentioned in Chapter VI., on which the king was reminded
how many great private families there were in Tsin quite capable
of raising a hundred chariots apiece.
It appears that envoys, at least in Lu, were hereditary in some
families, just as other families provided successive generations
of ministers. A Lu envoy to Tsin, who carried a very valuable gem-
studded girdle with him, had very great pressure put upon him by a
covetous Tsin minister who wanted the girdle. The envoy offered to
give some silk instead, but he said that not even to save his life
would he give up the girdle. The Tsin magnate thought better of
it; but it is remarkable how many cases of sordid greed of this
kind are recorded, all pointing to the comparative absence of
commercial exchanges, or standards of value between the feudal
states.
Ts’u seems to have thoroughly deserved Yen-tsz’s imputations of
treachery and roguery. At the great Peace Conference held outside
the Sung capital in 546, the Ts’u escort was detected wearing
cuirasses underneath their clothing. One of the greatest of the
Tsin statesmen, Shuh Hiang (a personal friend of Yen-tsz,
Confucius, and Tsz-ch’an) managed diplomatically to keep down the
rising indignation of the other powers and representatives present
by pooh-poohing the clumsy artifice on the ground that by such
treachery Ts’u simply injured her own reputation in the federation
to the manifest advantage of Tsin: it did not suit Tsin to
continue the struggle with Ts’u just then. Then there was a
squabble as to precedence at the same Peace Conference; that is,
whether Tsin or Ts’u had the first right to smear lips with the
blood of sacrifice: here again Shuh Hiang tactfully gave way, and
by his conciliatory conduct succeeded in inducing the federal
princes to sign a sort of disarmament agreement. This is one of
the numerous instances in which Confucius as an annalist tries to
menager the true facts in the interests of orthodoxy.
Even the more fully civilized state of Ts’i attempted an act of
gross treachery, when in 500 B.C. the ruler of Lu, accompanied by
Confucius as his minister in attendance, went to pay his respects.
But Confucius was just as sharp as Yen-tsz and Tsz-ch’an, his
friends, neighbours, and colleagues: he at once saw through the
menacing appearance of the barbarian “dances” (introduced here,
again, as a “variety entertainment”), and by his firm behaviour
not only saved the person of his prince, but shamed the ruler of
Ts’i into disclaiming and disavowing his obsequious fellow-
practical jokers. Yen-tsz was actually present at the time, in
attendance upon his own marquis; but it is nowhere alleged that he
was responsible for the disgraceful manoeuvre. As a result T’si
was obliged to restore to Lu several cities and districts
wrongfully annexed some years before, and Lu promised to assist
Ts’i in her wars.
[Illustration: MAP
1. The River Sz still starts at Sz-shui (cross in circle; means
“River Sz”), and runs past Confucius’ town, K’iih-fu, into the
Canal in two branches. But in Confucius’ time what is now the
Canal continued to be the River Sz, down to its junction with the
Hwai. The River I starts still from I-shui (also a cross in
circle; means “River I”), passes I-thou, and used to join the Sz
(now the Canal) at the lower cross in a circle. The neck (dotted)
of the Hwai embouchure no longer exists, and the Lake Hung-tseh
now dissipates itself into lakelets and canals. The Wu fleets, by
sailing up the Hwai, Sz, and I, could get up to Lu, and threaten
Ts’i.
2. In Confucius’ time the Yellow River turned north near the
junction of the Emperor’s territory with Cheng: it passed through
Wei, and there divided. Its main branch, after coursing through
part of the River Wei bed, left it and took possession of the
River Chang bed. Up to 602 B.C. the secondary branch took the more
easterly dotted line (the present Yellow River, once the River
Tsi); but after 602 B.C. it cut through Hing, followed the Wei,
and took the line of the present Canal. Hing was a Tartar-harried
state contested by Ts’i and Tsin: it fell at last to Tsin.
3. The capitals of Ts’i, Wei, Ts’ao, Cheng, Sung, Ch’en, Ts’ai
(three) are marked with encircled crosses. K’iih-fu, the capital
of Lu, is marked with a small circle. In 278 B.C. the Ts’u capital
was moved east to Ch’en. In 241 B.C., under pressure of Ts’in, the
Ts’u capital had to be moved to the double black cross on the
south bank of the Hwai.]
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
