



A traveller in modern China may still wonder at the utter absence
of any sign of wealth or luxury except in the very largest towns.
Fine clothes, jewels, concubines, rich food, aphrodisiacs, opium,
land, cattle–these represent “wealth” as conceived by the Chinese
rich man’s mind. In 655 Ts’in is said to have paid five ram-skins
to Ts’u in order to secure the services of a coveted adviser. Not
many years after that, when the future Second Protector was making
his terms with the King of Ts’u, he remarked: “What can I do for
you in return? You already possess all the slaves, musicians,
treasures, silks, feathers, ivory, and leather you can want.” In
606 a magnificent turtle was sent as a new year’s dinner present
from Ts’u to Cheng; in modern China this form of politeness would
never do at all, as the turtle has acquired an evil reputation as
a term of abuse, akin to the Spanish use or abuse of the word
“garlic”: however, I myself once experienced, when inland, far
away from the sea, a curious compliment in the shape of a live
crab two inches long (sent to me as a great honour) in a small
jar. Of course chairs were unknown, and even the highest sat or
squatted on mats; not necessarily on the ground, but spread on
couches. Hence the word survives the object, just as with us
("covers” at dinner are “provided” but never seen; thus in China a
host is “east mat” and a guest “west mat.”) In 626, when the ruler
of Ts’in was talking politics with the Tartar envoy just mentioned
above, he allowed him, as a special favour, to sit alongside of
his own mat (on the couch). These couches probably resembled the
modern settee, sofa, k’ang, or divan, such as all visitors
to China have seen and sat on. Tea was quite unknown in those
days, and is not mentioned before the seventh century A.D.; but
possibly wine may have been served, as tea is now, on a low table
between the two seats. “Tartar couches” (possibly Turkish divans)
are frequently mentioned, even in the field of battle, and in
comparatively modern times. In 300 B.C. Ts’u made a present to a
distinguished renegade prince of the Ts’i house of an “elephant
couch,” by which is probably meant a couch inlaid with ivory, in
the present well-known Annamese style.
In 589 B.C., when Tsin troops reached the Ts’i capital and the sea
(as already related in Chapters VI. and XXXIX. under the heads of
Armies and Geographical Knowledge), T’si endeavoured to purchase
peace by offering to the victor the state treasure in the shape of
precious utensils. In 551 a rich man of Ts’u was considered
insolently showy because he possessed forty horses. In 545 the
envoy from Cheng, acting under the Peace Conference agreement so
often previously described and alluded to, brings presents of furs
and silks to Ts’u; and in 537 Tsin speaks of such articles as
often being presented to Ts’u. In 494, when the King of Yiieh
received his great defeat at the hands of the King of Wu, his
first desperate idea was to kill his wives and children, burn his
valuables, and seek death at the head of his troops; but the
inevitable wily Chinese adviser was at hand, and the King ended by
taking his mentor’s advice and successfully bribing the Wu general
(a Ts’u renegade) with presents of women and valuables. When this
shrewd Chinese adviser of the Yueh king had, by his sagacious
counsels, at last secured the final defeat of Wu, he packed up his
portable valuables, pearls, and jades, collected his family and
clients, and went away by sea, never to come back. As a matter of
fact, he settled in Ts’i, where he made an enormous fortune in the
fish trade, and ultimately became the traditional Croesus of
China, his name being quite as well known to modern Chinese
through the Confucian historians, as the name of Croesus is to
modern Europeans through Herodotus. He had, between the two
defeats of Yiieh by Wu and Wu by Yiieh, served for several years
as a spy in Wu, and the fact of his reaching Shan Tung by sea
confirms in principle the story of the family of his contemporary,
the King of Wu, having similarly escaped to Japan. The place where
he landed was probably the same as where the celebrated pilgrim
Fah Hien landed, after his Indian pilgrimage, in 415 A.D., i.e.,
at the German port of Ts’ing-tao.
We do not hear much of gold in the earlier times, but in 237 B.C.,
when Ts’in was straining every nerve to conquer China, the
(future) First August Emperor was advised that “it would not cost
more than 300,000 pounds weight in gold to bribe the ministers of
all the states in league against Ts’in.” Yet in 643 B.C., on the
death of the First Protector, the orthodox state of Cheng (lying
between Ts’i and Tsin to the north and Ts’u to the south), was
bribed with “metal” of some sort–probably gold or silver–to
abandon Ts’i. In 538 the celebrated Cheng statesman Tsz-ch’an
informs his Ts’u colleagues that the Tsin officers “think of
nothing but money.” What kind of money this was is doubtful, but
it will be remembered that about this time the “powerful family"
of Lu had succeeded in bribing the Tsin ministers, or the “six
great families” then managing Tsin, to deny justice to the
fugitive Lu duke. In 513 B.C. the powerful Wu king who made
(modern) Soochow his capital is said to have possessed both iron
and gold mines, and it is stated that not even China proper could
turn out better weapons. Large “cash” are said to have been coined
by the Emperor who reigned from 540 to 520 B.C.; and in 450 B.C.
the King of Ts’u is reported to have “closed his depot of
the three moneys.” As only copper was coined, it is not easy to
say now what the other two “moneys” were. In 318 B.C. a bribe of
“one hundred golds” was given by Yen to one of the well-known
political diplomats or intriguers then forming leagues with or
against Ts’in; it is not known for certain how much this was at
that particular time and place; but a century or two later it
meant, under the Ts’in dynasty, twenty-four ounces; during the Han
dynasty, conquerors of the Ts’in dynasty, it was only about half
that. Cooks seem to have held official positions of considerable
dignity. “Meat-eaters” in Confucian times was a term for
“officials” or “the rich.” Thus when the haughty King of Wu was
suddenly recalled home, from his high-handed durbar with Tsin, Lu,
and other orthodox states, to go and deal with his formidable
enemy of Yueh, he turned quite pale. By dint of bold “bluff” he
managed after all to gain most of his political points, and to
retire from an awkward corner with honour; but Chinese spies had
their eyes on him none the less, and reported to the watchful
enemy that “meat-eaters are not usually blackfaced"–meaning that
the King of Wu evidently had some very recent bad news on his
mind, for “the well-fed do not usually look care-worn.”
Silk was universally known. When the Second Protector (to be) was
dallying with his lady-love in Ts’i, the maid of his mistress
happened to overhear important conversations from her post in a
mulberry tree; the presumption is that she was collecting leaves
for the silkworms. Again in 519, a century later, there was a
dispute on the Ts’u-Wu frontier (North An Hwei province), about
the possession of certain mulberry trees. Cotton (Gossypium)
was unknown in China, and the poorer classes wore garments of
hempen materials; the cotton tree (Bombyx) was known in
the south, but then (as now) the catkins could not be woven
into cloth. It was never the custom of officers in China to wear
swords, until in 409 B.C. Ts’in introduced the practice; but it
probably never extended to orthodox China, so far, at least, as
civilians’ were concerned. The three dynasties of Hia, Shang, and
Chou had all made use of jade or malachite rings, tablets,
sceptres, and so on, as marks of official rank.
As to sports, hunting, and especially fowling, seem to have been
the most popular pastimes. In 660 a prince of Wei (orthodox) is
said to have had a passion for egret fights. In 539 four-horsed
chariots are mentioned as being used in a great Ts’u hunt south of
the modern Teh-an in northern Hu Peh province, then mostly jungle:
these hunts were used as a sort of training for war as well as for
sport. The celebrated “stone drums” discovered in the seventh
century A.D. near the old Chou capital describe the war-hunts of
the active emperor mentioned in Chapter XLI. As might be expected,
Yen (Peking plain) would be well off for horses-to this day
brought by the Mongols in droves to Peking: in 539 it is said of
Yen: “She was never a strong power, in spite of her numerous
horses.” In 534 a great hunt in Lu is described with much detail;
here also chariots were used, and their shafts were reared in
opposite rows with their tips meeting above, so as to form a
“shaft gate,” on which, besides, a flag was kept flying. The
entrance to Chinese official yamens is still called “the
shaft gate";-in fact, the ya was orginally a flag, and “yamen“
simply means “flag gate.” In the Middle Ages the Turkish Khans’
encampments were always spoken of as their ya–thus: “from
hence 1500 miles north-west to the Khan’s ya.” Cockfighting
was a common sport in Ts’i and Lu. In 517 B.C. two prominent
Lu functionaries had a quarrel because one had put metal
spurs on his bird, whilst the other had scattered mustard in the
feathers of his fighting cock: owing to the ambiguity or double
meaning of one of the pictographs employed, it is not quite
certain that “mustard in the wings” may not mean “a metal helmet
on the head.” Lifting weights was (as now) a favourite exercise;
in 307 a Ts’in prince died from the effects of a strain produced
in trying to lift a heavy metal tripod. In Ts’i games at ball,
including a kind of football, were played. As a rule, however, it
is to be feared that the wealthy Chinese classes in ancient (as in
modern) times found their chief recreation in feasting, literary
bouts, and female society. Curiously enough, nothing is said of
gambling. Women are depicted at their looms, or engaged upon the
silk industry; but it is singular how very little is said of home
life, of how the houses were constructed, of how the hours of
leisure were passed. In modern China the bulk of the male rural
population rises with or before the dawn, and is engaged upon
field or garden work until the shades of evening fall in; there is
no artificial light adequate for purposes of needlework or private
study; even the consolations of tobacco and tea–not to say opium,
and now newspapers–were unknown in Confucian days. It is
presumed, therefore, that life was even more humdrum than it is
now, except that women at least had feet to walk upon. We gain
some glimpses of excessive taxation and popular misery, forced
labour and the press-gang; of callous luxury on the part of the
rich, from the pages of Lao-tsz and Mencius; the Book of Odes also
tells us much about the pathetic sadness of the people under their
taskmasters’ hands. In all countries popular habits change slowly;
in none more so than in China. We are driven, therefore, by
comparison with the life of to-day to conclude that life in those
times was sufficiently wretched, and it is therefore not to be
wondered at that the miserable people readily sold their services
to the first ambitious adventurer who could protect them, and feed
them from day to day.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
