



The period of political development covered by Confucius’ history–
the object of which history, it must be remembered, was to read
to the restless age a series of solemn warnings–was immediately
succeeded by the most active and bloodthirsty period in the
Chinese annals, that of the Fighting States, or the Six Countries;
sometimes they (including Ts’in) were called the “Seven Males,"
i.e. the Seven Great Masculine Powers. Tsin had been already
practically divided up between the three surviving great families
of the original eleven in 424 B.C.; but these three families of
Ngwei, Han, and Chao were not recognized by the Emperor until 403;
nor did they extinguish the legitimate ruler until 376, about
three years after the sacrifices of the legitimate Ts’i kings were
stopped. Accordingly we hear the original name Tsin, or “the three
Tsin,” still used concurrently with the names Han, Ngwei, and
Chao, as that of Ts’u’s chief enemy in the north for some time
after the division into three had taken place.
Tsin’s great rival to the west, Ts’in, now found occupation in
extending her territory to the south-west at the expense of Shuh,
a vast dominion corresponding to the modern Sz Ch’wan, up to then
almost unheard of by orthodox China, but which, it then first
transpired, had had three kings and ten “emperors” of its own,
nine of these latter bearing the same appellation. Even now, the
rapids and gorges of the Yang-tsz River form the only great
commercial avenue from China into Sz Ch’wan, and it is therefore
not hard to understand how in ancient times, the tribes of “cave
barbarians” (whose dwellings are still observable all over that
huge province) effectively blocked traffic along such subsidiary
mountain-roads as may have existed then, as they exist now, for
the use of enterprising hawkers.
The Chinese historians have no statistics, indulge in fen (few?)
remarks about economic or popular development, describe no popular
life, and make no general reflections upon history; they confine
themselves to narrating the bald and usually unconnected facts
which took place on fixed dates, occasionally describing some
particularly heroic or daring individual act, or even sketching
the personal appearance and striking conduct of an exceptionally
remarkable king, general, or other leading personality: hence
there is little to guide us to an intelligent survey of causes and
effects, of motives and consequences; it is only by carefully
piecing together and collating a jumble of isolated events that it
is possible to obtain any general coup d’oeil at all: the wood is
often invisible on account of the trees.
But there can be no doubt that populations had been rapidly
increasing; that improved means had been found to convey
accumulated stores and equipments; that generals had learnt how to
hurl bodies of troops rapidly from one point to the other; and
that rulers knew the way either to interest large populations in
war, or to force them to take an active part in it. The marches,
durbars, and gigantic canal works, undertaken by the barbarous
King of Wu, as described in Chapter XXI., prove this in the case
of one country. Chinese states always became great in the same
way: first Kwan-tsz developed, on behalf of his master the First
Protector, the commerce, the army, and the agriculture of Ts’i. He
was imitated at the same time by Duke Muh of Ts’in and King Chwang
of Ts’u, both of which rulers (seventh century B.C.) set to work
vigorously in developing their resources. Then Tsz-ch’an raised
Cheng to a great pitch of diplomatic influence, if not also of
military power. His friend Shuh Hiang did the same thing for Tsin;
and both of them were models for Confucius in Lu, who had,
moreover, to defend his own master’s interests against the policy
of the philosopher Yen-tsz of Ts’i. After his first defeat by the
King of Wu, the barbarian King of Yueh devoted himself for some
years to the most strenuous life, with the ultimate object of
amassing resources for the annihilation of Wu; the interesting
steps he took to increase the population will be described at
length in a later Chapter. In 361, as we have explained in Chapter
XXII., a scion of Wei went as adviser to Ts’in, and within a
generation of his arrival the whole face of affairs was changed in
that western state hitherto so isolated; the new position, from a
military point of view, was almost exactly that of Prussia during
the period between the tyranny of the first Napoleon, together
with the humiliation experienced at his hands, and the patient
gathering of force for the final explosion of 1870, involving the
crushing of the second (reigning) Napoleon.
Very often the term “perpendicular and horizontal” period is
applied to the fourth century B.C. That is, Ts’u’s object was to
weld together a chain of north and south alliances, so as to bring
the power of Ts’i and Tsin to bear together with her own upon
Ts’in; and Ts’in’s great object was, on the other hand, to make a
similar string of east and west alliances, so as to bring the same
two powers to bear upon Ts’u. The object of both Ts’in and Ts’u
was to dictate terms to each unit of; and ultimately to possess,
the whole Empire, merely utilizing the other powers as catspaws to
hook the chestnuts out of the furnace. No other state had any
rival pretensions, for, by this time, Ts’in and Ts’u each really
did possess one-third part of China as we now understand it,
whilst the other third was divided between Ts’i and the three
Tsin. In 343 B.C. the Chou Emperor declared Ts’in Protector, and
from 292 to 288 B.C., Tsin and Ts’i took for a few years the
ancient title of Ti or “Emperor” of the West and East respectively:
in the year 240 the Chou Emperor even proceeded to Ts’in to do
homage there. Tsin might have been in the running for universal
empire had she held together instead of dividing herself into
three. Yen was altogether too far away north,–though, curiously
enough, Yen (Peking) has been the political centre of North
China for 900 years past,–and Ts’i was too far away east.
Moreover, Ts’i was discredited for having cut off the sacrifices
of the legitimate house. Ts’u was now master of not only her old
vassals, Wu and Yiieh, but also of most of the totally unknown
territory down to the south sea, of which no one except the Ts’u
people at that time knew so much as the bare local names; it bore
the same relation to Ts’u that the Scandinavian tribes did to the
Romanized Germans. Ts’in had become not only owner of Sz Ch’wan–
at first as suzerain protector, not as direct administrator–but
had extended her power down to the south-west towards Yiin Nan and
Tibet, and also far away to the north-west in Tartarland, but not
farther than to where the Great Wall now extends. It is in the
year 318 B.C. that we first hear the name Hiung-nu (ancestors of
the Huns and Turks), a body of whom allied themselves in that year
with the five other Chinese powers then in arms against the
menacing attitude of Ts’in; something remarkable must have taken
place in Tartarland to account for this sudden change of name, The
only remains of old federal China consisted of about ten petty
states such as Sung, Lu, etc., all situated between the Rivers Sz
and Hwai, and all waiting, hands folded, to be swallowed up at
leisure by this or that universal conqueror.
Ts’in s’en va t’en guerre seriously in the year 364, and
began her slashing career by cutting off 60,000 “Tsin” heads; (the
legitimate Tsin sacrifices had been cut off in 376, so this “Tsin"
must mean “Ngwei,” or that part of old Tsin which was coterminous
with Ts’in); in 331, in a battle with Ngwei, 80,000 more heads
were taken off. ’In 318 the Hiung-nu combination just mentioned
lost 82,000 heads between them; in 314 Han lost 10,000; in 312
Ts’u lost 80,000; in 307 Han lost 60,000; and in 304 Ts’u lost
80,000. In the year 293 the celebrated Ts’in general, Peh K’i, who
has left behind him a reputation as one of the greatest
manipulators of vast armies in Eastern history, cut off 240,000
Han heads in one single battle; in 275, 40,000 Ngwei heads; and in
264, 50,000 Han heads. “Enfin je vais me mesurer avec ce
Vilainton” said the King of Chao, when his two western friends
of Han and Ngwei had been hammered out of existence. In the year
260 the Chao forces came to terrible grief; General Peh K’i
managed completely to surround their army of 400,000 men he
accepted their surrender, guaranteed their safety, and then
proceeded methodically to massacre the whole of them to a man. In
257 “Tsin” (presumably Han or Ngwei) lost 6,000 killed and 20,000
drowned; in 256 Han lost 40,000 heads, and in 247 her last 30,000,
whilst also in 256 Chao her last 90,000. These terrible details
have been put together from the isolated statements; but there can
be no mistake about them, for the historian Sz-ma Ts’ien, writing
in 100 B.C., says: “The allies with territory ten times the extent
of the Ts’in dominions dashed a million men against her in vain;
she always had her reserves in hand ready, and from first to last
a million corpses bit the dust.”
No such battles as these are even hinted at in more ancient times;
nor, strange to say, are the ancient chariots now mentioned any
more. Ts’in had evidently been practising herself in fighting with
the Turks and Tartars for some generations, and had begun to
perceive what was still only half understood in China, the
advantage of manoeuvring large bodies of horsemen; but, curiously
enough, nothing is said of horses either; yet all these battles
seem to have been fought on the flat lands of old federal China,
suitable for either chariots or horses. The first specific mention
of cavalry manoeuvres on a large scale was in the year 198 B.C.
when the new Han Emperor of China in person, with a straggling
army of 320,000 men, mostly infantry, was surrounded by four
bodies of horsemen led by the Supreme Khan, in white, grey, black,
and chestnut divisions, numbering 300,000 cavalry in all: his name
was Megh-dun (? the Turkish Baghatur).
Whilst all this was going on, Mencius, the Confucian philosopher,
and the two celebrated diplomatists (of Taoist principles), Su
Ts’in and Chang I, were flying to and fro all over orthodox China
with a view of offering sage political advice; this was the time
par excellence when the rival Taoist and Confucian prophets
were howling in the wilderness of war and greed: but Ts’in cared
not much for talkers: generals did her practical business better:
in 308 she began to cast covetous eyes on the Emperor’s poor
remaining appanage. In 301 she was called upon to quell a revolt
in Shuh; then she materially reduced the pretensions of her great
rival Ts’u; and finally rested a while, whilst gathering more
strength for the supreme effort-the conquest of China.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
