



Mention has been made of eunuchs, a class which seems to have
originated with the law’s severity rather than from a callous
desire of the rich to secure a craven and helpless medium and
means for pandering to and enjoying the pleasures of the harem
without fear of sexual intrigue. Criminals whose feet were cut off
were usually employed as park-keepers simply because there could
be no inclination on their part to gad about and chase the game.
Those who lost their noses were employed as isolated frontier
pickets, where no boys could jeer at them, and where they could
better survive their misfortune in quiet resignation. Those
branded in the face were made gate-keepers, so that their
livelihood was perpetually marked out for them. It is sufficiently
obvious why the castrated were specially charged with the duty of
serving females in a menial capacity. One name for eunuch is
“cleanse man,” and it is explained by a very old commentator that
the duty of these functionaries was to sweep and cleanse the
court; but it is perhaps as likely that the original idea was
really “purified man,” or man deprived of incentive to certain
evils. It is often said disparagingly of the Chou dynasty that
they introduced the effeminate Persian custom of keeping eunuchs;
but the Chou family, which was in full career before Zoroaster
existed, is perhaps entitled to a much greater antiquity in
civilization than Persia–Cyrus himself was a contemporary of Lao-
tsz and Confucius–and probably the castrated were only utilized
as menials because they already were eunuchs by law, and were not
made eunuchs against the spirit of natural law simply in order
that their services as menials should be conveniently rendered.
In 655 B.C. the Tsin ruler despatched a eunuch to try and
assassinate his half-brother (the future Second Protector of
China) when in Tartar exile. When the Second Protector in 636 at
last came to his rights as ruler of Tsin, the same eunuch offered
to commit an assassination in his interest; arguing, by way of
justifying his previous attempt, that a servant’s duty was to
serve his de facto master for the time being, and not to
question de jure claims, which were a matter beyond the
competence of a menial. In 548 the ruler of Ts’i was assassinated
by a eunuch who would not even grant his master permission to
commit suicide decently in the ancestral hall; (see p. 62). A year
later, the succeeding ruler under urgent circumstances secured the
services of a eunuch as coachman. In contrast to these traitors,
in 481 a faithful eunuch tries to save the ruler of Ts’i from
assassination by one of the supplanting great families: this was
the case that so horrified Confucius that he died soon after, in
despair of ever seeing “divine right” regain the upper hand in
China. In 544 B.C. the ruler of Wei was assassinated by a eunuch
door-keeper. In 537 the King of Ts’u conceived the idea of
castrating and cutting the feet off the two Tsin envoys for use as
a palace gate-keeper and for service in his harem; but he was
prudently dissuaded by his chief counsellor from incurring the
risks consequent upon such an international outrage; (see p. 46).
Three centuries later, in the year 239, the First August Emperor’s
(real) father, for his own spying purposes, got a sham eunuch
appointed to a post in the service of the ex-concubine made over,
as explained in the last Chapter, to the First Emperor’s father;
by the dowager-queen, as she then was, the supposed eunuch had
two sons. When subsequently this dangerous person revolted, the
First August Emperor’s own real eunuchs took part in opposing his
murderous designs.–It must be mentioned that this objectionable
father of the Emperor was himself a very distinguished man
notwithstanding, and has left a valuable historical and
philosophical work of twenty-six Chapters behind him, put together
under his direction by a number of clever writers. It is usually
considered a Taoist work, because it savours in parts of Lao-tsz’s
doctrine; but, like the works of Hwai-nan-tsz (an imperial prince
of the Han dynasty 150 years later) it was classified in 50 B. C.
as a “miscellany."–Finally, a eunuch played an important part as
witness when the Second August Emperor was assassinated. Thus all
the states–those around the original nucleus of Old China at
least–employed eunuchs in the royal harems, even if the vassal
princes of orthodox China as a general rule did not.
It is much the same thing with another disagreeable feature in the
manners of those times–human sacrifices. Many instances have
already been given of such practices in the state of Ts’in. The
tomb of the King of Ts’u who died in 591–of that king whose death
Confucius condescended to record, decently and in ritual terms,
because of his many good qualities–which tomb appears to be still
in existence near King-chou Fu, is surrounded by ten other smaller
tombs, supposed so be those of the persons who “followed him to
the grave.” At all events, when in the year 529 a later king of
Ts’u hanged himself, a faithful follower buried two of his own
daughters with the royal body. In A. D. 312 the tomb of the first
Protector, who died in 643 B.C., was opened under circumstances so
graphically described that there can scarcely be a doubt of the
substantial truth: the stench was so great that dogs had to be
sent in first to test the effects of the poisoned atmosphere; so
many bones were found lying about that there can be little doubt
many women and concubines were buried with him. It is often said
by modern writers that it was a general custom to do so all over
ancient China, and possibly the fact that in the second century
B.C. a humane Chinese emperor (of Taoist principles) ordered the
discontinuance of the practice may be thought to give colour to
this supposition. But it must be remembered that the great house
of Han had only then recently overthrown the dynasty of Ts’in, and
had incorporated nearly the whole of China as we now view it: the
Emperor would naturally therefore be referring to Ts’i, Ts’in,
Ts’u, and possibly also to Wu and Yueeh, three of which states had,
as we see, once practised this cruel custom.
Wine, or rather spirit, was known everywhere; in Confucian times
the Far West had not yet been discovered, and there were neither
grapes nor any names for grapes; no grape wine, nor any other
fruit wine. Even now, though the Peking grapes are as good as
English grapes, no one nearer than Shan Shi makes wine from them.
Spirits seem to have been served from remote times at the imperial
and princely feasts. Here, once more, as with the two vicious
practices described, the drunkards appear to be found more among
those peoples surrounding orthodox China than in the ancient
nucleus. In 694 B.C., when the ruler of Lu was on a visit to his
brother-in-law, the ruler of Ts’i, whose sister he had married,
brother and sister had incestuous intercourse; which being
detected, the ruler of Ts’i made his Lu brother-in-law drunk, and
suborned a powerful ruffian to squeeze his ribs as he was assisted
into his chariot. Thus the Duke Hwan of Lu perished. In 640 B.C.,
as we have seen, when the future Second Protector was dallying
with his Ts’i wife, it was found by his henchman necessary to make
him drunk in order to get him away. In 574 a Ts’u general was
found drunk when sent for by his king to explain a defeat by Tsin
troops. In 560 the Ts’i envoy–the philosopher Yen-tsz–was
entertained by the Ts’u court at a wine. In 531 the ruler of Ts’u
first made drunk, and then killed, one of the petty rulers of
orthodox China. In 537 it had already been explained to the King
of Ts’u that on the occasions of the triennial visits of vassals
to the Emperor (probably only theoretical visits at that date)
wine was served at long tables in full cups, but was only drunk at
the proper ritualistic moment. Two years after that the King of
Ts’u was described as being at his wine, and therefore in the
proper frame of mind to listen to representations.
In 541 the Ts’u envoy was entertained at a punch d’honneur
by the Tsin statesmen, one of whom seized the occasion to chant
one of the Odes warning people against drunkenness. It is well
known that Confucius enjoyed his dram; indeed, it is said of him:
“As to wine, he had no measure, but he did not fuddle himself.” In
the year 506 the ruler of Ts’in is described as being a heavy
drinker. In 489 a Ts’i councillor is described as being drunk. A
few years later the ruler of Ts’i and his wife are seen drinking
together on the verandah, and some prisoners escape owing to the
gaoler having been judiciously plied with drink.
Meat seems to have been much more generally consumed in old China
(by those who could afford it) than in modern times; and, as we
might expect, among the Tartar infected people, horse-flesh in
particular. In the second century B.C. the question of eating
horse-liver is compared by a witty Emperor with the danger of
revolutionary talk. He said: “We may like it, but it is
dangerous.” (Last year, when in Neu Brandenburg, I came across a
man whose brother was a horse-butcher in Pomerania, and,
remembering this imperial remark, I asked about horse-liver. The
man said he always had a feast of horse-liver when he visited his
brother, and that he much preferred it to cows’ liver, or to any
other part of the horse; but, he added, “you must be careful about
eating it in summer.”) In 645 Duke Muh of Ts’in was rescued from
the Tsin troops by what was described to him as a body-guard of
horse-flesh eaters. It appeared, when he sought for explanation,
that the same Ts’in ruler had, some time before, been robbed of a
horse by some “wild men,” who proceeded to cut it up and eat it.
They were arrested; but the magnanimous duke said: “I am told
horse-flesh needs spirits to make it digest well,” and, instead of
punishing them, he gave them a keg of liquor, adding: “no sage
would ever injure men on account of a mere beast.”, He had
forgotten the circumstance, but it now transpired that these men
had, out of gratitude, since then enlisted as soldiers. This story
is the more interesting as it proves how incompletely civilized
the neighbourhood of Ts’in then was.–Bears’ paws are often spoken
of as a favourite dish. In 626 the King of Ts’u, about to be
murdered by his son and successor, said: “At least, let me have a
bear’s paw supper before I die.” But it takes many hours to cook
this dish to a turn, and the son easily saw through the paternal
manoeuvre, pleaded only to gain time. It may be here mentioned,
too, that Ts’u made regular use of elephants in battle, which
circumstance is another piece of testimony in favour of the
Annamese connection of Ts’u. In the Rites of Chou, supposed
to be the work of the Duke of Chou, mention is made of ivory as
one of the products of the “Jungle province,” as then called. In
modern times Annam has regularly supplied the Peking Government
with elephants, the skin of which is eaten as a tonic. After the
annihilation of Wu by Yiieh, the cunning Chinese adviser of Yiieh
decided to retire with his fortune to Ts’i, on the ground that the
“good sleuth-hound, when there is no more work for him, is apt to
find his way to the cooking-pot.” Dogs (fed up for the purpose)
are still eaten in some parts of China, and (as we shall soon see)
they were eaten in ancient Yiieh.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
