



One of the difficulties of Chinese ancient history is the
unravelling of proper names; but, as with other difficulties, this
one is owing rather to the novelty and strangeness of the subject,
to the unfamiliarity of scene and of atmosphere, than to any
inherent want of clearness in the matter itself. In reading
Scottish history, no one is much disconcerted to find a man called
upon the same page (as an imaginary instance), Old John, John
McQuhirt, the Master of Weel, the McQuhirt, the Laird o’ Airton,
the Laird of the Isle, and the Earl of Airton and Weel; there are
many such instances to be found in Boswell’s account of the
Johnsonian trip to the Hebrides; but the puzzled Englishman has at
least his own language and a fairly familiar ground to deal with.
When, however, we come to unpronounceable Chinese names of strange
individuals, moving about amid hitherto unheard-of surroundings
2500 years ago, with a suspicion of uncertainty added about the
genuineness and good faith of the whole story, things are apt to
seem hopelessly involved, even where the best of good-will to
understand is present. Thus Confucius may be called K’ung-tsz,
K’ung Fu-tsz, or Chung-ni, besides other personal applications
under the influence of tabu rules, Tsz-ch’an may be spoken
of as Kung-sun K’iao, or (if he himself speaks) simply as K’iao.
And so on with nearly all prominent individuals. In those times
the family names, or “surnames” as we say in English, were not
used with the regularity that prevails in China now, when every
one of standing has a fixed family name, such as Li or Yiian,
followed by an official personal name, like Hung-chang or Shi-
k’ai. In old times the clan or tribe counted first; for instance
the imperial clan of Ki included princes of several vassal
states. But, after five generations, it was expected that any
given family unit should detach itself. Thus, in 710 B.C.,
Confucius’ ancestor, son of the composer of odes mentioned on page
175, took, or was given by the ruler of his native state, Sung,
the detached family name of K’ung-fu (Father K’ung), “Father"
being the social application, and K’ung the surname, which thence
became the family name of a new branch. The old original clan-
names were little used by any one in a current sense, just as the
English family name of Guelph is kept in the dim background so far
as current use goes. Nor were the personal names, even of Chinese
emperors and kings, so grave and decorous in style as they have
always been in later times. For instance, “Black Buttocks,” “Black
Arm,” “Double Ears";–such names (decidedly Turkish in style) are
not only used of Tsin princes with an admixture of Tartar blood
nearly always coursing more or less in their veins, but also in
such states as the orthodox Lu. The name “Black Arm,” for
instance, is used both by Lu and by Ts’u princes; also by a Ts’u
private individual; whilst an orthodox Duke of Sung bears the
purely Turkish name of T’ouman, which (and exactly the same
pictograph characters, too) was also the name of the first
historical Hiung-nu (later Turkish) Khan several centuries later.
The name Luh-fu or “Emoluments Father,” belonging to the
son of the last Emperor of the Shang dynasty in 1123 B.C., was
also the personal name of one of the rulers of Ts’i many centuries
later. In the same way we find identical personal names in CH’EN
and Lu, and also in Ts’u and Lu princes. Eunuchs were not
considered to possess family names, or even official personal
names. If there had been then, as now, a celibate priestly caste,
no doubt then, as now, priests would also have been relieved of
their family name rights.
It seems quite clear that many if not most family names began in
China with the name of places, somewhat after the Scotch style:
even in Lancashire the title of the old lord of the manor is often
the family surname of many of the village folk around. Take the
Chinese imperial domain for instance; in the year 558 one Liu Hia
goes to meet his master the new Emperor. His name (Hia) and
surname (Liu) would serve just as well for current use to-day, as
for example with the late viceroy Liu K’un-yih; but we are told
Liu Hia was so “named” by the historian in full because his rank
was not that of first-class statesman, and it is explained that
Liu was the name of his tenancy in the imperial appanage. At a Lu
funeral in 626 B.C. the Emperor’s representative to the vassal
state is spoken of complimentarily by his social appellation in
view of his possessing first-class ministerial rank: he cannot be
spoken of by his detached clan-name, or family name, “because he
has not yet received a town in fee.” A few years later, another
imperial messenger is spoken of as King-shuh (Glory Uncle),
“Glory” being the name of his manor or fee, and “Uncle” his social
appellation. In 436 B.C. the Emperor sent a present of sacrificial
meat to Lu by X. As X is thus “named,” he must be of “scholar"
rank, as an imperial “minister” (it is explained) could not be
thus named. The ruler alone has the right to “affront a man” at
all times with his personal name, but even a son in speaking of
his own father to the Emperor may “affront” his father, because
both his father and himself are on equal subject footing before
the Emperor. To “name” a man in history is not always like
“naming” a member in the House of Commons. For instance, the King
of Ts’u, as mentioned in Chapter XXVII., was named for killing a
Chinese in 531, but not for killing a barbarian prince in 526 B.C.
It was partly by these delicate shades of naming or not naming,
titling or not titling, that Confucius hinted at his opinions in
his history: in the Ts’u case, it seems to have been an honour to
“name” a barbarian. Wei Yang, Kung-sun Yang, or Shang Kiin, or
Shang Yang, the important personage who carried a new civilization
to Ts’in, and practically “created” that power about 350 B.C.,
was, personally, simply named Yang, or “Bellyband.” As he came
originally from the orthodox state or principality of Wei, he
might be called Wei Yang, just as we might say Alexander of Fife.
As he received from Ts’in, as a reward for his services, the petty
principality of Shang (taken in war by Ts’in from Ts’u), he might
be called the prince or laird (kuen) of Shang (of. Lochiel),
or Shang Kuen. As he was the grandson (sun) of a deceased earl
(called kung, or “duke,” as a posthumous compliment), he
was entitled to take the family name of Kung-sun, just as we say
“Fitzgeorge” or “Fitzwilliam.” Finally, he was Yang (= John) of
Shang (= Lochiel). In speaking of this man to an educated Chinese,
it does not in the least matter which of the four names be used.
In the same way, Tsz-ch’an (being a duke’s grandson) was Kung-sun
K’iao. The word tsz, or “son,” after a family name, as for
instance in K’ung-tsz (Confucius), is defined as having the effect of
“gracefully alluding to a male.” It seems really to be the same in effect
as the Latin us, as in Celsius, Brutus, Thompsonius, etc. When
it precedes, not the family name or the tabu’d personal
name, but the current or acquaintance name, then it seems to have
the effect of Don or Dom, used with the most attenuated
honorificity; or the effect of “Mr.” Fu-tsz means “The Master.”
As to tabus, the following are curious specific instances.
King, or “Jungle,” was the earliest name for Ts’u, or “Brushwood,"
the uncleared region south of the River Han, along the banks of
the Yang-tsz; and it afterwards became a powerful state. But one
of the most powerful kings of Ts’in (249-244) was called Tsz-ts’u,
or “Don Brushwood,” so his successor the First August Emperor (who
was really a bastard, and not of genuine Ts’in blood at all)
tabu’d the word Ts’u, and ordered historians to use the old
name King instead. In the same way the philosopher Chwang Chou, or
Chwang-tsz, was spoken of by the Han historians as Yen Chou,
because chwang was an imperial personal name. Both words
mean “severe”: it is as though private Romans and public scribes
had been commanded to call themselves and to write Austerus,
instead of Severus, out of respect for the Emperor Septimius
Severus. The business-like First August Emperor, himself, evidently
had no hand in the pedantic King and Ts’u tabu business,
for one of his first general orders when he became Supreme Emperor
in 221 B.C., was to proclaim that “in ancient times there were no
posthumous names, and they are hereby suppressed. I am Emperor
the First. My successor will simply be Emperor the Second, and so
on for ever.” There is no clear record of posthumous names and titles
anterior to the Chou dynasty; the first certain instance is the father of
the founder, whose personal name was Ch’ang, and who had been
generally known as the “Earl of the West.” His son, the founder, made
him W&n Wang, or the “Civilian King,” posthumously. In the same way the
Duke of Chou, a son of the Civilian King, made his brother the
founder, personally called Fah, Wu Wang, or the “Warrior
King.” The same Duke of Chou (the first ruler of Lu, and
Confucius’ model in all things) was the virtual founder of the
Chou administrative system in general, and also of the posthumous
name rules which were “intended to punish the bad and encourage
the good"; but counsellors have naturally always been very
gingerly and roundabout in wounding royal family feeling by
selecting too harsh a “punishing” name.
Not only royal and princely personages had posthumous names. In
817 and 796 B.C., each, we find a counsellor of the Emperor spoken
of both by the real and the posthumous name. In 542 B.C. a
concubine of one of the Lu rulers is spoken of by her clan-name
and her posthumous name. In 560 B.C. the dying King of Ts’u
modestly alludes to the choice of an inferior posthumous name
befitting him and his poor talents, for use at the times of
biennial sacrifice to his manes, and adds: “I am now going to take
my place a la suite, in company with my ancestors in the
temple.”
Persons of the same clan-name could not properly intermarry. Thus
the Emperor Muh, who is supposed to have travelled to Turkestan in
the tenth century B.C., had a mysterious liaison during his
expedition with a beauteous Miss Ki (i.e. a girl of his own
clan), who died on the way. The only way tolerant posterity can make
a shift to defend this “incest,” is by supposing that in those times the
names of relatives were “arranged differently.” However, the mere
fact that the funeral ceremonies were carried out with full imperial
Chou ritual, and that incest is mentioned at all, seems to militate against
the view (noticed in Chapter XIII.) that it was Duke Muh of Ts’in who
(400 years later) undertook this journey, for he did not belong to
the Ki family at all. Curiously enough, it fell to the lot
of the son and successor of the Emperor Muh to have to punish and
destroy a petty vassal state whose ruler had committed the
incestuous act of marrying three sisters of his own clan-name. In
483 B.C. the ruler of Lu also committed an indiscretion by
marrying a Ki girl. As her clan-name must, according to
rule, be mentioned at her burial, she was not formally buried at
all, but the whole affair was hushed up, and she was called by the
fancy name of Meng-tsz (exactly the same characters as “Mencius”),
Another instance serves to illustrate the above-mentioned imperial
journey west, and the fief questions jointly. When the Emperor Muh
went west, he was served as charioteer by one of the ancestors of
the future Ts’in principality, who for his services was enfeoffed
at Chao (north of Shan Si province). Chao was one of the three
states into which Tsin broke up in 403 B.C., and was very Tartar
in its sympathies. Thus, as both Ts’in and Chao bore the same
original clan-name of Ying, granted to the Ts’in family as
possessions of the Ts’in fief (Eastern Kan Suh province) by the
early Chou emperors in 870 B.C., Ts’in is often spoken of as
having the sub-clan-name of Chao. These facts, again, all militate
against the theory that it was Duke Muh of Ts’in who made the
voyage of discovery usually attributed to the Chou Emperor Muh;
for Duke Muh’s lineal ancestor, ancestor also of the original
Ts’in Ying, himself acted as guide in Tartary to the Emperor Muh.
The First August Emperor, who was, as already stated, really a
bastard, was borne by the concubine of a Chao merchant, who made
over the concubine whilst enceinte to his (the Emperor’s)
father, when that father was a royal Ts’in hostage dwelling in the
state of Chao; hence the Emperor is often called Chao CHENG
(CHENG being his personal name). He had thus a double claim
to the family name of Chao, first because–granting his
legitimacy–his Ts’in ancestor (also the ancestor of all the Chao
family) was, during the ninth century B.C., enfeoffed in Chao; and
secondly because, when Chao became an independent kingdom, he was,
during the third century B.C., himself born in Chao to a Chao man
of a Chao woman.
A great deal more might of course be said upon the subject of
names, and of their effect in sometimes obscuring, sometimes
elucidating, historical facts; but these few remarks will perhaps
suffice, at least, to suggest the importance of scrutinizing
closely the possible bearing of each name upon the political
events connected with it.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
