



Consulting the oracles seems to have been a universal practice,
and there are numerous historical allusions, made by statesmen of
the orthodox principalities, to supposed interpretations attached
to this or that combination of mystic signs or diagrams from the
“Changes,” together with arguments as to their specific meaning or
omen in given circumstances. Doubtless the Chinese of those dates,
like our own searchers for religious “analogies” and mysteries,
examined with perfect good faith combinations of the Diagrams
which to us appear arrant nonsense; and there can be no doubt of
Confucius’ own individual zeal, though the fact that he thought
fifty years’ study at least would be necessary for full
comprehension points to the tacit confession that he had totally
failed to understand much of the mystery. The Changes are supposed
to have been developed by the father of the Warrior King when
(about 1160 B.C.) he was in prison under the tyrannous suspicions
of the last Shang emperor; and we have seen that the ruler of Ts’u
was his tutor, at a time when Ts’u was not yet vassal to
Chou. Like the Odes, Book, and Rites, the Changes were Chou
literature, though possibly the unwritten traditions of earlier
dynasties may have contributed to that literature; which, indeed,
seems very likely, as Ts’u was already able to teach Chou.
Another form of augury was the examination of the marks on the
carapax of a tortoise; thus the Martial King in 146 consulted, and
found unfavourable, such marks–this was before attacking the last
Shang emperor; and it was only at the earnest instigation of his
chief henchman (afterwards vassal king and founder of Ts’i) that
he was prevailed upon to proceed. Possibly he borrowed Eastern
ideas from this founder of Ts’i too. Later on, the Martial King’s
younger brother, the Duke of Chou, consulted the oracle along with
the same Ts’i adviser: this was done before the three ancestral
altars of their father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, in
order to ascertain if the Emperor (i.e. the Martial King)
would recover from a sickness. In 1109 the Martial King’s son and
successor sent one of his uncles or near relatives to examine the
site of modern Ho-nan Fu, with a view to transferring the
metropolis thither, and, the oracles being favourable, the Nine
Tripods were removed to that place, and it was afterwards called
the “Eastern Metropolis” (the original or western capital was not
moved for over 300 years after that). It was at the same time
foretold that there would be thirty more reigns, of 700 years in
all: this was “Heaven’s decree.” On the other hand, when the Duke
of Chou died during a tempest, the young Emperor was advised not
to consult the oracles as to what the storm signified, because his
uncle’s virtues were so manifest that Heaven itself had, by the
agency of a tempest, spontaneously announced the fact.
Astrology was another form of soothsaying. In 780 B.C. the
imperial astrologer (one of those two men, by the way, whom
erroneous tradition 1000 years later confused with Lao-tsz)
foretold the rise of Ts’i, Tsin, Ts’u, and Ts’in, upon the ruins
of the imperial power; in 773 the same astrologer repeated the
prophecy to the imperial prince then recently enfeoffed by his
relative the Emperor in the state of CHENG. In 705 the imperial
astrologer, when passing through the orthodox state of CH’EN,
foretold from the diagrams that a scion of the CH’EN house would
obtain the throne of Ts’i (which actually took place when the
maire du palais, to the horror of Confucius, assassinated
the last legitimate duke in 481 B.C.); this particular prophecy is
doubly interesting, because the diagrams from the Changes, thus
cited in detail in Confucius’ history, correspond exactly with the
diagrams of the Book of Changes as we have it now, since Confucius
manipulated it–proof that no change has taken place in this part
of the text at least.
The ruler of Ts’in in the year 762, nine years after receiving the
western half of the Chou imperial domain, and being recognized as
a first-class vassal, consulted the oracle as to whither he should
move his own capital. In the year 677 the oracles once more
decided the then reigning ruler to shift his capital to (the
modern) Feng-siang Fu in West Shen Si; the oracles added: “And
later you will water your steeds in the Yellow River"; which came
to pass after the conquests and annexations of 643 B.C., as
already related. In 374 B.C. the imperial astrologer (the second
man whom tradition, 300 years later this time, erroneously
confused with Lao-tsz) then on a visit to the now royal Ts’in
court said: “After 500 years of separation Ts’in is reunited to
our imperial house; in 77 years more a domineering monarch will
arise.” Seven years later the “raining down of metal” (probably
some natural phenomenon not clearly understood at the time) was
considered a good omen in connection with the new capital, now
placed on the south bank of the River Wei. After Ts’in had
conquered China, there are numerous other instances of oracles,
omens, and so forth, all supposed to have had political
significance.
In 645 the ruler of the neighbouring state of Tsin consults the
oracles in order to ascertain who will be the most suitable war
charioteer. A few years before that the court diviner foretold the
future success of the petty Ngwei sub-principality of Tsin, which
in 403 B.C. actually became a separate vassal kingdom. In 575 Tsin
dared not, at the moment, accept the battle challenge of Tsu,
because the particular day was a dies nefas, being the last
day of the moon. Meanwhile the spies of the Ts’u army discerned
that the Tsin leaders were consulting the oracles before the
tablets of their ancestors in the field tent. In 535 the Ts’in
administration consulted its own astrologer upon the point: “Will
the state of Ch’en survive?” The answer was: “When it secures
Ts’i, it will perish.” As just explained, a scion of the Ch’en
house did practically obtain Ts’i in 481 B.C., and the very next
year Ch’en was annexed by Ts’u. In 510 the Tsin astrologer
prophesied the destruction of Wu by Yiieh within forty years, and
also the predominancy of the Lu private family so intimately
connected with Confucius’ troubles. There were not lacking
sensible men, even in those days, who ridiculed the science of
astrology: for instance, Shuh Hiang of Tsin–the man who so
strongly disapproved Tsz-ch’an’s written laws, and the man who
discussed with the Ts’i envoy, the philosopher Yen-tsz, the
worthlessness of their respective dukes–said on one occasion when
the “course of the heavens towards north-west” was supposed to
indicate a success for Tsin: “The course of the heavens, as that
of our success, lies in the qualities of the prince, and not in
the situation of the stars.”
Tsz-ch’an of Cheng himself pooh-poohed oracular warnings, and said
that he preferred to do his best, and leave omens to do their
worst. On one occasion, outside the south gate of the Cheng
capital, two snakes (one from the city, one from outside) were
observed fighting; the one from the inside was defeated. Sure
enough! the exiled duke six years after that returned to his own.
So, in the state of Lu, the children sang: “When the thrushes come
and make their nests, the ruler will go to a place on the Tsin
frontier; when the thrushes settle here, the duke will be abroad"–
in allusion to the future ejecting of the reigning prince by the
powerful family above referred to. And, again (480 B.C.), in the
state of Sung, whose terrestrial position was supposed to be
“invaded” by the then peculiar celestial position of the planet
Mars: it was suggested, however, to the ruling prince that he
might “pass on” the threatened disaster to his ministers, to his
people, or to their harvests–a solution the duke declined to
avail himself of. ’Yours are indeed the words of a sage,’ said the
astrologer.
We now come to the semi-civilized state of Ts’u, which seems to
have had its oracles with the best of them, at all events after
560 B.C. At that date it was explained to the King that “the
ancient emperors would at times consult the oracles for five years
before deciding upon an expedition, or fixing the date of it; they
were content to await patiently the decrees of Heaven.” In 537 the
Ts’u king, having a prince of Wu in his power, sent to ask him
ironically if he had duly consulted the oracles. “Yes,” said the
prince, “every ruler has his tortoise, and it is easy to
demonstrate by our oracles how injurious it will be for you if any
harm comes to me.” This presence of mind saved his life. In 528 a
Ts’u usurper invited a man who had once assisted him to name any
post he would like. The man chose that of diviner, which, it
appears, was an office of the first rank. The father of this king
had secretly arranged with a concubine, notwithstanding the Ts’u
rule (or possibly in accordance with it) that one of the youngest
sons should succeed, to “sacrifice from a distance to the gods in
general, and ask of them which of five sons should sacrifice to
the spirits of the land"; then he buried a jade symbol of rule in
the ancestral temple, and ordered the five sons to enter after
proper purification; the three sons who happened to touch the spot
reigned one after the other. In 489 the King of Ts’u, then engaged
in assisting the orthodox state of Ch’en against the attacks of
Wu, interrogated the imperial astrologer (who must have been there
on a visit): “What is the meaning of that halo, like a bird’s
wings, on each side of the sun?” The astrologer replied: “It
presages calamity, but you can transfer it to your generals.” The
generals then offered to consult the gods themselves, and even to
sacrifice their own persons if necessary; but the King declined
(on the same ground as the Duke of Sung above mentioned) because
“my generals are my own limbs.” It was then proposed to transfer
the calamity to the Yellow River. “No, the Yellow River has never
played me false: ever since we received our fief, we have never at
full moon sacrificed beyond the River Han and Yang-tsz.” Confucius
registered his approval of this answer. It will be remembered that
just at this time Confucius was hanging about Ch’Uen and coquetting
with Ts’u, so that possibly this approval had something to do with
his own prospects.
In recording these instances of prophecies and omens (which might
be multiplied tenfold), it is desired to show how one main set of
ideas pervaded the whole. We should not be too ready to ridicule
them, or to hint at “after the event.” Our own Scriptures are full
of similar prophecies, and what is good for us is good for the
Chinese. If the celestial movements can be foretold, why not
corresponding terrestrial movements, each corner of the earth
being on the meridian of something? In the infancy of science, it
is rather a question of good faith than of truth; and even the
truth, if we insist on expecting it, was rudely guessed at by such
great thinkers as Tsz-ch’an and Shuh Hiang.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
