



In laying stress upon the barbarous, or semi-barbarous, quality of
the states (all in our days considered pure Chinese), which
surrounded the federal area at even so late a period as 771 B.C.,
we wish to emphasize a point which has never yet been made quite
clear, perhaps not even made patent by their own critics to the
Chinese themselves; that is to say, the very small and modest
beginnings of the civilized patriarchal federation called the
Central Kingdom, or Chu Hia–"All the Hia"–just as we say,
“All the Russias.”
In allotting precedence to the various states, the historical
editors, of course, always put the Emperor first in order of
mention; then comes CHENG, the first ruler of which state was son
of an Emperor of the then ruling imperial house; next, the three
Protectors Ts’i, Tsin, and Sung; then follow the petty states of
Wei, Ts’ai, Ts’ao, and T’eng, all of the imperial family name, or,
as we say in English, “surname,” and all lying between the Hwai
and the Sz systems (T’eng was a “belonging state” of Lu). Then
come half a dozen petty orthodox states of less honourable family
names; next, three Eastern barbarian states, which had become
“Central Kingdom,” or which, once genuine Chinese, had become half
barbarian; and finally, Ts’u, Ts’in, Wu, and Yiieh, which were
frankly, if vaguely, “outer barbarian-Tartar.”
It has already been demonstrated that there is evidence, however
imperfect, to show that the mass of the population of Ts’u and Wu
were of decidedly foreign origin. Even as to Ts’i, which was
always treated as an orthodox principality, it is stated that the
founder sent there in or about 1100 B.C. “conformed to the manners
of the place, and encouraged manufactures, commerce, salt and fish
industries.” On the other hand, the son of the Duke of Chou (the
first vassal prince appointed by his brother the Emperor) changed
the customs of Lu, modified the local rites, and induced the
people to keep on their mourning attire for three full years. It
was considered that the Ts’i policy was the wiser of the two, and
it was foretold that Lu would always “look up to” Ts’i in
consequence of this superior judgment on the part of Ts’i. On
frequent occasions the petty adjoining “Chinesified” states, of
which Lu was practically the mesne lord, are stated to have been
“tainted with Eastern barbarian rites.” From and including modern
Sue-chou (North Kiang Su) and eastward, all were “Eastern
barbarians"; in fact, the city just named (mentioned by the name
of Sue in 1100 B.C., and again about 950 B.C., as revolting
against the Emperor) perpetuates the “Sue barbarians” country,
which was for long a bone of contention between Ts’i and Ts’u, and
afterwards Wu; and the name “Hwai savages” proves that the Lower
Hwai Valley was also independent. The Hwai savages, who appear in
the Tribute of Yue, founder of the Hia dynasty, 2205 B.C., revolted
1000 years later against the founders of the Chou dynasty. They
were present at Ts’u’s first durbar in 538 B.C., and are mentioned
as barbarians still resisting Chinese methods so late as A.D. 970.
In Confucius’ time the Lai barbarians (modern Lai-thou Fu in the
German sphere) were employed by Ts’i, who had conquered them in
567 B.C., to try and effect the assassination of Confucius’
master. Six hundred years before that, these same barbarians were
among the first to give in their submission to the founder of
Ts’i; and in 602 B.C. both Ts’i and Lu had endeavoured to crush
them.
As to the state of Ts’in, there is not a single instance given of
any literary conversation or correspondence held by an orthodox
high functionary with a Ts’in statesman. While it is not yet quite
clear that orthodox China can shake herself entirely free of the
reproach of human sacrifices in all senses, it is quite certain
that Ts’in had a barbarous and exclusive notoriety in this
regard’; and, as the Hiung-nu Tartars also practised it, and Ts’in
was at least half Tartar in blood, it is probable that she derived
her sanguinary notions from this blood connection with the Turko-
Scythian tribes. On the death of the Ts’in ruler in 678 B.C., the
first recorded human sacrifices were made, “sixty-six individuals
following the dead.” In 621, on the death of the celebrated Duke
Muh, 177 persons lost their lives, and the people of Ts’in, in
pity, “composed the Yellow Bird Ode” (of these popular Chinese
odes more anon). This holocaust was given as one reason why Ts’in
could never “rule in the East,” i.e. assume the Protectorate over
the orthodox powers all lying to its east, on account of this cruel defect
in its laws. In 387 B.C., the new Earl of Ts’in (who succeeded a nephew,
and therefore could, having no paternal duty to fulfil, introduce the
innovation more cheaply) abolished the principle of human sacrifices
at the death of a ruler. Ten years later, the Emperor’s astrologer paid
a visit to Ts’in;–evidence that the imperial civilizing influence was
still, at least morally, active, This astrologer and historiographer,
whose name was Tan, is interesting, inasmuch as he has been
confused with Li Tan (the personal name of the philosopher Lao-
tsz, who was also an imperial official employed in the historiographical
department). It is added that, previous to this visit, for five hundred
years Ts’in and Chou had kept apart from each other. Notwithstanding
this prohibition of human sacrifices, when the First August Emperor of
Universal China died in 210 B.C., the old Ts’in custom was reintroduced,
and all his women who had not given birth to children were buried with
him. Besides this, all the workmen who had made the secret door and
passage to his grave were cemented in alive, so that they might never
disclose the secret of its approaches.
It was only after gradually adopting Chinese civilization that
Ts’in began to be a considerable power; thus, when Ki-chah of Wu
was entertained at Lu with specimens of the various styles of
music, he observed, on being regaled with Ts’in music: “Ah!
civilized sounds; it has succeeded in refining itself; it is in
occupation of the old Chou appanage.” So late as 361 B.C., when
Ngwei (one of the three royal subdivisions of old Tsin) built a
wall to keep off Ts’in, both Ngwei and Ts’u (which by this time
was quite as good orthodox Chinese as any other state) treated
Ts’in as though the latter were still barbarian, In 326 Ts’in
first introduced into her realm the well-known year-end sacrifices
of the orthodox Chinese, which fact alone points to a long
isolation of Ts’in before this date.
The rule of succession in Ts’in seems to have been of the Tartar
kind at one time. Duke Muh, in 660 B.C., succeeded his brother,
though that brother had seven sons of his own living: that brother
again, had also succeeded a brother.
As to Yueeh, there is no question as to its barbarism, though the
one single king around whose name centres the whole glory of Yiieh
(Kou-tsien, 496-475) seems to have been a man of great ability and
some fine feeling. The native name for Yiieh was Yue-yueeh,
as stated in Chapter VII.; and it seems likely that all the coast
of China down to Tonquin, or Northern Annam, was then inhabited by
cognate tribes, all having the syllable Yueeh, or Viet, in
their names. The great empire or kingdom of Yiieh, founded upon
the ruins of Wu, soon split up into the “Hundred Yiieh,” i.e. (probably)
it relapsed into its native barbarism, and ceased to cohere as a
political factor. “Southern Yueeh” (the Canton region) has undoubted
historical connections with the Tonquin part of Annam, and several
other of the subdivisions of Yiieh, corresponding to Foochow, Wenchow,
etc., show distinct traces of having belonged to the same race. But it is
unsafe to say how the Chinese-transcribed name Yii-yiieh was
pronounced; still more unsafe is it to argue that it must have been U
or O-viet simply because the Annamese so pronounce the word
now. We have seen that, according to one historical statement, the
Wu and Yiieh people spoke the same language; in which case the
members of the ruling Wu caste who fled to Japan in 473 B.C. were
probably not of the same race as the “savages around them.” As an
act of bravado, in 481, the King of Wu made five condemned
centurions cut their own throats before the Tsin envoy, in order
to show what effectively stern discipline he kept, In 484 the King
of Yiieh had already committed a similar act of bravado; but
neither of these barbarian states is distinctly recorded to have
indulged in human sacrifices at the death of a sovereign. Previous
to the crushing of Wu by Yiieh, in 473 B.C., Yiieh was nearly
annihilated by Wu, and on this occasion Kou-tsien’s envoy
advanced crawling on his knees to beg for mercy; this is hardly an
orthodox Chinese custom. However barbarous Yiieh may have been,
its ruling house possessed traditions of descent, through a
concubine, from an emperor of the Hia dynasty; for which reason
the founder was enfeoffed, near modern Shao-hing, west of Ningpo,
in order to fulfil the sacrifices to the founder of the Hia
dynasty, who was, and is, supposed to be buried there: like the
first colonists who migrated to Wu, he cut his hair, tattooed
himself, opened up the jungle, and built a town. In 330 B.C. Kou-
tsien’s descendant spoke of “taking the road left to Chu-
hia,” through modern Ho Nan province; that means taking the
high-road to China proper. The term originated in times when Ts’u
had not yet become a recognized “Hia.” The fact that Yueeh, with
its new capital then in Shan Tung, could never govern the Yang-tsz
and Hwai inland regions, seems to prove that her power was always
purely a water power, and that she was comparatively ignorant of
land campaigns.
Continue...

This electronic book of Ancient China Simplified by Edward Harper Parker,
M.A., (Manc.), Professor of Chinese at the Victoria University of Manchester,
London is public domain.
Hypertext conversion by Philipp Lenssen.


At Amazon: The Cambridge Illustrated History of China


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ancient China Simplified (1908)By Edward Harper ParkerAt Amazon
