


It was in the year of grace 1490, in the reign of Guidobaldo, Lord
of Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino,–the year, by the way, of the
birth of that most illustrious and gracious lady, Vittoria
Colonna.
It was in the spring of the year, in that mountain eyrie beloved
of the Muses and coveted of the Borgia, that a little boy stood
looking out of a grated casement into the calm, sunshiny day. He
was a pretty boy, with hazel eyes, and fair hair cut straight
above his brows; he wore a little blue tunic with some embroidery
about the throat of it, and had in his hand a little round flat
cap of the same color. He was sad of heart this merry morning, for
a dear friend of his, a friend ten years older than himself, had
gone the night before on a journey over the mountains to Maestro
Francesco at Bologna, there to be bound apprentice to that gentle
artist. This friend, Timoteo della Vita, had been very dear to the
child, had played with him and jested with him, made him toys and
told him stories, and he was very full of pain at Timoteo’s loss.
Yet he told himself not to mind, for had not Timoteo said to him,
“I go as goldsmith’s ’prentice to the best of men; but I mean to
become a painter”? And the child understood that to be a painter
was to be the greatest and wisest the world held; he quite
understood that, for he was Raffaelle, the seven-year-old son of
Signor Giovanni Sanzio.
He was a very happy little boy here in this stately, yet homely
and kindly Urbino, where his people had come for refuge when the
lances of Malatesta had ravaged and ruined their homestead. He had
the dearest old grandfather in all the world; he had a loving
mother, and he had a father who was very tender to him, and
painted him among the angels of heaven, and was always full of
pleasant conceits and admirable learning, and such true love of
art that the child breathed it with every breath, as he could
breathe the sweetness of a cowslip-bell when he held one in his
hands up to his nostrils. It was good in those days to live in old
Urbino. It was not, indeed, so brilliant a place as it became in a
later day, when Ariosto came there, and Bembo and Castiglione and
many another witty and learned gentleman, and the Courts of Love
were held with ingenious rhyme and pretty sentiment, sad only for
wantonness. But, if not so brilliant, it was homelier, simpler,
full of virtue, with a wise peace and tranquillity that joined
hands with a stout courage. The burgher was good friends with his
prince, and knew that in any trouble or perplexity he could go up
to the palace, or stop the duke in the market place, and be sure
of sympathy and good counsel. There were a genuine love of
beautiful things, a sense of public duty and of public spirit, a
loyal temper and a sage contentment, among the good people of that
time, which made them happy and prosperous.
All work was solidly and thoroughly done, living was cheap, and
food good and plentiful, much better and more plentiful than it is
now; in the fine old houses every stone was sound, every bit of
ornament well wrought; men made their nests to live in and to pass
to their children and children’s children after them, and had
their own fancies and their own traditions recorded in the
ironwork of their casements and in the woodwork of their doors.
They had their happy day of honest toil from matins bell to
evensong, and then walked out or sat about in the calm evening air
and looked down on the plains below that were rich with grain and
fruit and woodland, and talked and laughed among each other, and
were content with their own pleasant, useful lives, not burnt up
with envy of desire to be some one else, as in our sickly,
hurrying time most people are.
Yes, life must have been very good in those old days in old
Urbino, better than it is anywhere in ours.
Can you not picture to yourself good, shrewd, wise Giovanni
Sanzio, with his old father by his side, and his little son
running before him, in the holy evening time of a feast day, with
the deep church bells swaying above-head, and the last sun-rays
smiting the frescoed walls, the stone bastions, the blazoned
standard on the castle roof, the steep city rocks shelving down
into the greenery of cherry orchard and of pear tree? I can,
whenever I shut my eyes and recall Urbino as it was; and would it
had been mine to live then in that mountain home, and meet that
divine child going along his happy smiling way, garnering
unconsciously in his infant soul all the beautiful sights and
sounds around him, to give them in his manhood to the world.
“Let him alone: he will paint all this some day,” said his wise
father, who loved to think that his brushes and his colors would
pass in time to Raffaelle, whose hands would be stronger to hold
them than his own had been. And, whether he would ever paint it or
not, the child never tired of thus looking from his eyrie on the
rocks and counting all that passed below through the blowing corn
under the leafy orchard boughs.
There were so many things to see in Urbino in that time, looking
so over the vast green valley below: a clump of spears, most
likely, as men-at-arms rode through the trees; a string of market
folk bringing in the produce of the orchards or the fields;
perchance a red-robed cardinal on a white mule with glittering
housings, behind him a sumpter train rich with baggage, furniture,
gold and silver plate; maybe the duke’s hunting party going out or
coming homeward with caracoling steeds, beautiful hounds straining
at their leash, hunting horns sounding merrily over the green
country; maybe a band of free lances, with plumes tossing, steel
glancing, bannerets fluttering against the sky; or maybe a quiet
gray-robed string of monks or pilgrims singing the hymn sung
before Jerusalem, treading the long lush grass with sandaled feet,
coming towards the city, to crowd slowly and gladly up its rocky
height. Do you not wish with me you could stand in the window with
Raffaelle to see the earth as it was then?
No doubt the good folks of Urbino laughed at him often for a
little moonstruck dreamer, so many hours did he stand looking,
looking,–only looking,–as eyes have a right to do that see well
and not altogether as others see. Happily for him, the days of his
childhood were times of peace, and he did not behold, as his
father had done, the torches light up the street and the flames
devour the homesteads.
At this time Urbino was growing into fame for its pottery work:
those big dishes and bowls, those marriage plates and pharmacy
jars which it made, were beginning to rival the products of its
neighbor Gubbio, and when its duke wished to send a bridal gift,
or a present on other festal occasions, he oftenest chose some
service or some rare platter of his own Urbino ware. Now, pottery
had not then taken the high place among the arts of Italy that it
was destined very soon to do. As you will learn when you are
older, after the Greeks and the Christians had exhausted all that
was beautiful in shape and substance of clay vases, the art seemed
to die out, and the potters and the pottery painters died with it,
or at any rate went to sleep for a great many centuries, whilst
soldiers and prelates, nobles and mercenaries, were trampling to
and fro all over the land and disputing it, and carrying fire and
torch, steel and desolation, with them in their quarrels and
covetousness. But now, the reign of the late good duke, great
Federigo, having been favorable to the Marches (as we call his
province now), the potters and pottery painters, with other gentle
craftsmen, had begun to look up again, and the beneficent fires of
their humble ovens had begun to burn in Castel Durante, in Pesaro,
in Faenza, in Gubbio, and in Urbino itself. The great days had not
yet come: Maestro Giorgio was but a youngster, and Orazio Fontane
not born, nor the clever baker Prestino either, nor the famous Fra
Xanto; but there was a Don Giorgio even then in Gubbio, of whose
work, alas! one plate now at the Louvre is all we have; and here
in the ducal city on the hill rich and noble things were already
being made in the stout and lustrous majolica that was destined to
acquire later on so wide a ceramic fame. Jars and bowls and
platters, oval dishes and ewers and basins, and big-bodied, metal-
welded pharmacy vases were all made and painted at Urbino whilst
Raffaelle Sanzio was running about on rosy infantine feet. There
was a master-potter of the Montefeltro at that time, one Maestro
Benedetto Ronconi, whose name had not become world-renowned as
Orazio Fontane’s and Maestro Giorgio’s did in the following
century, yet who in that day enjoyed the honor of all the duchy,
and did things very rare and fine in the Urbino ware. He lived
within a stone’s throw of Giovanni Sanzio, and was a gray-haired,
handsome, somewhat stern and pompous man, now more than middle-
aged, who had one beauteous daughter, by name Pacifica. He
cherished Pacifica well, but not so well as he cherished the
things he wrought–the deep round nuptial plates and oval massive
dishes that he painted with Scriptural stories and strange
devices, and landscapes such as those he saw around, and flowing
scrolls with Latin mottoes in black letters, and which, when thus
painted, he consigned with an anxiously beating heart to the trial
of the ovens, and which sometimes came forth from the trial all
cracked and blurred and marred, and sometimes emerged in triumph
and came into his trembling hands iridescent and lovely with those
lustrous and opaline hues which we admire in them to this day as
the especial glory of majolica.
Maestro Benedetto was an ambitious and vain man, and had had a
hard, laborious manhood, working at his potter’s wheel and
painter’s brush before Urbino ware was prized in Italy or even in
the duchy. Now, indeed, he was esteemed at his due worth, and his
work was so also, and he was passably rich, and known as a good
artist beyond the Marches; but there was a younger man over at
Gubbio, the Don Giorgio who was precursor of unequaled Maestro
Giorgio Andreoli, who surpassed him, and made him sleep o’ nights
on thorns, as envy makes all those to do who take her as their
bedfellow.
The house of Maestro Benedetto was a long stone building, with a
loggia at the back all overclimbed by hardy rose trees, and
looking on a garden that was more than half an orchard, and in
which grew abundantly pear trees, plum trees, and wood strawberries.
The lancet windows of his workshop looked on all this quiet greenery.
There were so many such pleasant workshops then in the land–calm,
godly, homelike places, filled from without with song of birds and
scent of herbs and blossoms. Nowadays men work in crowded, stinking
cities, in close factory chambers; and their work is barren as their
lives are.
The little son of neighbor Sanzio ran in and out this bigger,
wider house and garden of Maestro Benedetto at his pleasure, for
the maiden Pacifica was always glad to see him, and even the
sombre master-potter would unbend to him, and show him how to lay
the color on to the tremulous, fugitive, unbaked biscuit.
Pacifica was a lovely young woman of some seventeen or eighteen
summers; and perhaps Raffaelle was but remembering her when he
painted in his after-years the face of his Madonna di San Sisto.
He loved her as he loved everything that was beautiful and every
one who was kind; and almost better than his own beloved father’s
studio, almost better than his dear old grandsire’s cheerful
little shop, did he love this grave, silent, sweet-smelling, sun-
pierced, shadowy old house of Maestro Benedetto.
Maestro Benedetto had four apprentices or pupils in that time
learning to become figuli, but the one whom Raffaelle liked the
most (and Pacifica too) was one Luca Torelli, of a village above
in the mountains,–a youth with a noble, dark, pensive beauty of
his own, and a fearless gait, and a supple, tall, slender figure
that would have looked well in the light coat of mail and silken
doublet of a man-at-arms. In sooth, the spirit of Messer Luca was
more made for war and its risks and glories than for the wheel and
the brush of the bottega; but he had loved Pacifica ever since he
had come down one careless holy-day into Urbino, and had bound
himself to her father’s service in a heedless moment of eagerness
to breathe the same air and dwell under the same roof as she did.
He had gained little for his pains: to see her at mass and at
mealtimes, now and then to be allowed to bring water from the well
for her or feed her pigeons, to see her gray gown go down between
the orchard trees and catch the sunlight, to hear the hum of her
spinning wheel, the thrum of her viol–this was the uttermost he
got of joy in two long years; and how he envied Raffaelle running
along the stone floor of the loggia to leap into her arms, to hang
upon her skirts, to pick the summer fruit with her, and sort with
her the autumn herbs for drying!
“I love Pacifica!” he would say, with a groan, to Raffaelle; and
Raffaelle would say, with a smile, “Ah, Luca, so do I!”
“It is not the same thing, my dear,” sighed Luca; “I want her for
my wife.”
“I shall have no wife; I shall marry myself to painting,” said
Raffaelle, with a little grave, wise face looking out from under
the golden roof of his fair hair. For he was never tired of
watching his father painting the saints with their branch of palm
on their ground of blue or of gold, or Maestro Benedetto making
the dull clay glow with angels’ wings and prophets’ robes and holy
legends told in color.
Now, one day, as Raffaelle was standing and looking thus at his
favorite window in the potter’s house, his friend, the handsome,
black-browed Luca, who was also standing there, did sigh so deeply
and so deplorably that the child was startled from his dreams.
“Good Luca, what ails you?” he murmured, winding his arms about
the young man’s knees.
“Oh, ’Faello!” mourned the apprentice, woefully. “Here is such a
chance to win the hand of Pacifica if only I had talent–such
talent as that Giorgio of Gubbio has! If the good Lord had only
gifted me with a master’s skill, instead of all this bodily
strength and sinew, like a wild hog of the woods, which avails me
nothing here!”
“What chance is it?” asked Raffaelle, “and what is there new about
Pacifica? She told me nothing, and I was with her an hour.”
“Dear simple one, she knows nothing of it,” said Luca, heaving
another tremendous sigh from his heart’s deepest depths. “You must
know that a new order has come in this very forenoon from the
duke; he wishes a dish and a jar of the very finest and firmest
majolica to be painted with the story of Esther, and made ready in
three months from this date, to then go as his gifts to his
cousins of Gonzaga. He has ordered that no cost be spared in the
work, but that the painting thereof be of the best that can be
produced, and the prize he will give is fifty scudi. Now, Maestro
Benedetto, having known some time, it seems, of this order, has
had made in readiness several large oval dishes and beautiful big-
bellied jars: he gives one of each to each of his pupils,–to
myself, to Berengario, to Tito, and Zenone. The master is sorely
distraught that his eyesight permits him not himself to execute
the duke’s commands; but it is no secret that should one of us be
so fortunate as to win the duke’s approbation, the painter who
does so shall become his partner here and shall have the hand of
Pacifica. Some say that he has only put forth this promise as a
stimulus to get the best work done of which his bottega is
capable; but I know Maestro Benedetto too well to deem him guilty
of any such evasion. What he has said, he will carry out; if the
vase and the dish win the duke’s praise, they will also win
Pacifica. Now you see, ’Faello mine, why I am so bitterly sad of
heart, for I am a good craftsman enough at the wheel and the
furnace, and I like not ill the handling and the moulding of the
clay, but at the painting of the clay I am but a tyro, and
Berengario or even the little Zenone will beat me; of that I am
sure.”
Raffaelle heard all this in silence, leaning his elbows on his
friend’s knee, and his chin on the palms of his own hands. He knew
that the other pupils were better painters by far than his Luca,
though not one of them was such a good-hearted or noble-looking
youth, and for none of them did the maiden Pacifica care.
“How long a time is given for the jar and the dish to be ready?"
he asked, at length.
“Three months, my dear,” said Luca, with a sigh sadder than ever.
“But if it were three years, what difference would it make? You
cannot cudgel the divine grace of art into a man with blows as you
cudgel speed into a mule, and I shall be a dolt at the end of the time
as I am now. What said your good father to me but yesternight?–and
he IS good to me and does not despise me. He said: ’Luca, my son,
it is of no more avail for you to sigh for Pacifica than for the
moon. Were she mine I would give her to you, for you have a heart
of gold, but Signor Benedetto will not; for never, I fear me, will
you be able to decorate anything more than an apothecary’s mortar
or a barber’s basin. If I hurt you, take it not ill; I mean kindness,
and were I a stalwart youth like you I would go try my fortunes in
the Free Companies in France or Spain, or down in Rome, for you are
made for a soldier.’ That was the best even your father could say
for me, ’Faello.”
“But Pacifica,” said the child,–"Pacifica would not wish you to
join the Free Companies.”
“God knows,” said Luca, hopelessly. “Perhaps she would not care.”
“I am sure she would,” said Raffaelle, “for she does love you,
Luca, though she cannot say so, being but a girl, and Signor
Benedetto against you. But that redcap you tamed for her, how she
loves it, how she caresses it, and half is for you, Luca, half for
the bird!”
Luca kissed him.
But the tears rolled down the poor youth’s face, for he was much
in earnest and filled with despair.
“Even if she did, if she do,” he murmured hopelessly, “she never
will let me know it, since her father forbids a thought of me; and
now here is this trial of skill at the duke’s order come to make
things worse, and if that swaggering Berengario of Fano win her,
then truly will I join the free lances and pray heaven send me
swift shrive and shroud.”
Raffaelle was very pensive for a while; then he raised his head,
and said:–
“I have thought of something, Luca. But I do not know whether you
will let me try it.”
“You angel child! What would your old Luca deny to you? But as for
helping me, my dear, put that thought out of your little mind
forever, for no one can help me, ’Faello, not the saints
themselves, since I was born a dolt!”
Raffaelle kissed him, and said, “Now listen!”
A few days later Signer Benedetto informed his pupils in
ceremonious audience of the duke’s command and of his own
intentions; he did not pronounce his daughter’s name to the
youths, but he spoke in terms that were clear enough to assure
them that whoever had the good fortune and high merit to gain the
duke’s choice of his pottery should have the honor of becoming
associate in his own famous bottega. Now, it had been known in
Urbino ever since Pacifica had gone to her first communion that
whoever pleased her father well enough to become his partner would
have also to please her as her husband. Not much attention was
given to maidens’ wishes in those times, and no one thought the
master-potter either unjust or cruel in thus suiting himself
before he suited his daughter. And what made the hearts of all the
young men quake and sink the lowest was the fact that Signer
Benedetto offered the competition, not only to his own apprentices,
but to any native of the duchy of Urbino. For who could tell what
hero might not step forth from obscurity and gain the great prize
of this fair hand of Pacifica’s? And with her hand would go many
a broad gold ducat, and heritage of the wide old gray stone house,
and many an old jewel and old brocade that were kept there in dusky
sweet-smelling cabinets, and also more than one good piece of land,
smiling with corn and fruit trees, outside the gates in the lower
pastures to the westward.
Luca, indeed, never thought of these things, but the other three
pupils did, and other youths as well. Had it not been for the
limitation as to birth within the duchy, many a gallant young
painter from the other side of the Apennines, many a lusty
vasalino or boccalino from the workshops of fair Florence herself,
or from the Lombard cities, might have traveled there in hot haste
as fast as horses could carry them, and come to paint the clay for
the sake of so precious a recompense. But Urbino men they had to
be; and poor Luca, who was so full of despair that he could almost
have thrown himself headlong from the rocks, was thankful to
destiny for even so much slender mercy as this,–that the number
of his rivals was limited.
“Had I been you,” Giovanni Sanzio ventured once to say
respectfully to Signor Benedetto, “I think I should have picked
out for my son-in-law the best youth that I knew, not the best
painter; for be it said in all reverence, my friend, the greatest
artist is not always the truest man, and by the hearthstone humble
virtues have sometimes high claim.”
Then Signor Benedetto had set his stern face like a flint, knowing
very well what youth Messer Giovanni would have liked to name to
him.
“I have need of a good artist in my bottega to keep up its fame,"
he had said stiffly. “My vision is not what it was, and I should
be loath to see Urbino ware fall back, whilst Pesaro and Gubbio
and Castel Durante gain ground every day. Pacifica must pay the
penalty, if penalty there be, for being the daughter of a great
artist.”
Mirthful, keen-witted Sanzio smiled to himself, and went his way
in silence; for he who loved Andrea Mantegna did not bow down in
homage before the old master-potter’s estimation of himself, which
was in truth somewhat overweening in its vanity.
“Poor Pacifica!” he thought; “if only my ’Faello were but some
decade older!”
He, who could not foresee the future, the splendid, wondrous,
unequaled future that awaited his young son, wished nothing better
for him than a peaceful painter’s life here in old Urbino, under
the friendly shadow of the Montefeltro’s palace walls.
Meanwhile, where think you was Raffaelle? Half the day, or all the
day, and every day whenever he could? Where think you was he?
Well, in the attic of Luca, before a bowl and a dish almost as big
as himself. The attic was a breezy, naked place, underneath the
arches supporting the roof of Maestro Benedetto’s dwelling. Each
pupil had one of these garrets to himself,–a rare boon, for which
Luca came to be very thankful, for without it he could not have
sheltered his angel; and the secret that Raffaelle had whispered
to him that day of the first conference had been, “Let ME try and
paint it!”
For a long time Luca had been afraid to comply, had only forborne
indeed from utter laughter at the idea from his love and reverence
for the little speaker. Baby Sanzio, who was only just seven years
old as the April tulips reddened the corn, painting a majolica
dish and vase to go to the Gonzaga of Mantua! The good fellow
could scarcely restrain his shouts of mirth at the audacious
fancy; and nothing had kept him grave but the sight of that most
serious face of Raffaelle, looking up to his with serene, sublime
self-confidence, nay, perhaps, rather, confidence in heaven and in
heaven’s gifts.
“Let me try!” said the child a hundred times. He would tell no
one, only Luca would know; and if he failed–well, there would
only be the spoiled pottery to pay for, and had he not two whole
ducats that the duke had given him when the court had come to
behold his father’s designs for the altar frescos at San Dominico
di Cagli?
So utterly in earnest was he, and so intense and blank was Luca’s
absolute despair, that the young man had in turn given way to his
entreaties. “Never can I do aught,” he thought, bitterly, looking
at his own clumsy designs, “And sometimes by the help of cherubs
the saints work miracles,”
“It will be no miracle,” said Raffaelle, hearing him murmur this;
“it will be myself, and that which the dear God has put into me.”
From that hour Luca let him do what he would, and through all
these lovely early summer days the child came and shut himself up
in the garret, and studied, and thought, and worked, and knitted
his pretty fair brows, and smiled in tranquil satisfaction,
according to the mood he was in and the progress of his labors.
Giovanni Sanzio went away at that time to paint an altar-piece
over at Citta di Castello, and his little son for once was glad he
was absent. Messer Giovanni would surely have remarked the long
and frequent visits of Raffaelle to the attic, and would, in all
likelihood, have obliged him to pore over his Latin or to take
exercise in the open fields; but his mother said nothing, content
that he should be amused and safe, and knowing well that Pacifica
loved him and would let him come to no harm under her roof.
Pacifica herself did wonder that he deserted her so perpetually
for the garret. But one day when she questioned him the sweet-
faced rogue clung to her and murmured, “Oh, Pacifica, I do want
Luca to win you, because he loves you so; and I do love you both!"
And she grew pale, and answered him, “Ah, dear, if he could!” and
then said never a word more, but went to her distaff; and
Raffaelle saw great tears fall off her lashes down among the flax.
She thought he went to the attic to watch how Luca painted, and
loved him more than ever for that, but knew in the hopelessness of
her heart–as Luca also knew it in his–that the good and gallant
youth would never be able to create anything that would go as the
duke’s gifts to the Gonzaga of Mantua. And she did care for Luca!
She had spoken to him but rarely indeed, yet passing in and out of
the same doors, and going to the same church offices, and dwelling
always beneath the same roof, he had found means of late for a
word, a flower, a serenade. And he was so handsome and so brave,
and so gentle, too, and so full of deference. Poor Pacifica cared
not in the least whether he could paint or not. He could have made
her happy.
In the attic Raffaelle passed the most anxious hours of all his
sunny little life. He would not allow Luca even to look at what he
did. He barred the door and worked; when he went away he locked
his work up in a wardrobe. The swallows came in and out of the
unglazed window, and fluttered all around him; the morning
sunbeams came in, too, and made a nimbus round his golden head,
like that which his father gilded above the heads of saints.
Raffaelle worked on, not looking off, though clang of trumpet, or
fanfare of cymbal, often told him there was much going on worth
looking at down below. He was only seven years old, but he labored
as earnestly as if he were a man grown, his little rosy ringers
gripping that pencil which was to make him in life and death
famous as kings are not famous, and let his tender body lie in its
last sleep in the Pantheon of Rome.
He had covered hundreds of sheets with designs before he had
succeeded in getting embodied the ideas that haunted him. When he
had pleased himself at last, he set to work to transfer his
imaginations to the clay in color in the subtile luminous metallic
enamel that characterizes Urbino majolica.
Ah, how glad he was now that his father had let him draw from the
time he was two years old, and that of late Messer Benedetto had
shown him something of the mysteries of painting on biscuit and
producing the metallic lustre which was the especial glory of the
pottery of the duchy!
How glad he was, and how his little heart bounded and seemed to
sing in this his first enjoyment of the joyous liberties and
powers of creative work!
A well-known writer has said that genius is the power of taking
pains; he should have said rather that genius HAS this power also,
but that first and foremost it possesses the power of spontaneous
and exquisite production without effort and with delight.
Luca looked at him (not at his work, for the child had made him
promise not to do so) and began to marvel at his absorption, his
intentness, the evident facility with which he worked: the little
figure leaning over the great dish on the bare board of the table,
with the oval opening of the window and the blue sky beyond it,
began to grow sacred to him with more than the sanctity of
childhood. Raffaelle’s face grew very serious, too, and lost its
color, and his large hazel eyes looked very big and grave and
dark.
“Perhaps Signer Giovanni will be angry with me if ever he knows,"
thought poor Luca; but it was too late to alter anything now. The
child Sanzio had become his master.
So Raffaelle, unknown to any one else, worked on and on there in
the attic while the tulips bloomed and withered, and the
honeysuckle was in flower in the hedges, and the wheat and barley
were being cut in the quiet fields lying far down below in the
sunshine. For midsummer was come; the three months all but a week
had passed by. It was known that every one was ready to compete
for the duke’s choice.
One afternoon Raffaelle took Luca by the hand and said to him,
“Come.”
He led the young man up to the table, beneath the unglazed window,
where he had passed so many of these ninety days of the spring and
summer.
Luca gave a great cry, and stood gazing, gazing, gazing. Then he
fell on his knees and embraced the little feet of the child: it
was the first homage that he, whose life became one beautiful song
of praise, received from man.
“Dear Luca,” he said softly, “do not do that. If it be indeed
good, let us thank God.”
What his friend saw were the great oval dish and the great jar or
vase standing with the sunbeams full upon them, and the brushes
and the tools and the colors all strewn around. And they shone
with lustrous opaline hues and wondrous flame-like glories and
gleaming iridescence, like melted jewels, and there were all
manner of graceful symbols and classic designs wrought upon them;
and their borders were garlanded with cherubs and flowers, bearing
the arms of Montefeltro, and the landscapes were the tender,
homely landscapes round about Urbino; and the mountains had the
solemn radiance that the Apennines wore at eveningtime; and amidst
the figures there was one supreme, white-robed, golden-crowned
Esther, to whom the child painter had given the face of Pacifica.
And this wondrous creation, wrought by a baby’s hand, had safely
and secretly passed the ordeal of the furnace, and had come forth
without spot or flaw.
Luca ceased not from kneeling at the feet of Raffaelle, as ever
since has kneeled the world.
“Oh, wondrous boy! Oh, angel sent unto men!” sighed the poor
’prentice, as he gazed; and his heart was so full that he burst
into tears.
“Let us thank God,” said little Raffaelle again; and he joined his
small hands that had wrought this miracle, and said his Laus
Domini.
When the precious jar and the great platter were removed to the
wardrobe and shut up in safety behind the steel wards of the
locker, Luca said timidly, feeling twenty years in age behind the
wisdom of this divine child: “But, dearest boy, I do not see how
your marvelous and most exquisite accomplishment can advantage me.
Even if you would allow it to pass as mine, I could not accept
such a thing; it would be a fraud, a shame: not even to win
Pacifica could I consent.”
“Be not so hasty, good friend,” said Raffaelle. “Wait just a
little longer yet and see. I have my own idea. Do trust in me.”
“Heaven speaks in you, that I believe,” said Luca, humbly.
Raffaelle answered not, but ran downstairs, and, passing Pacifica,
threw his arms about her in more than his usual affectionate
caresses.
“Pacifica, be of good heart,” he murmured, and would not be
questioned, but ran homeward to his mother.
“Can it be that Luca has done well,” thought Pacifica; but she
feared the child’s wishes had outrun his wisdom. He could not be
any judge, a child of seven years, even though he were the son of
that good and honest painter and poet, Giovanni Sanzio.
The next morning was midsummer day. Now, the pottery was all to be
placed on this forenoon in the bottega of Signor Benedetto; and
the Duke Guidobaldo was then to come and make his choice from
amidst them; and the master-potter, a little because he was a
courtier, and more because he liked to affect a mighty indifference
and to show he had no favoritism, had declared that he would not
himself see the competing works of art until the eyes of the Lord
of Montefeltro also fell upon them.
As for Pacifica, she had locked herself in her chamber, alone with
her intense agitation. The young men were swaggering about, and
taunting each other, and boasting. Luca alone sat apart, thrumming
an old lute. Giovanni Sanzio, who had ridden home at evening from
Citta di Castello, came in from his own house and put his hand on
the youth’s shoulder.
“I hear the Pesaro men have brought fine things. Take courage, my
lad. Maybe we can entreat the duke to dissuade Pacifica’s father
from this tyrannous disposal of her hand.”
Luca shook his head wearily.
There would be one beautiful thing there, indeed, he knew; but
what use would that be to him?
“The child–the child–” he stammered, and then remembered that he
must not disclose Raffaelle’s secret.
“My child?” said Signor Giovanni. “Oh, he will be here; he will be
sure to be here: wherever there is a painted thing to be seen,
there always, be sure, is Raffaelle.”
Then the good man sauntered within from the loggia, to exchange
salutations with Ser Benedetto, who, in a suit of fine crimson
with doublet of sad-colored velvet, was standing ready to advance
bareheaded into the street as soon as the hoofs of the duke’s
charger should strike on the stones.
“You must be anxious in your thoughts,” said Signor Giovanni to
him. “They say a youth from Pesaro brings something fine: if you
should find yourself bound to take a stranger into your workroom
and your home–”
“If he be a man of genius, he will be welcome,” answered Messer
Ronconi, pompously. “Be he of Pesaro, or of Fano, or of Castel
Durante, I go not back from my word: I keep my word, to my own
hindrance even, ever.”
“Let us hope it will bring you only joy and triumph here,” said
his neighbor, who knew him to be an honest man and a true, if
over-obstinate and too vain of his own place in Urbino.
“Our lord the duke!” shouted the people standing in the street;
and Ser Benedetto walked out with stately tread to receive the
honor of his master’s visit to his bottega.
Raffaelle slipped noiselessly up to his father’s side, and slid
his little hand into Sanzio’s.
“You are not surely afraid of our good Guidobaldo!” said his
father, with a laugh and some little surprise, for Raffaelle was
very pale, and his lower lip trembled a little.
“No,” said the child, simply.
The young duke and his court came riding down the street, and
paused before the old stone house of the master-potter,–splendid
gentlemen, though only in their morning apparel, with noble
Barbary steeds fretting under them, and little pages and liveried
varlets about their steps. Usually, unless he went hunting or on a
visit to some noble, Guidobaldo, like his father, walked about
Urbino like any one of his citizens; but he knew the pompous and
somewhat vainglorious temper of Messer Benedetto, and good-
naturedly was willing to humor its harmless vanities. Bowing to
the ground, the master-potter led the way, walking backward into
his bottega; the courtiers followed their prince; Giovanni Sanzio
with his little son and a few other privileged persons went in
also at due distance. At the farther end of the workshop stood the
pupils and the artists from Pesaro and other places in the duchy
whose works were there in competition. In all there were some ten
competitors: poor Luca, who had set his own work on the table with
the rest as he was obliged to do, stood hindmost of all, shrinking
back, to hide his misery, into the deepest shadow of the deep-
bayed latticed window.
On the narrow deal benches that served as tables on working days
to the pottery painters were ranged the dishes and the jars, with
a number attached to each–no name to any, because Signor
Benedetto was resolute to prove his own absolute disinterestedness
in the matter of choice: he wished for the best artist. Prince
Guidobaldo, doffing his plumed cap courteously, walked down the
long room and examined each production in its turn. On the whole,
the collection made a brave display of majolica, though he was
perhaps a little disappointed at the result in each individual
case, for he had wanted something out of the common run and
absolutely perfect. Still, with fair words he complimented Signor
Benedetto on the brave show, and only before the work of poor Luca
was he entirely silent, since indeed silence was the greatest
kindness he could show to it: the drawing was bold and regular,
but the coloring was hopelessly crude, glaring, and ill-disposed.
At last, before a vase and a dish that stood modestly at the very
farthest end of the deal bench, the duke gave a sudden exclamation
of delight, and Signor Benedetto grew crimson with pleasure and
surprise, and Giovanni Sanzio pressed a little nearer and tried to
see over the shoulders of the gentlemen of the court, feeling sure
that something rare and beautiful must have called forth that cry
of wonder from the Lord of Montefeltro, and having seen at a
glance that for his poor friend Luca there was no sort of hope.
“This is beyond all comparison,” said Guidobaldo, taking the great
oval dish up reverently in his hands. “Maestro Benedetto, I do
felicitate you indeed that you should possess such a pupil. He
will be a glory to our beloved Urbino.”
“It is indeed most excellent work, my lord duke,” said the master-
potter, who was trembling with surprise and dared not show all the
astonishment and emotion that he felt at the discovery of so
exquisite a creation in his bottega. “It must be,” he added, for
he was a very honest man, “the work of one of the lads of Pesaro
or Castel Durante. I have no such craftsman in my workshop. It is
beautiful exceedingly!”
“It is worth its weight in gold!” said the prince, sharing his
emotion. “Look, gentlemen–look! Will not the fame of Urbino be
borne beyond the Apennines and Alps?”
Thus summoned, the court and the citizens came to look, and
averred that truly never in Urbino had they seen such painting on
majolica. “But whose is it?” said Guidobaldo, impatiently, casting
his eyes over the gathered group in the background of apprentices
and artists. “Maestro Benedetto, I pray you, the name of the
artist; I pray you, quick!”
“It is marked number eleven, my lord,” answered the master-potter.
“Ho, you who reply to that number, stand out and give your name.
My lord duke has chosen your work. Ho, there! do you hear me?”
But not one of the group moved. The young men looked from one to
another. Who was this nameless rival? There were but ten of
themselves.
“Ho, there!” repeated Signor Benedetto, getting angry. “Cannot you
find a tongue, I say? Who has wrought this work? Silence is but
insolence to his highness and to me!”
Then the child Sanzio loosened his little hand from his father’s
hold, and went forward, and stood before the master-potter.
“I painted it,” he said, with a pleased smile; “I, Raffaelle.”
Can you not fancy, without telling, the confusion, the wonder, the
rapture, the incredulity, the questions, the wild ecstasy of
praise, that followed on the discovery of the child artist? Only
the presence of Guidobaldo kept it in anything like decent
quietude, and even he, all duke though he was, felt his eyes wet
and felt his heart swell; for he himself was childless, and for
the joy that Giovanni Sanzio felt that day he would have given his
patrimony and duchy.
He took a jewel hung on a gold chain from his own breast and threw
it over Raffaelle’s shoulders.
“There is your first guerdon,” he said; “you will have many, O
wondrous child, who shall live when we are dust!”
Raffaelle, who himself was all the while quite tranquil and
unmoved, kissed the duke’s hand with sweetest grace, then turned
to his own father.
“It is true I have won my lord duke’s prize?”
“Quite true, my angel!” said Giovanni Sanzio, with tremulous
voice.
Raffaelle looked up at Maestro Benedetto.
“Then I claim the hand of Pacifica!”
There was a smile on all the faces round, even on the darker
countenances of the vanquished painters.
“Oh, would indeed you were of age to be my son by marriage, as you
are the son of my heart!” murmured Signor Benedetto. “Dear and
marvelous child, you are but jesting, I know. Tell me what it is
indeed that you would have. I could deny you nothing; and truly it
is you who are my master.”
“I am your pupil,” said Raffaelle, with that pretty serious smile
of his, his little fingers playing with the ducal jewel. “I could
never have painted that majolica yonder had you not taught me the
secrets and management of your colors. Now, dear maestro mine, and
you, O my lord duke, do hear me! I by the terms of the contest
have won the hand of Pacifica and the right of association with
Messer Ronconi. I take these rights and I give them over to my
dear friend Luca of Fano, because he is the honestest man in all
the world, and does honor Signor Benedetto and love Pacifica as no
other can do so well, and Pacifica loves him, and my lord duke
will say that thus all will be well.”
So with the grave, innocent audacity of a child he spoke–this
seven-year-old painter who was greater than any there.
Signor Benedetto stood mute, sombre, agitated. Luca had sprung
forward and dropped on one knee; he was as pale as ashes.
Raffaelle looked at him with a smile.
“My lord duke,” he said, with his little gentle smile, “you have
chosen my work; defend me in my rights.”
“Listen to the voice of an angel, my good Benedetto; heaven speaks
by him,” said Guidobaldo, gravely, laying his hand on the arm of
his master-potter.
Harsh Signor Benedetto burst into tears.
“I can refuse him nothing,” he said, with a sob. “He will give
such glory unto Urbino as never the world hath seen!”
“And call down this fair Pacifica whom Raffaelle has won,” said
the sovereign of the duchy, “and I will give her myself as her
dower as many gold pieces as we can cram into this famous vase. An
honest youth who loves her and whom she loves–what better can you
do, Benedetto? Young man, rise up and be happy. An angel has
descended on earth this day for you.”
But Luca heard not; he was still kneeling at the feet of
Raffaelle, where the world has knelt ever since.
Continue...

This full text of “Bimbi” (Stories for Children) by Louise de la Ramee belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
