




Mark Twain remained less than two years in Buffalo–a period of much
affliction.
In the beginning, prospects could hardly have been brighter.  His
beautiful home seemed perfect.  At the office he found work to his hand,
and enjoyed it.  His co-editor, J. W. Larned, who sat across the table
from him, used to tell later how Mark enjoyed his work as he went along–
the humor of it–frequently laughing as some new absurdity came into his
mind.  He was not very regular in his arrivals, but he worked long hours
and turned in a vast amount of “copy"–skits, sketches, editorials, and
comments of a varied sort.  Not all of it was humorous; he would stop
work any time on an amusing sketch to attack some abuse or denounce an
injustice, and he did it in scorching words that made offenders pause.
Once, when two practical jokers had sent in a marriage notice of persons
not even contemplating matrimony, he wrote:
“This deceit has been practised maliciously by a couple of men whose
     small souls will escape through their pores some day if they do not
     varnish their hides.”
In May he considerably increased his income by undertaking a department
called “Memoranda” for the new “Galaxy” magazine.  The outlook was now so
promising that to his lecture agent, James Redpath, he wrote:
“DEAR RED: I’m not going to lecture any more forever.  I’ve got
     things ciphered down to a fraction now.  I know just about what it
     will cost to live, and I can make the money without lecturing.
     Therefore, old man, count me out.”
And in a second letter:
“I guess I’m out of the field permanently.  Have got a lovely wife, a
     lovely house bewitchingly furnished, a lovely carriage, and a
     coachman whose style and dignity are simply awe-inspiring, nothing
     less; and I’m making more money than necessary, by considerable, and
     therefore why crucify myself nightly on the platform!  The
     subscriber will have to be excused, for the present season, at
     least.”
The little household on Delaware Avenue was indeed a happy place during
those early months.  Neither Clemens nor his wife in those days cared
much for society, preferring the comfort of their own home.  Once when a
new family moved into a house across the way they postponed calling until
they felt ashamed.  Clemens himself called first.  One Sunday morning he
noticed smoke pouring from an upper window of their neighbor’s house.
The occupants, seated on the veranda, evidently did not suspect their
danger.  Clemens stepped across to the gate and, bowing politely, said:
“My name is Clemens; we ought to have called on you before, and I
     beg your pardon for intruding now in this informal way, but your
     house is on fire.”
It was at the moment when life seemed at its best that shadows gathered.
Jervis Langdon had never accepted his son-in-law’s playful invitation to
“bring his bag and stay overnight,” and now the time for it was past.  In
the spring his health gave way.  Mrs. Clemens, who adored him, went to
Elmira to be at his bedside.  Three months of lingering illness brought
the end.  His death was a great blow to Mrs. Clemens, and the strain of
watching had been very hard.  Her own health, never robust, became poor.
A girlhood friend, who came to cheer her with a visit, was taken down
with typhoid fever.  Another long period of anxiety and nursing ended
with the young woman’s death in the Clemens home.
To Mark Twain and his wife it seemed that their bright days were over.
The arrival of little Langdon Clemens, in November, brought happiness,
but his delicate hold on life was so uncertain that the burden of anxiety
grew.
Amid so many distractions Clemens found his work hard.  His “Memoranda"
department in the “Galaxy” must be filled and be bright and readable.
His work at the office could not be neglected.  Then, too, he had made a
contract with Bliss for another book “Roughing It"–and he was trying to
get started on that.
He began to chafe under the relentless demands of the magazine and
newspaper.  Finally he could stand it no longer.  He sold his interest in
the “Express,” at a loss, and gave up the “Memoranda.”  In the closing
number (April, 1871) he said:
“For the last eight months, with hardly an interval, I have had for
     my fellows and comrades, night and day, doctors and watchers of the
     sick!  During these eight months death has taken two members of my
     home circle and malignantly threatened two others.  All this I have
     experienced, yet all the time have been under contract to furnish
     humorous matter, once a month, for this magazine ....  To be a
     pirate on a low salary and with no share of the profits in the
     business used to be my idea of an uncomfortable occupation, but I
     have other views now.  To be a monthly humorist in a cheerless time
     is drearier.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
