




Life which had begun very cheerfully at Riverdale ended sadly enough.  In
August, at York Harbor, Maine, Mrs. Clemens’s health failed and she was
brought home an invalid, confined almost entirely to her room.  She had
been always the life, the center, the mainspring of the household.  Now
she must not even be consulted–hardly visited.  On her bad days–and
they were many–Clemens, sad and anxious, spent most of his time
lingering about her door, waiting for news, or until he was permitted to
see her for a brief moment.  In his memorandum-book of that period he
wrote:
“Our dear prisoner is where she is through overwork–day and night
     devotion to the children and me.  We did not know how to value it.
     We know now.”
And on the margin of a letter praising him for what he had done for the
world’s enjoyment, and for his triumph over debt, he wrote:
“Livy never gets her share of those applauses, but it is because the
     people do not know.  Yet she is entitled to the lion’s share.”
She improved during the winter, but very slowly.  Her husband wrote in
his diary:
“Feb. 2, 1903–Thirty-third wedding anniversary.  I was allowed to
     see Livy five minutes this morning, in honor of the day.”
Mrs. Clemens had always remembered affectionately their winter in
Florence of ten years before, and she now expressed the feeling that if
she were in Florence again she would be better.  The doctors approved,
and it was decided that she should be taken there as soon as she was
strong enough to travel.  She had so far improved by June that they
journeyed to Elmira, where in the quiet rest of Quarry Farm her strength
returned somewhat and the hope of her recovery was strong.
Mark Twain wrote a story that summer in Elmira, in the little octagonal
study, shut in now by trees and overgrown with vines.  “A Dog’s Tale,” a
pathetic plea against vivisection, was the last story written in the
little retreat that had seen the beginning of “Tom Sawyer” twenty-nine
years before.
There was a feeling that the stay in Europe was this time to be
permanent.  On one of the first days of October Clemens wrote in his
note-book:
“To-day I place flowers on Susy’s grave–for the last time, probably
     –and read the words, ’Good night, dear heart, good night,
     good night.’”
They sailed on the 24th, by way of Naples and Genoa, and were presently
installed in the Villa Reale di Quarto, a fine old Italian palace, in an
ancient garden looking out over Florence toward Vallombrosa and the
Chianti hills.  It was a beautiful spot, though its aging walls and
cypresses and matted vines gave it a rather mournful look.  Mrs.
Clemens’s health improved there for a time, in spite of dull, rainy,
depressing weather; so much so that in May, when the warmth and sun came
back, Clemens was driving about the country, seeking a villa that he
might buy for a home.
On one of these days–it was a Sunday in early June, the 5th–when he had
been out with Jean, and had found a villa which he believed would fill
all their requirements, he came home full of enthusiasm and hope, eager
to tell the patient about the discovery.  Certainly she seemed better.  A
day or two before she had been wheeled out on the terrace to enjoy the
wonder of early Italian summer.
He found her bright and cheerful, anxious to hear all their plans for the
new home.  He stayed with her alone through the dinner hour, and their
talk was as in the old days.  Summoned to go at last, he chided himself
for staying so long; but she said there was no harm and kissed him,
saying, “you will come back?” and he answered “Yes, to say good night,"
meaning at half-past nine, as was the permitted custom.  He stood a
moment at the door, throwing kisses to her, and she returned them, her
face bright with smiles.
He was so full of hope–they were going to be happy again.  Long ago he
had been in the habit of singing jubilee songs to the children.  He went
upstairs now to the piano and played the chorus and sang “Swing Low,
Sweet Chariot,” and “My Lord He Calls Me.”  He stopped then, but Jean,
who had come in, asked him to go on.  Mrs. Clemens, from her room, heard
the music and said to Katy Leary:
“He is singing a good-night carol to me.”
The music ceased presently.  A moment later she asked to be lifted up.
Almost in that instant life slipped away without a sound.
Clemens, just then coming to say good-night, saw a little group gathered
about her bed, and heard Clara ask:
“Katy, is it true?  Oh, Katy, is it true?”
In his note-book that night he wrote:
“At a quarter-past nine this evening she that was the life of my life
     passed to the relief and the peace of death, after twenty-two months
     of unjust and unearned suffering.  I first saw her thirty-seven
     years ago, and now I have looked upon her face for the last time....
     I was full of remorse for things done and said in these thirty-
     four years of married life that have hurt Livy’s heart.”
And to Howells a few days later:
“To-day, treasured in her worn, old testament, I found a dear and
     gentle letter from you dated Far Rockaway, September 12, 1896, about
     our poor Susy’s death.  I am tired and old; I wish I were with Livy.”
They brought her to America; and from the house, and the rooms, where she
had been made a bride bore her to a grave beside Susy and little Langdon.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
