




I spent most of each day with him, merely sitting by the bed and reading.
I noticed when he slept that his breathing was difficult, and I could see
that he did not improve, but often he was gay and liked the entire family
to gather about and be merry.  It was only a few days before we sailed
that the severe attacks returned.  Then followed bad nights; but respite
came, and we sailed on the 12th, as arranged.  The Allen home stands on
the water, and Mr. Allen had chartered a tug to take us to the ship.  We
were obliged to start early, and the fresh morning breeze was
stimulating.  Mark Twain seemed in good spirits when we reached the
“Oceana,” which was to take him home.
As long as I remember anything I shall remember the forty-eight hours of
that homeward voyage.  He was comfortable at first, and then we ran into
the humid, oppressive air of the Gulf Stream, and he could not breathe.
It seemed to me that the end might come at any moment, and this thought
was in his own mind, but he had no dread, and his sense of humor did not
fail.  Once when the ship rolled and his hat fell from the hook and made
the circuit of the cabin floor, he said:
“The ship is passing the hat.”
I had been instructed in the use of the hypodermic needle, and from time
to time gave him the “hypnotic injunction,” as he still called it.  But
it did not afford him entire relief.  He could remain in no position for
any length of time.  Yet he never complained and thought only of the
trouble he might be making.  Once he said:
“I am sorry for you, Paine, but I can’t help it–I can’t hurry this
     dying business.”
And a little later:
“Oh, it is such a mystery, and it takes so long!”
Relatives, physicians, and news-gatherers were at the dock to welcome
him.  Revived by the cool, fresh air of the North, he had slept for
several hours and was seemingly much better.  A special compartment on
the same train that had taken us first to Redding took us there now, his
physicians in attendance.  He did not seem to mind the trip or the drive
home.
As we turned into the lane that led to Stormfield he said:
“Can we see where you have built your billiard-room?”
The gable of the new study showed among the trees, and I pointed it out
to him.
“It looks quite imposing,” he said.
Arriving at Stormfield, he stepped, unassisted, from the carriage to
greet the members of the household, and with all his old courtliness
offered each his hand.  Then in a canvas chair we had brought we carried
him up-stairs to his room–the big, beautiful room that looked out to the
sunset hills.  This was Thursday evening, April 14, 1910.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
