




It was about the end of 1863 that a new literary impulse came into Mark
Twain’s life.  The gentle and lovable humorist Artemus Ward (Charles F.
Browne) was that year lecturing in the West, and came to Virginia City.
Ward had intended to stay only a few days, but the whirl of the Comstock
fascinated him.  He made the “Enterprise” office his headquarters and
remained three weeks.  He and Mark Twain became boon companions.  Their
humor was not unlike; they were kindred spirits, together almost
constantly.  Ward was then at the summit of his fame, and gave the
younger man the highest encouragement, prophesying great things for ha
work.  Clemens, on his side, was stirred, perhaps for the first time,
with a real literary ambition, and the thought that he, too, might win a
place of honor.  He promised Ward that he would send work to the Eastern
papers.
On Christmas Eve, Ward gave a dinner to the “Enterprise” staff, at
Chaumond’s, a fine French restaurant of that day.  When refreshments
came, Artemus lifted his glass, and said:
“I give you Upper Canada.”
The company rose and drank the toast in serious silence.  Then Mr.
Goodman said:
“Of course, Artemus, it’s all right, but why did you give us Upper
Canada?”
“Because I don’t want it myself,” said Ward, gravely.
What would one not give to have listened to the talk of that evening!
Mark Twain’s power had awakened; Artemus Ward was in his prime.  They
were giants of a race that became extinct when Mark Twain died.
Goodman remained rather quiet during the evening.  Ward had appointed him
to order the dinner, and he had attended to this duty without mingling
much in the conversation.  When Ward asked him why he did not join the
banter, he said:
“I am preparing a joke, Artemus, but I am keeping it for the present.”
At a late hour Ward finally called for the bill.  It was two hundred and
thirty-seven dollars.
“What!” exclaimed Artemus.
“That’s my joke,” said Goodman.
“But I was only exclaiming because it was not twice as much,” laughed
Ward, laying the money on the table.
Ward remained through the holidays, and later wrote back an affectionate
letter to Mark Twain.
“I shall always remember Virginia as a bright spot in my existence,” he
said, “as all others must, or rather, cannot be, as it were.”
With Artemus Ward’s encouragement, Mark Twain now began sending work
eastward.  The “New York Sunday Mercury” published one, possibly more, of
his sketches, but they were not in his best vein, and made little
impression.  He may have been too busy for outside work, for the
legislative session of 1864 was just beginning.  Furthermore, he had been
chosen governor of the “Third House,” a mock legislature, organized for
one session, to be held as a church benefit.  The “governor” was to
deliver a message, which meant that he was to burlesque from the platform
all public officials and personages, from the real governor down.
With the exception of a short talk he had once given at a printer’s
dinner in Keokuk, it was Mark Twain’s first appearance as a speaker, and
the beginning of a lifelong series of triumphs on the platform.  The
building was packed–the aisles full.  The audience was ready for fun,
and he gave it to them.  Nobody escaped ridicule; from beginning to end
the house was a storm of laughter and applause.
Not a word of this first address of Mark Twain’s has been preserved, but
those who heard it always spoke of it as the greatest effort of his life,
as to them it seemed, no doubt.
For his Third House address, Clemens was presented with a gold watch,
inscribed “To Governor Mark Twain.”  Everywhere, now, he was pointed out
as a distinguished figure, and his quaint remarks were quoted.  Few of
these sayings are remembered to-day, though occasionally one is still
unforgotten.  At a party one night, being urged to make a conundrum, he
said:
“Well, why am I like the Pacific Ocean?”
Several guesses were made, but he shook his head.  Some one said:
“We give it up.  Tell us, Mark, why are you like the Pacific Ocean?”
“I–don’t–know,” he drawled.  “I was just–asking for information.”
The governor of Nevada was generally absent, and Orion Clemens was
executive head of the territory.  His wife, who had joined him in Carson
City, was social head of the little capital, and Brother Sam, with his
new distinction and now once more something of a dandy in dress, was
society’s chief ornament–a great change, certainly, from the early
months of his arrival less than three years before.
It was near the end of May, 1864, when Mark Twain left Nevada for San
Francisco.  The immediate cause of his going was a duel–a duel
elaborately arranged between Mark Twain and the editor of a rival paper,
but never fought.  In fact, it was mainly a burlesque affair throughout,
chiefly concocted by that inveterate joker, Steve Gillis, already
mentioned in connection with the pipe incident.  The new dueling law,
however, did not distinguish between real and mock affrays, and the
prospect of being served with a summons made a good excuse for Clemens
and Gillis to go to San Francisco, which had long attracted them.  They
were great friends, these two, and presently were living together and
working on the same paper, the “Morning Call,” Clemens as a reporter and
Gillis as a compositor.
Gillis, with his tendency to mischief, was a constant exasperation to his
room-mate, who, goaded by some new torture, would sometimes denounce him
in feverish terms.  Yet they were never anything but the closest friends.
Mark Twain did not find happiness in his new position on the “Call."
There was less freedom and more drudgery than he had known on the
“Enterprise.”  His day was spent around the police court, attending
fires, weddings, and funerals, with brief glimpses of the theaters at
night.
Once he wrote: “It was fearful drudgery–soulless drudgery–and almost
destitute of interest.  It was an awful slavery for a lazy man.”
It must have been so.  There was little chance for original work.  He had
become just a part of a news machine.  He saw many public abuses that he
wished to expose, but the policy of the paper opposed him.  Once,
however, he found a policeman asleep on his beat.  Going to a near-by
vegetable stall, he borrowed a large cabbage-leaf, came back, and stood
over the sleeper, gently fanning him.  He knew the paper would not
publish the policeman’s negligence, but he could advertise it in his own
way.  A large crowd soon collected, much amused.  When he thought the
audience large enough, he went away.  Next day the joke was all over the
city.
He grew indifferent to the “Call” work, and, when an assistant was
allowed him to do part of the running for items, it was clear to
everybody that presently the assistant would be able to do it all.
But there was a pleasant and profitable side to the San Francisco life.
There were real literary people there–among them a young man, with rooms
upstairs in the “Call” office, Francis Bret Harte, editor of the
“Californian,” a new literary weekly which Charles Henry Webb had
recently founded.  Bret Harte was not yet famous, but his gifts were
recognized on the Pacific slope, especially by the “Era” group of
writers, the “Golden Era” being a literary monthly of considerable
distinction.  Joaquin Miller recalls, from his diary of that period,
having seen Prentice Mulford, Bret Harte, Charles Warren Stoddard, Mark
Twain, Artemus Ward, and others, all assembled there at one time–a
remarkable group, certainly, to be dropped down behind the Sierras so
long ago.  They were a hopeful, happy lot, and sometimes received five
dollars for an article, which, of course, seemed a good deal more
precious than a much larger sum earned in another way.
Mark Twain had contributed to the “Era” while still in Virginia City, and
now, with Bret Harte, was ranked as a leader of the group.  The two were
much together, and when Harte became editor of the “Californian” he
engaged Clemens as a regular contributor at the very fancy rate of twelve
dollars an article.  Some of the brief chapters included to-day in
“Sketches New and Old” were done at this time.  They have humor, but are
not equal to his later work, and beyond the Pacific slope they seem to
have attracted little attention.
In “Roughing It” the author tells us how he finally was dismissed from
the “Call” for general incompetency, and presently found himself in the
depths of hard luck, debt, and poverty.  But this is only his old habit
of making a story on himself sound as uncomplimentary as possible.  The
true version is that the “Call” publisher and Mark Twain had a friendly
talk and decided that it was better for both to break off the connection.
Almost immediately he arranged to write a daily San Francisco letter for
the “Enterprise,” for which he received thirty dollars a week.  This,
with his earnings from the “Californian,” made his total return larger
than before.  Very likely he was hard up from time to time–literary men
are often that–but that he was ever in abject poverty, as he would have
us believe, is just a good story and not history.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
