




One day during the summer of 1889 a notable meeting took place in Elmira.
On a blazing forenoon a rather small and very hot young man, in a slow,
sizzling hack made his way up East Hill to Quarry Faun.  He inquired for
Mark Twain, only to be told that he was at the Langdon home, down in the
town which the young man had just left.  So he sat for a little time on
the pleasant veranda, and Mrs. Crane and Susy Clemens, who were there,
brought him some cool milk and listened to him talk in a way which seemed
to them very entertaining and wonderful.  When he went away he left his
card with a name on it strange to them–strange to the world at that
time.  The name was Rudyard Kipling.  Also on the card was the address
Allahabad, and Sissy kept it, because, to her, India was fairyland.
Kipling went down into Elmira and found Mark Twain.  In his book
“American Notes” he has left an account of that visit.  He claimed that
he had traveled around the world to see Mark Twain, and his article
begins:
“You are a contemptible lot over yonder.  Some of you are
     commissioners, and some are lieutenant-governors, and some have the
     V. C., and a few are privileged to walk about the Mall arm in arm
     with the viceroy; but I have seen Mark Twain this golden morning,
     have shaken his hand, and smoked a cigar–no, two cigars–with him,
     and talked with him for more than two hours!”
But one should read the article entire–it is so worth while.  Clemens
also, long after, dictated an account of the meeting.
Kipling came down and spent a couple of hours with me, and at the end of
that time I had surprised him as much as he had surprised me–and the
honors were easy.  I believed that he knew more than any person I had met
before, and I knew that he knew that I knew less than any person he had
met before.  .  .  When he had gone, Mrs. Langdon wanted to know about my
visitor.  I said:
“He is a stranger to me, but he is a most remarkable man–and I am the
other one.  Between us we cover all knowledge.  He knows all that can be
known, and I know the rest.”
He was a stranger to me and all the world, and remained so for twelve
months, but then he became suddenly known and universally known.  .  .
George Warner came into our library one morning, in Hartford, with a
small book in his hand, and asked me if I had ever heard of Rudyard
Kipling.  I said “No.”
He said I would hear of him very soon, and that the noise he made would
be loud and continuous.  .  .  A day or two later he brought a copy of
the London “World” which had a sketch of Kipling in it and a mention of
the fact that he had traveled in the United States.  According to the
sketch he had passed through Elmira.  This remark, with the additional
fact that he hailed from India, attracted my attention–also Susy’s.  She
went to her room and brought his card from its place in the frame of her
mirror, and the Quarry Farm visitor stood identified.
A theatrical production of “The Prince and the Pauper,” dramatized by
Mrs. A. S. Richardson, was one of the events of this period.  It was a
charming performance, even if not a great financial success, and little
Elsie Leslie, who played the double part of the Prince and Tom Canty,
became a great favorite in the Clemens home.  She was also a favorite of
the actor and playwright, William Gillette, [9] and once when Clemens and
Gillette were together they decided to give the little girl a surprise–a
pair of slippers, in fact, embroidered by themselves.  In his
presentation letter to her, Mark Twain wrote:
“Either of us could have thought of a single slipper, but it took both of
us to think of two slippers.  In fact, one of us did think of one
slipper, and then, quick as a flash, the other thought of the other one.”
He apologized for his delay:
“You see, it was my first attempt at art, and I couldn’t rightly get the
hang of it, along at first.  And then I was so busy I couldn’t get a
chance to work at home, and they wouldn’t let me embroider on the cars;
they said it made the other passengers afraid.  .  .  Take the slippers
and wear them next your heart, Elsie dear, for every stitch in them is a
testimony of the affection which two of your loyalest friends bear you.
Every single stitch cost us blood.  I’ve got twice as many pores in me
now as I used to have .  .  .  .  Do not wear these slippers in public,
dear; it would only excite envy; and, as like as not, somebody would try
to shoot you.”
For five years Mark Twain had not published a book.  Since the appearance
of “Huck Finn” at the end of 1884 he had given the public only an
occasional magazine story or article.  His business struggle and the
type-setter had consumed not only his fortune, but his time and energy.
Now, at last, however, a book was ready.  “A Connecticut Yankee in King
Arthur’s Court” came from the press of Webster & Co. at the end of 1889,
a handsome book, elaborately and strikingly illustrated by Dan Beard–a
pretentious volume which Mark Twain really considered his last.  “It’s my
swan-song, my retirement from literature permanently,” he wrote Howells,
though certainly he was young, fifty-four, to have reached this
conclusion.
The story of the “Yankee"–a fanciful narrative of a skilled Yankee
mechanic swept backward through the centuries to the dim day of Arthur
and his Round Table–is often grotesque enough in its humor, but under it
all is Mark Twain’s great humanity in fierce and noble protest against
unjust laws, the tyranny of an individual or of a ruling class–
oppression of any sort.  As in “The Prince and the Pauper,” the wandering
heir to the throne is brought in contact with cruel injustice and misery,
so in the “Yankee” the king himself becomes one of a band of fettered
slaves, and through degradation and horror of soul acquires mercy and
humility.
The “Yankee in King Arthur’s Court” is a splendidly imagined tale.
Edmund Clarence Stedman and William Dean Howells have ranked it very
high.  Howells once wrote: “Of all the fanciful schemes in fiction, it
pleases me most.”  The “Yankee” has not held its place in public favor
with Mark Twain’s earlier books, but it is a wonderful tale, and we
cannot afford to leave it unread.
When the summer came again, Mark Twain and his family decided for once to
forego Quarry Farm for a season in the Catskills, and presently found
themselves located in a cottage at Onteora in the midst of a most
delightful colony.  Mrs. Mary Mapes Dodge, then editor of St. Nicholas,
was there, and Mrs. Custer and Brander Matthews and Lawrence Hutton and a
score of other congenial spirits.  There was constant visiting from one
cottage to another, with frequent gatherings at the Inn, which was
general headquarters.  Susy Clemens, now eighteen, was a central figure,
brilliant, eager, intense, ambitious for achievement–lacking only in
physical strength.  She was so flower-like, it seemed always that her
fragile body must be consumed by the flame of her spirit.  It was a happy
summer, but it closed sadly.  Clemens was called to Keokuk in August, to
his mother’s bedside.  A few weeks later came the end, and Jane Clemens
had closed her long and useful life.  She was in her eighty-eighth year.
A little later, at Elmira, followed the death of Mrs. Clemens’s mother, a
sweet and gentle woman.
[9] Gillette was originally a Hartford boy.  Mark Twain had recognized
his ability, advanced him funds with which to complete his dramatic
education, and Gillette’s first engagement seems to have been with the
Colonel Sellers company.  Mark Twain often advanced money in the interest
of education.  A young sculptor he sent to Paris for two years’ study.
Among others, he paid the way of two colored students through college.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
