




Samuel Clemens now decided to pay his long-deferred visit to the Langdon
home in Elmira.  Through Charlie Langdon he got the invitation renewed,
and for a glorious week enjoyed the generous hospitality of the beautiful
Langdon home and the society of fair Olivia Langdon–Livy, as they called
her–realizing more and more that for him there could never be any other
woman in the world.  He spoke no word of this to her, but on the morning
of the day when his visit would end he relieved himself to Charlie
Langdon, much to the young man’s alarm.  Greatly as he admired Mark Twain
himself, he did not think him, or, indeed, any man, good enough for
“Livy,” whom he considered little short of a saint.  Clemens was to take
a train that evening, but young Langdon said, when he recovered:
“Look here, Clemens, there’s a train in half an hour.  I’ll help you
catch it.  Don’t wait until tonight; go now!”
Mark Twain shook his head.
“No, Charlie,” he said, in his gentle drawl.  “I want to enjoy your
hospitality a little longer.  I promise to be circumspect, and I’ll go
to-night.”
That night after dinner, when it was time to take the train, a light two-
seated wagon was at the gate.  Young Langdon and his guest took the back
seat, which, for some reason, had not been locked in its place.  The
horse started with a quick forward spring, and the seat with its two
occupants described a circle and landed with force on the cobbled street.
Neither passenger was seriously hurt–only dazed a little for the moment.
But to Mark Twain there came a sudden inspiration.  Here was a chance to
prolong his visit.  When the Langdon household gathered with
restoratives, he did not recover at once, and allowed himself to be
supported to an arm-chair for further remedies.  Livy Langdon showed
especial anxiety.
He was not allowed to go, now, of course; he must stay until it was
certain that his recovery was complete.  Perhaps he had been internally
injured.  His visit was prolonged two weeks, two weeks of pure happiness,
and when he went away he had fully resolved to win Livy Langdon for his
wife.
Mark Twain now went to Hartford to look after his book proofs, and there
for the first time met the Rev. Joseph H. Twichell, who would become his
closest friend.  The two men, so different in many ways, always had the
fondest admiration for each other; each recognized in the other great
courage, humanity, and sympathy.  Clemens would gladly have remained in
Hartford that winter.  Twichell presented him to many congenial people,
including Charles Dudley Warner, Harriet Beecher Stowe, and other writing
folk.  But flattering lecture offers were made him, and he could no
longer refuse.
He called his new lecture “The Vandal Abroad,” it being chapters from the
forthcoming book, and it was a great success everywhere.  His houses were
crowded; the newspapers were enthusiastic.  His delivery was described as
a “long, monotonous drawl, with fun invariably coming in at the end of a
sentence–after a pause.”  He began to be recognized everywhere–to have
great popularity.  People came out on the street to see him pass.
Many of his lecture engagements were in central New York, no great
distance from Elmira.  He had a standing invitation to visit the Langdon
home, and went when he could.  His courtship, however, was not entirely
smooth.  Much as Mr. Langdon honored his gifts and admired him
personally, he feared that his daughter, who had known so little of life
and the outside world, and the brilliant traveler, lecturer, author,
might not find happiness in marriage.  Many absurd stories have been told
of Mark Twain’s first interview with Jervis Langdon on this subject, but
these are without foundation.  It was an earnest discussion on both
sides, and left Samuel Clemens rather crestfallen, though not without
hope.  More than once the subject was discussed between the two men that
winter as the lecturer came and went, his fame always growing.  In time
the Langdon household had grown to feel that he belonged to them.  It
would be only a step further to make him really one of the family.
There was no positive engagement at first, for it was agreed between
Clemens and Jervis Langdon that letters should be sent by Mr. Langdon to
those who had known his would-be son-in-law earlier, with inquiries as to
his past conduct and general character.  It was a good while till answers
to these came, and when they arrived Samuel Clemens was on hand to learn
the result.  Mr. Langdon had a rather solemn look when they were alone
together.
Clemens asked, “You’ve heard from those gentlemen out there?”
“Yes, and from another gentlemen I wrote to concerning you.”
“They don’t appear to have been very enthusiastic, from your manner.”
“Well, yes, some of them were.”
“I suppose I may ask what particular form their emotion took.”
“Oh, yes, yes; they agree unanimously that you are a brilliant, able man-
-a man with a future, and that you would make about the worst husband on
record.”
The applicant had a forlorn look.  “There is nothing very evasive about
that,” he said.
Langdon reflected.
“Haven’t you any other friend that you could suggest?”
“Apparently none whose testimony would be valuable.”
Jervis Langdon held out his hand.
“You have at least one,” he said. “I believe in you.  I know you better
then they do.”
The engagement of Samuel Langhorne Clemens and Olivia Lewis Langdon was
ratified next day, February 4, 1869.  To Jane Clemens her son wrote:
“She is a little body, but she hasn’t her peer in Christendom.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
