




A long time ago, back in the early years of another century, a family
named Clemens moved from eastern Tennessee to eastern Missouri–from a
small, unheard-of place called Pall Mall, on Wolf River, to an equally
small and unknown place called Florida, on a tiny river named the Salt.
That was a far journey, in those days, for railway trains in 1835 had not
reached the South and West, and John Clemens and his family traveled in
an old two-horse barouche, with two extra riding-horses, on one of which
rode the eldest child, Orion Clemens, a boy of ten, and on the other
Jennie, a slave girl.
In the carriage with the parents were three other children–Pamela and
Margaret, aged eight and five, and little Benjamin, three years old.  The
time was spring, the period of the Old South, and, while these youngsters
did not realize that they were passing through a sort of Golden Age, they
must have enjoyed the weeks of leisurely journeying toward what was then
the Far West–the Promised Land.
The Clemens fortunes had been poor in Tennessee.  John Marshall Clemens,
the father, was a lawyer, a man of education; but he was a dreamer, too,
full of schemes that usually failed.  Born in Virginia, he had grown up
in Kentucky, and married there Jane Lampton, of Columbia, a descendant of
the English Lamptons and the belle of her region.  They had left Kentucky
for Tennessee, drifting from one small town to another that was always
smaller, and with dwindling law-practice John Clemens in time had been
obliged to open a poor little store, which in the end had failed to pay.
Jennie was the last of several slaves he had inherited from his Virginia
ancestors.  Besides Jennie, his fortune now consisted of the horses and
barouche, a very limited supply of money, and a large, unsalable tract of
east Tennessee land, which John Clemens dreamed would one day bring his
children fortune.
Readers of the “Gilded Age” will remember the journey of the Hawkins
family from the “Knobs” of Tennessee to Missouri and the important part
in that story played by the Tennessee land.  Mark Twain wrote those
chapters, and while they are not history, but fiction, they are based
upon fact, and the picture they present of family hardship and struggle
is not overdrawn.  The character of Colonel Sellers, who gave the
Hawkinses a grand welcome to the new home, was also real.  In life he was
James Lampton, cousin to Mrs. Clemens, a gentle and radiant merchant of
dreams, who believed himself heir to an English earldom and was always on
the verge of colossal fortune.  With others of the Lampton kin, he was
already settled in Missouri and had written back glowing accounts; though
perhaps not more glowing than those which had come from another relative,
John Quarles, brother-in-law to Mrs. Clemens, a jovial, whole-hearted
optimist, well-loved by all who knew him.
It was a June evening when the Clemens family, with the barouche and the
two outriders, finally arrived in Florida, and the place, no doubt,
seemed attractive enough then, however it may have appeared later.  It
was the end of a long journey; relatives gathered with fond welcome;
prospects seemed bright.  Already John Quarles had opened a general store
in the little town.  Florida, he said, was certain to become a city.
Salt River would be made navigable with a series of locks and dams.  He
offered John Clemens a partnership in his business.
Quarles, for that time and place, was a rich man.  Besides his store he
had a farm and thirty slaves.  His brother-in-law’s funds, or lack of
them, did not matter.  The two had married sisters.  That was capital
enough for his hearty nature.  So, almost on the moment of arrival in the
new land, John Clemens once more found himself established in trade.
The next thing was to find a home.  There were twenty-one houses in
Florida, and none of them large.  The one selected by John and Jane
Clemens had two main rooms and a lean-to kitchen–a small place and
lowly–the kind of a place that so often has seen the beginning of
exalted lives.  Christianity began with a babe in a manger; Shakespeare
first saw the light in a cottage at Stratford; Lincoln entered the world
by way of a leaky cabin in Kentucky, and into the narrow limits of the
Clemens home in Florida, on a bleak autumn day–November 30, 1835–there
was born one who under the name of Mark Twain would live to cheer and
comfort a tired world.
The name Mark Twain had not been thought of then, and probably no one
prophesied favorably for the new-comer, who was small and feeble, and not
over-welcome in that crowded household.  They named him Samuel, after his
paternal grandfather, and added Langhorne for an old friend–a goodly
burden for so frail a wayfarer.  But more appropriately they called him
“Little Sam,” or “Sammy,” which clung to him through the years of his
delicate childhood.
It seems a curious childhood, as we think of it now.  Missouri was a
slave State–Little Sam’s companions were as often black as white.  All
the children of that time and locality had negroes for playmates, and
were cared for by them.  They were fond of their black companions and
would have felt lost without them.  The negro children knew all the best
ways of doing things–how to work charms and spells, the best way to cure
warts and heal stone-bruises, and to make it rain, and to find lost
money.  They knew what signs meant, and dreams, and how to keep off
hoodoo; and all negroes, old and young, knew any number of weird tales.
John Clemens must have prospered during the early years of his Florida
residence, for he added another slave to his household–Uncle Ned, a man
of all work–and he built a somewhat larger house, in one room of which,
the kitchen, was a big fireplace.  There was a wide hearth and always
plenty of wood, and here after supper the children would gather, with
Jennie and Uncle Ned, and the latter would tell hair-lifting tales of
“ha’nts,” and lonely roads, and witch-work that would make his hearers
shiver with terror and delight, and look furtively over their shoulders
toward the dark window-panes and the hovering shadows on the walls.
Perhaps it was not the healthiest entertainment, but it was the kind to
cultivate an imagination that would one day produce “Tom Sawyer” and
“Huck Finn.”
True, Little Sam was very young at this period, but even a little chap of
two or three would understand most of that fireside talk, and get
impressions more vivid than if the understanding were complete.  He was
barely four when this earliest chapter of his life came to a close.
John Clemens had not remained satisfied with Florida and his undertakings
there.  The town had not kept its promises.  It failed to grow, and the
lock-and-dam scheme that would make Salt River navigable fell through.
Then one of the children, Margaret, a black-eyed, rosy little girl of
nine, suddenly died.  This was in August, 1839.  A month or two later the
saddened family abandoned their Florida home and moved in wagons, with
their household furnishings, to Hannibal, a Mississippi River town,
thirty miles away.  There was only one girl left now, Pamela, twelve
years old, but there was another boy, baby Henry, three years younger
than Little Sam–four boys in all.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
