




Samuel Clemens went to visit his sister Pamela in St. Louis and was
presently at work, setting type on the “Evening News.”  He had no
intention, however, of staying there.  His purpose was to earn money
enough to take him to New York City.  The railroad had by this time
reached St. Louis, and he meant to have the grand experience of a long
journey “on the cars.”  Also, there was a Crystal Palace in New York,
where a world’s exposition was going on.
Trains were slow in 1853, and it required several days and nights to go
from St. Louis to New York City, but to Sam Clemens it was a wonderful
journey.  All day he sat looking out of the window, eating when he chose
from the food he carried, curling up in his seat at night to sleep.  He
arrived at last with a few dollars in his pocket and a ten-dollar bill
sewed into the lining of his coat.
New York was rather larger than he expected.  All of the lower end of
Manhattan Island was covered by it.  The Crystal Palace–some distance
out–stood at Forty-second Street and Sixth Avenue–the present site of
Bryant Park.  All the world’s newest wonders were to be seen there–a
dazzling exhibition.  A fragment of the letter which Sam Clemens wrote to
his sister Pamela–the earliest piece of Mark Twain’s writing that has
been preserved–expresses his appreciation of the big fair:
“From the gallery (second floor) you have a glorious sight–the
     flags of the different countries represented, the lofty dome,
     glittering jewelry, gaudy tapestry, etc., with the busy crowd
     passing to and fro–’tis a perfect fairy palace–beautiful beyond
     description.
“The machinery department is on the main floor, but I cannot
     enumerate any of it on account of the lateness of the hour (past one
     o’clock).  It would take more than a week to examine everything on
     exhibition, and I was only in a little over two hours to-night.  I
     only glanced at about one-third of the articles; and, having a poor
     memory, I have enumerated scarcely any of even the principal
     objects.  The visitors to the Palace average 6,000 daily–double the
     population of Hannibal.  The price of admission being fifty cents,
     they take in about $3,000.
“The Latting Observatory (height about 280 feet) is near the Palace.
     From it you can obtain a grand view of the city and the country
     around.  The Croton Aqueduct, to supply the city with water, is the
     greatest wonder yet.  Immense pipes are laid across the bed of the
     Harlem River, and pass through the country to Westchester County,
     where a whole river is turned from its course and brought to New
     York.  From the reservoir in the city to Westchester County
     reservoir the distance is thirty-eight miles, and, if necessary,
     they could easily supply every family in New York with one hundred
     barrels of water a day!
“I am very sorry to learn that Henry has been sick.  He ought to go
     to the country and take exercise, for he is not half so healthy as
     Ma thinks he is.  If he had my walking to do, he would be another
     boy entirely.  Four times every day I walk a little over a mile; and
     working hard all day and walking four miles is exercise.  I am used
     to it now, though, and it is no trouble.  Where is it Orion’s going
     to?  Tell Ma my promises are faithfully kept; and if I have my
     health I will take her to Ky. in the spring.  I shall save money for
     this.
“(It has just struck 2 A.M., and I always get up at six and am at
     work at 7.) You ask where I spend my evenings.  Where would you
     suppose, with a free printers’ library containing more than 4,000
     volumes within a quarter of a mile of me, and nobody at home to talk
     to?”
“I shall write to Ella soon.  Write soon.
     “Truly your Brother,
“SAMY.
“P.S.–I have written this by a light so dim that you nor Ma could
     not read by it.”
We get a fair idea of Samuel Clemens at seventeen from this letter.  For
one thing, he could write good, clear English, full of interesting facts.
He is enthusiastic, but not lavish of words.  He impresses us with his
statement that the visitors to the Palace each day are in number double
the population of Hannibal; a whole river is turned from its course to
supply New York City with water; the water comes thirty-eight miles, and
each family could use a hundred barrels a day!  The letter reveals his
personal side–his kindly interest in those left behind, his anxiety for
Henry, his assurance that the promise to his mother was being kept, his
memory of her longing to visit her old home.  And the boy who hated
school has become a reader–he is reveling in a printers’ library of
thousands of volumes.  We feel, somehow, that Samuel Clemens has suddenly
become quite a serious-minded person, that he has left Tom Sawyer and Joe
Harper and Huck Finn somewhere in a beautiful country a long way behind.
He found work with the firm of John A. Gray & Green, general printers, in
Cliff Street.  His pay was four dollars a week, in wild-cat money–that
is, money issued by private banks–rather poor money, being generally at
a discount and sometimes worth less.  But if wages were low, living was
cheap in those days, and Sam Clemens, lodging in a mechanics’ boarding-
house in Duane Street, sometimes had fifty cents left on Saturday night
when his board and washing were paid.
Luckily, he had not set out to seek his fortune, but only to see
something of the world.  He lingered in New York through the summer of
1853, never expecting to remain long.  His letters of that period were
few.  In October he said, in a letter to Pamela, that he did not write to
the family because he did not know their whereabouts, Orion having sold
the paper and left Hannibal.
“I have been fooling myself with the idea that I was going to leave
     New York every day for the last two weeks,” he adds, which sounds
     like the Mark Twain of fifty years later.  Farther along, he tells
     of going to see Edwin Forrest, then playing at the Broadway Theater:
“The play was the ’Gladiator.’  I did not like part of it much, but
     other portions were really splendid.  In the latter part of the last
     act. . . the man’s whole soul seems absorbed in the part he is
     playing; and it is real startling to see him.  I am sorry I did not
     see him play “Damon and Pythias,” the former character being the
     greatest.  He appears in Philadelphia on Monday night.”
A little farther along he says:
“If my letters do not come often, you need not bother yourself about
     me; for if you have a brother nearly eighteen years old who is not
     able to take care of himself a few miles from home, such a brother
     is not worth one’s thoughts.”
Sam Clemens may have followed Forrest to Philadelphia.  At any rate, he
was there presently, “subbing” in the composing-rooms of the “Inquirer,"
setting ten thousand ems a day, and receiving pay accordingly.  When
there was no vacancy for him to fill, he put in the time visiting the
Philadelphia libraries, art galleries, and historic landmarks.  After
all, his chief business was sight-seeing.  Work was only a means to this
end.  Chilly evenings, when he returned to his boarding-house, his room-
mate, an Englishman named Sumner, grilled a herring over their small open
fire, and this was a great feast.  He tried writing–obituary poetry, for
the “Philadelphia Ledger"–but it was not accepted.
“My efforts were not received with approval” was his comment long after.
In the “Inquirer” office there was a printer named Frog, and sometimes,
when he went out, the office “devils” would hang over his case a line
with a hook on it baited with a piece of red flannel.  They never got
tired of this joke, and Frog never failed to get fighting mad when he saw
that dangling string with the bit of red flannel at the end.  No doubt
Sam Clemens had his share in this mischief.
Sam found that he liked Philadelphia.  He could save a little money and
send something to his mother–small amounts, but welcome.  Once he
inclosed a gold dollar, “to serve as a specimen of the kind of stuff we
are paid with in Philadelphia.”  Better than doubtful “wild-cat,"
certainly.  Of his work he writes:
“One man has engaged me to work for him every Sunday till the first
     of next April, when I shall return home to take Ma to Ky .  .  .  .
     If I want to, I can get subbing every night of the week.  I go to
     work at seven in the evening and work till three the next morning.
     .  .  . The type is mostly agate and minion, with some bourgeois,
     and when one gets a good agate “take,” he is sure to make money.  I
     made $2.50 last Sunday.”
There is a long description of a trip on the Fairmount stage in this
letter, well-written and interesting, but too long to have place here.
In the same letter he speaks of the graves of Benjamin Franklin and his
wife, which he had looked at through the iron railing of the locked
inclosure.  Probably it did not occur to him that there might be points
of similarity between Franklin’s career and his own.  Yet in time these
would be rather striking: each learned the printer’s trade; each worked
in his brother’s office and wrote for the paper; each left quietly and
went to New York, and from New York to Philadelphia, as a journeyman
printer; each in due season became a world figure, many-sided, human, and
of incredible popularity.
Orion Clemens, meantime, had bought a paper in Muscatine, Iowa, and
located the family there.  Evidently by this time he had realized the
value of his brother as a contributor, for Sam, in a letter to Orion,
says, “I will try to write for the paper occasionally, but I fear my
letters will be very uninteresting, for this incessant night work dulls
one’s ideas amazingly.”
Meantime, he had passed his eighteenth birthday, winter was coming on, he
had been away from home half a year, and the first attack of homesickness
was due.  “One only has to leave home to learn how to write interesting
letters to an absent friend,” he wrote; and again.  “I don’t like our
present prospect for cold weather at all.”
He declared he only wanted to get back to avoid night work, which was
injuring his eyes, but we may guess there was a stronger reason, which
perhaps he did not entirely realize.  The novelty of wandering had worn
off, and he yearned for familiar faces, the comfort of those he loved.
But he did not go.  He made a trip to Washington in January–a sight-
seeing trip–returning to Philadelphia, where he worked for the “Ledger"
and “North American.”  Eventually he went back to New York, and from
there took ticket to St. Louis.  This was in the late summer of 1854; he
had been fifteen months away from his people when he stepped aboard the
train to return.
Sam was worn out when he reached St. Louis; but the Keokuk packet was
leaving, and he stopped only long enough to see Pamela, then went aboard
and, flinging himself into his berth, did not waken until the boat
reached Muscatine, Iowa, thirty-six hours later.
It was very early when he arrived, too early to rouse the family.  He sat
down in the office of a little hotel to wait for morning, and picked up a
small book that lay on the writing-table.  It contained pictures of the
English rulers with the brief facts of their reigns.  Sam Clemens
entertained himself learning these data by heart.  He had a fine memory
for such things, and in an hour or two had those details so perfectly
committed that he never forgot one of them as long as he lived.  The
knowledge acquired in this stray fashion he found invaluable in later
life.  It was his groundwork for all English history.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
