




Sam was at Mr. Cross’s school on the Square in due time, and among the
pupils were companions that appealed to his gentler side.  There were the
RoBards boys–George, the best Latin scholar, and John, who always won
the good-conduct medal, and would one day make all the other boys envious
by riding away with his father to California, his curls of gold blowing
in the wind.
There was Buck Brown, a rival speller, and John Garth, who would marry
little Helen Kercheval, and Jimmy MacDaniel, whom it was well to know
because his father kept a pastry-shop and he used to bring cakes and
candy to school.
There were also a number of girls.  Bettie Ormsley, Artemisia Briggs, and
Jennie Brady were among the girls he remembered in later years, and Mary
Miller, who was nearly double his age and broke his heart by getting
married one day, a thing he had not expected at all.
Yet through it all he appears, like Tom Sawyer, to have had one faithful
sweetheart.  In the book it is Becky Thatcher–in real life she was Laura
Hawkins.  The Clemens and Hawkins families lived opposite, and the
children were early acquainted.  The “Black Avenger of the Spanish Main"
was very gentle when he was playing at house-building with little Laura,
and once, when he dropped a brick on her finger, he cried the louder and
longer of the two.
For he was a tender-hearted boy.  He would never abuse an animal, except
when his tendency to mischief ran away with him, as in the “pain-killer"
incident.  He had a real passion for cats.  Each summer he carried his
cat to the farm in a basket, and it always had a place by him at the
table.  He loved flowers–not as a boy botanist or gardener, but as a
companion who understood their thoughts.  He pitied dead leaves and dry
weeds because their lives were ended and they would never know summer
again or grow glad with another spring.  Even in that early time he had
that deeper sympathy which one day would offer comfort to humanity and
make every man his friend.
But we are drifting away from Sam Clemens’s school-days.  They will not
trouble us much longer now.  More than anything in the world Sam detested
school, and he made any excuse to get out of going.  It is hard to say
just why, unless it was the restraint and the long hours of confinement.
The Square in Hannibal, where stood the school of Mr. Cross, was a grove
in those days, with plum-trees and hazel-bushes and grape-vines.  When
spring came, the children gathered flowers at recess, climbed trees, and
swung in the vines.  It was a happy place enough, only–it was school.
To Sam Clemens, the spelling-bee every Friday afternoon was the one thing
that made it worth while.  Sam was a leader at spelling–it was one of
his gifts–he could earn compliments even from Mr. Cross, whose name, it
would seem, was regarded as descriptive.  Once in a moment of inspiration
Sam wrote on his late:
“Cross by name and Cross by nature,
             Cross jumped over an Irish potato.”
John Briggs thought this a great effort, and urged the author to write it
on the blackboard at noon.  Sam hesitated.
“Oh, pshaw!” said John, “I wouldn’t be afraid to do it.”
“I dare you to do it,” said Sam.
This was enough.  While Mr. Cross was at dinner John wrote in a large
hand the fine couplet.  The teacher returned and called the school to
order.  He looked at the blackboard, then, searchingly, at John Briggs.
The handwriting was familiar.
“Did you do that?” he asked, ominously.
It was a time for truth.
“Yes, sir,” said John.
“Come here!”  And John came and paid handsomely for his publishing
venture.  Sam Clemens expected that the author would be called for next;
but perhaps Mr. Cross had exhausted himself on John.  Sam did not often
escape.  His back kept fairly warm from one “flailing” to the next.
Yet he usually wore one of the two medals offered in that school–the
medal for spelling.  Once he lost it by leaving the first “r” out of
February.  Laura Hawkins was on the floor against him, and he was a
gallant boy.  If it had only been Huck Brown he would have spelled that
and all the other months backward, to show off.  There were moments of
triumph that almost made school worth while; the rest of the time it was
prison and servitude.
But then one day came freedom.  Judge Clemens, who, in spite of
misfortune, had never lost faith in humanity, indorsed a large note for a
neighbor, and was obliged to pay it.  Once more all his property was
taken away.  Only a few scanty furnishings were rescued from the wreck.
A St. Louis cousin saved the home, but the Clemens family could not
afford to live in it.  They moved across the street and joined
housekeeping with another family.
Judge Clemens had one hope left.  He was a candidate for the clerkship of
the surrogate court, a good office, and believed his election sure.  His
business misfortunes had aroused wide sympathy.  He took no chances,
however, and made a house-to house canvas of the district, regardless of
the weather, probably undermining his health.  He was elected by a large
majority, and rejoiced that his worries were now at an end.  They were,
indeed, over.  At the end of February he rode to the county seat to take
the oath of office.  He returned through a drenching storm and reached
home nearly frozen. Pneumonia set in, and a few days later he was
dying.  His one comfort now was the Tennessee land.  He said it would
make them all rich and happy.  Once he whispered:
“Cling to the land; cling to the land and wait.  Let nothing beguile it
away from you.”
He was a man who had rarely displayed affection for his children.  But
presently he beckoned to Pamela, now a lovely girl of nineteen, and,
putting his arm around her neck, kissed her for the first time in years.
“Let me die,” he said.
He did not speak again.  A little more, and his worries had indeed ended.
The hard struggle of an upright, impractical man had come to a close.
This was in March, 1847.  John Clemens had lived less than forty-nine
years.
The children were dazed.  They had loved their father and honored his
nobility of purpose.  The boy Sam was overcome with remorse.  He recalled
his wildness and disobedience–a thousand things trifling enough at the
time, but heartbreaking now.  Boy and man, Samuel Clemens was never
spared by remorse.  Leading him into the room where his father lay, his
mother said some comforting words and asked him to make her a promise.
He flung himself into her arms, sobbing: “I will promise anything, if you
won’t make me go to school!  Anything!”
After a moment his mother said: “No, Sammy, you need not go to school any
more.  Only promise me to be a better boy.  Promise not to break my
heart!”
He gave his promise to be faithful and industrious and upright, like his
father.  Such a promise was a serious matter, and Sam Clemens, underneath
all, was a serious lad.  He would not be twelve until November, but his
mother felt that he would keep his word.
Orion Clemens returned to St. Louis, where he was receiving a salary of
ten dollars a week–high wage for those days–out of which he could send
three dollars weekly to the family.  Pamela, who played the guitar and
piano very well, gave music lessons, and so helped the family fund.
Pamela Clemens, the original of Cousin Mary, in “Tom Sawyer,” was a sweet
and noble girl.  Henry was too young to work, but Sam was apprenticed to
a printer named Ament, who had recently moved to Hannibal and bought a
weekly paper, “The Courier.”  Sam agreed with his mother that the
printing trade offered a chance for further education without attending
school, and then, some day, there might be wages.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
