




Orion could not persuade his brother to remain in Muscatine.  Sam
returned to his old place on the “Evening News,” in St. Louis, where he
remained until the following year, rooming with a youth named Burrough, a
journeyman chair-maker with literary taste, a reader of the English
classics, a companionable lad, and for Samuel Clemens a good influence.
By spring, Orion Clemens had married and had sold out in Muscatine.  He
was now located in Keokuk, Iowa.  When presently Brother Sam came
visiting to Keokuk, Orion offered him five dollars a week and his board
to remain.  He accepted.  Henry Clemens, now seventeen, was also in
Orion’s employ, and a lad named Dick Hingham.  Henry and Sam slept in the
office; Dick and a young fellow named Brownell, who roomed above, came in
for social evenings.
They were pretty lively evenings.  A music-teacher on the floor below did
not care for them–they disturbed his class.  He was furious, in fact,
and assailed the boys roughly at first, with no result but to make
matters worse.  Then he tried gentleness, and succeeded.  The boys
stopped their capers and joined his class.  Sam, especially, became a
distinguished member of that body.  He was never a great musician, but
with his good nature, his humor, his slow, quaint speech and originality,
he had no rival in popularity.  He was twenty now, and much with young
ladies, yet he was always a beau rather than a suitor, a good comrade to
all, full of pranks and pleasantries, ready to stop and be merry with any
that came along.  If they prophesied concerning his future, it is not
likely that they spoke of literary fame.  They thought him just easy-
going and light-minded.  True, they noticed that he often carried a book
under his arm–a history, a volume of Dickens, or the tales of Poe.
He read more than any one guessed.  At night, propped up in bed–a habit
continued until his death–he was likely to read until a late hour.  He
enjoyed smoking at such times, and had made himself a pipe with a large
bowl which stood on the floor and had a long rubber stem, something like
the Turkish hubble-bubble.  He liked to fill the big bowl and smoke at
ease through the entire evening.  But sometimes the pipe went out, which
meant that he must strike a match and lean far over to apply it, just
when he was most comfortable.  Sam Clemens never liked unnecessary
exertion.  One night, when the pipe had gone out for the second time, he
happened to hear the young book-clerk, Brownell, passing up to his room
on the top floor.  Sam called to him:
“Ed, come here!”
Brownell poked his head in the door.  The two were great chums.
“What will you have, Sam?” he asked.
“Come in, Ed; Henry’s asleep, and I’m in trouble.  I want somebody to
light my pipe.”
“Why don’t you light it yourself?” Brownell asked.
“I would, only I knew you’d be along in a few minutes and would do it for
me.”
Brownell scratched a match, stooped down, and applied it.
“What are you reading, Sam?”
“Oh, nothing much–a so-called funny book.  One of these days I’ll write
a funnier book myself.”
Brownell laughed.  “No, you won’t, Sam,” he said.  “You’re too lazy ever
to write a book.”
Years later, in the course of a lecture which he delivered in Keokuk,
Mark Twain said that he supposed the most untruthful man in the world
lived right there in Keokuk, and that his name was Ed Brownell.
Orion Clemens did not have the gift of prosperity, and his printing-
office did not flourish.  When he could no longer pay Sam’s wages he took
him into partnership, which meant that Sam got no wages at all, though
this was of less consequence, since his mother, now living with Pamela,
was well provided for.  The disorder of the office, however, distressed
him.  He wrote home that he could not work without system, and, a little
later, that he was going to leave Keokuk, that, in fact, he was planning
a great adventure–a trip to the upper Amazon!
His interest in the Amazon had been awakened by a book.  Lynch and
Herndon had surveyed the upper river, and Lieutenant Herndon’s book was
widely read.  Sam Clemens, propped up in bed, pored over it through long
evenings, and nightly made fabulous fortunes collecting cocoa and other
rare things–resolving, meantime, to start in person for the upper Amazon
with no unnecessary delay.  Boy and man, Samuel Clemens was the same.
His vision of grand possibilities ahead blinded him to the ways and means
of arrival.  It was an inheritance from both sides of his parentage.
Once, in old age, he wrote:
“I have been punished many and many a time, and bitterly, for doing
     things and reflecting afterward .  .  .  .  When I am reflecting on
     these occasions, even deaf persons can hear me think.”
He believed, however, that he had reflected carefully concerning the
Amazon, and that in a brief time he should be there at the head of an
expedition, piling up untold wealth.  He even stirred the imaginations of
two other adventurers, a Dr. Martin and a young man named Ward.  To
Henry, then in St. Louis, he wrote, August 5, 1856:
“Ward and I held a long consultation Sunday morning, and the result
     was that we two have determined to start to Brazil, if possible, in
     six weeks from now, in order to look carefully into matters there
     and report to Dr. Martin in time for him to follow on the first of
     March.”
The matter of finance troubled him.  Orion could not be depended on for
any specified sum, and the fare to the upper Amazon would probably be
considerable.  Sam planned different methods of raising it.  One of them
was to go to New York or Cincinnati and work at his trade until he saved
the amount.  He would then sail from New York direct, or take boat for
New Orleans and sail from there.  Of course there would always be vessels
clearing for the upper Amazon.  After Lieutenant Herndon’s book the ocean
would probably be full of them.
He did not make the start with Ward, as planned, and Ward and Martin seem
to have given up the Amazon idea.  Not so with Samuel Clemens.  He went
on reading Herndon, trying meantime to raise money enough to get him out
of Keokuk.  Was it fate or Providence that suddenly placed it in his
hands?  Whatever it was, the circumstance is so curious that it must be
classed as one of those strange facts that have no place in fiction.
The reader will remember how, one day in Hannibal, the wind had brought
to Sam Clemens, then printer’s apprentice, a stray leaf from a book about
“Joan of Arc,” and how that incident marked a turning-point in his mental
life.  Now, seven years later, it was the wind again that directed his
fortune.  It was a day in early November–bleak, bitter, and
gusty, with whirling snow; most persons were indoors.  Samuel Clemens,
going down Main Street, Keokuk, saw a flying bit of paper pass him and
lodge against a building.  Something about it attracted him and he
captured it.  It was a fifty-dollar bill!  He had never seen one before,
but he recognized it.  He thought he must be having a pleasant dream.
He was tempted to pocket his good fortune and keep still.  But he had
always a troublesome conscience.  He went to a newspaper office and
advertised that he had found a sum of money, a large bill.
Once, long after, he said: “I didn’t describe it very particularly, and I
waited in daily fear that the owner would turn up and take away my
fortune.  By and by I couldn’t stand it any longer.  My conscience had
gotten all that was coming to it.  I felt that I must take that money out
of danger.”
Another time he said, “I advertised the find and left for the Amazon the
same day.”  All of which we may take with his usual literary discount–
the one assigned to him by his mother in childhood.  As a matter of fact,
he remained for an ample time, and nobody came for the money.  What was
its origin?  Was it swept out of a bank, or caught up by the wind from
some counting-room table?  Perhaps it materialized out of the unseen.
Who knows?
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
