




That summer at Quarry Farm was one of the happiest they had ever known.
Mark Twain, nearing fifty, was in the fullness of his manhood and in the
brightest hour of his fortune.  Susy, in her childish “biography,” begun
at this time, gives us a picture of him.  She begins:
“We are a happy family!  We consist of Papa, Mama, Jean, Clara, and
     me.  It is Papa I am writing about, and I shall have no trouble in
     not knowing what to say about him, as he is a very striking
     character.  Papa’s appearance has been described many times, but
     very incorrectly; he has beautiful, curly, gray hair, not any too
     thick or any too long, just right; a Roman nose, which greatly
     improves the beauty of his features, kind blue eyes, and a small
     mustache; he has a wonderfully shaped head and profile; he has a
     very good figure–in short, is an extraordinarily fine-looking man.”
“He is a very good man, and a very funny one; he has got a temper,
     but we all have in this family.  He is the loveliest man I ever saw,
     or ever hope to see, and oh, so absent-minded!”
We may believe this is a true picture of Mark Twain at fifty.  He did not
look young for his years, but he was still young in spirit and body.
Susy tells how he blew bubbles for the children, filling them with
tobacco smoke.  Also, how he would play with the cats and come clear down
from his study to see how a certain kitten was getting along.
Susy adds that “there are eleven cats at the farm now,” and tells of the
day’s occupations, but the description is too long to quote.  It reveals
a beautiful, busy life.
Susy herself was a gentle, thoughtful, romantic child.  One afternoon she
discovered a wonderful tangle of vines and bushes, a still, shut-in
corner not far from the study.  She ran breathlessly to her aunt.
“Can I have it–can Clara and I have it all for our own?”
The petition was granted and the place was called Helen’s Bower, for they
were reading “Thaddeus of Warsaw”, and the name appealed to Susy’s poetic
fancy.  Something happened to the “bower"–an unromantic workman mowed it
down–but by this time there was a little house there which Mrs. Clemens
had built, just for the children.  It was a complete little cottage, when
furnished.  There was a porch in front, with comfortable chairs.  Inside
were also chairs, a table, dishes, shelves, a broom, even a stove–small,
but practical.  They called the little house “Ellerslie,” out of Grace
Aguilar’s “Days of Robert Bruce.”  There alone, or with their Langdon
cousins, how many happy summers they played and dreamed away.  Secluded
by a hillside and happy trees, overlooking the hazy, distant town, it was
a world apart–a corner of story-book land.  When the end of the summer
came its little owners went about bidding their treasures good-by,
closing and kissing the gates of Ellerslie.
Looking back now, Mark Twain at fifty would seem to have been in his
golden prime.  His family was ideal–his surroundings idyllic.  Favored
by fortune, beloved by millions, honored now even in the highest places,
what more had life to give?  When November 30th brought his birthday, one
of the great Brahmins, Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, wrote him a beautiful
poem.  Andrew Lang, England’s foremost critic, also sent verses, while
letters poured in from all sides.
And Mark Twain realized his fortune and was disturbed by it.  To a friend
he said: “I am frightened at the proportions of my prosperity.  It seems
to me that whatever I touch turns to gold.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
