




He arrived in Keokuk at what seemed a lucky moment.  Through Edward
Bates, a member of Lincoln’s Cabinet, Orion Clemens had received an
appointment as territorial secretary of Nevada, and only needed the money
to carry him to the seat of his office at Carson City.  Out of his
pilot’s salary his brother had saved more than enough for the journey,
and was willing to pay both their fares and go along as private secretary
to Orion, whose position promised something in the way of adventure and a
possible opportunity for making a fortune.
The brothers went at once to St. Louis for final leave-taking, and there
took boat for “St. Jo,” Missouri, terminus of the great Overland Stage
Route.  They paid one hundred and fifty dollars each for their passage,
and about the end of July, 1861, set out on that long, delightful trip,
behind sixteen galloping horses, never stopping except for meals or to
change teams, heading steadily into the sunset over the billowy plains
and snow-clad Rockies, covering the seventeen hundred miles between St.
Jo and Carson City in nineteen glorious days.
But one must read Mark Twain’s “Roughing It” for the story of that long-
ago trip–the joy and wonder of it, and the inspiration.  “Even at this
day,” he writes, “it thrills me through and through to think of the life,
the gladness, and the wild sense of freedom that used to make the blood
dance in my face on those fine overland mornings.”
It was a hot dusty, August day when they arrived, dusty, unshaven, and
weather-beaten, and Samuel Clemens’s life as a frontiersman began.
Carson City, the capital of Nevada, was a wooden town with an assorted
population of two thousand souls.  The mining excitement was at its
height and had brought together the drift of every race.
The Clemens brothers took up lodgings with a genial Irishwoman, the Mrs.
O’Flannigan of “Roughing It,” and Orion established himself in a modest
office, for there was no capitol building as yet, no government
headquarters.  Orion could do all the work, and Samuel Clemens, finding
neither duties nor salary attached to his position, gave himself up to
the study of the life about him, and to the enjoyment of the freedom of
the frontier.  Presently he had a following of friends who loved his
quaint manner of speech and his yarns.  On cool nights they would collect
about Orion’s office-stove, and he would tell stories in the wonderful
way that one day would delight the world.  Within a brief time Sam
Clemens (he was always “Sam” to the pioneers) was the most notable figure
on the Carson streets.  His great, bushy head of auburn hair, has
piercing, twinkling eyes, his loose, lounging walk, his careless disorder
of dress invited a second look, even from strangers.  From a river dandy
he had become the roughest-clad of pioneers–rusty slouch hat, flannel
shirt, coarse trousers slopping half in and half out of heavy cowhide
boots, this was his make-up.  Energetic citizens did not prophesy success
for him.  Often they saw him leaning against an awning support, staring
drowsily at the motley human procession, for as much as an hour at a
time.  Certainly that could not be profitable.
But they did like to hear him talk.
He did not catch the mining fever at once.  He was interested first in
the riches that he could see.  Among these was the timber-land around
Lake Bigler (now Tahoe)–splendid acres, to be had for the asking.  The
lake itself was beautifully situated.
With an Ohio boy, John Kinney, he made an excursion afoot to Tahoe, a
trip described in one of the best chapters of “Roughing It.”  They staked
out a timber claim and pretended to fence it and to build a house, but
their chief employment was loafing in the quiet luxury of the great woods
or drifting in a boat on the transparent water.  They did not sleep in
the house.  In “Roughing It” he says:
“It never occurred to us, for one thing; and, besides, it was built
     to hold the ground, and that was enough.  We did not wish to strain
     it.”
They made their camp-fires on the borders of the lake, and one evening it
got away from them, fired the forest, and destroyed their fences and
habitation.  In a letter home he describes this fire in a fine, vivid
way.  At one place he says:
“The level ranks of flame were relieved at intervals by the standard-
     bearers, as we called the tall dead trees, wrapped in fire, and
     waving their blazing banners a hundred feet in the air.  Then we
     could turn from the scene to the lake, and see every branch and leaf
     and cataract of flame upon its banks perfectly reflected, as in a
     gleaming, fiery mirror.”
He was acquiring the literary vision and touch.  The description of this
same fire in “Roughing It,” written ten years later, is scarcely more
vivid.
Most of his letters home at this time tell of glowing prospects–the
certainty of fortune ahead.  The fever of the frontier is in them.  Once,
to Pamela Moffett, he wrote:
“Orion and I have enough confidence in this country to think that, if
     the war lets us alone, we can make Mr. Moffett rich without its ever
     costing him a cent or a particle of trouble.”
From the same letter we gather that the brothers are now somewhat
interested in mining claims:
“We have about 1,650 feet of mining-ground, and, if it proves good,
     Mr. Moffett’s name will go in; and if not, I can get ’feet’ for him
     in the spring.”
This was written about the end of October.  Two months later, in
midwinter, the mining fever came upon him with full force.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
