




For Samuel Clemens these were happy days–the happiest, in some respects,
he would ever know.  He had plenty of money now.  He could help his
mother with a liberal hand, and could put away fully a hundred dollars a
month for himself.  He had few cares, and he loved the ease and romance
and independence of his work as he would never quite love anything again.
His popularity on the river was very great.  His humorous stories and
quaint speech made a crowd collect wherever he appeared.  There were
pilot-association rooms in St. Louis and New Orleans, and his appearance
at one of these places was a signal for the members to gather.
A friend of those days writes: “He was much given to spinning yarns so
funny that his hearers were convulsed, and yet all the time his own face
was perfectly sober.  Occasionally some of his droll yarns got into the
papers.  He may have written them himself.”
Another old river-man remembers how, one day, at the association, they
were talking of presence of mind in an accident, when Pilot Clemens said:
“Boys, I had great presence of mind once.  It was at a fire.  An old man
leaned out of a four-story building, calling for help.  Everybody in the
crowd below looked up, but nobody did anything.  The ladders weren’t long
enough.  Nobody had any presence of mind–nobody but me.  I came to the
rescue.  I yelled for a rope.  When it came I threw the old man the end
of it.  He caught it, and I told him to tie it around his waist.  He did
so, and I pulled him down.”
This was a story that found its way into print, probably his own
contribution.
“Sam was always scribbling when not at the wheel,” said Bixby, “but the
best thing he ever did was the burlesque of old Isaiah Sellers.  He
didn’t write it for print, but only for his own amusement and to show to
a few of the boys.  Bart Bowen, who was with him on the “Edward J. Gay"
at the time, got hold of it, and gave it to one of the New Orleans
papers.”
The burlesque on Captain Sellers would be of little importance if it were
not for its association with the origin, or, at least, with the
originator, of what is probably the best known of literary names–the
name Mark Twain.
This strong, happy title–a river term indicating a depth of two fathoms
on the sounding-line–was first used by the old pilot, Isaiah Sellers,
who was a sort of “oldest inhabitant” of the river, with a passion for
airing his ancient knowledge before the younger men.  Sellers used to
send paragraphs to the papers, quaint and rather egotistical in tone,
usually beginning, “My opinion for the citizens of New Orleans,” etc.,
prophesying river conditions and recalling memories as far back as 1811.
These he generally signed “Mark Twain.”
Naturally, the younger pilots amused themselves by imitating Sellers, and
when Sam Clemens wrote abroad burlesque of the old man’s contributions,
relating a perfectly impossible trip, supposed to have been made in 1763
with a Chinese captain and a Choctaw crew, it was regarded as a
masterpiece of wit.
It appeared in the “True Delta” in May, 1859, and broke Captain Sellers’s
literary heart.  He never wrote another paragraph.  Clemens always
regretted the whole matter deeply, and his own revival of the name
afterward was a sort of tribute to the old man he had thoughtlessly and
unintentionally wounded.
Old pilots of that day remembered Samuel Clemens as a slender, fine-
looking man, well dressed, even dandified, generally wearing blue serge,
with fancy shirts, white duck trousers, and patent-leather shoes.  A
pilot could do that, for his surroundings were speckless.
The pilots regarded him as a great reader–a student of history, travels,
and the sciences.  In the association rooms they often saw him poring
over serious books.  He began the study of French one day in New Orleans,
when he had passed a school of languages where French, German, and
Italian were taught, one in each of three rooms.  The price vas twenty-
five dollars for one language, or three for fifty.  The student was
provided with a set of conversation cards for each, and was supposed to
walk from one apartment to another, changing his nationality at each
threshold.  The young pilot, with his usual enthusiasm, invested in all
three languages, but after a few round trips decided that French would
do.  He did not return to the school, but kept the cards and added text-
books.  He studied faithfully when off watch and in port, and his old
river note-book, still preserved, contains a number of advanced
exercises, neatly written out.
Still more interesting are the river notes themselves.  They are not the
timid, hesitating memoranda of the “little book” which, by Bixby’s
advice, he bought for his first trip.  They are quick, vigorous records
that show confidence and knowledge.  Under the head of “Second high-water
trip–Jan., 1861 ’Alonzo Child,’” the notes tell the story of a rising
river, with overflowing banks, blind passages, and cut-offs–a new river,
in fact, that must be judged by a perfect knowledge of the old–guessed,
but guessed right.
Good deal of water all over Cole’s Creek Chute, 12 or 15 ft. bank–could
have gone up above General Taylor’s–too much drift .  .  .  .
Night–didn’t run either 77 or 76 towheads–8-ft. bank on main shore
Ozark chute.
To the reader to-day it means little enough, but one may imagine,
perhaps, a mile-wide sweep of boiling water, full of drift, shifting
currents with newly forming bars, and a lone figure in the dark pilot-
house, peering into the night for blind and disappearing landmarks.
But such nights were not all there was of piloting.  There were glorious
nights when the stars were blazing out, and the moon was on the water,
and the young pilot could follow a clear channel and dream long dreams.
He was very serious at such times–he reviewed the world’s history he had
read, he speculated on the future, he considered philosophies, he lost
himself in a study of the stars.  Mark Twain’s love of astronomy, which
never waned until his last day, began with those lonely river watches.
Once a great comet blazed in the sky, a “wonderful sheaf of light,” and
glorified his long hours at the wheel.
Samuel Clemens was now twenty-five, full of health and strong in his
courage.  In the old notebook there remains a well-worn clipping, the
words of some unknown writer, which he may have kept as a sort of creed:
HOW TO TAKE LIFE.–Take it just as though it was–as it is–an earnest,
vital, and important affair.  Take it as though you were born to the task
of performing a merry part in it–as though the world had awaited for
your coming.  Take it as though it was a grand opportunity to do and
achieve, to carry forward great and good schemes to help and cheer a
suffering, weary, it may be heartbroken, brother.  Now and then a man
stands aside from the crowd, labors earnestly, steadfastly, confidently,
and straightway becomes famous for wisdom, intellect, skill, greatness of
some sort.  The world wonders, admires, idolizes, and it only illustrates
what others may do if they take hold of life with a purpose.  The
miracle, or the power that elevates the few, is to be found in their
industry, application, and perseverance under the promptings of a brave,
determined spirit.
Bixby and Clemens were together that winter on the “Child,” and were the
closest friends.  Once the young pilot invited his mother to make the
trip to New Orleans, and the river journey and a long drive about the
beautiful Southern city filled Jane Clemens with wonder and delight.  She
no longer shad any doubts of Sam.  He had long since become the head of
the family.  She felt called upon to lecture him, now and then, but down
in her heart she believed that he could really do no wrong.  They joked
each other unmercifully, and her wit, never at a loss, was quite as keen
as his.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
