




It was true, after all; and on Tuesday morning, January 9, 1906, I was on
hand with a capable stenographer, ready to begin.  Clemens, meantime, had
developed a new idea: he would like to add, he said, the new dictations
to his former beginnings, completing an autobiography which was to be
laid away and remain unpublished for a hundred years.  He would pay the
stenographer himself, and own the notes, allowing me, of course, free use
of them as material for my book.  He did not believe that he could follow
the story of his life in its order of dates, but would find it necessary
to wander around, picking up the thread as memory or fancy prompted.  I
could suggest subjects and ask questions.  I assented to everything, and
we set to work immediately.
As on my former visit, he was in bed when we arrived, though clad now in
a rich Persian dressing gown, and propped against great, snowy pillows.
A small table beside him held his pipes, cigars, papers, also a reading-
lamp, the soft light of which brought out his brilliant coloring and the
gleam of his snowy hair.  There was daylight, too, but it was dull winter
daylight, from the north, while the walls of the room were a deep,
unreflecting red.
He began that morning with some memories of the Comstock mine; then he
dropped back to his childhood, closing at last with some comment on
matters quite recent.  How delightful it was–his quaint, unhurried
fashion of speech, the unconscious habits of his delicate hands, the play
of his features as his fancies and phrases passed through his mind and
were accepted or put aside.  We were watching one of the great literary
creators of his time in the very process of his architecture.  Time did
not count.  When he finished, at last, we were all amazed to find that
more than two hours had slipped away.
“And how much I have enjoyed it,” he said.  “It is the ideal plan for
this kind of work.  Narrative writing is always disappointing.  The
moment you pick up a pen you begin to lose the spontaneity of the
personal relation, which contains the very essence of interest.  With
short-hand dictation one can talk as if he were at his own dinner-table
always an inspiring place.  I expect to dictate all the rest of my life,
if you good people are willing to come and listen to it.”
The dictations thus begun continued steadily from week to week, with
increasing charm.  We never knew what he was going to talk about, and it
was seldom that he knew until the moment of beginning.  But it was always
fascinating, and I felt myself the most fortunate biographer in the
world, as indeed I was.
It was not all smooth sailing, however.  In the course of time I began to
realize that these marvelous dictated chapters were not altogether
history, but were often partly, or even entirely, imaginary.  The creator
of Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn had been embroidering old incidents or
inventing new ones too long to stick to history now, to be able to
separate the romance in his mind from the reality of the past.  Also, his
memory of personal events had become inaccurate.  He realized this, and
once said, in his whimsical, gentle way:
“When I was younger I could remember anything, whether it happened
     or not; but I am getting old, and soon I shall remember only the
     latter.”
Yet it was his constant purpose to stick to fact, and especially did he
make no effort to put himself in a good light.  Indeed, if you wanted to
know the worst of Mark Twain you had only to ask him for it.  He would
give it to the last syllable, and he would improve upon it and pile up
his sins, and sometimes the sins of others, without stint.  Certainly the
dictations were precious, for they revealed character as nothing else
could; but as material for history they often failed to stand the test of
the documents in the next room–the letters, notebooks, agreements, and
the like–from which I was gradually rebuilding the structure of the
years.
In the talks that we usually had when the dictations were ended and the
stenographer had gone I got much that was of great value.  It was then
that I usually made those inquiries which we had planned in the
beginning, and his answers, coming quickly and without reflection, gave
imagination less play.  Sometimes he would touch some point of special
interest and walk up and down, philosophizing, or commenting upon things
in general, in a manner not always complimentary to humanity and its
progress.
I seldom asked him a question during the dictation–or interrupted in any
way, though he had asked me to stop him when I found him repeating or
contradicting himself, or misstating some fact known to me.  At first I
lacked the courage to point out a mistake at the moment, and cautiously
mentioned the matter when he had finished.  Then he would be likely to
say:
“Why didn’t you stop me?  Why did you let me go on making a donkey
     of myself when you could have saved me?”
So then I used to take the risk of getting struck by lightning, and
nearly always stopped him in time.  But if it happened that I upset his
thought, the thunderbolt was apt to fly.  He would say:
“Now you’ve knocked everything out of my head.”
Then, of course, I was sorry and apologized, and in a moment the sky was
clear again.  There was generally a humorous complexion to the
dictations, whatever the subject.  Humor was his natural breath of life,
and rarely absent.
Perhaps I should have said sooner that he smoked continuously during the
dictations.  His cigars were of that delicious fragrance which belongs to
domestic tobacco.  They were strong and inexpensive, and it was only his
early training that made him prefer them.  Admiring friends used to send
him costly, imported cigars, but he rarely touched them, and they were
smoked by visitors.  He often smoked a pipe, and preferred it to be old
and violent.  Once when he had bought a new, expensive briar-root, he
handed it to me, saying:
“I’d like to have you smoke that a year or two, and when it gets so you
can’t stand it, maybe it will suit me.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
