




They went directly to Quarry Farm, where Clemens again took up work on
his book, which he hoped to have ready for early publication.  But his
writing did not go as well as he had hoped, and it was long after they
had returned to Hartford that the book was finally in the printer’s
hands.
Meantime he had renewed work on a story begun two years before at Quarry
Farm.  Browsing among the books there one summer day, he happened to pick
up “The Prince and the Page,” by Charlotte M. Yonge.  It was a story of a
prince disguised as a blind beggar, and, as Mark Twain read, an idea came
to him for an altogether different story, or play, of his own.  He would
have a prince and a pauper change places, and through a series of
adventures learn each the trials and burdens of the other life.  He
presently gave up the play idea, and began it as a story.  His first
intention had been to make the story quite modern, using the late King
Edward VII. (then Prince of Wales) as his prince, but it seemed to him
that it would not do to lose a prince among the slums of modern London–
he could not make it seem real; so he followed back through history until
he came to the little son of Henry VIII., Edward Tudor, and decided that
he would do.
It was the kind of a story that Mark Twain loved to read and to write.
By the end of that first summer he had finished a good portion of the
exciting adventures of “The Prince and the Pauper,” and then, as was
likely to happen, the inspiration waned and the manuscript was laid
aside.
But with the completion of “A Tramp Abroad"–a task which had grown
wearisome–he turned to the luxury of romance with a glad heart.  To
Howells he wrote that he was taking so much pleasure in the writing that
he wanted to make it last.
“Did I ever tell you the plot of it?  It begins at 9 A.M., January
     27, 1547 .  .  .  .  My idea is to afford a realizing sense of the
     exceeding severity of the laws of that day by inflicting some of
     their penalties upon the king himself, and allowing him a chance to
     see the rest of them applied to others.”
Susy and Clara Clemens were old enough now to understand the story, and
as he finished the chapters he read them aloud to his small home
audience–a most valuable audience, indeed, for he could judge from its
eager interest, or lack of attention, just the measure of his success.
These little creatures knew all about the writing of books.  Susy’s
earliest recollection was “Tom Sawyer” read aloud from the manuscript.
Also they knew about plays.  They could not remember a time when they did
not take part in evening charades–a favorite amusement in the Clemens
home.
Mark Twain, who always loved his home and played with his children,
invented the charades and their parts for them, at first, but as they
grew older they did not need much help.  With the Twichell and Warner
children they organized a little company for their productions, and
entertained the assembled households.  They did not make any preparation
for their parts.  A word was selected and the syllables of it whispered
to the little actors.  Then they withdrew to the hall, where all sorts of
costumes had been laid out for the evening, dressed their parts, and each
group marched into the library, performed its syllable, and retired,
leaving the audience of parents to guess the answer.  Now and then, even
at this early day, they gave little plays, and of course Mark Twain could
not resist joining them.  In time the plays took the place of the
charades and became quite elaborate, with a stage and scenery, but we
shall hear of this later on.
“The Prince and the Pauper” came to an end in due season, in spite of the
wish of both author and audience for it to go on forever.  It was not
published at once, for several reasons, the main one being that “A Tramp
Abroad” had just been issued from the press, and a second book might
interfere with its sale.
As it was, the “Tramp” proved a successful book–never as successful as
the “Innocents,” for neither its humor nor its description had quite the
fresh quality of the earlier work.  In the beginning, however, the sales
were large, the advance orders amounting to twenty-five thousand copies,
and the return to the author forty thousand dollars for the first year.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
