




Mark Twain lived just a week from that day and hour.  For a time he
seemed full of life, talking freely, and suffering little.  Clara and
Ossip Gabrilowitsch arrived on Saturday and found him cheerful, quite
like himself.  At intervals he read.  “Suetonius” and “Carlyle” lay on
the bed beside him, and he would pick them up and read a page or a
paragraph.  Sometimes when I saw him thus–the high color still in his
face, the clear light in his eyes’–I said: “It is not reality.  He is
not going to die.”
But by Wednesday of the following week it was evident that the end was
near.  We did not know it then, but the mysterious messenger of his birth
year, Halley’s comet, became visible that night in the sky.[13]
On Thursday morning, the 21st, his mind was still fairly clear, and he
read a little from one of the volumes on his bed.  By Clara he sent word
that he wished to see me, and when I came in he spoke of two unfinished
manuscripts which he wished me to “throw away,” as he briefly expressed
it, for his words were few, now, and uncertain.  I assured him that I
would attend to the matter and he pressed my hand.  It was his last word
to me.  During the afternoon, while Clara stood by him, he sank into a
doze, and from it passed into a deeper slumber and did not heed us any
more.
Through that peaceful spring afternoon the life-wave ebbed lower and
lower.  It was about half-past six, and the sun lay just on the horizon,
when Dr. Quintard noticed that the breathing, which had gradually become
more subdued, broke a little.  There was no suggestion of any struggle.
The noble head turned a little to one side, there was a fluttering sigh,
and the breath that had been unceasing for seventy-four tumultuous years
had stopped forever.
In the Brick Church, New York, Mark Twain–dressed in the white he loved
so well–lay, with the nobility of death upon him, while a multitude of
those who loved him passed by and looked at his face for the last time.
Flowers in profusion were banked about him, but on the casket lay a
single wreath which Dan Beard and his wife had woven from the laurel
which grows on Stormfield hill.  He was never more beautiful than as he
lay there, and it was an impressive scene to see those thousands file by,
regard him for a moment, gravely, thoughtfully, and pass on.  All sorts
were there, rich and poor; some crossed themselves, some saluted, some
paused a little to take a closer look.
That night we went with him to Elmira, and next day he lay in those
stately parlors that had seen his wedding-day, and where little Langdon
and Susy had lain, and Mrs. Clemens, and then Jean, only a little while
before.
The worn-out body had reached its journey’s end; but his spirit had never
grown old, and to-day, still young, it continues to cheer and comfort a
tired world.
 

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
