




A third little girl came to the Clemens household during the summer of
1880.  They were then at Quarry Farm, and Clemens wrote to his friend
Twichell:
“DEAR OLD JOE,–Concerning Jean Clemens, if anybody said he “didn’t
     see no p’ints about that frog that’s any better than any other
     frog,” I should think he was convicting himself of being a pretty
     poor sort of an observer. . .  It is curious to note the change in
     the stock-quotations of the Affection Board.  Four weeks ago the
     children put Mama at the head of the list right along, where she has
     always been, but now:
                                   Jean    
                                   Mama
                                   Motley    }cat
                                   Fraulein  }cat
                                   Papa
“That is the way it stands now.  Mama is become No. 2; I have dropped
     from 4 and become No. 5.  Some time ago it used to be nip and tuck
     between me and the cats, but after the cats “developed” I didn’t
     stand any more show.”
Those were happy days at Quarry Farm.  The little new baby thrived on
that summer hilltop.
Also, it may be said, the cats.  Mark Twain’s children had inherited
his love for cats, and at the farm were always cats of all ages and
varieties.  Many of the bed-time stories were about these pets–stories
invented by Mark Twain as he went along–stories that began anywhere and
ended nowhere, and continued indefinitely from evening to evening,
trailing off into dreamland.
The great humorist cared less for dogs, though he was never unkind to
them, and once at the farm a gentle hound named Bones won his affection.
When the end of the summer came and Clemens, as was his habit, started
down the drive ahead of the carriage, Bones, half-way to the entrance,
was waiting for him.  Clemens stooped down, put his arms about him, and
bade him an affectionate good-by.
Eighteen hundred and eighty was a Presidential year.  Mark Twain was for
General Garfield, and made a number of remarkable speeches in his favor.
General Grant came to Hartford during the campaign, and Mark Twain was
chosen to make the address of welcome.  Perhaps no such address of
welcome was ever made before.  He began:
“I am among those deputed to welcome you to the sincere and cordial
     hospitalities of Hartford, the city of the historic and revered
     Charter Oak, of which most of the town is built.”
He seemed to be at a loss what to say next, and, leaning over, pretended
to whisper to Grant.  Then, as if he had been prompted by the great
soldier, he straightened up and poured out a fervid eulogy on Grant’s
victories, adding, in an aside, as he finished, “I nearly forgot that
part of my speech,” to the roaring delight of his hearers, while Grant
himself grimly smiled.
He then spoke of the General being now out of public employment, and how
grateful his country was to him, and how it stood ready to reward him in
every conceivable–inexpensive–way.
Grant had smiled more than once during the speech, and when this sentence
came out at the end his composure broke up altogether, while the throng
shouted approval.  Clemens made another speech that night at the opera-
house–a speech long remembered in Hartford as one of the great efforts
of his life.
A very warm friendship had grown up between Mark Twain and General Grant.
A year earlier, on the famous soldier’s return from his trip around the
world, a great birthday banquet had been given him in Chicago, at which
Mark Twain’s speech had been the event of the evening.  The colonel who
long before had chased the young pilot-soldier through the Mississippi
bottoms had become his conquering hero, and Grant’s admiration for
America’s foremost humorist was most hearty.  Now and again Clemens urged
General Grant to write his memoirs for publication, but the hero of many
battles was afraid to venture into the field of letters.  He had no
confidence in his ability to write.  He did not realize that the man who
had written “I will fight it out on this line if it takes all summer,"
and, later, “Let us have peace,” was capable of English as terse and
forceful as the Latin of Caesar’s Commentaries.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
