




A Hannibal paper, the “Journal,” was for sale under a mortgage of five
hundred dollars, and Orion Clemens, returning from St. Louis, borrowed
the money and bought it.  Sam’s two years’ apprenticeship with Ament had
been completed, and Orion felt that together they could carry on the
paper and win success.  Henry Clemens, now eleven, was also taken out of
school to learn type-setting.
Orion was a better printer than proprietor.  Like so many of his family,
he was a visionary, gentle and credulous, ready to follow any new idea.
Much advice was offered him, and he tried to follow it all.
He began with great hopes and energy.  He worked like a slave and did not
spare the others.  The paper was their hope of success.  Sam, especially,
was driven.  There were no more free afternoons.  In some chapters
written by Orion Clemens in later life, he said:
“I was tyrannical and unjust to Sam.  He was swift and clean as a
     good journeyman.  I gave him ’takes,’ and, if he got through well, I
     begrudged him the time and made him work more.”
Orion did not mean to be unjust.  The struggle against opposition and
debt was bitter.  He could not be considerate.
The paper for a time seemed on the road to success, but Orion worked too
hard and tried too many schemes.  His enthusiasm waned and most of his
schemes turned out poorly.  By the end of the year the “Journal” was on
the down grade.
In time when the need of money became great, Orion made a trip to
Tennessee to try to raise something on the land which they still held
there.  He left Sam in charge of the paper, and, though its proprietor
returned empty-handed, his journey was worth while, for it was during his
absence that Samuel Clemens began the career that would one day make him
Mark Twain.
Sam had concluded to edit the paper in a way that would liven up the
circulation.  He had never written anything for print, but he believed he
knew what the subscribers wanted.  The editor of a rival paper had been
crossed in love, and was said to have tried to drown himself.  Sam wrote
an article telling all the history of the affair, giving names and
details.  Then on the back of two big wooden letters, used for bill-
printing, he engraved illustrations of the victim wading out into the
river, testing the depth of the water with a stick.
The paper came out, and the demand for it kept the Washington hand-press
busy.  The injured editor sent word that he was coming over to thrash the
whole Journal staff, but he left town, instead, for the laugh was too
general.
Sam also wrote a poem which startled orthodox readers.  Then Orion
returned and reduced him to the ranks.  In later years Orion saw his
mistake.
“I could have distanced all competitors, even then,” he wrote,
     “if I had recognized Sam’s ability and let him go ahead, merely
     keeping him from offending worthy persons.”
Sam was not discouraged.  He liked the taste of print.  He sent two
anecdotes to the Philadelphia Saturday Evening Post.  Both were accepted
–without payment, of course, in those days–and when they appeared he
walked on air.  This was in 1851.  Nearly sixty years later he said:
“Seeing them in print was a joy which rather exceeded anything in
      that line I have ever experienced since.”
However, he wrote nothing further for the “Post.”  Orion printed two of
his sketches in the “Journal,” which was the extent of his efforts at
this time.  None of this early work has been preserved.  Files of the
“Post” exist, but the sketches were unsigned and could hardly be
identified.
The Hannibal paper dragged along from year to year.  Orion could pay
nothing on the mortgage–financial matters becoming always worse.  He
could barely supply the plainest food and clothing for the family.  Sam
and Henry got no wages, of course.  Then real disaster came.  A cow got
into the office one night, upset a type-case, and ate up two composition
rollers.  Somewhat later a fire broke out and did considerable damage.
There was partial insurance, with which Orion replaced a few necessary
articles; then, to save rent, he moved the office into the front room of
the home on Hill Street, where they were living again at this time.
Samuel Clemens, however, now in his eighteenth year, felt that he was no
longer needed in Hannibal.  He was a capable workman, with little to do
and no reward.  Orion, made irritable by his misfortunes, was not always
kind.  Pamela, who, meantime, had married well, was settled in St. Louis.
Sam told his mother that he would visit Pamela and look about the city.
There would be work in St. Louis at good wages.
He was going farther than St. Louis, but he dared not tell her.  Jane
Clemens, consenting, sighed as she put together his scanty belongings.
Sam was going away.  He had been a good boy of late years, but her faith
in his resisting powers was not strong.  Presently she held up a little
Testament.
“I want you to take hold of the other end of this, Sam,” she said, “and
make me a promise.”
The slim, wiry woman of forty-nine, gray-eyed, tender, and resolute,
faced the fair-cheeked youth of seventeen, his eyes as piercing and
unwavering as her own.  How much alike they were!
“I want you,” Jane Clemens said, “to repeat after me, Sam, these words: I
do solemnly swear that I will not throw a card or drink a drop of liquor
while I am gone.”
He repeated the vow after her, and she kissed him.
“Remember that, Sam, and write to us,” she said.
“And so,” writes Orion, “he went wandering in search of that comfort and
advancement, and those rewards of industry, which he had failed to find
where I was–gloomy, taciturn, and selfish.  I not only missed his labor;
we all missed his abounding activity and merriment.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
