




Hannibal was a town with prospects and considerable trade.  It was
slumbrous, being a slave town, but it was not dead.  John Clemens
believed it a promising place for business, and opened a small general
store with Orion Clemens, now fifteen, a studious, dreamy lad, for clerk.
The little city was also an attractive place of residence.  Mark Twain
remembered it as “the white town drowsing in the sunshine of a summer
morning, .  .  .  the great Mississippi, the magnificent Mississippi,
rolling its mile-wide tide along, ....  the dense forest away on the
other side.”
The “white town” was built against green hills, and abutting the river
were bluffs–Holliday’s Hill and Lover’s Leap.  A distance below the town
was a cave–a wonderful cave, as every reader of Tom Sawyer knows–while
out in the river, toward the Illinois shore, was the delectable island
that was one day to be the meeting-place of Tom’s pirate band, and later
to become the hiding-place of Huck and Nigger Jim.
The river itself was full of interest.  It was the highway to the outside
world.  Rafts drifted by; smartly painted steamboats panted up and down,
touching to exchange traffic and travelers, a never-ceasing wonder to
those simple shut-in dwellers whom the telegraph and railway had not yet
reached.  That Hannibal was a pleasant place of residence we may believe,
and what an attractive place for a boy to grow up in!
Little Sam, however, was not yet ready to enjoy the island and the cave.
He was still delicate–the least promising of the family.  He was queer
and fanciful, and rather silent.  He walked in his sleep and was often
found in the middle of the night, fretting with the cold, in some dark
corner.  Once he heard that a neighbor’s children had the measles, and,
being very anxious to catch the complaint, slipped over to the house and
crept into bed with an infected playmate.  Some days later, Little Sam’s
relatives gathered about his bed to see him die.  He confessed, long
after, that the scene gratified him.  However, he survived, and fell into
the habit of running away, usually in the direction of the river.
“You gave me more uneasiness than any child I had,” his mother once said
to him, in her old age.
“I suppose you were afraid I wouldn’t live,” he suggested.
She looked at him with the keen humor which had been her legacy to him.
“No, afraid you would,” she said.  Which was only her joke, for she had
the tenderest of hearts, and, like all mothers, had a weakness for the
child that demanded most of her mother’s care.  It was chiefly on his
account that she returned each year to Florida to spend the summer on
John Quarles’s farm.
If Uncle John Quarles’s farm was just an ordinary Missouri farm, and his
slaves just average negroes, they certainly never seemed so to Little
Sam.  There was a kind of glory about everything that belonged to Uncle
John, and it was not all imagination, for some of the spirit of that
jovial, kindly hearted man could hardly fail to radiate from his
belongings.
The farm was a large one for that locality, and the farm-house was a big
double log building–that is, two buildings with a roofed-over passage
between, where in summer the lavish Southern meals were served, brought
in on huge dishes by the negroes, and left for each one to help himself.
Fried chicken, roast pig, turkeys, ducks, geese, venison just killed,
squirrels, rabbits, partridges, pheasants, prairie-chickens, green corn,
watermelon–a little boy who did not die on that bill of fare would be
likely to get well on it, and to Little Sam the farm proved a life-saver.
It was, in fact, a heavenly place for a little boy.  In the corner of the
yard there were hickory and black-walnut trees, and just over the fence
the hill sloped past barns and cribs to a brook, a rare place to wade,
though there were forbidden pools.  Cousin Tabitha Quarles, called
“Puss,” his own age, was Little Sam’s playmate, and a slave girl, Mary,
who, being six years older, was supposed to keep them out of mischief.
There were swings in the big, shady pasture, where Mary swung her charges
and ran under them until their feet touched the branches.  All the woods
were full of squirrels and birds and blooming flowers; all the meadows
were gay with clover and butterflies, and musical with singing
grasshoppers and calling larks; the fence-rows were full of wild
blackberries; there were apples and peaches in the orchard, and plenty of
melons ripening in the corn.  Certainly it was a glorious place!
Little Sam got into trouble once with the watermelons.  One of them had
not ripened quite enough when he ate several slices of it.  Very soon
after he was seized with such terrible cramps that some of the household
did not think he could live.
But his mother said: “Sammy will pull through.  He was not born to die
that way.”  Which was a true prophecy.  Sammy’s slender constitution
withstood the strain.  It was similarly tested more than once during
those early years.  He was regarded as a curious child.  At times dreamy
and silent, again wild-headed and noisy, with sudden impulses that sent
him capering and swinging his arms into the wind until he would fall with
shrieks and spasms of laughter and madly roll over and over in the grass.
It is not remembered that any one prophesied very well for his future at
such times.
The negro quarters on Uncle John’s farm were especially fascinating.  In
one cabin lived a bedridden old woman whom the children looked upon with
awe.  She was said to be a thousand years old, and to have talked with
Moses.  She had lost her health in the desert, coming out of Egypt.  She
had seen Pharaoh drown, and the fright had caused the bald spot on her
head.  She could ward off witches and dissolve spells.
Uncle Dan’l was another favorite, a kind-hearted, gentle soul, who long
after, as Nigger Jim in the Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn tales, would
win world-wide love and sympathy.
Through that far-off, warm, golden summer-time Little Sam romped and
dreamed and grew.  He would return each summer to the farm during those
early years.  It would become a beautiful memory.  His mother generally
kept him there until the late fall, when the chilly evenings made them
gather around the wide, blazing fireplace.  Sixty years later he wrote:
“I can see the room yet with perfect clearness.  I can see all
     its belongings, all its details; the family-room of the house, with
     the trundle-bed in one corner and the spinning-wheel in another–a
     wheel whose rising and falling wail, heard from a distance, was the
     mournfulest of all sounds to me and made me homesick and low-
     spirited and filled my atmosphere with the wandering spirits of the
     dead; the vast fireplace, piled high with flaming logs from whose
     ends a sugary sap bubbled out but did not go to waste, for we
     scraped it off and ate it; .  .  .  the lazy cat spread out on the
     rough hearthstones, the drowsy dogs braced against the jambs,
     blinking; my aunt in one chimney-corner, and my uncle in the other,
     smoking his corn-cob pipe.”
It is hard not to tell more of the farm, for the boy who was one day
going to write of Tom and Huck and the rest learned there so many things
that Tom and Huck would need to know.
But he must have “book-learning,” too, Jane Clemens said.  On his return
to Hannibal that first summer, she decided that Little Sam was ready for
school.  He was five years old and regarded as a “stirring child.”
“He drives me crazy with his didoes when he’s in the house,” his mother
declared, “and when he’s out of it I’m expecting every minute that some
one will bring him home half dead.”
Mark Twain used to say that he had had nine narrow escapes from drowning,
and it was at this early age that he was brought home one afternoon in a
limp state, having been pulled from a deep hole in Bear Creek by a slave
girl.
When he was restored, his mother said: “I guess there wasn’t much danger.
People born to be hanged are safe in water.”
Mark Twain’s mother was the original of Aunt Polly in the story of Tom
Sawyer, an outspoken, keen-witted, charitable woman, whom it was good to
know.  She had a heart full of pity, especially for dumb creatures.  She
refused to kill even flies, and punished the cat for catching mice.  She
would drown young kittens when necessary, but warmed the water for the
purpose.  She could be strict, however, with her children, if occasion
required, and recognized their faults.
Little Sam was inclined to elaborate largely on fact.  A neighbor once
said to her: “You don’t believe anything that child says, I hope.”
“Oh yes, I know his average.  I discount him ninety per cent.  The rest
is pure gold.”
She declared she was willing to pay somebody to take him off her hands
for a part of each day and try to teach him “manners.”  A certain Mrs. E.
Horr was selected for the purpose.
Mrs. Horr’s school on Main Street, Hannibal, was of the old-fashioned
kind.  There were pupils of all ages, and everything was taught up to the
third reader and long division.  Pupils who cared to go beyond those
studies went to a Mr. Cross, on the hill, facing what is now the public
square.  Mrs. Horr received twenty-five cents a week for each pupil, and
the rules of conduct were read daily.  After the rules came the A-B-C
class, whose recitation was a hand-to-hand struggle, requiring no study-
time.
The rules of conduct that first day interested Little Sam.  He wondered
how nearly he could come to breaking them and escape.  He experimented
during the forenoon, and received a warning.  Another experiment would
mean correction.  He did not expect to be caught again; but when he least
expected it he was startled by a command to go out and bring a stick for
his own punishment.
This was rather dazing.  It was sudden, and, then, he did not know much
about choosing sticks for such a purpose.  Jane Clemens had commonly used
her hand.  A second command was needed to start him in the right
direction, and he was still dazed when he got outside.  He had the
forests of Missouri to select from, but choice was not easy.  Everything
looked too big and competent.  Even the smallest switch had a wiry look.
Across the way was a cooper’s shop.  There were shavings outside, and one
had blown across just in front of him.  He picked it up, and, gravely
entering the room, handed it to Mrs. Horr.  So far as known, it is the
first example of that humor which would one day make Little Sam famous
before all the world.
It was a failure in this instance.  Mrs. Horr’s comic side may have
prompted forgiveness, but discipline must be maintained.
“Samuel Langhorne Clemens,” she said (he had never heard it all strung
together in that ominous way), “I am ashamed of you!  Jimmy Dunlap, go
and bring a switch for Sammy.”  And the switch that Jimmy Dunlap brought
was of a kind to give Little Sam a permanent distaste for school.  He
told his mother at noon that he did not care for education; that he did
not wish to be a great man; that his desire was to be an Indian and scalp
such persons as Mrs. Horr.  In her heart Jane Clemens was sorry for him,
but she openly said she was glad there was somebody who could take him in
hand.
Little Sam went back to school, but he never learned to like it.  A
school was ruled with a rod in those days, and of the smaller boys Little
Sam’s back was sore as often as the next.  When the days of early summer
came again, when from his desk he could see the sunshine lighting the
soft green of Holliday’s Hill, with the glint of the river and the purple
distance beyond, it seemed to him that to be shut up with a Webster
spelling-book and a cross teacher was more than human nature could bear.
There still exists a yellow slip of paper upon which, in neat, old-
fashioned penmanship is written:
     MISS PAMELA CLEMENS
     Has won the love of her teacher and schoolmates by her amiable
     deportment and faithful application to her various studies.
     E. HORR, Teacher.
Thus we learn that Little Sam’s sister, eight years older than himself,
attended the same school, and that she was a good pupil.  If any such
reward of merit was ever conferred on Little Sam, it has failed to come
to light.  If he won the love of his teacher and playmates, it was
probably for other reasons.
Yet he must have learned somehow, for he could read, presently, and was a
good speller for his age.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
