




The Rev. Joseph H. Twichell and Mark Twain used to take many long walks
together, and once they decided to walk from Hartford to Boston–about
one hundred miles.  They decided to allow three days for the trip, and
really started one morning, with some luncheon in a basket, and a little
bag of useful articles.  It was a bright, brisk November day, and they
succeeded in getting to Westford, a distance of twenty-eight miles, that
evening.  But they were lame and foot-sore, and next morning, when they
had limped six miles or so farther, Clemens telegraphed to Redpath:
“We have made thirty-five miles in less than five days.  This shows
     the thing can be done.  Shall finish now by rail.  Did you have any
     bets on us?”
He also telegraphed Howells that they were about to arrive in Boston, and
they did, in fact, reach the Howells home about nine o’clock, and found
excellent company–the Cambridge set–and a most welcome supper waiting.
Clemens and Twichell were ravenous.  Clemens demanded food immediately.
Howells writes:
“I can see him now as he stood up in the midst of our friends, with
     his head thrown back, and in his hands a dish of those scalloped
     oysters without which no party in Cambridge was really a party,
     exulting in the tale of his adventure, which had abounded in the
     most original characters and amusing incidents at every mile of
     their progress.”
The pedestrians returned to Hartford a day or two later–by train.  It
was during another, though less extended, tour which Twichell and Clemens
made that fall, that the latter got his idea for a Mississippi book.
Howells had been pleading for something for the January “Atlantic,” of
which he was now chief editor, but thus far Mark Twain’s inspiration had
failed.  He wrote at last, “My head won’t go,” but later, the same day,
he sent another hasty line.
“I take back the remark that I can’t write for the January number,
     for Twichell and I have had a long walk in the woods, and I got to
     telling him about old Mississippi days of steam-boating glory and
     grandeur as I saw them (during four years) from the pilot-house.  He
     said, ’What a virgin subject to hurl into a magazine!’  I hadn’t
     thought of that before.  Would you like a series of papers to run
     through three months, or six, or nine–or about four months, say?”
Howells wrote at once, welcoming the idea.  Clemens forthwith sent the
first instalment of that marvelous series of river chapters which rank
to-day among the very best of his work.  As pictures of the vanished
Mississippi life they are so real, so convincing, so full of charm that
they can never grow old.  As long as any one reads of the Mississippi
they will look up those chapters of Mark Twain’s piloting days.  When the
first number appeared, John Hay wrote:
“It is perfect; no more, no less.  I don’t see how you do it.”
The “Old Times” chapter ran through seven numbers of the “Atlantic,” and
show Mark Twain at his very best.  They form now most of the early
chapters of “Life on the Mississippi.”  The remainder of that book was
added about seven years later.
Those were busy literary days for Mark Twain.  Writing the river chapters
carried him back, and hardly had he finished them when he took up the
neglected story of “Tom and Huck,” and finished that under full steam.
He at first thought of publishing it in the “Atlantic”, but decided
against this plan.  He sent Howells the manuscript to read, and received
the fullest praise.  Howells wrote:
“It is altogether the best boy’s story I ever read.  It will be an
     immense success.”
Clemens, however, delayed publication.  He had another volume in press–a
collection of his sketches–among them the “Jumping Frog,” and others of
his California days.  The “Jumping Frog” had been translated into French,
and in this book Mark Twain published the French version and then a
literal retranslation of his own, which is one of the most amusing
features in the volume.  As an example, the stranger’s remark, “I don’t
see no p’ints about that frog that’s any better than any other frog,” in
the literal retranslation becomes, “I no saw not that that frog had
nothing of better than each frog,” and Mark Twain parenthetically adds,
“If that isn’t grammar gone to seed, then I count myself no judge.”
“Sketches New and Old” went very well, but the book had no such sale as
“The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,” which appeared a year later, December,
1876.  From the date of its issue it took its place as foremost of
American stories of boy life, a place that to this day it shares only
with “Huck Finn.”  Mark Twain’s own boy life in the little drowsy town of
Hannibal, with John Briggs and Tom Blankenship–their adventures in and
about the cave and river–made perfect material.  The story is full of
pure delight.  The camp on the island is a picture of boy heaven.  No boy
that reads it but longs for the woods and a camp-fire and some bacon
strips in the frying-pan.  It is all so thrillingly told and so vivid.
We know certainly that it must all have happened.  “The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer” has taken a place side by side with “Treasure Island.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
