




On my return I found Mark Twain elated: he had been invited to England to
receive the degree of Literary Doctor from the Oxford University.  It is
the highest scholastic honorary degree; and to come back, as I had, from
following the early wanderings of the barefoot truant of Hannibal, only
to find him about to be officially knighted by the world’s most venerable
institution of learning, seemed rather the most surprising chapter even
of his marvelous fairy-tale.  If Tom Sawyer had owned the magic wand, he
hardly could have produced anything as startling as that.
He sailed on the 8th of June, 1907, exactly forty years from the day he
had sailed on the “Quaker City” to win his greater fame.  I did not
accompany him.  He took with him a secretary to make notes, and my
affairs held me in America.  He was absent six weeks, and no attentions
that England had ever paid him before could compare with her lavish
welcome during this visit.  His reception was really national.  He was
banqueted by the greatest clubs of London, he was received with special
favor at the King’s garden party, he traveled by a royal train, crowds
gathering everywhere to see him pass.  At Oxford when he appeared on the
street the name Mark Twain ran up and down like a cry of fire, and the
people came running.  When he appeared on the stage at the Sheldonian
Theater to receive his degree, clad in his doctor’s robe of scarlet and
gray, there arose a great tumult–the shouting of the undergraduates for
the boy who had been Tom Sawyer and had played with Huckleberry Finn.
The papers next day spoke of his reception as a “cyclone,” surpassing any
other welcome, though Rudyard Kipling was one of those who received
degrees on that occasion, and General Booth and Whitelaw Reid, and other
famous men.
Perhaps the most distinguished social honor paid to Mark Twain at this
time was the dinner given him by the staff of London “Punch,” in the
historic “Punch” editorial rooms on Bouverie Street.  No other foreigner
had ever been invited to that sacred board, where Thackeray had sat, and
Douglas Jerrold and others of the great departed.  “Punch” had already
saluted him with a front-page cartoon, and at this dinner the original
drawing was presented to him by the editor’s little daughter, Joy Agnew.
The Oxford degree, and the splendid homage paid him by England at large,
became, as it were, the crowning episode of Mark Twain’s career.  I think
he realized this, although he did not speak of it–indeed, he had very
little to say of the whole matter.  I telephoned a greeting when I knew
that he had arrived in New York, and was summoned to “come down and play
billiards.”  I confess I went with a good deal of awe, prepared to sit in
silence and listen to the tale of the returning hero.  But when I arrived
he was already in the billiard-room, knocking the balls about–his coat
off, for it was a hot night.  As I entered, he said:
“Get your cue–I’ve been inventing a new game.”
That was all.  The pageant was over, the curtain was rung down.  Business
was resumed at the old stand.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
