




Following his birthday dinner, Mark Twain had become once more the “Belle
of New York,” and in a larger way than ever before.  An editorial in the
“Evening Mail” referred to him as a kind of joint Aristides, Solon, and
Themistocles of the American metropolis, and added:
“Things have reached a point where, if Mark Twain is not at a public
     meeting or banquet, he is expected to console it with one of his
     inimitable letters of advice and encouragement.”
He loved the excitement of it, and it no longer seemed to wear upon him.
Scarcely an evening passed that he did not go out to some dinner or
gathering where he had promised to speak.  In April, for the benefit of
the Robert Fulton Society, he delivered his farewell lecture–the last
lecture, he said, where any one would have to pay to hear him.  It was at
Carnegie Hall, and the great place was jammed.  As he stood before that
vast, shouting audience, I wondered if he was remembering that night,
forty years before in San Francisco, when his lecture career had begun.
We hoped he might speak of it, but he did not do so.
In May the dictations were transferred to Dublin, New Hampshire, to the
long veranda of the Upton House, on the Monadnock slope.  He wished to
continue our work, he said; so the stenographer and myself were presently
located in the village, and drove out each morning, to sit facing one of
the rarest views in all New England, while he talked of everything and
anything that memory or fancy suggested.  We had begun in his bedroom,
but the glorious outside was too compelling.
The long veranda was ideal.  He was generally ready when we arrived, a
luminous figure in white flannels, pacing up and down before a background
of sky and forest, blue lake, and distant hills.  When it stormed we
would go inside to a bright fire.  The dictation ended, he would ask his
secretary to play the orchestrelle, which at great expense had been
freighted up from New York.  In that high situation, the fire and the
music and the stormbeat seemed to lift us very far indeed from reality.
Certain symphonies by Beethoven, an impromptu by Schubert, and a nocturne
by Chopin were the selections he cared for most,[12] though in certain
moods he asked, for the Scotch melodies.
There was a good deal of social life in Dublin, but, the dictations were
seldom interrupted.  He became lonely, now and then, and paid a brief
visit to New York, or to Mr. Rogers in Fairhaven, but he always returned
gladly, for he liked the rest and quiet, and the dictations gave him
employment.  A part of his entertainment was a trio of kittens which he
had rented for the summer–rented because then they would not lose
ownership and would find home and protection in the fall.  He named the
kittens Sackcloth and Ashes–Sackcloth being a black-and-white kit, and
Ashes a joint name owned by the two others, who were gray and exactly
alike.  All summer long these merry little creatures played up and down
the wide veranda, or chased butterflies and grasshoppers down the clover
slope, offering Mark Twain never-ending amusement.  He loved to see them
spring into the air after some insect, miss it, tumble back, and quickly
jump up again with a surprised and disappointed expression.
In spite of his resolve not to print any of his autobiography until he
had been dead a hundred years, he was persuaded during the summer to
allow certain chapters of it to be published in “The North American
Review.”  With the price received, thirty thousand dollars, he announced
he was going to build himself a country home at Redding, Connecticut, on
land already purchased there, near a small country place of my own.  He
wished to have a fixed place to go each summer, he said, and his thought
was to call it “Autobiography House.”
[12] His special favorites were Schubert’s Op. 142, part 2, and Chopin’s
Op. 37, part 2.
Continue...

This complete text of The Boys’ Life of Mark Twain by Albert Bigelow Paine is in the public domain.


Also see: Mark Twain Documentary (DVD).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The boys' life of Mark Twain: The story of a man who made the world laugh and love himBy Albert Bigelow PaineAt Amazon
