


The history of Buddhism in China may be divided into four periods.
Buddhism entered China, as we have seen, in the second century B.C. The
first period, that of the translation and propagation of the faith,
ended in 420 A.D. The second period, that of interpenetration, lasted to
the beginning of the T’ang dynasty, 618 A.D. The third, the period of
establishment, ended with the close of the five dynasties, in 960 A.D.
The fourth period, that of decay, has extended to the present day.
There are signs of a revival of Buddhism in China. Whether this is a
tide, or a wave, only the future can reveal. In 1893 Dharmapala, an
Indian monk, stopped in Shanghai on his way back from the Congress of
Religions in Chicago. It was his purpose to make a tour of China, to
arouse the Chinese Buddhists to send missionaries to India to restore
Buddhism there, and then to start a propaganda throughout the whole
world. He addressed the monks of Shanghai. Dr. Edkins, the veteran
missionary, acted as his interpreter. Dharmapala was surrounded by a
horde of curious monks who were more interested in his strange
appearance and in the cost of his garments than they were in his great
ideals. They were also feeling the iron heel of the Confucian government
and at once inquired about the attitude of the government toward such an
innovation. Dharmapala did not go beyond Shanghai.
Japanese Buddhists, especially the members of the Hongwanji sect, have
taken a deep interest in Chinese Buddhists. Count Otani once visited the
chief monasteries of China. Numerous Japanese Buddhists have made such
visits. In 1902, the Empress Dowager, fired by a reforming zeal, decided
to confiscate Buddhist property and to use the proceeds for the spread
of modern education. The Buddhist monasteries put themselves under the
protection of Japanese monks in order to hold their property. When by
1906 the Empress Dowager saw the consequences of her edict, she at once
issued a new edict, reversing the former one, and the Japanese monks
took their departure.
The Japanese Buddhists have been fired by missionary zeal for China. In
many of the large cities of China are the temples of the Hongwanji sect.
Established primarily for the Japanese, these temples are intended to
serve as points of departure for a nation-wide missionary work. The
twenty-one demands made upon China included two significant items in the
last group which the Chinese refused to sign: “Art. 2: Japanese
hospitals, churches and schools in the interior of China shall be
granted the right of owning land.” “Art. 7: China agrees that Japanese
subjects shall have the right of missionary propaganda in China.”
Under Japanese influence there was established in 1907 at Nanking, under
the leadership of Yang, a lay Buddhist devotee, a school for the
training of Buddhist missionaries. The students were to go to Japan for
further training, and the more promising ones were to study in India.
This project was discontinued after the death of Yang on account of the
lack of funds.
When the republic was established Buddhism felt a wave of reform. The
monasteries established schools for monks and children. A magazine was
published which appeared irregularly for several numbers and then
stopped. A national organization was formed with headquarters at Peking.
A survey of monasteries was begun. The activities in lecturing and
propaganda were increased, but Yuan Shih-kai issued twenty-seven
regulations for the control of Buddhist monasteries, which markedly
dampened the ardor of the reformers.
The world war which accentuated the spirit of nationalism had the added
effect of stirring up Buddhist enthusiasm. There are at present signs of
new activity among them in China.
While Buddhism may be standing still or even dying in certain parts of
China, it is showing signs of new life in the provinces of Kiangsu and
Chekiang and in the large cities. Such revival in centers subject to the
influence of the modern world shows that Buddhism in China as in Japan
has sufficient vitality to adjust itself to modern conditions. Let us
consider some of these activities.
(a) The Reconstruction of Monasteries.–During the T’ai Ping
rebellion, which devastated China in 1850-1865, the monasteries suffered
with the towns. Not only were the monasteries burned to the ground, but
their means of support were taken away and the monks were scattered.
There are still many of these ruined monasteries in the Yangtze valley
and in southern and western China. Quite a number of them have been
rebuilt. Perhaps the most notable example is that at Changchow which was
destroyed during the rebellion. Today it is the largest monastery in
China, having about two thousand monks. In Fukien several new
monasteries have been built in the last few decades. In the provinces of
Chekiang and Kiangsu, in the large cities and about Peking there are
building activities, showing that the monasteries are feeling a new wave
of prosperity.
T’ai Hsu, one of the leaders’ of modern Buddhism, is holding up an ideal
program for Buddhism in this time of reconstruction. He proposes that
there should be 576 central monasteries, 4608 preaching places, 72
Buddhist hospitals and 72 orphanages.
(b) Accessions.–Regarding the number of monks it is almost
impossible to obtain any reliable figures. A conservative estimate,
based upon partial returns, makes the number of monks about 400,000 and
that of nuns about 10,000. The impression among the Buddhists is that
the number of monks is increasing. That is quite probable in view of the
rebuilding and repairing which is now in progress.
More significant is the number of accessions from the learned class.
Many officials, disheartened by the present confused political
situation, have sought refuge in the monasteries. Some of them are now
abbots of monasteries and are using their influence to build them up.
All over China there are Confucian scholars who are giving themselves to
the study of Buddhism and to meditation. Some of the Chinese students
who have studied in Buddhist universities in Japan are propagating
Buddhism by lecture and pen.
(c) Publications.–Quite as significant is the increase in the
publication of Buddhist literature of all kinds. Many of the monasteries
have printing departments where they publish the sutras needed for their
own use. In addition, there are eight or more publishing centers where
Buddhist literature is printed. The most famous are Yang’s establishment
at Nanking, the Buddhist Press in Yangchow and that in Peking. In these
establishments about nine hundred different works are being published.
The most noteworthy recent publication has been that of the Chinese
Buddhist Tripitaka in Shanghai.
Among these publications are a few modern issues. The Chung Hua Book
Company has published several works on Buddhism. Other books have been
issued for the sake of harmonizing Buddhism with western science and
philosophy. In this enterprise Japanese influence is visible. In 1921 a
Shanghai press published a dictionary of Buddhist terms containing 3302
pages, based on the Japanese Dictionary of Buddhism. Other works also
show the influence of Japanese scholarship.
Among the publications have appeared two magazines. One published at
Ningpo, is called “New Buddhism.” This is struggling and may have to
succumb. The other is known as the “Sound of the Sea Tide,” now
published in Hankow. Moreover, in all the large cities there are
Buddhist bookshops where only Buddhist works are sold. These all report
a good business. This literary activity reveals an interest among the
reading classes of China. Few such books are purchased by the monks. The
Chinese scholars read them for their style and for their deep
philosophy, but also for light and for help in the present distracting
political situation of their country.
(d) Lectures.–Along with publication goes the spread of Buddhism
by lectures in the monasteries and the cities of China. A few years ago
Buddhist sermons, however serious, were only listened to by monks and by
a few pious devotees. Today such addresses are advertised and are
usually well attended by the intellectuals. Often many women are found
listening. Monks like T’ai Hsü and Yuan Ying have a national reputation.
Not only monks, but laymen trained in Japan are delivering lectures on
the Buddhist sutras. The favorites are the Awakening of Faith and the
Suddharma Pundarika sutra.
(e) Buddhist Societies.–With the lectures goes the organization
of Buddhist societies for all sorts of purposes. There is a central
society in Peking which has branches in every province. The connection
is rather loose. Buddhism has never been in favor of centralization. Nor
for that matter would the government have allowed it. The chief ends
aimed at by these societies are fellowship, devotion, study,
propagation, and service. Such societies, often short lived, are
springing up in many quarters. They meet for lectures on Buddhism or to
conduct a study class in some of the sutras. Occasionally the more
ambitious conduct an institute for several months. Some spend part of
the time in meditation together. Several schools for children are
supported by these societies. They also encourage work of a religious
nature among prisoners, distributing tracts and holding services. Such
activities are especially appreciated by those who are to suffer the
death penalty. The societies are also doing publishing work. The two
magazines are supported by the members of the larger societies.
(f) Signs of Social Ambition.–Social work is a prominent feature
of some of these Buddhist societies. They have raised money for famine
stricken regions, have opened orphanages, and assist in Red Cross work.
One of the largest Chinese institutions for ministering to people who
are sick and in trouble is located at Hankow. Around a central Buddhist
temple is a modern-built hospital, an orphanage and several schools for
poor children. It may not maintain western standards of efficiency, but
it certainly represents the outreach of modern Buddhism.
Perhaps their most far-reaching advance has been made because of the
realization that leaders are needed and that they must be trained.
Several schools for this purpose have sprung into existence. Such
schools are necessarily very primitive and are struggling with the
difficulties of finding an adequate staff and equipment and of obtaining
the best type of students.
Another sign of new life has been the making of programs for the future
development of Buddhism. One of the most comprehensive appeared a short
time ago. For the individual it proposes the cultivation of love, mercy,
equality, freedom, progressiveness, an established faith, patience and
endurance. For all men it proposes (1) an education according to
capacity; (2) a trade suited to ability; (3) an opportunity to develop
one’s powers; (4) a chance for enlightenment for all. For society it
urges the cultivation of cooperation, social service, sacrifice for the
social weal, and the social consciousness in the individual. On behalf
of the country it urges patriotism, participation in the government, and
cooperation in international movements. For the world it advocates
universal progress. As to the universe it specifies as a goal the
bringing of men into harmony with spiritual realities, the enlightenment
of all and the realization of the spiritual universe.
A Buddhist writer sums up the aims of new Buddhism as follows:
“Formerly Buddhism desired to escape the sinful world. Today Buddhism
not only desires to escape this world of sin, but longs to transform
this world of sin into a new world dominated by the ideals of Buddhism.
Formerly Buddhism was occupied with erecting and perfecting its
doctrines and polity as an organization. Today it not only hopes to
perfect the doctrines and polity, but desires to spread the doctrines
and ideals abroad so as to help mankind to become truly cultured.”
Not only the Chinese Buddhists, but the Lamas of Mongolia and Tibet are
feeling the impulses of the new age. Quite recently an exhibition was
held in the Lama temple at Peking which attracted thousands of visitors.
Its object was to obtain money to repair the temple, and thus to give
its work a fresh impulse. That these impulses are not necessarily
hostile to Christianity is shown by a letter written by the Kurung
Tsering Lama of Kokonor district to the Rev. T. Sörensen of Szechuan:
“I, your humble servant, have seen several copies of the Scriptures and,
having read them carefully, they certainly made me believe in Christ. I
understand a little of the outstanding principles and the doctrinal
teaching of the One Son, but as to the Holy Spirit’s nature and essence,
and as to the origin of this religion, I am not at all clear, and it is
therefore important that the doctrinal principles of this religion
should be fully explained, so as to enlighten the unintelligent and
people of small mental ability.
“The teaching of the science of medicine and astrology is also very
important. It is therefore evident if we want this blessing openly
manifested, we must believe in the religion of the only Son of God.
Being in earnest, I therefore pray you from my heart not to consider
this letter lightly. With a hundred salutations.”
Enclosed with this letter was a poem written in most elegant language.
“O thou Supreme God and most precious Father, The truth above all
religions, The Ruler of all animate and inanimate worlds! Greater than
wisdom, separated from birth and death, Is his son Christ the Lord
shining in glory among endless beings. Incomprehensible wonder,
miraculously made! In this teaching I myself also believe–As your
spirit is with heaven united, My soul undivided is seeking the truth
Jesus the Savior’s desire fulfilling, For the coming of the Kingdom of
Heaven I am praying. Happiness to all.”
Looking back over the last twenty-five years we see rising quite
distinctly a Buddhist world growing conscious of itself, of its past
history and of its mission to the world. This Buddhist, world has much
more of a program than it had twenty-five years ago. Its object is to
unite the Mahayâna and the Hînayâna branches of Buddhism and to spread
Buddhist propaganda over the world. At present the leadership of this
movement is in Japan. It is in part a political movement. There is no
question that Christianity is not at all pleasing to the Japanese
militarists. It is regarded by them as the advance post of western
industrialism and political ambition. Quite naturally such leaders
desire to make the Buddhist world a unit. It is also a social movement.
The spirit of the Japanese Buddhist has been brought to consciousness by
the new position of Japan. Japan is seeking to take its place in the
world as a first rate power. By this not only will Japan’s industry and
commerce profit, but its spiritual values must also be adapted to the
world. The movement then has its spiritual side. Japanese travelers and
people are going to all parts of the world. They carry with them the
religious ideals which have been shaped by Buddhism. Buddhism in the
past was one of the great religions of salvation with an inspiring
missionary message. It is again awakening to this task of
evangelization. Under the leadership of Japanese scholars and religious
statesmen the Japanese are seeking to unite the Buddhist world so that
it shall become a force in the new world. Japan is thus trying to give
back what it has received in the past.
At present in Buddhist countries there is a strong force working against
this movement. Nationalism is a new force to be reckoned with. Still
even with the spirit of nationalism permeating every group, the Buddhist
world is getting together and will strive to make its contribution to
the life of the whole world.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
