


This volume is the third to be published of a series on “The World’s
Living Religions,” projected in 1920 by the Board of Missionary
Preparation of the Foreign Missions Conference of North America. The
series seeks to introduce Western readers to the real religious life of
each great national area of the non-Christian world.
Buddhism is a religion which must be viewed from many angles. Its
original form, as preached by Gautama in India and developed in the
early years succeeding, and as embodied in the sacred literature of
early Buddhism, is not representative of the actual Buddhism of any land
today. The faithful student of Buddhist literature would be as far
removed from understanding the working activities of a busy center of
Buddhism in Burmah, Tibet or China today as a student of patristic
literature would be from appreciating the Christian life of London or
New York City.
Moreover Buddhism, like Christianity, has been affected by national
conditions. It has developed at least three markedly different types,
requiring, therefore, as many distinct volumes of this series for its
fair interpretation and presentation. The volume on the Buddhism of
Southern Asia by Professor Kenneth J. Saunders was published in May,
1923; this volume on the Buddhism of China by Professor Hodous will be
the second to appear; a third on the Buddhism of Japan, to be written by
Dr. R. C. Armstrong, will be published in 1924. Each of these is needed
in order that the would be student of Buddhism as practiced in those
countries should be given a true, impressive and friendly picture of
what he will meet.
A missionary no less than a professional student of Buddhism needs to
approach that religion with a real appreciation of what it aims to do
for its people and does do. No one can come into contact with the best
that Buddhism offers without being impressed by its serenity, assurance
and power.
Professor Hodous has written this volume on Buddhism in China out of the
ripe experience and continuing studies of sixteen years of missionary
service in Foochow, the chief city of Fukien Province, China, one of the
important centers of Buddhism. His local studies were supplemented by
the results of broader research and study in northern China. No other
available writer on the subject has gone so far as he in reproducing the
actual thinking of a trained Buddhist mind in regard to the fundamentals
of religion. At the same time he has taken pains to exhibit and to
interpret the religious life of the peasant as affected by Buddhism. He
has sought to be absolutely fair to Buddhism, but still to express his
own conviction that the best that is in Buddhism is given far more
adequate expression in Christianity.
The purpose of each volume in this series is impressionistic rather than
definitely educational. They are not textbooks for the formal study of
Buddhism, but introductions to its study. They aim to kindle interest
and to direct the activity of the awakened student along sound lines.
For further study each volume amply provides through directions and
literature in the appendices. It seeks to help the student to
discriminate, to think in terms of a devotee of Buddhism when he
compares that religion with Christianity. It assumes, however, that
Christianity is the broader and deeper revelation of God and the world
of today.
Buddhism in China undoubtedly includes among its adherents many
high-minded, devout, and earnest souls who live an idealistic life.
Christianity ought to make a strong appeal to such minds, taking from
them none of the joy or assurance or devotion which they possess, but
promoting a deeper, better balanced interpretation of the active world,
a nobler conception of God, a stronger sense of sinfulness and need, and
a truer idea of the full meaning of incarnation and revelation.
It is our hope that this fresh contribution to the understanding of
Buddhism as it is today may be found helpful to readers everywhere.
The Editors.
New York city,
December, 1923.
The Committee of Reference and Counsel of the Foreign Missions
Conference of North America has authorized the publication of this
series. The author of each volume is alone responsible for the opinions
expressed, unless otherwise stated.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
