


Near the House of Parliament in Peking is located a small monastery
dedicated to the goddess of Mercy, Kuan Yin. Before her image the
incense burners send forth curling clouds of smoke. The walls are
decorated with old paintings of gods and goddesses. The temple with its
courtyard has the appearance of prosperity. Its neat reception room,
with its tables, chairs and clock, shows the influence of the modern
world.
Here a monk in the prime of life spent a few months recently lecturing
on Buddhism to members of parliament and to scholars from various parts
of China. Frequently the writer used to drop in of an afternoon to
discuss Buddhism and its outlook. Usually a simple repast concluded
these conversations, the substance of which forms the greater part of
this section.
“What does Buddhism do for men?”
“There are in the world at least three classes of men. The lowest class
live among material things, they are occupied with possessions. Their
life is entangled in the crude and coarse materials which they regard as
real. A second, higher class, regard ideas as realities. They are not
entangled in the maze of things, but are confused by ideas, ascribing
reality to them. The third and highest class are those who by meditation
have freed themselves from the thraldom of ideas and can enter the
sixteen heavens.”
“What can Buddhism do for the lowest class?”
“For this class Buddhism has the ten prohibitions. Every man has in him
ten evils, which must be driven out. Three have to do with evil in the
body, namely, not to steal, not to kill, not to commit adultery; four
belong to the mouth, lying, exaggeration, abuse, and ambiguous talk;
three belong to the mind, covetousness, malice, and unbelief.”
“Is not this entirely negative?”
“Yes, but it is necessary, for during the process of eliminating these
evil deeds, man acquires patience and equanimity. Buddhism does not stop
with the prohibitions. The believer must practice the ten charitable
deeds. Not only must he remove the desire to kill living beings, but he
must cultivate the desire to save all beings. Not only must he not
steal, but he must assist men with his money. Not only must he not give
himself to lasciviousness, but he must treat all men with propriety. So
each prohibition involves a positive impulse to virtue, which is quite
as essential as the refraining from evil.”
“What energizing power does Buddhism provide?”
“First, is purgatory with its terrors. The evil man, seeing the
consequences of his acts upon himself, becomes afraid to do them and
does that which is good. Then there is transmigration with the danger of
transmigration into beasts and insects. Again, there are the rewards in
the paradise of Amitâbha. Moreover, there is even the possibility not
only of saving one’s self, but by accumulated merit of saving one’s
parents and relatives and shortening their stay in purgatory.”
“Can any man enter the western paradise of Amitâbha?”
“Yes, it is open to all men. The sutra says: ’If there be any one who
commits evil deeds, and even completes the ten evil actions, the five
deadly sins and the like; that man, being himself stupid and guilty of
many crimes, deserves to fall into a miserable path of existence and
suffer endless pains during many long ages. On the eve of death he may
meet a good and learned teacher who, soothing and encouraging him in
various ways, will preach to him the excellent Law and teach him the
remembrance of Buddha, but being harassed by pains’, he will have no
time to think of Buddha.’”
“What hope has such a man?”
“Even such a man has hope. The sutra says: ’Some good friend will say to
him: Even if thou canst not exercise the remembrance of Buddha, utter
the name of Buddha Amitabha.’ Let him do so serenely with his voice
uninterrupted; let him be (continually) thinking of Buddha, until he has
completed ten times the thought, repeating ’Namah O-mi-to-fo,’ I put my
trust in Buddha! On the strength of (his merit of) uttering Buddha’s
name he will, during every repetition expiate the sins which involve him
in births and deaths during eighty millions of long ages. He will, while
dying, see a golden lotus-flower, like the disk of the sun, appearing
before his eyes; in a moment he will be born in the world of highest
happiness. After twelve greater ages the lotus-flower will unfold;
thereupon the Bodhisattvas, Avalôkitësvaras and Mahasattva’s, raising
their voices in great compassion, will preach to him in detail the real
state of all the elements of nature and the law of the expiation of
sins.”
“Does faith save such a man?”
“Yes, not his own faith, but the faith which prompted the vow of
Amitabha. Amitâbha’s faith in the possibility of his salvation gives him
supreme confidence that he will attain salvation. All he needs is to
have the desire to be born in that paradise and to repeat the name of
Amitabha.”
“How do those of the second class attain salvation?”
“The men of the second class regard ideas as realities. They are not
entangled in the maze of things, but are confused by ideas, regarding
them as real. These men do not need images and outward sanctions, but
they need heaven and purgatory though regarding them as ideas. By
performing the ten good deeds they will obtain a quiet heart, having no
fear, and become saints and sages. Among men, saints and sages occupy a
high rank, but not so among Buddhists. By merit of good works merely
they enter the planes of sensuous desire, the six celestial worlds
located immediately above the earth.”
“And the third class?”
“This class has many ranks. There are those who by the practice of
meditation (four
dkyanas)* can
enter the sixteen heavens conditioned by form. By the practice of the
four arûpa-dhyânas** they enter the four
highest heavens free from all sensuous desires and not conditioned by
form. These heavens are the anteroom of Nirvana.”

*Dhyana means contemplation. In later times under the influence of the idea of transmigration heavens
were imagined which corresponded to the degrees of contemplation.
**That degree of abstract contemplation from which all sensations are absent.

“What is the driving power in all this?”
“It is vîrya or energy.”
“Do heaven and purgatory exist?”
“Heaven and purgatory are in the minds and hearts of men. Really heaven
is in the mind of Amitâbha and purgatory exists in the illusioned brains
of men.”
“Does anything exist?”
“Nâgârjuna says: ’There is no production, no destruction, no
annihilation, no persistence, no unity, no plurality, no coming in and
no going forth.’”
“Does sin exist?”
“In the mind of the real Buddhist sin and virtue are different aspects
of the all. Sin is illusion; virtue is illusion, There is a higher unity
in which they are reconciled.”
“Do you know of any one who attained Nirvâna?”
“Yes, I have experienced it. It is not a state beyond the grave. It is a
state into which one can enter here.”
“Can you express this experience in words?”
“Impossible. I can only indicate the shore of this great ocean. At first
I was in great distress and agony, as though carrying the illusions of
the world. Then came a great peace and calm, ineffable, serene, and
surpassing the power of language to express.”
“What is behind this universe!”
“Underlying this universe of phenomena and change there is a unity. It
is the basis of all being. It is within all being and all being rests in
it. It is because of this common background that men are able to
apprehend it. This universal basis we call dharma, or law. Its
characteristics are that everything born grows old, is subject to
disease and death; that the teachings of Buddha purify the mind and
enable it to obtain supreme enlightenment; that all Buddhas by treading
the same way of perfection will attain the highest freedom.”
“You speak of the Buddhist Trinity.”
“Yes, we have the Dharmakâya. This is the essence-body, the ground of
all being, taking many forms, Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, spirits, angels,
men and even demons. It is impersonal, all-pervasive. It may be called
the first person. The second person is the Sambhogakâya, the body of
bliss. This is the heavenly manifestation of Buddha. The third person is
the Nirmânakâya. This is the projection of the body of bliss on earth.”
Some identify this trinity with that of the Christian faith. While there
is a resemblance, we should note that the first person of the Buddhist
trinity would correspond to God as the absolute or the impersonal
background of universal Being. The second corresponds to the glorified
Christ and the third to the historic Jesus. There is no counterpart
either to God the Father or to the Holy Spirit.
“Do you believe in the salvation of all beings?”
“Yes, all have the Buddha heart. All living beings will finally become
Buddhas.”
Then turning to a friend of mine the speaker said: “What have you done
in Buddhism?” The friend answered: “I have written and translated many
books.” “I do not mean that,” he answered. “What work have you
done?” The friend confessed that he had not done much else. Then he
said: “Every morning when you awake, reflect deeply and profoundly upon
your state before you were born. Think back to that state where your
soul was merged with Buddha. Find yourself in that state and you will
find ineffable enlightenment and joy.”
The sun was setting behind the Western hills. The blare of trumpets
sounded on the city wall. Outside of the door was the whirling sound of
Peking returning home from its mundane tasks and joys. We joined the
rushing, restless crowd and still we felt the calm of another world. Has
not Christianity a message of balm and peace for these sons of the East
who are so sensitive to the touch of the eternal and sublime?
An important government official obliged to deal with many vexatious
requests and demands declared: “I could not get through my day’s work,
if I did not spend an hour every day in meditation, just as Buddha did
when he became enlightened.” He was asked what he did when he meditated
or prayed. “Nothing at all.” “Well, about what do you think?” “Of
nothing at all. I stop thinking when I engage in religious meditation.
Life makes me think too much. I should lose my sanity, if I did not stop
thinking and enter into the ’void’, whence we all came and into which we
all are going to drop back.”
His Christian inquirer still was unsatisfied by the Buddhist’s
description of his prayer life, and pressed further for details. “What
happens when you meditate or pray?”
“Nothing happens, I tell you, except, that I experience a peace which
the passing world cannot give and which the passing world cannot
altogether take away. The secret of religion is simply to realize that
everything is passing away. When you accept that fact, then you become
really free. The Christian world seemed to have been tremendously
impressed by the slogan of the French soldiers at Verdun, ’They shall
not pass!’ Perhaps the German soldiers did not pass just then or there.
But the French soldiers themselves are all passing away. And everything
in the world is passing away. What our Buddhist religion teaches us is:
’Let it pass!’ You cannot keep anything for very long. And prayer or
meditation is simply to practice yourself in that thought deliberately.
Oh, it is a wonderful peace when you fully believe that gospel, and
enter into it every day. Vanity of vanities, everything is vanity! Why
worry? We do altogether too much worrying. To pray means simply to quit
worrying, to quit thinking, to enter into the indescribably passionless
peace of Nirvana.”
Here seemed to be an ardent Buddhist. When asked what he thought as the
difference between a Buddhist and a Christian, he answered promptly:
“Yes, there is my wife. She is a very good woman. All the neighbors come
to her, when there is any one sick or in trouble. So I say to her:
’Wife, I should think you would make a first-class Christian.’ But I
think she lets herself be worried by altogether too many troubles. She
is all the time thinking and fussing and planning. To be sure, it is
mostly about other people, But then she does have the children and the
house and the relatives and friends and neighbors to look after. Perhaps
she really cannot be a Buddhist. Perhaps it is all a matter of
temperament. Oh, but I tell you it is great to be a Buddhist, because it
gives you such a wonderful peace.”
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
