


Before the advent of Buddhism the Chinese had only a vague idea
regarding life after death. The Land and Water Classic mentions the Tu
Shuo mountain in the Eastern Sea, under which spirits of the dead live,
the entrance guarded by two spirits, Shên Tu and Yü Lei, who are in
general control of the demons. In some parts of China the names or
pictures, of these spirits are placed on the doors of a house to guard
it. The Taoists early developed the idea of a western paradise presided
over by the Queen of the West, located at first in the K’un Lun
mountains and later in the islands of the Eastern Sea. This heaven,
however, was limited to Taoist hermits and mystics. Buddhism made a
complete purgatory and heaven known to every one in China.
This is really Buddhism’s most noteworthy addition to China’s religious
equipment; Buddhism lays much stress upon the experiences of a soul
immediately after death. Its punishments are well known to every
individual. The temple of the City Guardian found in every walled city
has a replica of the court in purgatory over which he presides. In the
temples of T’ai Shan there is an elaborate exhibit of the tortures
inflicted on culprits in purgatory. Every funeral service conducted by
Buddhists or Taoists is intended to conduct the soul of the dead through
purgatory and pictures vividly the progressive experiences from the
first seventh day to the seventh seventh day. On the the seventh month,
on the fifteenth day [about August] a special service is held for the
souls of the dead in purgatory. Furthermore, every community has a
general service [about October] for the souls of those who died a
violent death or who have no one to look after them. During the war many
services were thus held for those who died on the battlefields of
Europe. At such services the scenes in purgatory are vividly portrayed
by pictures and figures. The temples distribute tracts with pictures of
purgatory so that women may see them and understand. On the stage are
often acted powerful plays whose scenes are laid in Hades. This
propaganda is perhaps the most efficient of its kind.
Purgatory is depicted as consisting of ten courts each surrounded by
small hells, where the soul undergoes punishment and cleansing. The
fifth court, which may be taken as an example of the other courts, is in
charge of Yen Lo or Yama. Yama was once in charge of the first court,
but his tender heart pitied the souls who came before him and sent them
back to earth. Because of this leniency he was placed in charge of the
fifth court.
When a soul has passed through the first four courts and it has been
discovered that there is no good conduct to its credit, it is led to the
fifth court and examined every seven days regarding past conduct. In
order to get back to the world of men, it eagerly promises to complete
various unfinished vows, such as to repair monasteries, schools,
bridges, or roads, to clean wells, to deepen rivers, to distribute good
books, to release animals, to take care of aged parents, or to bury them
suitably. But it is plainly told that the gods know its artifices, and
that now these unfinished tasks can never be completed. The gods have
reached the unanimous opinion that no injustice is being done.
Accordingly there is no appeal, but each soul is led by attendants with
bulls’ heads and horses’ faces to a tower whence they may see their
native village. Its front is in the shape of a bow with a perimeter of
twenty-seven miles; its height is four hundred and ninety feet. It is
guarded by walls of sword trees.
Good men, whose deeds of omission are balanced by the good they have
done, return to life. Only souls judged to be evil see their village
from this tower. These can see their own families moving about, and can
hear their conversation. They realize how they disobeyed the teachings
of their elders. They see that the earthly goods for which they have
struggled are of no value. Their plottings rise up with lurid reality.
They see how they planned a new marriage although already married, how
they appropriated fields, state property, and falsified accounts,
putting the blame on persons who were dead. While they observe their
village they behold their erstwhile friends touch their coffin and
inwardly rejoice. They hear themselves called selfish and insincere. But
their punishment does not stop here. They behold their children punished
by magistrates, their women afflicted with strange diseases, their
daughters ravished, their sons led astray, their property taken away,
the ancestral house burned and their business ruined. From this tower
all passes before them as a lurid dream and they are stricken in heart.
About the fifth court are sixteen small hells where the soul is
punished. In each one are stakes buried in the ground and fierce
animals. The hands and feet of the guilty one are bound to a stake, his
body is opened with small knives, and his heart and intestines quickly
devoured.
In each of these sixteen hells is a certain type of sinner: (1) Those
who do not reverence the gods and demons and who doubt the existence of
rewards and punishments; (2) those who hurt and kill living beings; (3)
those who break their vows to do good; (4) those who resort to heterodox
practices and vainly hope to attain eternal life; (5) those who upbraid
good men, fear the wicked and hate men because they do not die speedily;
(6) those who strive with other people and then put the blame upon them;
(7) men who force women; and women who seduce young men, and all who
have libidinous desires; (8) those who gain profit for themselves by
injuring others; (9) the stingy and those who absolutely disregard
others, whether alive or dead, giving them no help in dire need, when
they can do so without injury to themselves; (10) those who steal and
put the crime upon others; (11) those who requite favors with hate; (12)
those whose hearts are perverse and poisonous, who instigate others to
do wrong even if they may not have carried out their suggestion; (13)
those who tempt others by deceit; (14) those who involve others in their
squabbles and in gambling and then themselves win out; (15) those who
stubbornly persist in their false ideas, do not repent, and slander
others; (16) those who hate good and virtuous men.
Besides these sixteen sorts of sinners the fifth court deals with other
types of wicked people; those who do not believe in rewards and
punishments after death, who hinder good causes, who burn incense
without a sincere heart, speak of the sins of others, who burn books
that urge men to be good and worship the Great Dipper, but persist in
eating meat; those who hate men; who repeat sutras and incantations, and
take part in religious ceremonies, but do not fast beforehand; who
slander the Buddhist and Taoist religions; who know how to read, but
refuse to read the ancient and modern exhortations regarding rewards and
punishments; who dig into graves and destroy their marks, who purposely
set fire to trees and underbrush, or are careless with fire in their own
houses; who shoot arrows at animals with the intent, to kill; who urge
and tempt the sick and weak to enter into contests of any kind with
themselves; who throw tiles and stones over neighboring walls, poison
fish in the river, fire guns, or make nets or traps for birds; who sow
salt on the ground, who do not bury dead eats and snakes very deep and
thus cause death to those who dig; who cause men to dig the frozen
ground in winter or spring (the vapors of earth chill such diggers to
death); who tear down adjoining walls and compel their neighbors to move
the kitchen stove; who appropriate public highways, lands, close wells
and stop gutters.
Those who have committed any of the above sins are taken, to the tower
whence they can see their own village and then are consigned to the
great crying hell, Râurava, that is, the fourth of the Buddhist hot
hells.* Thence they go to
their respective small hells. When their time has expired, they are
examined in order to see whether they have any other sins which need
punishment.
*Buddhism distinguishes hot and cold hells. In a
country like India severe cold is a serious torture.
Those who have committed any of the above sins may not only escape
punishment, but may have their punishment in the sixth court lessened,
if they fast regularly on the eighth day of the first month and take a
vow not to commit these sins. Some sins, however, cannot be arranged for
in such a way, such as the killing of living beings and hurting them;
the associating with heretics; committing fornication with women and
then poisoning them; committing adultery, violence, envy, or injuring
the good name of others; stealing, requiting favors with hatred, and
hearing exhortation but not repenting. These are major sins.
The social value of purgatory is quite plain from the description of the
fifth court and of the sinners who are punished therein. Purgatory is
the social mirror of China, wherein the consequences of all unsocial
acts are pictured in such a vivid way as to deter the individual from
committing them. It is effective in China, not only because of the
realistic presentation, but because the opinion of the community is
against such acts and in favor of repressing them on every occasion.
Buddhism brought into China not only a fully developed purgatory but
also a heaven which all may enter. The sovereign of the western heaven
is Amitâbha (or in Chinese O-mi-to-fo), with whom Kuan Yin, the goddess
of Mercy, is usually associated. Amitâbha is explained as meaning
“boundless age.” The original meaning is “boundless light,” which
suggests a Persian origin with Mannichean influences. The translations
of the Amitâbha sutras were wholly made by natives of central Asia.
Amitâbha is one of the thousand Buddhas; he is regarded as the reflex of
Sakyamuni and is connected also in his earthly incarnation with a monk
called Dharmâkara. This monk desired to become a Buddha. This wish he
presented to Lôkês’vararâja asking him to teach him as to what a Buddha
and a Buddha country ought to be. Lôkês’vararâja imparted this
knowledge. Then the monk after meditation returned having made
forty-eight vows that he would not become a Buddha, until all living
beings should attain salvation in his heaven.
The eighteenth vow expresses his ideal:
“O Bhagavat, if those beings who have directed their thought towards the
highest perfect knowledge in other worlds, and who, after having heard
my name, when I have obtained Bodhi (knowledge), have meditated on me
with serene thoughts; if at the moment of their death, after having
approached them surrounded by an assembly of monks, I should not stand
before them worshipped by them, that is, so that their thoughts should
not be troubled, then may I not obtain the highest perfect knowledge.”
A few extracts from the Amitâbha Vyûha Sûtra will illustrate the
Buddhist idea of life in this Pure Land:
“In the western region beyond one hundred thousand myriads of Buddhist
lands there is a world. Great Happiness by name. This land has a Buddha
called Amitâbha. The living beings there do not suffer any pain, but
enjoy all happiness. Therefore, it is called the land of Pure Delight
... the land of Pure Delight has seven precious fountains full of water
containing the eight virtues. The bottom of these fountains is covered
with golden sand. On four sides there are steps made of gold, silver,
crystal and glass, precious stones, red pearls, and highly polished
agates. In the pools are variously colored, light emitting lotus flowers
as large as cart wheels, delicate, admirable, odorous and pure...”
“The Buddha of this land makes heavenly music. It is covered with gold.
Morning and evening during six hours it rains the wonderful celestial
flowers (Erythrina Indica). All the inhabitants of this land on clear
mornings after dressing offer these celestial flowers to the hundred
thousand myriads of Buddhas of the regions who return to their country
at meal time. When they have eaten they go away again.”
“This country possesses every kind of wonderful varicolored birds, the
white egret, the peacock, the parrot, the s’rarika (a long legged bird),
the Kalavingka (a sweet voiced bird) ... All these birds, morning and
evening during the six hours, utter forth a beautiful harmonious sound.
Their song produces the five indrya (roots of faith, energy,
memory, ecstatic meditation, wisdom), the five bala (the powers
of faith, energy, memory, meditation and wisdom), the seven
bodhyanga (the seven degrees of intelligence, memory,
discrimination, energy, tranquillity, ecstatic contemplation,
indifference), and the eight portions of the correct path marga,
(the possession of correct views, decision and purity of thought and
will, the ability of reproducing any sound uttered in the universe, vow
of poverty, asceticism, attainment of meditative abstraction of
self-control, religious recollectedness, honesty and virtue), and such
doctrines. When all beings of this land have heard the music, they
declare their faithfulness to the Buddha, Dharma and the Sangha (the
Buddha, the Law and the community of monks).”
As to those who enter this land it says:
“All living beings who hear this should make a vow to be born in that
land. How can they reach the Pure Land? All very good men will gather in
that place ... He whose blessedness and virtue are great can be born
into that country. If there is a good man or woman who, on hearing of
Amitâbha, takes this name and holds it in his mind one, two, three,
four, five, six, or seven days, and his whole heart is not distracted,
to that man at death Amitâbha will appear. His heart will not be
disturbed. He will at once enter into life in the land of Pure Delight
of Amitâbha. I see this blessing and hence utter these words. Those
living beings who hear these words should make a vow to be born in that
land.”
The extension of life beyond the grave in purgatory, or in the Pure Land
and through transmigration was readily accepted in China. Both the new
ideas and the disciplines through which to realize them were eagerly
adopted, and have held their place to this day. In other lands the
creation of a heaven and a hades has weakened the grip of ancestor
worship and ultimately displaced it. In China the opposite result has
obtained, due, no doubt, to the fact that the family system and along
with it the supreme duty of filial piety were fostered by the state and
Buddhism and its teachings were permitted only in so far as they
bolstered it up. Another reason lies in the agricultural basis of
China’s civilization, reenforced by the great difficulty of
communication, which tended to make the family system dominant in China.
Today, the improvement of communication and the introduction of the
industrial system of the West with the individual emphasis of modern
education are factors which are weakening the family system and with it
ancestral worship.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
