


Buddhism was not an indigenous religion of China. Its, founder was
Gautama of India in the sixth century B.C. Some centuries later it found
its way into China by way of central Asia. There is a tradition that as
early as 142 B.C. Chang Ch’ien, an ambassador of the Chinese emperor, Wu
Ti, visited the countries of central Asia, where he first learned about
the new religion which was making such headway and reported concerning
it to his master. A few years later the generals of Wu Ti captured a
gold image of the Buddha which the emperor set up in his palace and
worshiped, but he took no further steps.
According to Chinese historians Buddhism was officially recognized in
China about 67 A.D. A few years before that date, the emperor, Ming-Ti,
saw in a dream a large golden image with a halo hovering above his
palace. His advisers, some of whom were no doubt already favorable to
the new religion, interpreted the image of the dream to be that of
Buddha, the great sage of India, who was inviting his adhesion.
Following their advice the emperor sent an embassy to study into
Buddhism. It brought back two Indian monks and a quantity of Buddhist
classics. These were carried on a white horse and so the monastery which
the emperor built for the monks and those who came after them was called
the White Horse Monastery. Its tablet is said to have survived to this
day.
This dream story is worth repeating because it goes to show that
Buddhism was not only known at an early date, but was favored at the
court of China. In fact, the same history which relates the dream
contains the biography of an official who became an adherent of Buddhism
a few years before the dream took place. This is not at all surprising,
because an acquaintance with Buddhism was the inevitable concomitant of
the military campaigning, the many embassies and the wide-ranging trade
of those centuries. But the introduction of Buddhism into China was
especially promoted by reason of the current policy of the Chinese
government of moving conquered populations in countries west of China
into China proper, The vanquished peoples brought their own religion
along with them. At one time what is now the province of Shansi was
populated in this way by the Hsiung-nu, many of whom were Buddhists.
The introduction and spread of Buddhism were hastened by the decline of
Confucianism and Taoism. The Han dynasty (206 B. C.-221 A. D.)
established a government founded on Confucianism. It reproduced the
classics destroyed in the previous dynasty and encouraged their study;
it established the state worship of Confucius; it based its laws and
regulations upon the ideals and principles advocated by Confucius. The
great increase of wealth and power under this dynasty led to a gradual
deterioration in the character of the rulers and officials. The sigid
Confucian regulations became burdensome to the people who ceased to
respect their leaders. Confucianism lost its hold as the complete
solution of the problems of life. At the same time Taoism had become a
veritable jumble of meaningless and superstitious rites which served to
support a horde of ignorant, selfish priests. The high religious ideals
of the earlier Taoist mystics were abandoned for a search after the
elixir of life during fruitless journeys to the isles of the Immortals
which were supposed to be in the Eastern Sea.
At this juncture there arose in North China a sect of men called the
Purists who advocated a return from the vagaries of Taoism and the
irritating rules of Confucianism to the simple life practised by the
Taoist mystics. When these thoughtful and earnest minded men came into
contact with Buddhism they were captivated by it. It had all they were
claiming for Taoist mysticism and more. They devoted their literary
ability and religious fervor to the spreading of the new religion and
its success was in no small measure due to their efforts. As a result of
this early association the tenets of the two religions seemed so much
alike that various emperors called assemblies of Buddhists and Taoists
with the intention of effecting a union of the two religions into one.
If the emperor was under the influence of Buddhism he tried to force all
Taoists to become Buddhists. If he was favorable to Taoism he tried to
make all Buddhists become Taoists.
But such mandates were as unsuccessful as other similar schemes have
been. In the third century A. D. after the Han dynasty had ended, China
was broken up into several small kingdoms which contended for supremacy,
so that for about four hundred years the whole country was in a state of
disunion. One of the strong dynasties of this period, the Northern Wei
(386-535 A. D.), was distinctly loyal to Buddhism. During its
continuance Buddhism prospered greatly. Although Chinese were not
permitted to become monks until 335 A. D., still Buddhism made rapid
advances and in the fourth century, when that restriction was removed,
about nine-tenths of the people of northwestern China had become
Buddhists. Since then Buddhism has been an established factor in Chinese
life.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
