


In order that, one may realize the place that Buddhism holds in the
religious life of the Chinese people as a whole, he must turn to the
organizations through which it functions. It is sometimes difficult to
estimate the place of Buddhism in China, because it so interpenetrates
the whole cultural and social life of the people. It becomes their
“way.” To see how it touches the life of the average man or woman in
various ways will, therefore, be illuminating. The most outstanding
evidence of devotion are the many monasteries which dot the land in all
Buddhist countries. China is less dominated by them than other lands,
yet they form a very important reason for the persistence and strength
of Buddhism there. One of the famous old shrines will represent them as
a class and give evidence of their importance.
Kushan Monastery, located about four hours’ ride by sedan-chair from
Foochow, is a famous shrine of South China. It occupies a large
amphitheater about fifteen hundred feet above the plain, part way up
Kushan, the “Drum Mountain,” some three thousand feet high. From the top
of the mountain on clear days with the help of a glass the blue shores
of Formosa may be seen on the eastern horizon. The spacious monastery
buildings are surrounded by a grove of noble trees, in which squirrels,
pheasants, chipmunks and snakes enjoy an undisturbed life.
The ascent to the monastery begins on the bank of the Min River. At the
foot of the mountain in a large temple the traveler may obtain mountain
chairs carried by two or more coolies. The road, paved with granite
slabs cut from the mountain side, consists of a series of stone stairs,
which zig-zag up the mountain under the shadow of ancient pine trees.
Every turn brings to view a bit of landscape carpeted with rice, or a
distant view where mountains and sky meet. A brook rushes by the side of
the road. Here it breaks into a beautiful waterfall. There it gurgles’
in a deep ravine. The sides of the road are covered with large granite
blocks which, loosened from the mountain side by earthquakes, have
disposed themselves promiscuously. Their blackened, weather-beaten sides
are incised with Chinese characters. One of them bears the words: “We
put our trust in Amitâbha.” Another immortalizes the sentiments of some
great official who has made the pilgrimage to the mountain. Near the
monastery stand the sombre dagobas where repose the ashes of former
abbots and monastery officials. Not far away on the other side of the
road, hidden by trees, is the crematory where the last remains of the
brethren are consumed by the flames.
As one approaches the monastery he hears the regular sounds of a bell
tolled by a water-wheel, reminding the faithful of Buddha’s law. He sees
monks strolling leisurely about and lay brethren carrying wood,
cultivating the gardens, or tending the animals released by pious
devotees to heap up merit for themselves in the next world. Just inside
the main gate is a large fish pond, where goldfish of great size
struggle with one another, and with the lazy turtles, for the round hard
cakes purchased from the monks by the merit-seeking devotee.
The monastery itself consists of a large group of buildings erected
about stone-paved courts, rising in terraces on the mountain side. The
large court at the entrance leads to the “Hall of the Four Kings.” As
one enters the spacious door, he is faced by a jolly, almost
naked image of the “Laughing Buddha.” This is Maitrêya, the Mea siah of
the Buddhists, who will return to the world five thousand years after
the departure of Sâkyamuni. In the northern monasteries Maitrêya is
often represented as reaching a height when standing of seventy feet or
more, which indicates the stature to which man will attain when he
returns to earth. On each side of the visitor are two immense images of
the Deva kings. In Brahman cosmogony they were the guardians of the
world. In this entrance hall of the Buddhist monastery they stand as
guardians of the Buddhist faith. In the same hall looking toward the
open court beyond is Wei To, another guardian deity of Buddhism.
Somewhere near by is Kuan Ti, the god worshipped by the soldiers and
merchants. Although a Confucian god, he was early adopted by Buddhist
monks into their pantheon and made the guardian of their Order.
Beyond this entrance hall is a large stone-paved court. On the right
side is a bell-tower whose bell is tolled by a monk who has kept the vow
of silence for fourteen years. On the left is a drum-tower. On the right
one finds a series of small shrines. A passage way leads to the library
where numerous Buddhist writings repose in lacquered cases, some of them
written in their own blood by devout monks. On the same side are guest
halls, the dining room for three hundred monks, and the spacious, well
equipped kitchen with running water piped from a reservoir in the hills
above. A store where books, images and the simple requirements of the
monks can be obtained is just above the dining room. On the left side of
the court are large buildings used as dormitories far the monks,
storerooms, and for housing the great printing establishment with its
thousands of wooden blocks on which are carved passages from the
Buddhist scriptures. Here also are kept the coffins in which the monks
are to be burned.
On a terrace above the north side of the court rises the main hall,
called the “Hall of the Triratna,” the Buddhist Trinity, where three
gilded images are seated on a lotus flower with halos covering their
backs and heads. The center image is that of Sâkyamuni, the Buddha. On
his right is Yao Shih, the Buddha of medicine, and on the left,
Amitâbha. Quite often these images are said to represent the Buddha, the
Law and the Community of Monks. On the altar are candlesticks and a fine
incense burner from which curls of smoke arise. An immense lamp hangs
from the ceiling. In the rear are banners with praises to Buddha given
by pious devotees. The floor is tiled and covered with round mats made
of palm fiber on which the monks kneel during worship. Before the mats
are low stands for books. On each side of this main hall are the images
of nine Buddhist saints (arhats), eighteen in all. Behind this
large temple opens another court and on a terrace above it stands the
hall of the Law with the images of Kuan Yin, the goddess of Mercy, and
the twenty-four devas. Here also are small images of viceroys and
patrons of the monastery.
The hillsides are dotted with numerous temples and shrines. There is one
to Chu-Hsi, the great philosopher of the Sung dynasty, who was born in
Fukien. In it are preserved a few characters indited by his hand. On the
west side of the monastery are large buildings for the housing of
animals released by merit-seeking devotees. Here cows, hogs, goats,
chickens, geese and ducks spend their old age without fear of beginning
their transmigration by forming the main portion of a Chinese feast.
The monastery is governed by an abbot, usually a man of good business
ability, elected by the monks. Under him are the officers of the two
wings or groups of attendants. One set looks after the spiritual
interests, of the monks; the-other takes care of their material needs:
The monks have worship about two o’clock in the morning and again at
about four in the afternoon. The rest of the long day they spend in
meditation, or study, in strolling about the mountain side or in sleep.
Their life is separated from all stirring contact with the life of the
world.
This monastery with its appointments is a good type of the monasteries
all over China. It was founded at the request of the inhabitants of the
neighborhood, because the dragons of the region used to cause much
damage to the crops in the surrounding country. A holy monk came,
founded the monastery, and by his good influence so curbed the dragons
that the country-side has enjoyed peace ever since and the monastery has
prospered. Since the fourth century of our era records show that by the
building of monasteries in strategic place’s holy monks brought rains
and prosperity to various regions, or prevented floods and calamities
from damaging the villages. In other words the monasteries are regarded
as the controllers of fêng-shui (wind and water). According to
the Chinese philosophy winds and water are spiritual forces and may be
so controlled by other spiritual forces that instead of bringing harm
they will confer benefit upon the people. Floods and dry seasons are so
frequent in China that any institution holding out the promise of
regulating them would become firmly established in the affection of the
people. The monasteries have taken this place.
One of the picturesque features of a Chinese landscape is the pagoda.
These structures were introduced in the early stages of Buddhism to
enshrine the relics of Buddha. It was said that Buddha’s body consisted
of eighty thousand parts, hence numerous pagodas were erected to shelter
these relics. Inasmuch as a pagoda contained the relics of Buddha, it
possessed magic power and so came to play a great part in the control of
the winds and the rains. The pagoda in China has an odd number of
stories varying from three to thirteen. The odd numbers belong to the
positive principle in nature which is superior to the negative
principle. The pagoda plays quite a part in the festivals of the people.
On certain occasions the stories are hung with lanterns and the pagodas
are visited by numerous throngs.
Prayers for rain afford such a common illustration of the relation of
Buddhism to the life of the peasant that a detailed presentation of such
a service may be of seal value.
During a prolonged drought in some district of China, when the heat
opens gaping cracks in the fields and the grain is drying up, the
populace may visit their highest official and apprise him of the dire
situation. He often forbids the slaughter of all animals for three days
and, in case rain has not thereby come, he goes in person or sends a
deputy to the nearest monastery to direct the monks to pray for rain.
(a) The Altar.–On such an occasion the great hall of the Law may
be used for the ceremony. Quite often a special altar is erected in an
enclosure near the monastery on a platform one foot high and twenty-five
feet on each side, overspread by a tent of green cloth. In the center
seats are arranged for the presiding monk and his assistants. On each of
the four sides of the altar is placed an image of the Dragon King who is
supposed to control the rain. If an image is not obtainable a piece of
paper inscribed with the name of the dragon may be used. Flowers, fruits
and incense are spread before the images. On the doors of the tent are
painted dragons with clouds. The tent and altar are green and the monks
wear green garments, because green belongs to the spring and suggests
rain. For this ceremony the monks prepare themselves by abstinence and
cleansing. The presiding monk is one of high moral character and
religious fervor. While some monks recite appropriate sutras, two others
look after the offerings, the incense, and the sprinkling of water
during the ceremony to suggest the coming of rain. The services continue
day and night, being conducted by groups of monks in succession.
(b) The Prayer Service.–The ceremonial is opened by a chant as
follows:
“Pearly dew of the jade heavens, golden waves of Buddha’s ocean, scatter
the lotus flowers on a thousand thousand worlds of suffering, that the
heart of mercy may wash away great calamity, that a drop may become a
flood, that a drop may purify mountains and rivers.
“We put our trust in the Bodhisattvas and Mahâsattvas that purify the
earth.”
The chant ended, a monk takes a bowl of water and repeats thrice: “We
put our trust in the great merciful Kuan Yin Bodhisattva.” Then follows
the chant:
“The Bodhisattva’s sweet dew of the willow is able to make one drop
spread over the ten directions. It washes away the rank odors and dirt.
It keeps the altars clean and pure. The mysterious words of the doctrine
will be reverently repeated.”
This chant ended, the monks intone incantations of Kuan Yin, quite
unintelligible even to them, but of magical value. While these are being
uttered, the presiding monk and his attendants walk around the altar,
while one of them with a branch sprinkles water on the floor. This
symbolizes the cleansing of the altar and of the monks from all
impurities which might render the ritual ineffective. When the
perambulating monks have returned to their place, while the sprinkler
continues his duties, the monks repeat the words: “We put our trust in
the sweet dew kings, Bodhisattvas and Mahâsattvas.”
The Bodhisattvas have now come to the purified altar and while the abbot
offers incense to them, the monks repeat the words:
“The fields are destroyed so that they resemble the back of a tortoise.
The demons of drought produce calamity. The dark people* pray earnestly while crops are being
destroyed. We pray that abundant, limpid liquid may descend to purify
and refresh the whole world. The clouds of incense rise.”
*A term denoting the Chinese.
This plaint is repeated thrice and is followed by an invocation:
“Wholeheartedly we cast ourselves to the earth, O Triratna, who dost
exist eternally in the realm of dharma of the ten directions.”
The leader remains quiet a long time with his eyes closed, visualizing
the Buddhas, the Bodhisattvas, the dragon kings, and the saints, all
with their heavenly eyes and ears knowing that this region is afflicted
with drought, that an altar has been constructed and that all have come
to make petition. This meditation is regarded as of chief importance. It
is followed by an announcement to the effect that the sutra praying for
rain was given by the Buddha, that a drought is afflicting the land,
that the altar has been erected in accordance with the regulations and
that prayer is being made for rain. But fearing that something may have
been overlooked, the magic formula of “the king of light who turns the
wheel” is read seven times so as to remedy such oversight.
The altar having thus been cleansed of all impurities, the rain sutra is
opened and the one hundred and eighty-eight dragon kings are urged by
name in groups of ten to take action. The formula is as follows:
“We with our whole heart invite such and such dragon kings to come. We
desire that the heart and wisdom which knows others intuitively will
move the spirits above to obey the Buddha, to take pity on the people
below and to come to our province and send down sweet rain.”
When the dragons have all been duly invited, the monks chant suitable
magical formulas, while the leader sits in meditation visualizing these
dragon kings and their tender solicitude for the people in distress. The
monastery bell is sounded and the wooden fish is beaten, while drums and
cymbals add their effect. The whole is intended to draw the attention of
the dragon kings to the drought. Then the fifty-four Buddhas are invited
in a similar manner in groups of ten, the sixth group consisting of
four. A similar form of address is used and similar magical formulas are
recited with the noisy accompaniment. The ceremony concludes by the
expression of the hope that the three jewels (Buddha, the Law and the
Community of Monks) and the dragon kings will grant the rain.
Upon the altar are four copies of an announcement to the dragon kings
and Buddhas. On the first day three copies are sent to them through the
flames, one to the Buddhas, one to the dragon kings and one to the
devas. One copy is read daily and then sent up at the thanksgiving
ceremony. The announcement is as follows:
“We put our trust in the limitless, reverent ocean clouds, the dragons
of august virtue and all their host, all dragon kings and holy saints.
Their august virtue is difficult to measure. In accord with the command
of Buddha they send liquid rain. May their quiet mercy descend to the
altar; may they send down purity and freshness, spreading over the ten
directions. We put our trust in the company of dragon kings of the
clouds, the saints and the Bodhisattvas.”
The offerings are made only in the morning inasmuch as the Buddhas,
following ancient custom, are not supposed to eat after the noonday
meal. Great care is taken that the altar shall not be desecrated by any
one who eats meat or drinks wine. The magic formulas of great mercy are
uttered or the name of Kuan Yin is repeated a thousand times. The monks,
take turn in these services which continue day and night until rain
comes.
(c) Its Meaning.–In the religious consciousness of the people is
the idea that the drought is a punishment for sin. The altar is made
pure and acceptable and sin is removed in various symbolic ways. This
fits in with the idea that man is an intimate part of the world order.
His sin disturbs the order of nature. Heaven manifests displeasures by
sending down calamities upon men. Men should cease their wrongdoing
which disturbs the natural order and should also wash away the effects
of their sins. The services for rain with their magic formulas help to
clear away the consequences of sin and to predispose Heaven to grant its
blessings again.
The prayers for rain are an important part of the Chinese peasant’s
world order. Drought is the manifestation of Heaven’s displeasure at the
infraction of Heaven’s laws. It calls for self-examination and
repentance. Thus the monastery opens up the windows of the universal
order as this touches the humble tiller of the soil.
The Buddhist monasteries not only hold services in time of drought, but
also in time of flood and at times when plagues of grasshoppers afflict
the land, or when diseases afflict human beings. Their adoption of
Chinese customs led them to have special ceremonies at the eclipse of
the sun and moon, although they knew the cause of the eclipse. Peasants
and officials support the monastery because of these services regulating
the wind and water influences and through them bringing the people into
harmonious relation with the great world of spirits.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
