


Even the historical influences noted above do not account entirely for
the spread of Buddhism in China. In order to understand this and the
place which Buddhism occupies, we need to review briefly the different
forms which religion takes in China and to note how Buddhism has related
itself to them.
The Chinese believe in a surrounding-world of spirits, whose
origin is exceedingly various. They touch life at every point. There are
spirits which are guardians of the soil, tree spirits, mountain demons,
fire gods, the spirits of animals, of mountains, of rivers, seas and
stars, of the heavenly bodies and of many forms of active life. These
spirits to the Chinese mind, of today are a projection, a sort of
spiritual counterpart, of the many sided interests, practical or
otherwise, of the groups and communities by whom they are worshipped.
There are other spirits which mirror the ideals of the groups by which
they are worshipped. Some of them may have been incarnated in the lives
of great leaders. There are spirits which are mere animations,
occasional spirits, associated with objects crossing the interests of
men, but not constant enough to attain a definite, independent life as
spiritual beings. Thus surrounding the average Chinese peasant there is
a densely populated spirit world affecting in all kinds of ways his,
daily existence. This other world is the background which must be kept
in mind by one who would understand or attempt to guide Chinese
religious experience. It is the basis on which all organized forms of
religious activity are built. The nearest of these to his heart is the
proper regard for his ancestors.
The ancestral control of family life occupies so large and important a
place in Chinese thought and practice that ancestor worship has been
called the original religion of the Chinese. It is certain that the
earliest Confucian records recognize ancestor worship; but doubtless it
antedated them, growing up out of the general religious consciousness of
the people. The discussion of that origin in detail cannot be taken up
here. It may be followed in the literature noted in the appendix or in
the volume of this series entitled “Present-Day Confucianism.” Ancestor
worship is active today, however, because the Chinese as a people
believe that these ancestors control in a very real way the good or evil
fortunes of their descendants, because this recognition of ancestors
furnishes a potent means of promoting family unity and social ethics,
and, most of all, because a happy future life is supposed to be
dependent upon descendants who will faithfully minister to the dead.
Since each one desires such a future he is faithful in promoting the
observance of the obligation. Consequently, ancestor worship, like the
previously mentioned belief in the invisible spiritual world, underlies
all other religious developments. No family is so obscure or poor that
it does not submit to the ritual or discipline which is supposed to
ensure the favor of the spirits belonging to the community. Likewise,
every such family is loyal to the supposed needs of its deceased
ancestors. In a very intimate way these beliefs are interwoven with the
private and social morality of every family or group in Chinese society,
and must be taken into account by any one who seeks to bring a religious
message to the Chinese people.
Taoism is that system of Chinese religious thought and practice,
beginning about the fifth century B. C., which was originally based on
the teachings of Lao Tzu and developed in the writings of Lieh Tzu and
Chuang Tzu and found in the Tao Tê Ching. It is really in this original
form a philosophy of some merit. According to its teaching the Tao is
the great impersonal background of the world from which all things
proceed as beams from the sun, and to which all beings return. In
contrast to the present, transient, changing world the Tao is
unchangeable and quiet. Originally the Taoists emphasized quiescence, a
life in accordance with nature, as a means of assimilating themselves to
the Tao, believing that in this way they would obtain length of days,
eternal life and especially the power to become superior to natural
conditions.
There is a movement today among Chinese scholars in favor of a return to
this original highest form of Taoism. It appeals to them as a philosophy
of life; an answer to its riddles. Among the masses of the people,
however, Taoism manifests itself in a ritual of extreme superstition. It
recommends magic tricks and curious superstitions as a means of
prolonging life. It expresses itself very largely in these degrading
practices which few Chinese will defend, but which are yet very commonly
practiced.
Confucianism brought organization into these hazy conceptions of life
and duty. It took for granted this spiritual-unspiritual background of
animism, ancestor-worship and Taoism, but reshaped and adapted it as a
whole so that it might fit into that proper organization of the state
and nation which was one of its great objectives. Just as Confucianism
related the family to the village, the village to the district, and the
district to the state, so it organized the spiritual world into a
hierarchy with Shang Ti as its head. This hierarchy was developed along
the lines of the organization mentioned above. Under Shang Ti were the
five cosmic emperors, one for each of the four quarters and one for
heaven above, under whom were the gods of the soil, the mountains,
rivers, seas, stars, the sun and moon, the ancestors and the gods of
special groups. Each of the deities in the various ranks had duties to
those above and rights with reference to those below. These duties and
rights, as they affected the individual, were not only expressed in law
but were embodied in ceremony and music, in daily religious life and
practice in such a way that each individual had reason to feel that he
was a functioning agent in this grand Confucian universe. If any one
failed to do his part, the whole universe would suffer. So thoroughly
has this idea been adopted by the Chinese people that every one joins in
forcing an individual, however reluctant or careless, to perform his
part of each ceremony as it has been ordered from high antiquity.
The emperor alone worshipped the supreme deity, Shang Ti; the great
officers of state, according to the dignity of their office, were
related to subordinate gods and required to show them adequate respect
and reverence. Confucius and a long line of noted men following him were
semi-deified* and highly reverenced by the literati, the class from which the
officers of state were as a rule obtained, in connection with their
duties, and as an expression of their ideals. To the common people were
left the ordinary local deities, while all classes, of course, each in
its own fashion reverenced, cherished and obeyed their ancestors. It
should be remarked at this point that Confucianism of this official
character has broken down, not only under the impact of modern ideas,
but under the longing of the Chinese for a universal deity. The people
turn to Heaven and to the Pearly Emperor, the popular counterpart of
Shang Ti.
*Confucius was by imperial decree deified in
1908.
Viewed from another angle, Confucianism is an elaborate system of
ethics. In writings which are virtually the scriptures of the Chinese
people Confucius and his successors have set forth the principles which
should govern the life of a people who recognize this spiritual universe
and system. These ethics have grown out of a long and, in some respects,
a sound experience. Much can be said in their favor. The essential
weaknesses of the Confucian system of ethics lie in its sectional and
personal loyalties and its monarchical basis. The spirit of democracy is
a deadly foe to Confucianism. Another element of weakness is its
excessive dependence upon the past. Confucius reached ultimate wisdom by
the study of the best that had been attained before his day. He looked
backward rather than forward. Consequently a modern, broadly educated
Confucianist finds himself in an anomalous position. He does not need
absolutely to reject the wisdom which Confucianism embodies, but he can
no longer accept it as a sound, reliable and indisputable scheme of
thought and action. Yet its simple ethical principles and its social
relationships are basal in the lives of the vast masses of the Chinese.
Upon this, confused jumble of spiritism, superstition, loyalty to
ancestors and submission to a divine hierarchy Buddhism was
superimposed. It quickly dominated all because of its superior
excellence. The form of Buddhism which became established in China was
not, to be sure, like the Buddhism preached by Gautama and his
disciples, or like that form of Buddhism which had taken root in Burma
or Ceylon. Except in name, the Buddhism of Southern Asia and the
Buddhism which developed in China were virtually two distinct types of
religion. The Buddhism of Burma and Ceylon was of the conservative
Hînayâna ("Little Vehicle” of salvation) school, while that of China was
of the progressive Mahâyâna ("Great Vehicle” of salvation) school. Their
differences are so marked as to be worthy of a careful statement.
The Hinayana, which is today the type of Buddhism in Ceylon, Burma and
Siam, has always clung closely to tradition as expressed in the original
Buddhist scriptures. Its basic ideas were that life is on the whole a
time of suffering, that the cause of this sorrow is desire or ignorance,
and that there is a possible deliverance from it. This deliverance or
salvation is to be attained by following the eightfold path, namely,
right knowledge, aspiration, speech, conduct, means of livelihood,
endeavor, mindfulness and meditation. To the beatific state to be
ultimately attained Gautama gave the name Nirvana, explained by his
followers variously either as an utter extinction of personality or as a
passionless peace, a general state of well-being free from all evil
desire or clinging to life and released from the chain of
transmigration. Hinayana Buddhism appeals to the individual as affording
a way of escape from evil desire and its consequences by acquiring
knowledge, by constant discipline, and by a devotedness of the life to
religious ends through membership in the monastic order which Buddha
established. It encourages, however, a personal salvation worked out by
the individual alone.
The Mahâyâna school of Buddhists accept the general ideas of the
Hinayana regarding life and salvation, but so change the spirit and
objectives as to make Buddhism into what is virtually another religion.
It does not confine salvation to the few who can retire from the world
and give themselves wholly to good works, but opens Buddhahood to all.
The “saint” of Hinayana Buddhism is the arhat who is intent on
saving himself. The saint of Mahâyâna Buddhism is the candidate for
Buddhahood (Bodhisattva) who defers his entrance into the bliss of
deliverance in order to save others. Mahâyâna Buddhism is progressive.
It encourages missionary enterprise and was a secret of the remarkable
spread of Buddhism over Asia. Moreover, while the Hînayâna school
recognizes no god or being to whom worship is given, the Mahâyanâ came
to regard Gautama himself as a god and salvation as life in a heavenly
world of pure souls. Thus the Mahâyâna type of thinking constitutes a
bridge between Hînayâna Buddhism and Christianity. In fact, a recent
writer has declared that Hînayâna Buddhists are verging toward these
more spiritual conceptions.*
*See Saunders, Buddhism and
Buddhists in Southern Asia, pp. 10, 20.
After the death of Sâkyamuni* Buddhism broke up
into a number of sects usually said to be eighteen in number. When
Buddhism came to China some of these sects were introduced, but they
assumed new forms in their Chinese environment. Besides the sects
brought, from India the Chinese developed several strong sects of their
own. Usually they speak of ten sects although the number is far larger,
if the various subdivisions are included.
*Sâkyamuni is the name by which
Gautama, the Buddha, is familiarly known in China.
To indicate the manifold differences between these groups in Buddhism
would take us far afield and would not be profitable. It will be of
interest, however, to consider some of the chief sects. One of the sects
introduced from India is the Pure Land or the Ching T’u which holds
before the believer the “Western Paradise” gained through faith in
Amitâbha. Any one, no matter what his life may have been, may enter the
Western Paradise by repeating the name of Amitâbha. This sect is
widespread in China. In Japan there are two branches of it known as the
Nishi-Hongwanji and the Higashi-Hongwanji with their head monasteries in
Kyoto. They are the most progressive sects in Japan and are carrying on
missionary work in China, the Hawaiian Islands and in the United States.
Another strong sect is the Meditative sect or the Ch’an Men (Zen in
Japan). This was introduced by Bodhidharma, or Tamo, who arrived in the
capital of China in the year 520 A.D. On his arrival the emperor Wu Ti
tried to impress the sage with his greatness saying: “We have built
temples, multiplied the Scriptures, encouraged many to join the Order:
is not there much merit in all this?” “None,” was the blunt reply. “But
what say the holy books? Do they not promise rewards for such deeds?"
“There is nothing holy.” “But you, yourself, are you not one of the holy
ones?” “I don’t know.” “Who are you?” “I don’t know.” Thus introduced,
the great man proceeded to open his missionary-labors by sitting down
opposite a wall arid gazing at it for the next nine years. From this he
has been called the “wall-gazer.” He and his successors promulgated the
doctrine that neither the scriptures, the ritual nor the organization,
in fact nothing outward had any value in the attainment of
enlightenment. They held that the heart of the universe is Buddha and
that apart from the heart or the thought all is unreal. They thought
themselves back into the universal Buddha and then found the Buddha
heart in all nature. Thus they awakened the spirit which permeated
nature, art and literature and made the whole world kin with the spirit
of the Buddha.
*K. J. Saunders in Epochs of Buddhist History.
Such pantheism and quietism often lead to a confusion in moral
relations, but these mystics were quite correct in their morals because
they checked up their mysticism with the moral system of the Buddha.
Still another important sect originated in the sixth century A. D. on
Chinese soil, namely, the T’ien T’ai (Japanese Tendai), so called
because it started in a monastery situated on the beautiful T’ien T’ai
mountains south of Ningpo. Chih K’ai, the founder, realized that
Buddhism contained a great mass of contradictory teachings and practice,
all attributed to the Buddha. He sought for a harmonizing principle and
found it in the arbitrary theory that these teachings were given to
different people on five different occasions and hence the
discrepancies. The practical message of this sect has been that all
beings have the Buddha heart and that the Buddha loves all beings, so
that all beings may attain salvation, which consists in the full
realization of the Buddha heart latent in them.
There was a time when these sects were very active and flourishing in
China. At the present time the various tendencies for which they stood
have been adopted by Buddhism as a whole and the various sectaries,
though still keeping the name of the sect, live peacefully in the same
monastery. All the monasteries practice meditation, believe in the
paradise of Amitâbha, and are enjoying the ironic calm advocated by the
T’ien T’ai. While the struggle among the sects of China has been
followed by a calm which resembles stagnation, those in Japan are very
active and the reader is referred to the volume of this series on
Japanese Buddhism for further treatment of the subject.
When Buddhism entered China it brought with it a new world. It was new
practical and new spiritually. It brought a knowledge unknown
before regarding the heavenly bodies, regarding nature and regarding
medicine, and a practice vastly above the realm of magical arts. In
addition to these practical benefits, Buddhism proclaimed a new
spiritual universe far more real and extensive than any of which the
Chinese had dreamed, and peopled with spiritual beings having
characteristics entirely novel. In comparison with this new universe or
series of universes which Indian imagination had created, the Chinese
universe was wooden and geometric. Since it was an organized system and
a greater rather than a different one, the Chinese people readily
accepted it and made it their own.
Buddhism not only enlarged the universe and gave the individual a range
of opportunity hitherto unsuspected, but it introduced a scheme of
religious practice, or rather several of them, enabling the individual
devotee to attain a place in this spiritual universe through his own
efforts. These “ways” of salvation were quite in harmony with Chinese
ideas. They resembled what had already been a part of the national
practice and so were readily adopted and adapted by the Chinese.
Buddhism rendered a great service to the Chinese through its new
estimate of the individual. Ancient China scarcely recognized the
individual. He was merged in the family and the clan. Taoists, to be
sure, talked of “immortals” and Confucianism exhibited its typical
personality, or “princely man,” but these were thought of as supermen,
as ideals. The classics of China had very little to say about the common
people. The great common crowd was submerged. Buddhism, on the other
hand, gave every individual a distinct place in the great wheel
dharma, the law, and made it possible for him to reach the very
highest goal of salvation. This introduced a genuinely new element into
the social and family life of the Chinese people.
Buddhism was so markedly superior to any one of the four other methods
of expressing the religious life, that it quickly won practical
recognition as the real religion of China. Confucianism may be called
the doctrine of the learned classes. It formulates their principles of
life, but it is in no strict sense a popular religion. It is rather a
state ritual, or a scheme of personal and social ethics. Taoism
recognizes the immediate influence of the spirit world, but it ministers
only to local ideals and needs. In the usages of family and community
life, ancestor worship has a definite place, but an occasional one.
Buddhism was able to leave untouched each of these expressions of
Chinese personal and social life, and yet it went far beyond them in
ministering to religious development. Its ideas of being, of moral
responsibility and of religious relationships furnished a new psychology
which with all its imperfections far surpassed that of the Chinese.
Buddhism’s organization was so satisfying and adaptable that not only
was it taken over readily by the Chinese, but it has also persisted in
China without marked changes since its introduction. Most of all it
stressed personal salvation and promised an escape from the impersonal
world of distress and hunger which surrounds the average Chinese into a
heaven ruled by Amitâbha* the Merciful. The
obligations of Buddhism are very definite and universally recognized. It
enforces high standards of living, but has added significance because it
draws each devotee into a sort of fellowship with the divine, and mates
not this life alone, but this life plus a future life, the end of human
activity. Buddhism, therefore, really expresses the deepest religious
life of the people of China.
*Amitâbha, meaning “infinite light,"
is the Sanskrit name of one of the Buddhas moat highly revered in China.
The usual Chinese equivalent is Omi-To-Fo.
It will be worth while to note some illustrations of the conviction of
the Chinese people that there are three religions to which they owe
allegiance and yet that these are essentially one. They often say, “The
three teachings are the whole teaching.” An old scholar is reported to
have remarked, “The three roads are different, but they lead to the same
source.” A common story reports that Confucius was asked in the other
world about drinking wine, which Buddhists forbid but Taoists permit.
Confucius replied: “If I do not drink I become a Buddha. If I drink I
become an Immortal. Well, if there is wine, I shall drink; if there is
none, I shall abstain.” This expresses characteristically the Chinese
habit of adaptation. Such a decision sounds quite up to date.
The Ethical Culture Society of Peking, recently organized, has upon its
walls pictures of Buddha, Lao Tzu, Confucius and Christ. Its members
claim to worship Shang Ti as the god of all religions. An offshoot of
this society, the T’ung Shan She, associates the three founders very
closely with Christ. It claims to have a deeper revelation of Christ
than the Christians themselves. A new organization, the Tao Yuan, plans
to harmonize the three old religions with Mohammedanism and
Christianity.
Buddhism has consistently and continually striven to bring about a unity
of religion in China by interpenetrating Confucianism and Taoism. Quite
early the Buddhists invented the story that the Bodhisattva Ju T’ung was
really Confucius incarnate. There was at one time a Buddhist temple to
Confucius in the province of Shantung. The Buddhists also gave out the
story that Bodhisattva Kas’yapa was the incarnation of Lao Tzu, the
founder of Taoism. An artist painted Lao Tzu transformed into a Buddha,
seated in a lotus bud with a halo about his head. In front of the Buddha
was Confucius doing reverence. A Chinese scholar, asked for his opinion
about the picture, said: “Buddha should be seated; Lao Tzu should be
standing at the side looking askance at Buddha; and Confucius should be
grovelling on the floor.”
A monument dating from 543 A. D., illustrates this tendency of Buddhism
to represent its own superiority in Chinese religious life. At the top
of the monument is Brahma, lower down is Sâkyamuni with his disciples,
Ananda and Kas’yapa on one face, and on the other Sâkyamuni again,
conversing with Buddha Prabhutaratna and worshipped by monks and
Bodhisattvas. On the pedestal are Confucian and Taoist deities, ten in
number. Thus Buddhism sought to rank itself clearly above the other two
religions. From the early days Buddhism regarded itself as their
superior and began the processes of interpenetration and absorption. In
consequence the values originally inherent in Buddhism have come to be
regarded as the natural possession of the Chinese. It does express their
religious life, especially in South China, where outward manifestations
of religion are perhaps more marked than in the north.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Buddhism and Buddhists in China” (Lewis Hodus).


Also see The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and Japan at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
