


Read at the Second Church, Copley Square, Boston, Wednesday, November
29, 1899
A hundred years ago A. Bronson Alcott was born, and thirty-three years
later his daughter Louisa was born, happily on the same day of the year,
as if for this very purpose,—that you might testify your appreciation of
the good work they did in this world, at one and the same moment. It was
a fortunate coincidence, which we like to think of to-day, as it
undoubtedly gave pleasure to Bronson Alcott and his wife sixty-seven
years ago.
How genuine were Mr. Alcott and his daughter, Louisa! “All else,” says
the sage, “is superficial and perishable, save love and truth only.” It
is through the love and truth that was in these two that we still feel
their influence as if they were living to-day. How well I recollect Mr.
Alcott’s first visit to my father’s house at Medford, when I was a boy! I
had the same impression of him then that the consideration of his life
makes on me now,—as an exceptional person, but one greatly to be
trusted. I could see that he was a man who wished well to me, and to all
mankind; who had no intention of encroaching on my rights as an
individual in any way whatever; and who, furthermore, had no suspicion of
me as a person alien to himself. The criticism made of him by my young
brother held good of him then and always,—that “he looked like one of
Christ’s disciples.” His aspect was intelligently mild and gentle,
unmixed with the slightest taint of worldly self-interest.
He heard that Goethe had said, “We begin to sin as soon as we act;” but
he did not agree to this, and was determined that one man at least should
live in this world without sinning. He carried this plan out so
consistently that, as he once confessed to me, it brought him to the
verge of starvation. Then he realized that in order to play our part in
the general order of things,—in order to obviate the perpetual tendency
in human affairs to chaos,—we are continually obliged to compromise.
However, to the last he would never touch animal food. Others might
murder sheep and oxen, but he, Bronson Alcott, would not be a partaker in
what he considered a serious transgression of moral law. This brought him
into antagonism with the current of modern opinion, which considers man
the natural ruler of this earth, and that it is both his right and his
duty to remodel it according to his ideas of usefulness and beauty.
It brought him into a life-long conflict with society, but how gallantly,
how amiably he carried this on you all know. It cannot be said that he
was defeated, for his spirit was unconquerable. His purity of intention
always received its true recognition; and wherever Bronson Alcott went he
collected the most earnest, high-minded people about him, and made them
more earnest, more high-minded by his conversation.
How different was his daughter, Louisa,—the keen observer of life and
manners; the witty story-teller with the pictorial mind; always
sympathetic, practical, helpful—the mainstay of her family, a pillar of
support to her friends; forgetting the care of her own soul in her
interest for the general welfare; heedless of her own advantage, and
thereby obtaining for herself as a gift from heaven, the highest of all
advantages, and the greatest of all rewards!
And yet, with so wide a difference in the practical application of their
lives, the well-spring of Louisa’s thought and the main-spring of her
action were identical with those of her father, and may be considered an
inheritance from him. For the well-spring of her thought was
truth, and the main-spring of her action was love. There
can be no fine art, no great art, no art which is of service to mankind,
which does not originate on this twofold basis. We are told that when she
was a young girl, on a voyage from Philadelphia to Boston, her face
suddenly lighted up with the true brightness of genius, as she said, “I
love everybody in this whole world!” If, afterwards, a vein of satire
came to be mingled with this genial flow of human kindness, it was not
Louisa’s fault.
In like manner, Bronson Alcott rested his argument for immortality on the
ground of the family affections. “Such strong ties,” he reasoned, “could
not have been made merely to be broken.” Let us share his faith, and
believe that they have not been broken.
Continue...

This complete text of the Cambridge Sketches book by Frank Preston Stearns are in the public domain.


Buy this essays series at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Cambridge SketchesBy Frank Preston StearnsAt Amazon
