


Thomas G. Appleton, universally known as “Tom” Appleton, was a notable
figure during the middle of the last century not only in Boston and
Cambridge, but in Paris, Rome, Florence, and other European cities. He
was descended from one of the oldest and wealthiest families of Boston,
and graduated from Harvard in 1831, together with Wendell Phillips and
George Lothrop Motley. He was not distinguished in college for his
scholarship, but rather as a wit, a bon vivant, and a good fellow.
Yet his companions looked upon him as a strong character and much above
the average in intellect. After taking his degree of Bachelor of Arts he
went through the Law School, and attempted to practise that profession in
Boston. At the end of the first year, happening to meet Wendell Phillips
on the sidewalk, the latter inquired if he had any clients. He had not;
neither had Phillips, and they both agreed that waiting for fortune in
the legal profession was wearisome business. They were both well adapted
to it, and the only reason for their ill success would seem to have been
that they belonged to wealthy and rather aristocratic families, amongst
whom there is little litigation.
At the same time Sumner was laying the foundation by hard study for his
future distinction as a legal authority, and Motley was discussing Goethe
and Kant with the youthful Bismarck in Berlin. Wendell Phillips soon gave
up his profession to become an orator in the anti-slavery cause; and Tom
Appleton went to Rome and took lessons in oil painting.
Nothing can be more superficial than to presume that young men who write
verses or study painting think themselves geniuses. A man may have a
genius for mechanics; and in most instances men and women are attracted
to the arts from the elevating character of the occupation. It is not
likely that Tom Appleton considered himself a genius, for although he had
plenty of self-confidence, his opinion of himself was always a modest
one. He painted the portraits of some of his friends, but he never fairly
made a profession of it. However, he learned the mechanism of pictorial
art in this way, and soon became one of the best connoisseurs of his
time.
His finest enjoyment was to meet with some person, especially a stranger,
with whom he could discuss the celebrated works in the galleries of
Europe. He soon became known as a man who had something to say, and who
knew how to say it. He told the Italian picture-dealers to cheat him as
much as they could, and he gave amusing accounts of their various
attempts to do this. He knew more than they did.
After this time he lived as much in Europe as he did in America. Before
1860 he had crossed the Atlantic nearly forty times. The marriage of his
sister to Henry W. Longfellow was of great advantage to him, for through
Longfellow he made the acquaintance of many celebrated persons whom he
would not otherwise have known, and being always equal to such occasions
he retained their respect and good will. One might also say, “What could
Longfellow have done without him?” His conversation was never
forced, and the wit, for which he became as much distinguished in social
life as Lowell or Holmes, was never premeditated, often making its
appearance on unexpected occasions to refresh his hearers with its
sparkle and originality.
In the “Autocrat of the Breakfast Table” Doctor Holmes quotes this saying
by the “wittiest of men,” that “good Americans, when they die, go to
Paris.” Now this wittiest of men was Tom Appleton, as many of us knew at
that time. He said of Leonardo da Vinci’s “Last Supper” that it probably
had faded out from being stared at by sightseers, and that the same thing
might have happened to the Sistine Madonna if it had not been put under
glass,—these being the two most popular paintings in Europe. His fund of
anecdotes was inexhaustible.
Earlier in life he was occasionally given to practical jokes. A woman who
kept a thread and needle store in Boston was supposed to have committed
murder, and was tried for it but acquitted. One day, as Appleton was
going by her place of business with a friend he said: “Come in here with
me; I want to see how that woman looks.” Then surveying the premises, as
if he wished to find something to purchase, he asked her if she had any
“galluses” for sale,—gallus being a shop-boy’s term at the time for
suspenders.
When the Art Museum in Boston was first built its odd appearance
attracted very general attention, and some one asked Tom Appleton what he
thought of it. “Well,” he said, “I have heard that architecture is a kind
of frozen music, and if so I should call the Art Museum frozen ’Yankee
Doodle.’”
Thomas G. Appleton was no dilettante; his interest in the subject was
serious and abiding. He did not wear his art as he did his gloves, nor
did he turn it into an intellectual abstraction. There was nothing he
disliked more than the kind of pretension which tries to make a knowledge
of art a vehicle for self-importance. “Who,” he said, “ought not to feel
humble before a painting of Titian’s or Correggio’s? It is only when we
feel so that we can appreciate a great work of art.” He believed that an
important moral lesson could be inculcated by a picture as well as by a
poem,—even by a realistic Dutch painting. “Women worship the Venus of
Milo now,” he said, “just as they did in ancient Greece, and it is good
for them, too.” He respected William Morris Hunt as the best American
painter of his time, but thought he would be a better painter if he were
not so proud. Pride leads to arrogance, and arrogance is blinding.
After he came into possession of his inheritance he showed that he could
make a good use of money. One of his first acts was to purchase a set of
engravings in the Vatican, valued at ten thousand dollars, for the Boston
Public Library. “I was not such a fool as to pay that sum for it,
though,” he remarked to Rev. Samuel Longfellow. He visited the studios of
struggling artists in Rome and Boston, gave them advice and
encouragement,—made purchases himself, sometimes, and advised his
friends to purchase when he found a painting that was really excellent.
He also purchased some valuable old paintings to adorn his house on
Commonwealth Avenue.
He placed two of these at one time on free exhibition at Doll’s picture-
store, and going into the rooms where they hung, I found Tom Appleton
explaining their merits to a group of remarkably pretty school-girls.
At the same moment, another gentleman who knew Mr. Appleton entered, and
said, “Ah! a Palma Vecio, Mr. Appleton; how delightful! It is a Palma, is
it not?”
“That,” replied Mr. Appleton, “is probably a Palma; but what do you say
to this, which I consider a much better picture?” The gentleman did not
know; but it looked like Venetian coloring.
“Quite right,” said Mr. Appleton; “I bought it at the sale of a private
collection in Rome, and it was catalogued as a Tintoretto, but I said,
’No, Bassano;’ and it is the best Bassano I ever saw. The Italians call
it ’Il Coconotte.’”
Mr. Appleton had no intention of palming off doubtful paintings on his
friends or the public; but in regard to “Il Coconotte” he was
confident of its true value, and rightly so. The painting, so called from
a head in the group covered very thinly with hair, was the pride of his
collection and one of the best of Bassano’s works. The other painting
looked to me like a Palma, and I have always supposed that it was one.
After this Mr. Appleton branched off on to an interesting anecdote
concerning an Italian cicerone, and finally left his audience as well
entertained as if they had been to the theatre.
In 1871 he published a volume of poems for private circulation, in which
there were a number of excellent pieces, and especially two which deserve
a place in any choice collection of American poetry. One is called the
“Whip of the Sky” and relates to a subject which Mr. Appleton often dwelt
upon,—the unnecessary haste and restlessness of American life, and is
given here for the wider circulation which it amply deserves:
Continue...

This complete text of the Cambridge Sketches book by Frank Preston Stearns are in the public domain.


Buy this essays series at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Cambridge SketchesBy Frank Preston StearnsAt Amazon
