


Read in the Town Hall, Concord, Mass., July 23, 1903
On his first visit to England, Emerson was so continually besieged with
invitations that, as he wrote to Carlyle, answering the notes he received
“ate up his day like a cherry;” and yet I have never met but one
Englishman, Dr. John Tyndall, the chemist, who seemed to appreciate
Emerson’s poetry, and few others who might be said to appreciate the man
himself. Tyndall may have recognized Emerson’s keen insight for the
poetry of science in such verses as:
A person who lacks some knowledge of geology would not be likely to
understand this. Matthew Arnold and Edwin Arnold had no very high opinion
of Emerson’s poetry; and even Carlyle, who was Emerson’s best friend in
Europe, spoke of it in rather a disparaging manner. The “Mountain and the
Squirrel” and several others have been translated into German, but not
those which we here consider the best of them.
On the other hand, Dr. William H. Furness considered Emerson “heaven-high
above our other poets;” C. P. Cranch preferred him to Longfellow; Dr. F.
H. Hedge looked upon him as the first poet of his time; Rev. Samuel
Longfellow and Rev. Samuel Johnson held a very similar opinion, and David
A. Wasson considered Emerson’s “Problem” one of the great poems of the
century.
These men were all poets themselves, though they did not make a
profession of it, and in that character were quite equal to Matthew
Arnold, whose lecture on Emerson was evidently written under unfavorable
influences. They were men who had passed through similar experiences to
those which developed Emerson’s mind and character, and could therefore
comprehend him better than others. We all feel that Emerson’s poetry is
sometimes too abstruse, especially in his earlier verses, and that its
meaning is often too recondite for ready apprehension; but there are
passages in it so luminous and so far-reaching in their application that
only the supreme poets of all time have equalled them.
Homer’s strength consists in his pictorial descriptions, but also
sometimes in pithy reflections on life and human nature; and it is in
these latter that Emerson often comes close to him. Most widely known of
Homer’s epigrams is that reply of Telemachus to Antiochus in the Odyssey,
which Pope has rendered:
To which the following couplet from “Woodnotes” seems almost like a
continuation:
The wise man carries rest and contentment in his own mental life, and is
equally himself at the Corona d’Italia and on a western ranch; while the
weakling runs back to earlier associations like a colt to its stable. But
Homer is also Emersonian at times. What could be more so than Achilles’s
memorable saying, which is repeated by Ulysses in the Odyssey: “More
hateful to me than the gates of death is he who thinks one thing and
speaks another;” or this exclamation of old Laertes in the last book of
the Odyssey: “What a day is this when I see my son and grandson
contending in excellence!”
It seems a long way from Dante to Emerson, and yet there are Dantean
passages in “Woodnotes” and “Voluntaries.” They are not in Dante’s
matchless measure, but they have much of his grace, and more of his
inflexible will. This warning against mercenary marriages might be
compared to Dante’s answer to the embezzling Pope Nicholas III. in Canto
XIX. of the Inferno:
There is a Spartan-like severity in this, but so was Dante very severe.
It was his mission to purify the moral sense of his countrymen in an age
when the Church no longer encouraged virtue; and Emerson no less
vigorously opposed the rank materialism of America in a period of
exceptional prosperity.
The next succeeding lines are not exactly Dantean, but they are among
Emerson’s finest, and worthy of any great poet. The “Pine Tree” says:
Again we are reminded of Dante in the opening passages of “Voluntaries”:
It is still more difficult to compare Emerson with Shakespeare, for the
one was Puritan with a strong classic tendency, and the other anti-
Puritan with a strong romantic tendency; but allowing for this and for
Shakespeare’s universality, it may be affirmed that there are few
passages in King Henry IV. and Henry V. which take a higher rank than
Emerson’s description of Cromwell:
Emerson learned a large proportion of his wisdom from Goethe, as he
frequently confessed, but where in Goethe’s poetry will you find a
quatrain of more penetrating beauty or wider significance than this from
“Woodnotes”:
Or this one from the “Building of the House"—considered metaphorically
as the life structure of man:
There is a flash as of heaven’s own lightning in some of his verses, and
his name has become a spell to conjure with.
Continue...

This complete text of the Cambridge Sketches book by Frank Preston Stearns are in the public domain.


Buy this essays series at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Cambridge SketchesBy Frank Preston StearnsAt Amazon
