


     Schools at Jamnia, Lydda, Usha, and Sepphoris.–The Tannaim
     compile the Mishnah.–Jochanan, Akiba, Meir, Judah.–Aquila.
The story of Jewish literature, after the destruction of the Temple at
Jerusalem in the year 70 of the Christian era, centres round the city of
Jamnia. Jamnia, or Jabneh, lay near the sea, beautifully situated on the
slopes of a gentle hill in the lowlands, about twenty-eight miles from
the capital. When Vespasian was advancing to the siege of Jerusalem, he
occupied Jamnia, and thither the Jewish Synhedrion, or Great Council,
transferred itself when Jerusalem fell. A college existed there
already, but Jamnia then became the head-quarters of Jewish learning,
and retained that position till the year 135. At that date the learned
circle moved further north, to Galilee, and, besides the famous school
at Lydda in Judea, others were founded in Tiberias, Usha, and Sepphoris.
The real founder of the College at Jamnia was Jochanan, the son of
Zakkai, called “the father of wisdom.” Like the Greek philosophers who
taught their pupils in the gardens of the “Academy” at Athens, the
Rabbis may have lectured to their students in a “Vineyard” at Jamnia.
Possibly the term “Vineyard” was only a metaphor applied to the
meeting-place of the Wise at Jamnia, but, at all events, the result of
these pleasant intellectual gatherings was the Rabbinical literature.
Jochanan himself was a typical Rabbi. For a great part of his life he
followed a mercantile pursuit, and earned his bread by manual labor. His
originality as a teacher lay in his perception that Judaism could
survive the loss of its national centre. He felt that “charity and the
love of men may replace the sacrifices.” He would have preferred his
brethren to submit to Rome, and his political foresight was justified
when the war of independence closed in disaster. As Graetz has well
said, like Jeremiah Jochanan wept over the desolation of Zion, but like
Zerubbabel he created a new sanctuary. Jochanan’s new sanctuary was the
school.
In the “Vineyard” at Jamnia, the Jewish tradition was the subject of
much animated inquiry. The religious, ethical, and practical literature
of the past was sifted and treasured, and fresh additions were made. But
not much was written, for until the close of the second century the new
literature of the Jews was oral. The Bible was written down, and read
from scrolls, but the Rabbinical literature was committed to memory
piecemeal, and handed down from teacher to pupil. Notes were perhaps
taken in writing, but even when the Oral Literature was collected, and
arranged as a book, it is believed by many authorities that the book so
compiled remained for a considerable period an oral and not a written
book.
This book was called the Mishnah (from the verb shana, “to repeat"
or “to learn”). The Mishnah was not the work of one man or of one age.
So long was it in growing, that its birth dates from long before the
destruction of the Temple. But the men most closely associated with the
compilation of the Mishnah were the Tannaim (from the root tana, which
has the same meaning as shana). There were about one hundred and
twenty of these Tannaim between the years 70 and 200 C.E., and they may
be conveniently arranged in four generations. From each generation one
typical representative will here be selected.
    First Generation, 70 to 100 C.E.
    JOCHANAN, the son of Zakkai
    Second Generation, 100 to 130 C.E.
    AKIBA
    Third Generation, 130 to 160 C.E.
    MEIR
    Fourth Generation, 160 to 200 C.E.
    JUDAH THE PRINCE
The Tannaim were the possessors of what was perhaps the greatest
principle that dominated a literature until the close of the eighteenth
century. They maintained that literature and life were co-extensive.
It was said of Jochanan, the son of Zakkai, that he never walked a
single step without thinking of God. Learning the Torah, that is, the
Law, the authorized Word of God, and its Prophetical and Rabbinical
developments, was man’s supreme duty. “If thou hast learned much Torah,
ascribe not any merit to thyself, for therefor wast thou created.” Man
was created to learn; literature was the aim of life. We have already
seen what kind of literature. Jochanan once said to his five favorite
disciples: “Go forth and consider which is the good way to which a man
should cleave.” He received various answers, but he most approved of
this response: “A good heart is the way.” Literature is life if it be a
heart-literature–this may be regarded as the final justification of the
union effected in the Mishnah between learning and righteousness.
Akiba, who may be taken to represent the second generation of Tannaim,
differed in character from Jochanan. Jochanan had been a member of the
peace party in the years 66 to 70; Akiba was a patriot, and took a
personal part in the later struggle against Rome, which was organized by
the heroic Bar Cochba in the years 131 to 135. Akiba set his face
against frivolity, and pronounced silence a fence about wisdom. But his
disposition was resolute rather than severe. Of him the most romantic of
love stories is told. He was a herdsman, and fell in love with his
master’s daughter, who endured poverty as his devoted wife, and was
glorified in her husband’s fame. But whatever contrast there may have
been in the two characters, Akiba, like Jochanan, believed that a
literature was worthless unless it expressed itself in the life of the
scholar. He and his school held in low esteem the man who, though
learned, led an evil life, but they took as their ideal the man whose
moral excellence was more conspicuous than his learning. As R. Eleazar,
the son of Azariah, said: “He whose knowledge is in excess of his good
deeds is like a tree whose branches are many and its roots scanty; the
wind comes, uproots, and overturns it. But he whose good deeds are more
than his knowledge is like a tree with few branches but many roots, so
that if all the winds in the world come and blow upon it, it remains
firm in its place.” Man, according to Akiba, is master of his own
destiny; he needs God’s grace to triumph over evil, yet the triumph
depends on his own efforts: “Everything is seen, yet freedom of choice
is given; the world is judged by grace, yet all is according to the
work.” The Torah, the literature of Israel, was to Akiba “a desirable
instrument,” a means to life.
Among the distinctions of Akiba’s school must be named the first literal
translation of the Bible into Greek. This work was done towards the
close of the second century by Aquila, a proselyte, who was inspired by
Akiba’s teaching. Aquila’s version was inferior to the Alexandrian Greek
version, called the Septuagint, in graces of style, but was superior in
accuracy. Aquila followed the Hebrew text word by word. This translator
is identical with Onkelos, to whom in later centuries the Aramaic
translation (Targum Onkelos) of the Pentateuch was ascribed. Aramaic
versions of the Bible were made at a very early period, and the Targum
Onkelos may contain ancient elements, but in its present form it is not
earlier than the fifth century.
Meir, whom we take as representative of the third generation of Tannaim,
was filled with the widest sympathies. In his conception of truth,
everything that men can know belonged to the Torah. Not that the Torah
superseded or absorbed all other knowledge, but that the Torah needed,
for its right study, all the aids which science and secular information
could supply. In this way Jewish literature was to some extent saved
from the danger of becoming a merely religious exercise, and in later
centuries, when the mass of Jews were disposed to despise and even
discourage scientific and philosophical culture, a minority was always
prepared to resist this tendency and, on the ground of the views of some
of the Tannaim like Meir, claimed the right to study what we should now
term secular sciences. The width of Meir’s sympathies may be seen in his
tolerant conduct towards his friend Elisha, the son of Abuya. When the
latter forsook Judaism, Meir remained true to Elisha. He devoted himself
to the effort to win back his old friend, and, though he failed, he
never ceased to love him. Again, Meir was famed for his knowledge of
fables, in antiquity a branch of the wisdom of all the Eastern world.
Meir’s large-mindedness was matched by his large-heartedness, and in his
wife Beruriah he possessed a companion whose tender sympathies and fine
toleration matched his own.
The fourth generation of Tannaim is overshadowed by the fame of Judah
the Prince, Rabbi, as he was simply called. He lived from 150 to 210,
and with his name is associated the compilation of the Mishnah. A man of
genial manners, strong intellectual grasp, he was the exemplar also of
princely hospitality and of friendship with others than Jews. His
intercourse with one of the Antonines was typical of his wide culture.
Life was not, in Rabbi Judah’s view, compounded of smaller and larger
incidents, but all the affairs of life were parts of the great divine
scheme. “Reflect upon three things, and thou wilt not fall into the
power of sin: Know what is above thee–a seeing eye and a hearing
ear–and all thy deeds are written in a book.”
The Mishnah, which deals with things great and small, with everything
that concerns men, is the literary expression of this view of life. Its
language is the new-Hebrew, a simple, nervous idiom suited to practical
life, but lacking the power and poetry of the Biblical Hebrew. It is a
more useful but less polished instrument than the older language. The
subject-matter of the Mishnah includes both law and morality, the
affairs of the body, of the soul, and of the mind. Business, religion,
social duties, ritual, are all dealt with in one and the same code. The
fault of this conception is, that by associating things of unequal
importance, both the mind and the conscience may become incapable of
discriminating the great from the small, the external from the
spiritual. Another ill consequence was that, as literature corresponded
so closely with life, literature could not correct the faults of life,
when life became cramped or stagnant. The modern spirit differs from the
ancient chiefly in that literature has now become an independent force,
which may freshen and stimulate life. But the older ideal was
nevertheless a great one. That man’s life is a unity; that his conduct
is in all its parts within the sphere of ethics and religion; that his
mind and conscience are not independent, but two sides of the same
thing; and that therefore his religious, ethical, æsthetic, and
intellectual literature is one and indivisible,–this was a noble
conception which, with all its weakness, had distinct points of
superiority over the modern view.
The Mishnah is divided into six parts, or Orders (Sedarim); each Order
into Tractates (Massechtoth); each Tractate into Chapters (Perakim);
each Chapter into Paragraphs (each called a Mishnah). The six Orders
are as follows:
ZERAIM ("Seeds”). Deals with the laws connected with Agriculture, and
opens with a Tractate on Prayer ("Blessings”).
MOED ("Festival”). On Festivals.
NASHIM ("Women”). On the laws relating to Marriage, etc.
NEZIKIN ("Damages”). On civil and criminal Law.
KODASHIM ("Holy Things”). On Sacrifices, etc.
TEHAROTH ("Purifications”). On personal and ritual Purity.
THE MISHNAH.
Graetz.–History of the Jews, English translation,
  Vol. II, chapters 13-17 (character of the Mishnah, end of ch. 17).
Steinschneider.–Jewish Literature (London, 1857), p. 13.
Schiller-Szinessy.–Encyclopedia Britannica (Ninth Edition),
  Vol. XVI, p. 502.
De Sola and Raphall.–Eighteen Tractates from the Mishnah  (English translation, London).
C. Taylor.–Sayings of the Jewish Fathers (Cambridge, 1897).
A. Kohut.–The Ethics of the Fathers (New York, 1885).
G. Karpeles.–A Sketch of Jewish History (Jewish Publication
  Society of America, 1895), p. 40.
F.C. Burkitt.–Jewish Quarterly Review, Vol. X, p. 207.
Continue...

This eBook of “Chapters On Jewish Literature” (1899) by Israel Abrahams belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Chapters on Jewish LiteratureBy M. a. Israel AbrahamsAt Amazon
