


Rykov’s prophecies of the disappearance of Political parties
may be falsified by a development of that very non-partyism
on which he bases them.  It is true that the parties openly
hostile to the Communists in Russia have practically
disappeared. Many old-time Mensheviks have joined the
Communist Party.  Here and there in the country may be
found a Social Revolutionary stronghold.  Here and there in
the Ukraine the Mensheviks retain a footing, but I doubt
whether either of these parties has in it the vitality to make
itself once again a serious political factor.  There is,
however, a movement which, in the long run, may alter
Russia’s political complexion.  More and more delegates to
Soviets or Congresses of all kinds are explicitly described
as “Non-party.”  Non-partyism is perhaps a sign of revolt
against rigid discipline of any kind.  Now and then, of
course, a clever Menshevik or Social Revolutionary, by
trimming his sails carefully to the wind, gets himself elected
on a non-party ticket.  ’When this happens there is usually a
great hullabaloo as soon as he declares himself.  A section of
his electors agitates for his recall and presently some one else
is elected in his stead.  But non-partyism is much more than
a mere cloak of invisibility for enemies or conditional
supporters of the Communists.  I know of considerable
country districts which, in the face of every kind of agitation,
insist on returning exclusively non-party delegates.  The
local Soviets in these districts are also non-party, and they
elect usually a local Bolshevik to some responsible post to
act as it were as a buffer between themselves and the central
authority.  They manage local affairs in their own way, and,
through the use of tact on both sides, avoid falling foul of
the more rigid doctrinaires in Moscow.
Eager reactionaries outside Russia will no doubt point to
non-partyism as a symptom of friendship for themselves.  It
is nothing of the sort.  On all questions of the defense of the
Republic the non-party voting is invariably solid with that of the
Communists.  The non-party men do not want Denikin.
They do not want Baron Wrangel.  They have never heard
of Professor Struhve.  They do not particularly like the Communists.
They principally want to be left alone, and they principally fear any
enforced continuation of war of any kind.  If, in the course
of time, they come to have a definite political programme, I think
it not impossible that they may turn into a new kind of constitutional
democrat.  That does not mean that they will have any use for
M. Milukov or for a monarch with whom M. Milukov might be
ready to supply them.  The Constitution for which they will work
will be that very Soviet Constitution which is now in
abeyance, and the democracy which they associate with it
will be that form of democracy which were it to be
accurately observed in the present state of Russia, that
Constitution would provide.  The capitalist in Russia has
long ago earned the position in which, according to the
Constitution, he has a right to vote, since he has long ago
ceased to be a capitalist.  Supposing the Soviet Constitution
were today to be literally applied, it would be found that
practically no class except the priests would be excluded
from the franchise. And when this agitation swells in
volume, it will be an agitation extremely difficult to resist,
supposing Russia to be at peace, so that there will be no
valid excuse with which to meet it.  These new constitutional
democrats will be in the position of saying to the
Communists, “Give us, without change, that very
Constitution which you yourselves drew up.” I think they
will find many friends inside the Communist Party,
particularly among those Communists who are also Trade
Unionists.  I heard something very like the arguments of this
new variety of constitutional democrat in the Kremlin itself
at an All-Russian Conference of the Communist Party.  A
workman, Sapronov, turned suddenly aside in a speech on
quite another matter, and said with great violence that the
present system was in danger of running to seed and turning
into oligarchy, if not autocracy.  Until the moment when he
put his listeners against him by a personal attack on Lenin,
there was no doubt that he had with him the sympathies of
quite a considerable section of an exclusively Communist
audience.
Given peace, given an approximate return to normal
conditions, non-partyism may well profoundly modify the
activities of the Communists.  It would certainly be strong
enough to prevent the rasher spirits among them from
jeopardizing peace or from risking Russia’s chance of
convalescence for the sake of promoting in any way the
growth of revolution abroad.  Of course, so long as it is
perfectly obvious that Soviet Russia is attacked, no serious
growth of non-partyism is to be expected, but it is obvious
that any act of aggression on the part of the Soviet
Government, once Russia had attained  peace-which she has
not known since 1914-would provide just the basis of angry
discontent which might divide even the disciplined ranks of
the Communists and give non-partyism an active, instead of a
comparatively passive, backing throughout the country.
Non-partyism is already the peasants’ way of expressing their
aloofness from the revolution and, at the same time, their
readiness to defend that revolution against anybody who
attacks it from outside.  Lenin, talking to me about the
general attitude of the peasants, said: “Hegel wrote ’What is
the People?  The people is that part of the nation which does
not know what it wants.’ That is a good description of
the Russian peasantry at the present time, and it applies
equally well to your Arthur Hendersons and Sidney Webbs
in England, and to all other people like yourself who want
incompatible things.  The peasantry are individualists, but
they support us.  We have, in some degree, to thank Kolchak
and Denikin for that.  They are in favor of the Soviet
Government, but hanker after Free Trade, not understanding
that the two things are self-contradictory.  Of course, if they
were a united political force they could swamp us, but they
are disunited both in their interests and geographically.  The
interests of the poorer and middle class peasants are in
contradiction to those of the rich peasant farmer who
employs laborers.  The poorer and middle class see that we
support them against the rich peasant, and also see that he is
ready to support what is obviously not in their interests.”  I
said, “If State agriculture in Russia comes to be on a larger
scale, will there not be a sort of proletarianization of the
peasants so that, in the long run, their interests will come to
be more or less identical with those of the workers in other
than agricultural industry!”  He replied,  “Something in
that direction is being done, but it will have to be done very
carefully and must take a very long time.  When we are
getting many thousands of tractors from abroad, then
something of the sort would become possible.”  Finally I
asked him point blank, “Did he think they would pull
through far enough economically to be able to satisfy the
needs of the peasantry before that same peasantry had
organized a real political opposition that should overwhelm
them!” Lenin laughed.  “If I could answer that question,” he
said, “I could answer everything, for on the answer to that
question everything depends.  I think we can.  Yes, I think
we can.  But I do not know that we can.”
Non-partyism may well be the protoplasmic stage of the
future political opposition of the peasants.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
