


When I crossed the Russian front in October, 1919, the first
thing I noticed in peasants’ cottages, in the villages, in the
little town where I took the railway to Moscow, in every
railway station along the line, was the elaborate pictorial
propaganda concerned with the war.  There were posters
showing Denizen standing straddle over Russia’s coal, while
the factory chimneys were smokeless and the engines idle in
the yards, with the simplest wording to show why it was
necessary to beat Denizen in order to get coal; there were
posters illustrating the treatment of the peasants by the
Whites; posters against desertion, posters illustrating the
Russian struggle against the rest of the world, showing a
workman, a peasant, a sailor and a soldier fighting in
self-defence against an enormous Capitalistic Hydra.  There
were also-and this I took as a sign of what might
be-posters encouraging the sowing of corn, and posters
explaining in simple pictures improved methods of
agriculture.  Our own recruiting propaganda during the war,
good as that was, was never developed to such a point of
excellence, and knowing the general slowness with which
the Russian centre reacts on its periphery, I was amazed not
only at the actual posters, but at their efficient distribution
thus far from Moscow.
I have had an opportunity of seeing two of the propaganda
trains, the object of which is to reduce the size of Russia
politically by bringing Moscow to the front and to the out of
the way districts, and so to lessen the difficulty of obtaining
that general unity of purpose which it is the object of
propaganda to produce.  The fact that there is some hope
that in the near future the whole of this apparatus may be
turned over to the propaganda of industry makes it perhaps
worth while to describe these trains in detail.
Russia, for purposes of this internal propaganda, is divided
into five sections, and each section has its own train,
prepared for the particular political needs of the section it
serves, bearing its own name, carrying its regular crew-a
propaganda unit, as corporate as the crew of a ship. The
five trains at present in existence are the “Lenin,” the
“Sverdlov,” the “October Revolution,” the “Red East,"
which is now in Turkestan, and the “Red Cossack,” which,
ready to start for Rostov and the Don, was standing, in the
sidings at the Kursk station, together with the “Lenin,"
returned for refitting and painting.
Burov, the organizer of these trains, a ruddy, enthusiastic
little man in patched leather coat and breeches, took a party
of foreigners-a Swede, a Norwegian, two Czechs, a German
and myself to visit his trains, together with Radek, in the
hope that Radek would induce Lenin to visit them, in which
case Lenin would be kinematographed for the delight of the
villagers, and possibly the Central Committee would, if
Lenin were interested, lend them more lively support.
We walked along the “Lenin” first, at Burov’s special
request.  Burov, it seems, has only recently escaped from
what he considered a bitter affliction due to the Department
of Proletarian Culture, who, in the beginning, for the
decoration of his trains, had delivered him bound hand
and foot to a number of Futurists.  For that reason
he wanted us to see the “Lenin” first, in order that we might
compare it with the result of his emancipation, the “Red
Cossack,” painted when the artists “had been brought under
proper control.”  The “Lenin” had been painted a year and a
half ago, when, as fading hoarding in the streets of Moscow
still testify, revolutionary art was dominated by the Futurist
movement.  Every carriage is decorated with most striking
but not very comprehensible pictures in the brightest colors,
and the proletariat was called upon to enjoy what the
pre-revolutionary artistic public had for the most part failed to
understand.  Its pictures are “art for art’s sake,” and cannot
have done more than astonish, and perhaps terrify, the
peasants and the workmen of the country towns who had the
luck to see them.  The “Red Cossack” is quite different.
As Burov put it with deep satisfaction, “At first we were in the
artists’ hands, and now the artists are in our hands,” a sentence
suggesting the most horrible possibilities of official
art under socialism, although, of course, bad art flourishes
pretty well even under other systems.
I inquired exactly how Burov and his
friends kept the artists in the right way, and received the
fullest explanation.  The political section of the organization
works out the main idea and aim for each picture, which
covers the whole side of a wagon.  This idea is then
submitted to a “collective” of artists, who are jointly
responsible for its realization in paint.  The artists compete
with each other for a prize which is awarded for the best
design, the judges being the artists themselves.  It is the art
of the poster, art with a purpose of the most definite kind.
The result is sometimes amusing, interesting, startling, but,
whatever else it does, hammers home a plain idea.
Thus the picture on the side of one wagon is divided into
two sections.  On the left is a representation of the peasants
and workmen of the Soviet Republic.  Under it are the
words, “Let us not find ourselves again...” and then, in
gigantic lettering under the right-hand section of the picture,
“... in the HEAVEN OF THE WHITES.”  This heaven is
shown by an epauletted officer hitting a soldier in the face,
as was done in the Tsar’s army and in at least one army of
the counter revolutionaries, and workmen tied to
stakes, as was done by the Whites in certain towns in the
south.  Then another wagon illustrating the methods of Tsardom,
with a State vodka shop selling its wares to wretched folk,
who, when drunk on the State vodka, are flogged by the
State police.  Then there is a wagon showing the different
Cossacks-of the Don, Terek, Kuban, Ural-riding in pairs.
The Cossack infantry is represented on the other side of
this wagon.  On another wagon is a very jolly picture of
Stenka Razin in his boat with little old-fashioned brass
cannon, rowing up the river.  Underneath is written the
words: “I attack only the rich, with the poor I divide
everything.”  On one side are the poor folk running from
their huts to join him, on the other the rich folk firing at him
from their castle.  One wagon is treated purely decoratively,
with a broad effective characteristically South Russian
design, framing a huge inscription to the effect that the
Cossacks need not fear that the Soviet Republic will
interfere with their religion, since under its regime every
man is to be free to believe exactly what he likes.
Then there is an entertaining wagon, showing Kolchak
sitting inside a fence in Siberia  with a Red soldier
on guard, Judenitch sitting in a little circle with a sign-post
to show it is  Esthonia, and Denikin running at full speed
to the asylum indicated by another sign-post on which is
the crescent of the Turkish Empire. Another lively picture
shows the young Cossack girls learning to read, with a
most realistic old Cossack woman telling them they had
better not.  But there is no point in describing every
wagon.  There are sixteen wagons in the “Red Cossack,"
and every one is painted all over on both sides.
The internal arrangements of the train are a sufficient proof
that Russians are capable of organization if they set their
minds to it.  We went through it, wagon by wagon.  One
wagon contains a wireless telegraphy station capable of
receiving news from such distant stations as those of
Carnarvon or Lyons.  Another is fitted up as a newspaper
office, with a mechanical press capable of printing an edition
of fifteen thousand daily, so that the district served by the
train, however out of the way, gets its news simultaneously
with Moscow, many days sometimes before the belated Izvestia
or Pravda finds its way to them.  And with its latest
news it gets its latest propaganda, and in order to get the
one it cannot help getting the other.  Next door to that there
is a kinematograph wagon, with benches to seat about one
hundred and fifty persons.  But indoor performances are
only given to children, who must come during the daytime,
or in summer when the evenings are too light to permit an
open air performance.  In the ordinary way, at night, a great
screen is fixed up in the open.  There is a special hole cut in
the side of the wagon, and through this the kinematograph
throws its picture on the great screen outside, so that several
thousands can see it at once.  The enthusiastic Burov insisted
on working through a couple of films for us, showing the
Communists boy scouts in their country camps, children’s
meetings in Petrograd, and the big demonstrations of last
year in honor of the Third International.  He was extremely
disappointed that Radek, being in a hurry, refused to wait
for a performance of “The Father and his Son,” a drama
which, he assured us with tears in his eyes, was so thrilling
that we should not regret being late for our appointments if
we stayed to witness it.  Another wagon is fitted up as an
electric power-station, lighting the train, working the
kinematograph and the printing machine,etc.  Then there is a
clean little kitchen and dining-room, where, before being
kinematographed-a horrible experience when one is first
quite seriously begged (of course by Burov) to assume an
expression of intelligent interest-we had soup, a plate of
meat and cabbage, and tea.  Then there is a wagon
bookshop, where, while customers buy books, a
gramophone sings the revolutionary songs of Demian
Bledny, or speaks with the eloquence ofTrotsky or the logic
of Lenin.  Other wagons are the living-rooms of the
personnel, divided up according to their duties-political,
military, instructional, and so forth.  For the train has not
merely an agitational purpose.  It carries with it a staff to
give advice to local authorities, to explain what has not been
understood, and so in every way to bring the ideas of
the Centre quickly to the backwoods of the Republic.  It works
also in the opposite direction, helping to make the voice of
the backwoods heard at Moscow.  This is illustrated by a
painted pillar-box on one of the wagons, with a slot for
letters, labelled, “For Complaits of Every Kind.”  Anybody
anywhere who has grievance, thinks he is being unfairly
treated, or has a suggestion to make, can speak with
the Centre in this way.  When the train is on a voyage
telegrams announce its arrival beforehand, so that the local
Soviets can make full use of its advantages, arranging meetings,
kinematograph shows, lectures.  It arrives, this amazing
picture train, and proceeds to publish and distribute its
newspapers, sell its books (the bookshop, they tell me, is
literally stormed at every stopping place), send books and
posters for forty versts on either side of the line with the
motor-cars which it carries with it, and enliven the
population with its kinematograph.
I doubt if a more effective instrument of propaganda has
ever been devised.  And in considering the question whether
or no the Russians will be able after organizing their military
defence to tackle with similar comparative success the much
more difficult problem of industrial rebirth, the existence of
such instruments, the use of such propaganda is a factor not
to be neglected.  In the spring of this year, when the civil
war seemed to be ending, when there was a general belief
that the Poles would accept the peace that Russia offered
(they ignored this offer, advanced, took Kiev, were
driven back to Warsaw, advanced again, and finally agreed
to terms which they could have had in March without
bloodshed any kind), two of these propaganda trains were
already being repainted with a new purpose.  It was hoped
that in the near future all five trains would be explaining not
the need to fight but the need to work.  Undoubtedly, at the
first possible moment, the whole machinery of agitation, of
posters, of broadsheets and of trains, will be turned over to
the task of explaining the Government’s plans for
reconstruction, and the need for extraordinary concentration,
now on transport, now on something else, that these plans
involve.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
