


The general principle of industrial conscription recognized
by the Russian Constitution, section ii, chapter v, paragraph
18, which reads: “The Russian Socialist Federate Soviet
Republic recognizes that work is an obligation on every
citizen of the Republic,” and proclaims, “He who does not
work shall not eat.”  It is, however, one thing to proclaim
such a principle and quite another to put it into action.
On December 17, 1919, the moment it became clear that
there was a real possibility that the civil war was drawing to
an end, Trotsky allowed the Pravda to print a memorandum
of his, consisting of “theses” or reasoned notes about
industrial conscription and the militia system.  He points out
that a Socialist State demands a general plan for the
utilization of all the resources of a country, including its
human energy.  At the same time, “in the present economic
chaos in which are mingled the broken fragments of the
past and the beginnings of the future,” a sudden jump to a
complete centralized economy of the country as a whole is
impossible.  Local initiative, local effort must not be
sacrificed for the sake of a plan.  At the same time industrial
conscription is necessary for complete socialization.  It
cannot be regardless of individuality like military
conscription.  He suggests a subdivision of the State into
territorial productive districts which should coincide with the
territorial districts of the militia system which shall replace
the regular army.  Registration of labor necessary.
Necessary also to coordinate military and industrial
registration.  At demobilization the cadres of regiments,
divisions, etc., should form the fundamental cadres of the
militia.  Instruction to this end should be included in the
courses for workers and peasants who are training to
become officers in every district.  Transition to the militia
system must be carefully and gradually accomplished so as
not for a moment to leave the Republic defenseless.  While
not losing sight of these ultimate aims, it is necessary to
decide on immediate needs and to ascertain exactly what
amount of labor is necessary for their limited
realization. He suggests the registration of skilled labor in the
army.  He suggests that a Commission under general
direction of the Council of Public Economy should work out
a preliminary plan and then hand it over to the War
Department, so that means should be worked out for using
the military apparatus for this new industrial purpose.
Trotsky’s twenty-four theses or notes must have been written
in odd moments, now here now there, on the way from one
front to another.  They do not form a connected whole.
Contradictions jostle each other, and it is quite clear that
Trotsky himself had no very definite plan in his head.  But
his notes annoyed and stimulated so many other people that
they did perhaps precisely the work they were intended to
do. Pravada printed them with a note from the editor
inviting discussion.  The Ekonomitcheskaya Jizn printed
letter after letter from workmen, officials and others,
attacking, approving and bringing new suggestions.
Larin, Semashko, Pyatakov, Bucharin all took a hand in the
discussion.  Larin saw in the proposals the beginning of the
end of the revolution, being convinced that authority
would pass from the democracy of the workers into the
hands of the specialists.  Rykov fell upon them with sturdy
blows on behalf of the Trades Unions.  All, however, agreed
on the one point-that something of the sort was neccesary.
On December 27th a Commission for studying the question
of industrial conscription was formed under the presidency
of Trotsky.  This Commission included the People’s
Commissars, or Ministers, of Labor, Ways of
Communication, Supply, Agriculture, War, and the
Presidents of the Central Council of the Trades Unions and
of the Supreme Council of Public Economy.  They compiled
a list of the principal questions before them, and invited
anybody interested to bring them suggestions and material
for discussion.
But the discussion was not limited to the newspapers or to
this Commission.  The question was discussed in Soviets and
Conferences of every kind all over the country.  Thus, on
January 1st an All-Russian Conference of local
“departments for the registration and distribution of labor,"
after prolonged argument, contributed their views.  They
pointed out (1) the need of bringing to work numbers
of persons who instead of doing the skilled labor for which
they were qualified were engaged in petty profiteering, etc.;
(2) that there evaporation of skilled labor into unproductive
speculation  could at least be checked by the introduction of
labor books, which would give some sort of registration of
each citizen’s work; (3) that workmen can be brought back
from the villages only for enterprises which are supplied
with provisions or are situated in districts where there is
plenty. ("The opinion that, in the absence of these
preliminary conditions, it will be possible to draw workmen
from the villages by measures of compulsion or mobilization
is profoundly mistaken.”) (4) that there should be a census
of labor and that the Trades Unions should be invited to
protect the interests of the conscripted.  Finally, this
Conference approved the idea of using the already existing
military organization for carrying out a labor census of the
Red Army, and for the turning over to labor of parts of the
army during demobilization, but opposed the idea of giving
the military organization the work of labor registration and
industrial conscription in general.
On January 22, 1920, the Central Committee of the
Communist Party, after prolonged discussion  of Trotsky’s
rough memorandum, finally adopted and published a new
edition of the “theses,” expanded, altered, almost
unrecognizable, a reasoned body of theory entirely different
from the bundle of arrows loosed at a venture by Trotsky.
They definitely accepted the principle of industrial
conscription, pointing out the immediate reasons for it in the
fact that Russia cannot look for much help from without and
must somehow or other help herself.
Long before the All-Russian Congress of the Communist
Party approved the theses of the Committee, one form of
industrial conscription was already being tested at work.
Very early in January, when the discussion on the subject
was at its height, the Soviet of the Third Army addressed
itself to the Council of Defense of the Republic with an
invitation to make use of this army (which at least for the
moment had finished its military task) and to experiment
with it as a labor army.  The Council of Defense agreed.
Representatives of the Commissariats of Supply,
Agriculture, Ways and Communications, Labor and the
Supreme Council of Public Economy were sent to assist the
Army Soviet.  The army was proudly re-named “The First
Revolutionary Army of Labor,” and began to issue communiques
from the Labor front,” precisely like the communiques of an army
in the field.  I translate as a curiosity the first communique issued
by a Labor Army’s Soviet:
“Wood prepared in the districts of Ishim, Karatulskaya, Omutinskaya,
Zavodoutovskaya, Yalutorovska, Iushaly, Kamuishlovo, Turinsk,
Altynai, Oshtchenkovo, Shadrinsk, 10,180 cubic sazhins.
Working days, 52,651.  Taken to the railway stations, 5,334 cubic
sazhins.  Working days on transport, 22,840.  One hundred carpenters
detailed for the Kizelovsk mines.  One hundred carpenters detailed for
the bridge at Ufa.  One engineer specialist detailed to the
Government Council of Public Economy for repairing the mills of
Chelyabinsk Government.  One instructor accountant detailed for
auditing the accounts of the economic organizations of Kamuishlov.
Repair of locomotives procceding in the works at Ekaterinburg.
January 20, 1920, midnight.”
The Labor Army’s Soviet received a report on the state
of the district covered by the army with regard to supply and
needed work.  By the end of January it had already carried
out a labor census of the army, and found that it included
over 50,000 laborers, of whom a considerable number were
skilled.  It decided on a general plan of work in
reestablishing industry in the Urals, which suffered severely
during the Kolchak regime and the ebb and flow of the civil
war, and was considering a suggestion of one of its members
that if the scheme worked well the army should be increased
to 300,000 men by way of mobilization.
On January 23rd the Council of Defense of the Republic,
encouraged to proceed further, decided to make use of the
Reserve Army for the improvement of railway transport on
the Moscow-Kazan railway, one of the chief arteries
between eastern food districts and Moscow.  The main
object is to be the reestablishment of through traffic between
Moscow and Ekaterinburg and the repair of the Kazan-Ekaterinburg
line, which particularly suffered during the war.  An attempt was
to be made to rebuild the bridge over the Kama River
before the ice melts.  The Commander of the Reserve Army
was appointed Commissar of the eastern part of the Moscow-Kazan
railway, retaining his position as Commander of the Army.
With a view of coordination between the Army Soviet and
the railway authorities, a member of the Soviet was also appointed
Commissar of the railway.  On January 25th it was
announced that a similar experiment was being made in the
Ukraine.  A month before the ice broke the first train
actually crossed the Kama River by the rebuilt bridge.
By April of this year the organization of industrial
conscription had gone far beyond the original labor armies.
A decree of February 5th had created a Chief Labor
Committee, consisting of five members, Serebryakov and Danilov,
from the Commissariat of War; Vasiliev, from the
Commissariat of the Interior; Anikst, from the Commissariat
of Labor; Dzerzhinsky, from the Commissariat of Internal
Affairs.  Dzerzhinsky was President, and his appointment
was possibly made in the hope that the reputation he had
won as President of the Extraordinary Committee for
Fighting Counter-Revolution would frighten people into
taking this Committee seriously.  Throughout the country in
each government or province similar committees, called
“Troikas,” were created, each of three members, one from
the Commissariat of War, one from the Department of
Labor, one from the Department of Management, in each
case from the local Commissariats and Departments attached
to the local Soviet.  Representatives of the Central Statistical
Office and its local organs had a right to be present at the
meeting of these committees of three, or “Troikas,” but had
not the right to vote.  An organization or a factory requiring
labor, was to apply to the Labor Department of the local
Soviet.  This Department was supposed to do its best to
satisfy demands upon it by voluntary methods first.  If these
proved insufficient they were to apply to the local “Troika,"
or Labor Conscription Committee.  If this found that its
resources also were insufficient, it was to refer back the
request to the Labor Department of the Soviet, which was
then to apply to its corresponding Department in the
Government Soviet, which again, first voluntarily and then
through the Government Committee of Labor Conscription, was
to try to satisfy the demands.  I fancy the object of
this arrangement was to prevent local “Troikas” from
referring to Government “Troikas,” and so directly to Dzerzhinsky’s
Central Committee.  If they had been able to
do this there would obviously have been danger lest a new
network of independent and powerful organizations should
be formed.  Experience with the overgrown and
insuppressible Committees for Fighting Counter-Revolution
had taught people how serious such a development might be.
Such was the main outline of the scheme for conscripting
labor.  A similar scheme was prepared for superintending
and safeguarding labor when conscripted.  In every factory
of over 1,000 workmen, clerks, etc., there was formed a
Commission (to distinguish it from the Committee) of
Industrial Conscription.  Smaller factories shared such
Commissions or were joined for the purpose to larger
factories near by.  These Commissions were to be under the
direct control of a Factory Committee, thereby preventing
squabbles between conscripted and non-conscripted labor.
They were to be elected for six months, but their members
could be withdrawn and replaced by the Factory
Committee with the approval of the local “Troika."
These Commissions, like the “Troikas,” consisted of three
members: (1) from the management of the factory, (2) from
the Factory Committee, (3) from the Executive Committee
of the workers. (It was suggested in the directions that one
of these should be from the group which “has been
organizing ’Saturdayings,’ that is to say that he or she should
be a Communist.)The payment of conscripted workers was
to be by production, with prizes for specially good work.
Specially bad work was also foreseen in the detailed scheme
of  possible punishments.  Offenders were to be brought
before the “People’s Court” (equivalent to the ordinary Civil
Court), or, in the case of repeated or very bad offenses,
were to be brought before the far more dreaded
Revolutionary Tribunals.  Six categories of possible offenses
were placed upon the new code:
(1)Avoiding registration, absenteeism, or desertion.
(2)The preparation of false documents or the use of such.
(3)Officials giving false information to facilitate these crimes.
(4)Purposeful damage of instruments or material.
(5)Uneconomical or careless work.
(6)(Probably the most serious of all) Instigation to any of
these actions.
The “Troikas” have the right to deal administratively with the
less important crimes by deprival of freedom for not more
than two weeks.  No one can be brought to trial except by
the Committee for Industrial Conscription on the initiative of
the responsible director of work, and with the approval
either of the local labor inspection authorities or with that of
the local Executive Committee.
No one with the slightest knowledge of Russia will suppose
for a moment that this elaborate mechanism sprang suddenly
into existence when the decree was signed.  On the contrary,
all stages of industrial conscription exist simultaneously even
today, and it would be possible by going from one part of
Russia to another to collect a series of specimens of industrial
conscription at every stage of evolution, just as one
can collect all stages of man from a baboon to a company
director or a Communist.  Some of the more primitive
kinds of conscription were not among the least successful.
For example, at the time(in the spring of the year)when the
Russians still hoped that the Poles would be content with the
huge area of non-Polish territory they had already seized, the
army on the western front was without any elaborate system
of decrees being turned into a labor army.  The work done
was at first ordinary country work, mainly woodcutting.
They tried to collaborate with the local “Troikas,” sending
help when these Committees asked for it.  This, however,
proved unsatisfactory, so, disregarding the “Troikas,” they
organized things for themselves in the whole area
immediately behind the front.  They divided up the forests
into definite districts, and they worked these with soldiers
and with deserters.  Gradually their work developed, and
they built themselves narrow-gauge railways for the
transport of the wood.  Then they needed wagons and
locomotives, and of course immediately found themselves at
loggerheads with the railway authorities.  Finally, they
struck a bargain with the railwaymen, and were allowed to
take broken-down wagons which the railway people were
not in a position to mend. Using such skilled labor as
they had, they mended such wagons as were given them,
and later made a practice of going to the railway yards and
in    inspecting “sick” wagons for themselves, taking out any
that they thought had a chance even of temporary
convalescence.  Incidentally they caused great scandal by
finding in the Smolensk sidings among the locomotives and
wagons supposed to be sick six good locomotives and
seventy perfectly healthy wagons.  Then they began to
improve the feeding of their army by sending the wood they
had cut, in the trains they had mended, to people who
wanted wood and could give them provisions.  One such
train went to Turkestan and back from the army near Smolensk.
Their work continually increased, and since they
had to remember that they were an army and not merely a
sort of nomadic factory, they began themselves to mobilize,
exclusively for purposes of work, sections of the civil
population.  I asked Unshlicht, who had much to do with
this organization, if the peasants came willingly.  He said,
“Not very,” but added that they did not mind when they
found that they got well fed and were given packets of salt
as prizes for good work.  “The peasants,” he said, “do
not grumble against the Government when it shows the sort
of common sense that they themselves can understand.  We
found that when we said definitely how many carts and men
a village must provide, and used them without delay for a
definite purpose, they were perfectly satisfied and
considered it right and proper.  In every case, however,
when they saw people being mobilized and sent thither
without obvious purpose or result, they became hostile at
once.”  I asked Unshlicht how it was that their army still
contained skilled workmen when one of the objects of
industrial conscription was to get the skilled workmen back
into the factories.  He said: “We have an accurate census of
the army, and when we get asked for skilled workmen for
such and such a factory, they go there knowing that they still
belong to the army.”
That, of course, is the army point of view, and indicates one
of the main squabbles which industrial conscription has
produced.  Trotsky would like the various armies to turn into
units of a territorial militia, and at the same time to be an
important part of the labor organization of each district.
His opponents do not regard the labor armies as a permanent
manifestation, and many have gone so far as to say that the
productivity of labor in one of these armies is lower than
among ordinary workmen.  Both sides produce figures on
this point, and Trotsky goes so far as to say that if his
opponents are right, then not only are labor armies damned,
but also the whole principle of industrial conscription.  “If
compulsory labor-independently of social condition-is
unproductive, that is a condemnation not of the labor
armies, but of industrial conscription in general, and with it
of the whole Soviet system, the further development of
which is unthinkable except on a basis of universal industrial
conscription.”
But, of course, the question of the permanence of the labor
armies is not so important as the question of getting the
skilled workers back to the factories.  The comparative
success or failure of soldiers or mobilized peasants in cutting
wood is quite irrelevant to this recovery of the vanished
workmen.  And that recovery will take time, and will be
entirely useless unless it is possible to feed these workers
when they have been collected.  There have already
been several attempts, not wholly successful, to collect the
straying workers of particular industries.  Thus, after the freeing
of the oil-wells from the Whites, there was a general
mobilization of naphtha workers.  Many of these had bolted
on or after the arrival of Krasnov or Denikin and gone far
into Central Russia, settling where they could.  So months
passed before the Red Army definitely pushed the area of
civil war beyond the oil-wells, that many of these refugees
had taken new root and were unwilling to return.  I believe,
that in spite of the mobilization, the oil-wells are still short of
men.  In the coal districts also, which have passed through
similar experiences, the proportion of skilled to unskilled
labor is very much smaller than it was before the war.
There have also been two mobilizations of railway workers,
and these, I think, may be partly responsible for the
undoubted improvement noticeable during the year,
although this is partly at least due to other things beside
conscription.  In the first place Trotsky carried with him into
the Commissariat of Transport the same ferocious energy
that he has shown in the Commissariat of War, together
with the prestige that he had gained there.  Further, he
was well able in the councils of the Republic to defend the
needs of his particular Commissariat against those of all
others.  He was, for example able to persuade the
Communist Party to treat the transport crisis precisely as
they had treated each crisis on the front-that is to say, to
mobilize great numbers of professed Communists to meet it,
giving them in this case the especial task of getting engines
mended and, somehow or other, of keeping trains on the
move.
But neither the bridges mended and the wood cut by the
labor armies, nor the improvement in transport, are any final
proof of the success of industrial conscription.  Industrial
conscription in the proper sense of the words is impossible
until a Government knows what it has to conscript.  A
beginning was made early this year by the introduction of
labor books, showing what work people were doing and
where, and serving as a kind of industrial passports.  But in
April this year these had not yet become general in Moscow
although the less unwieldy population of Petrograd was
already supplied with them.  It will be long even if it is
possible at all, before any  considerable proportion of
the people not living in these two cities are registered in this
way.  A more useful step was taken at the end of August, in a
general census throughout Russia. There has been no
Russian census since 1897.  There was to have been another
about the time the war began. It was postponed for obvious
reasons.  If the Communists carry through the census with
even moderate success (they will of course have to meet
every kind of evasion), they will at least get some of the
information without which industrial conscription on a
national scale must be little more than a farce.  The census
should show them where the skilled workers are.  Industrial
conscription should enable them to collect them and put
them at their own skilled work.  Then if, besides
transplanting them, they are able to feed them, it will be
possible to judge of the success or failure of a scheme which
in most countries would bring a Government toppling to the
ground.
“In most countries"; yes, but then the economic crisis has
gone further in Russia than in most countries.  There is talk
of introducing industrial conscription (one year’s service) in
Germany, where things have not gone nearly so far.
And perhaps industrial conscription, like Communism itself,
becomes a thing of desperate hope only in a country actually
face to face with ruin.  I remember saying to Trotsky, when
talking of possible opposition, that I, as an Englishman, with
the tendencies to practical anarchism belonging to my race,
should certainly object most strongly if I were mobilized and
set to work in a particular factory, and might even want to
work in some other factory just for the sake of not doing
what I was forced to do.  Trotsky replied: “You would now.
But you would not if you had been through a revolution,
and seen your country in such a state that only the united,
concentrated effort of everybody could possibly reestablish
it.  That is the position here.  Everybody knows the position
and that there is no other way.”
WHAT THE COMMUNISTS ARE TRYING TO
DO IN RUSSIA
We come now to the Communist plans for reconstruction.
We have seen, in the first two chapters, something of the
appalling paralysis which is the most striking factor in the
economic problem to-day.  We have seen how Russia is
suffering from a lack of things and from a lack of labor, how
these two shortages react on each other, and how nothing
but a vast improvement in transport can again set in motion
what was one of the great food-producing machines of the
world.  We have also seen something of the political
organization which, with far wider ambitions before it, is at
present struggling to prevent temporary paralysis from
turning into permanent atrophy.  We have seen that it
consists of a political party so far dominant that the Trades
Unions and all that is articulate in the country may be
considered as  part of a machinery of propaganda, for
getting those things done which that political party considers
should be done.  In a country fighting, literally, for its life,
no man can call his soul his own, and we have seen how this
fact-a fact that has become obvious again and again in the
history of the world, whenever a nation has had its back to
the wall-is expressed in Russia in terms of industrial
conscription; in measures, that is to say, which would be
impossible in any country not reduced to such extremities; in
measures which may prove to be the inevitable
accompaniment of national crisis, when such crisis is
economic rather than military.  Let us now see what the
Russians, with that machinery at their disposal are trying to do.
It is obvious that since this machinery is dominated by a
political party, it will be impossible to understand the
Russian plans, without understanding that particular political
party’s estimate of the situation in general.  It is obvious that
the Communist plans for Russia must be largely affected by
their view of Europe as a whole.  This view is gloomy in the
extreme.  The Communists believe that Europe is steadily
shaking itself to pieces.  They believe that this
process has already gone so far that, even given good will on
the part of European Governments, the manufacturers of
Western countries are already incapable of supplying them
with all the things which Russia was importing before the
war, still less make up the enormous arrears which have
resulted from six years of blockade.  They do not agree with
M. Clemenceau that “revolution is a disease attacking
defeated countries only.”  Or, to put it as I have heard it
stated in Moscow, they believe that President Wilson’s
aspiration towards a peace in which should be neither
conqueror nor conquered has been at least partially realized
in the sense that every country ended the struggle
economically defeated, with the possible exception of
America, whose signature, after all, is still to be ratified.
They believe that even in seemingly prosperous countries the
seeds of economic disaster are already fertilized.  They think
that the demands of labor will become greater and more
difficult to fulfill until at last they become incompatible with
a continuance of the capitalist system.  They think that strike
after strike, irrespective of whether it is successful or
not, will gradually widen the cracks and flaws already
apparent in the damaged economic structure of Western
Europe.  They believe that conflicting interests will involve
our nations in new national wars, and that each of these will
deepen the cleavage between capital and labor.  They think
that even if exhaustion makes mutual warfare on a large
scale impossible, these conflicting interests will produce such
economic conflicts, such refusals of cooperation, as will turn
exhaustion to despair.  They believe, to put it briefly, that
Russia has passed through the worst stages of a process to
which every country in Europe will be submitted in turn by
its desperate and embittered inhabitants.  We may disagree
with them, but we shall not understand them if we refuse to
take that belief into account.  If, as they imagine, the next
five years are to be years of disturbance and growing
resolution, Russia will get very little from abroad.  If, for
example, there is to be a serious struggle in England, Russia
will get practically nothing.  They not only believe that these
things are going to be, but make the logical deductions as to
the effect of such disturbances on their own chances of
importing what they need.  For example, Lenin said to me
that “the shock of revolution in England would ensure the
final defeat of capitalism,” but he said at the same time that
it would be felt at once throughout the world and cause such
reverberations as would paralyze industry everywhere.  And
that is why, although Russia is an agricultural country, the
Communist plans for her reconstruction are concerned first
of all not with agriculture, but with industry.  In their
schemes for the future of the world, Russia’s part is that of a
gigantic farm, but in their schemes for the immediate future
of Russia, their eyes are fixed continually on the nearer
object of making her so far self-supporting that, even if
Western Europe is unable to help them, they may be able to
crawl out of their economic difficulties, as Krassin put it to
me before he left Moscow, “if necessary on all fours, but
somehow or other, crawl out.”
Some idea of the larger ambitions of the Communists with
regard to the development of Russia are given in a
conversation with Rykov, which follows this chapter.  The
most important characteristic of them is that they are
ambitions which cannot but find an echo in Russians of
any kind, quite regardless of their political convictions.  The
old anomalies of Russian industry, for example, the
distances of the industrial districts from their sources of fuel
and raw material are to be done away with.  These
anomalies were largely due to historical accidents, such as
the caprice of Peter the Great, and not to any economic
reasons.  The revolution, destructive as it has been, has at
least cleaned the slate and made it possible, if it is possible to
rebuild at all, to rebuild Russia on foundations laid by
common sense.  It may be said that the Communists are
merely doing flamboyantly and with a lot of flag-waving,
what any other Russian Government would be doing in their
place.  And without the flamboyance and the flag-waving, it
is doubtful whether in an exhausted country, it would be
possible to get anything done at all.  The result of this is that
in their work of economic reconstruction the Communists
get the support of most of the best engineers and other
technicians in the country, men who take no interest
whatsoever in the ideas of Karl Marx, but have a
professional interest in doing the best they can with their
knowledge, and a patriotic satisfaction in using
that knowledge for Russia.  These men, caring not at all
about Communism, want to make Russia once more a
comfortably habitable place, no matter under what
Government.  Their attitude is precisely comparable to that
of the officers of the old army who have contributed so
much to the success of the new.  These officers were not
Communists, but they disliked civil war, and fought to put
an end of it.  As Sergei Kamenev, the Commander-in-Chief,
and not a Communist, said to me, “I have not looked on the
civil war as on a struggle between two political ideas, for the
Whites have no definite idea.  I have considered it simply as
a struggle between the Russian Government and a number
of mutineers.” Precisely so do these “bourgeois” technicians
now working throughout Russia regard the task before them.
It will be small satisfaction to them if famine makes the
position of any Government impossible.  For them the
struggle is quite simply a struggle between Russia and the
economic forces tending towards a complete collapse of
civilization.
The Communists have thus practically the  whole
intelligence of the country to help them in their task of
reconstruction, or of salvage.  But the educated classes alone
cannot save a nation.  Muscle is wanted besides brain, and
the great bulk of those who can provide muscle are difficult
to move to enthusiasm by any broad schemes of economic
rearrangement that do not promise immediate improvement
in their own material conditions.  Industrial conscription
cannot be enforced in Russia unless there is among the
conscripted themselves an understanding, although a
resentful understanding, of its necessity.  The Russians have
not got an army of Martians to enforce effort on an alien
people.  The army and the people are one.  “We are bound
to admit,” says Trotsky, “that no wide industrial mobilization
will succeed, if we do not capture all that is honorable,
spiritual in the peasant working masses in explaining our
plan.” And the plan that he referred to was not the grandiose
(but obviously sensible) plan for the eventual electrification
of all Russia, but a programme of the struggle before them
in actually getting their feet clear of the morass of industrial
decay in which they are at present involved.  Such a
programme has actually been decided upon-a
programme the definite object of which is to reconcile the
workers to work not simply hand to mouth, each for himself,
but to concentrate first on those labors which will eventually
bring their reward in making other labors easier and
improving the position as a whole.
Early this year a comparatively unknown Bolshevik called Gusev,
to whom nobody had attributed any particular
intelligence, wrote, while busy on the staff of an army on the
southeast front, which was at the time being used partly as a
labor army, a pamphlet which has had an extraordinary
influence in getting such a programme drawn up.  The
pamphlet is based on Gusev’s personal observation both of a
labor army at work and of the attitude of the peasant
towards industrial conscription.  It was extremely frank, and
contained so much that might have been used by hostile
critics, that it was not published in the ordinary way but
printed at the army press on the Caucasian front and issued
exclusively to members of the Communist Party.  I got hold
of a copy of this pamphlet through a friend. It is called
“Urgent Questions of Economic Construction."Gusev sets
out in detail the sort of opposition he had met, and
says: “The Anarchists, Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
have a clear, simple economic plan which the great masses
can understand: ’Go about your own business and work
freely for yourself in your own place.’  They have a criticism
of labor mobilizations equally clear for the masses.  They
say to them, ’They are putting Simeon in Peter’s place, and
Peter in Simeon’s.  They are sending the men of Saratov to
dig the ground in the Government of Stavropol, and the
Stavropol men to the Saratov Government for the same
purpose.’  Then besides that there is ’nonparty’ criticism:
’When it is time to sow they will be shifting muck, and when
it is time to reap they will be told to cut timber.’ That is a
particularly clear expression of the peasants’ disbelief in our
ability to draw up a proper economic plan.  This belief is
clearly at the bottom of such questions as, ’Comrade Gusev,
have you ever done any plowing?’ or ’Comrade Orator, do
you know anything about peasant work?’  Disbelief in the
townsman who understands nothing about peasants is
natural to the peasant, and we shall have to conquer it, to get
through it, to get rid of it by showing the peasant, with
a clear plan in our hands that he can understand, that we are
not altogether fools in this matter and that we understand
more than he does.”  He then sets out the argument which he
himself had found successful in persuading the peasants to
do things the reward for which would not be obvious the
moment they were done.  He says, “I compared our State
economy to a colossal building with scores of stories and
tens of thousands of rooms.  The whole building has been
half smashed; in places the roof has tumbled down, the
beams have rotted, the ceilings are tumbling, the drains and
water pipes are burst; the stoves are falling to pieces, the
partitions are shattered, and, finally, the walls and
foundations are unsafe and the whole building is threatened
with collapse.  I asked, how, must one set about the repair of
this building?  With what kind of economic plan?  To this
question the inhabitants of different stories, and even of
different rooms on one and the same story will reply
variously.  Those who live on the  top floor will shout that
the rafters are rotten and the roof falling; that it is impossible
to live, there any longer, and that it is immediately
necessary, first of all, to put up new beams and to
repair the roof.  And from their point of view they will be
perfectly right.  Certainly it is not possible to live any longer
on that floor.  Certainly the repair of the roof is necessary.
The inhabitants of one of the lower stories in which the
water pipes have burst will cry out that it is impossible to
live without water, and therefore, first of all, the water pipes
must be mended.  And they, from their point of view, will
be perfectly right, since it certainly is impossible to live
without water.  The inhabitants of the floor where the stoves
have fallen to pieces will insist on an immediate mending of
the stoves, since they and their children are dying of cold
because there is nothing on which they can heat up water or
boil kasha for the children; and they, too, will be quite right.
But in spite of all these just demands, which arrive in
thousands from all sides, it is impossible to forget the most
important of all, that the foundation is shattered and that the
building is threatened with a collapse which will bury all the
inhabitants of the house together, and that, therefore, the
only immediate task is the strengthening of the foundation
and the walls. Extraordinary firmness, extraordinary
courage is necessary, not only not to listen to the cries and
groans of old men, women, children and sick, coming from
every floor, but also to decide on taking from the inhabitants
of all floors the instruments and materials necessary for the
strengthening of the foundations and walls, and to force
them to leave their corners and hearths, which they are
doing the best they can to make habitable, in order to drive
them to work on the strengthening of the walls and
foundations.”
Gusev’s main idea was that the Communists were asking
new sacrifices from a weary and exhausted people, that
without such sacrifices these people would presently find
themselves in even worse conditions, and that, to persuade
them to make the effort necessary to save themselves, it was
necessary to have a perfectly clear and easily understandable
plan which could be dinned into the whole nation and
silence the criticism of all possible opponents.  Copies of his
little book came to Moscow.  Lenin read it and caused
excruciating jealousy in the minds of several other
Communists, who had also been trying to find the
philosopher’s stone that should turn discouragement
into hope, by singling out Gusev for his special praise and
insisting that his plans should be fully discussed at the
Supreme Council in the Kremlin.  Trotsky followed Lenin’s
lead, and in the end a general programme for Russian
reconstruction was drawn up, differing only slightly from
that which Gusev had proposed.  I give this scheme in
Trotsky’s words, because they are a little fuller than those of
others, and knowledge of this plan will explain not only
what the Communists are trying to do in Russia, but
what they would like to get from us today and what
they will want to get tomorrow.  Trotsky says:-
“The fundamental task at this moment is improvement in
the condition of our transport, prevention of its further
deterioration and preparation of the most elementary
stores of food, raw material and fuel.  The whole of the first
period of our reconstruction will be completely occupied in
the concentration of labor on the solution of these
problems, which is a condition of further progress.
“The second period (it will be difficult to say now whether it
will be measured in months or years, since that depends on
many factors beginning with the international
situation and ending with the unanimity or the lack of it in
our own party) will be a period occupied in the building of
machines in the interest of transport, and the getting of raw
materials and provisions.
“The third period will be occupied in building machinery,
with a view to the production of articles in general demand,
and, finally, the fourth period will be that in which we are
able to produce these articles.”
Does it not occur, even to the most casual reader, that there
is very little politics in that program, and that, no matter
what kind of Government should be in Russia, it would have
to endorse that programme word for word?  I would ask any
who doubt this to turn again to my first two chapters
describing the nature of the economic crisis in Russia, and to
remind themselves how, not only the lack of things but the
lack of men, is intimately connected with the lack of
transport, which keeps laborers ill fed, factories ill supplied
with material, and in this way keeps the towns incapable of
supplying the needs of the country, with the result that the
country is most unwilling to supply the needs of the town.
No Russian Government unwilling to allow Russia to
subside definitely to a lower level of civilization can do
otherwise than to concentrate upon the improvement of
transport.  Labor in Russia must be used first of all for that,
in order to increase its own productivity.  And, if purchase
of help from abroad is to be allowed, Russia must “control"
the outflow of her limited assets, so that, by healing
transport first of all, she may increase her power of making
new assets.  She must spend in such a way as eventually
to increase her power of spending.  She must prevent the
frittering away of her small purse on things which, profitable
to the vendor and doubtless desirable by the purchaser,
satisfy only individual needs and do not raise the producing
power of the community as a whole.
RYKOV ON ECONOMIC PLANS AND ON THE
TRANSFORMATION OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY
Alexei Rykov, the President of the Supreme Council of
Public Economy, is one of the hardest worked men in
Russia, and the only time I was able to have a long talk with
him (although more than once he snatched moments to
answer particular questions) was on a holiday, when the old
Siberian Hotel, now the offices of the Council, was
deserted, and I walked through empty corridors until I found
the President and his secretary at work as usual.
After telling of the building of the new railway from
Alexandrovsk Gai to the Emba, the prospects of developing
the oil industry in that district, the relative values of those
deposits and of those at Baku, and the possible decreasing
significance of Baku in Russian industry generally, we
passed to   broader perspectives.  I asked him what he
thought of the relations between agriculture  and industry in
Russia, and supposed that he did not imagine that Russia
would ever become a great industrial country.  His answer
was characteristic of the tremendous hopes that nerve these
people in their almost impossible task, and I set it down as
nearly as I can in his own words.  For him, of course, the
economic problem was the first, and he spoke of it as the
director of a huge trust might have spoken.  But, as he
passed on to talk of what he thought would result from the
Communist method of tackling that problem, and spoke of
the eventual disappearance of political parties, I felt I was
trying to read a kind of palimpsest of the Economist and
News from Nowhere, or listening to a strange compound of
William Morris and, for example, Sir Eric Geddes.  He said:
“We may have to wait a long time before the inevitable
arrives and there is a Supreme Economic Council dealing
with Europe as with a single economic whole.  If that should
come about we should, of course, from the very nature of
our country, be called upon in the first place to provide
food for Europe, and we should hope enormously to
improve our agriculture, working on a larger and larger
scale, using mechanical plows and tractors, which would be
supplied us by the West.  But in the meantime we have to
face the fact that events may cause us to be, for all practical
purposes, in a state of blockade for perhaps a score of years,
and, so far as we can, we must be ready to depend on
ourselves alone.  For example, we want mechanical plows
which could be procured abroad.  We have had to start
making them ourselves.  The first electric plow made in
Russia and used in Russia started work last year, and this
year we shall have a number of such plows made in our
country, not because it is economic so to make them, but
because we could get them in no other way.  In so far as is
possible, we shall have to make ourselves self-supporting, so
as somehow or other to get along even if the blockade,
formal or perhaps willy-nilly (imposed by the inability of the
West to supply us), compels us to postpone cooperation with
the rest of Europe.  Every day of such postponement is one
in which the resources of Europe are not being used in the
most efficient manner to supply the needs not only of
our own country but of all.”
I referred to what he had told me last year about the
intended electrification of Moscow by a station using turf
fuel.
“That,” he said, “is one of the plans which, in spite of the
war, has gone a very long way towards completion.  We
have built the station in the Ryezan Government, on the
Shadul peat mosses, about 110 versts from Moscow.
Before the end of May that station should be actually at
work. (It was completed, opened and partially destroyed by
a gigantic fire.) Another station at Kashira in the Tula
Government (on the Oka), using the small coal produced
in the Moscow coalfields, will be at work before the autumn.
This year similar stations are being built at
Ivano-Voznesensk and at Nijni-Novgorod.  Also, with a
view to making the most economic use of what we already
possess, we have finished both in Petrograd and in Moscow
a general unification of all the private power-stations, which
now supply their current to a single main cable.  Similar
unification is nearly finished at Tula and at Kostroma.  The
big water-power station on the rapids of the Volkhov is
finished in so far as land construction goes, but we can
proceed no further until we have obtained the turbines,
which we hope to get from abroad.  As you know, we are
basing our plans in general on the assumption that in course
of time we shall supply the whole of Russian industry with
electricity, of which we also hope to make great use in
agriculture.  That, of course, will take a great number of
years.”
[Nothing could have been much more artificial than the
industrial geography of old Russia.  The caprice of history
had planted great industrial centers literally at the greatest
possible distance from the sources of their raw materials.
There was Moscow bringing its coal from Donetz, and Petrograd,
still further away, having to eke out a living by
importing coal from England.  The difficulty of transport
alone must have forced the Russians to consider how they
could do away with such anomalies.  Their main idea is that
the transport of coal in a modern State is an almost
inexcusable barbarism.  They have set themselves, these
ragged engineers, working in rooms which they can hardly
keep above freezing-point and walking home through the
snow in boots without soles, no less a task than the
electrification of the whole of Russia.  There is a State
Committee presided over by an extraordinary optimist called
Krzhizhanovsky, entrusted by the Supreme Council of
Public Economy and Commissariat of Agriculture with the
working out of a general plan.  This Committee includes,
besides a number of well-known practical engineers,
Professors Latsinsky, Klassen, Dreier, Alexandrov, Tcharnovsky,
Dend and Pavlov.  They are investigating the
water power available in different districts in Russia, the
possibilities of using turf, and a dozen similar questions
including, perhaps not the least important, investigation to
discover where they can do most with least dependence on
help from abroad.]
Considering the question of the import of machinery from
abroad, I asked him whether in existing conditions of
transport Russia was actually in a position to export the raw
materials with which alone the Russians could hope to buy
what they want.  He said:
“Actually we have in hand about two million poods (a pood
is a little over thirty-six English pounds) of flax, and any
quantity of light leather (goat, etc.), but the main
districts where we have raw material for ourselves or for
export are far away.  Hides, for example, we have in great
quantities in Siberia, in the districts of Orenburg and the
Ural River and in Tashkent.  I have myself made the
suggestion that we should offer to sell this stuff where it is,
that is to say not delivered at a seaport, and that the buyers
should provide their own trains, which we should eventually
buy from them with the raw material itself, so that after a
certain number of journeys the trains should become ours.
In the same districts we have any quantity of wool, and in
some of these districts corn.  We cannot, in the present
condition of our transport, even get this corn for ourselves.
In the same way we have great quantities of rice in Turkestan,
and actually are being offered rice from Sweden,
because we cannot transport our own.  Then we have over a
million poods of copper, ready for export on the same
conditions.  But it is clear that if the Western countries are
unable to help in the transport, they cannot expect to get raw
materials from us.”
I asked about platinum.  He laughed.
“That is a different matter.  In platinum we have a
world monopoly, and can consequently afford to wait.
Diamonds and gold, they can have as much as they want of
such rubbish; but platinum is different, and we are in no
hurry to part with it.  But diamonds and gold ornaments, the
jewelry of the Tsars, we are ready to give to any king in
Europe who fancies them, if he can give us some less
ornamental but more useful locomotives instead.”
I asked if Kolchak had damaged the platinum mines.  He
replied, “Not at all.  On the contrary, he was promising
platinum to everybody who wanted it, and he set the mines
going, so we arrived to find them in good condition, with a
considerable yield of platinum ready for use.”
(I am inclined to think that in spite of Rykov’s rather
intransigent attitude on the question, the Russians would
none the less be willing to export platinum, if only on
account of the fact in comparison with its great value it
requires little transport, and so would make possible for
them an immediate bargain with some of the machinery they
most urgently need.)
Finally we talked of the growing importance of the Council
of Public Economy.  Rykov was of opinion that it
would eventually become the centre of the whole State
organism, “it and Trades Unions organizing the actual
producers in each branch.”
“Then you think that as your further plans develop, with the
creation of more and more industrial centres, with special
productive populations concentrated round them, the
Councils of the Trades Unions will tend to become identical
with the Soviets elected in the same districts by the same
industrial units?”
“Precisely,” said Rykov, “and in that way the Soviets, useful
during the period of transition as an instrument of struggle
and dictatorship, will be merged with the Unions.” (One
important factor, as Lenin pointed out when considering the
same question, is here left out of count, namely the political
development of the enormous agricultural as opposed to
industrial population.)
“But if this merging of political Soviets with productive
Unions occurs, the questions that concern people will cease
to be political questions, but will be purely questions of
economics.”
“Certainly.  And we shall see the disappearance of political
parties.  That process is already apparent.  In the present
huge Trade Union Conference there are only sixty Mensheviks.
The Communists are swallowing one party after another.
Those who were not drawn over to us during the period
of struggle are now joining us during the process
of construction, and we find that our differences now are
not political at all, but concerned only with the practical
details of construction.”  He illustrated this by pointing out
the present constitution of the Supreme Council of Public
Economy.  There are under it fifty-three Departments or
Centres (Textile, Soap, Wool, Timber, Flax, etc.), each
controlled by a “College” of three or more persons.  There
are 232 members of these Colleges or Boards in all, and of
them 83 are workmen, 79 are engineers, 1 was an ex-director,
50 were from the clerical staff, and 19 unclassified.
Politically 115 were Communists, 105 were “non-party,"
and 12 were of non-Communist parties.  He continued,
“Further, in swallowing the other parties, the Communists
themselves will cease to exist as a political party.  Think only
that youths coming to their manhood during this year in
Russia and in the future will not be able to confirm from
their own experience the reasoning of Karl Marx,
because they will have had no experience of a capitalist
country.  What can they make of the class struggle?  The
class struggle here is already over, and the distinctions of
class have already gone altogether.  In the old days,
members of our party were men who had read, or tried to
read, Marx’s “Capital,” who knew the “Communist
Manifesto” by heart, and were occupied in continual
criticism of the basis of capitalist society.  Look at the new
members of our party.  Marx is quite unnecessary to them.
They join us, not for struggle in the interests of an oppressed
class, but simply because they understand our aims in
constructive work.  And, as this process continues, we old
social democrats shall disappear, and our places will be filled
by people of entirely different character grown up under
entirely new conditions.”
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
