


In the preceding chapter I wrote of Russia’s many wants, and
of the processes visibly at work, tending to make her
condition worse and not better.   But I wrote of things, not
of people.  I wrote of the shortage of this and of that, but
not of the most serious of all shortages, which, while itself
largely due to those already discussed, daily intensifies them,
and points the way to that further stage of decay which is
threatened in the near future in Russia, and, in the more
distant future in Europe.  I did not write of the shortage
deterioration of labor.
Shortage of labor is not peculiar to Russia.  It is among the
postwar phenomena common to all countries.  The war and
its accompanying eases have cost Europe, including Russia,
an enormous number of able-bodied men.  Many millions of
others have lost the habit of regular work.German
industrialists complain that they cannot get labor, and that
when they get it, it is not productive.  I heard complaints on
the same subject in England.  But just as the economic crisis,
due in the first instance to the war and the isolation it
imposed, has gone further in Russia than elsewhere, so the
shortage of labor, at present a handicap, an annoyance in
more fortunate countries, is in Russia perhaps the greatest of
the national dangers.  Shortage of labor cannot be measured
simply by the decreasing numbers of the workmen.  If it
takes two workmen as long to do a particular job in 1920 as
it took one man to do it in 1914, then, even if the  number
of workman has remained the same, the actual supply of
labor has been halved.  And in Russia the situation is worse
than that.  For example, in the group of State metal-working
factories, those, in fact which may be considered as the
weapon with which Russia is trying to cut her way out of her
transport difficulties, apart from the fact that there were in
19l6 81,600 workmen, whereas in 1920 there are only
42,500, labor has deteriorated in the most appalling manner.
In 1916 in these factories 92 per cent. of the nominal
working  hours were actually kept; in 1920 work goes on
during only 60 per cent. of the nominal hours.  It is
estimated that the labor of a single workman produces now
only one quarter of what it produced in 1916.  To take
another example, also from workmen engaged in transport,
that is to say, in the most important of all work at the present
time: in the Moscow junction of the Moscow Kazan
Railway, between November 1st and February 29th (1920),
292 workmen and clerks missed 12,048 working days, being
absent, on in average, forty days per man in the four
months.  In Moscow passenger-station on this line, 22
workmen missed in November 106 days, in December 273,
in January 338, and in February 380; in an appalling
crescendo further illustrated by the wagon department,
where 28 workmen missed in November 104 days and in
February 500.  In November workmen absented themselves
for single days.  In February the same workmen were absent
for the greater part of the month.  The invariable excuse was
illness.  Many cases of illness there undoubtedly were, since
this period was the worst of the typhus epidemic, but besides
illness, and besides mere obvious idleness which no
doubt accounts for a certain proportion of illegitimate
holidays, there is another explanation which goes nearer the
root of the matter.  Much of the time filched from the State
was in all probability spent in expeditions in search of food.
In Petrograd, the Council of Public Economy complain that
there is a tendency to turn the eight-hour day into a four-hour
day.  Attempts are being made to arrest this tendency
by making an additional food allowance conditional on the
actual fulfilment of working days.  In the Donetz coal basin,
the monthly output per man was in 1914 750 poods, in 1916
615 poods, in 1919 240 poods (figures taken from
Ekaterinoslav Government), and in 1920 theoutput per man
is estimated at being something near 220 poods.
In the shale mines on the Volga, where food conditions are
comparatively good, productivity is comparatively high.
Thus in a small mine near Simbirsk there are 230 workmen,
of’ whom 50 to 60 are skilled.  The output for the unskilled
is 28.9 poods in a shift, for the skilled 68.3.  But even there
25 per cent. of the workmen are regular absentees, and
actually the mine works only 17 or 18 days in a month, that
is, 70 per cent. of the normal number of working
days.  The remaining 30 per cent. of normal working time is
spent by the workmen in getting food.  Another small mine
in the same district is worked entirely by unskilled labor,
the wokers being peasants from the neighboring villages.  In this
mine the productivity per man is less, but all the men work
full time.  They do not have to waste time in securing food,
because, being local peasants, they are supplied by their own
villages and families.  In Moscow and Petrograd food is far
more difficult to secure, more time is wasted on that
hopeless task; even with that waste of time, the workman is
not properly fed, and it cannot be wondered at that his
productivity is low.
Something, no doubt, is due to the natural character of the
Russians, which led Trotsky to define man as an animal
distinguished by laziness.  Russians are certainly lazy, and
probably owe to their climate their remarkable incapacity for
prolonged effort.  The Russian climate is such that over
large areas of Russia the Russian peasant is accustomed, and
has been accustomed for hundreds of years, to perform
prodigies of labor during two short periods of sowing
and harvest, and to spend the immensely long and
monotonous winter in a hibernation like that of the snake or
the dormouse.  There is a much greater difference between a
Russian workman’s normal output and that of which he is
capable for a short time if he sets himself to it, than there is
between the normal and exceptional output of an
Englishman, whose temperate climate has not taught him to
regard a great part of the year as a period of mere waiting
for and resting from the extraordinary effort of a few
weeks.(*) [(*)Given any particular motive, any particula
enthusiasm, or visible, desirable object, even the hungry
Russian workmen of to-day are capable of sudden and
temporary increase of output. The “Saturdayings” (see p. 119)
provide endless illustrations of this.  They had something in
the character of a picnic, they were novel, they were out of
the routine, and the productivity of labor during a “Saturdaying"
was invariably higher than on a weekday.  For example,
there is a shortage of paper for cigarettes.  People roll
cigarettes in old newspapers.  It occurred to the Central Committee
of the Papermakers’ Union to organize a “Sundaying"
with the object of sending cigarette paper to the soldiers in
the Red Army. Six factories took part.  Here is a table showing the
output of these factories during the “Sundaying” and the average
weekday output.  The figures are in poods.
                           Made on      Average week
Factory               the Sunday     Day Output
Krasnogorodskaya.........615...............450
Griaznovskaya.............65................45
Medianskaya..............105................90
Dobruzhskaya.............186...............250
Belgiiskaya..............127................85
Ropshinskaya..............85................55]
But this uneven working temperament was characteristic of
the Russian before the war as well as now.  It has been said
that the revolution removed the stimulus to labor, and left the
Russian laziness to have its way.  In the first period
of the revolution that may have been true.  It is becoming
day by day less true.  The fundamental reasons of low
productivity will not be found in any sudden or unusual
efflorescence of idleness, but in economic conditions which
cannot but reduce the productivity of idle and industrious
alike.  Insufficient feeding is one such reason.  The
proportion of working time consumed in foraging is another.
But the whole of my first chapter may be taken as a compact
mass of reasons why the Russians at the present time should
not work with anything like a normal productivity.  It is said
that bad workmen complain of their tools, but even good
ones become disheartened if compelled to work with
makeshifts, mended tools, on a stock of materials that runs
out from one day to the next, in factories where the
machinery may come at any moment to a standstill from lack
of fuel. There would thus be a shortage of labor in Russia,
even if the numbers of workmen were the same today as
they were before the war.  Unfortunately that is not so.
Turning from the question of low productivity per man to
that of absolute shortage of men: the example given at the
beginning of this chapter, showing that in the most important
group of factories the number of workmen has fallen 50 per
cent. is by no means exceptional.  Walking through the
passages of what used to be the Club of the Nobles, and is
now the house of the Trades Unions during the recent
Trades Union Congress in Moscow,  I observed among a
number of pictorial diagrams on the walls, one in particular
illustrating the rise and fall of the working population of
Moscow during a number of years. Each year was
represented by the picture of a factory with a chimney which
rose and fell with the population.  From that diagram I took
the figures for 1913, 1918 and 1919.  These figures should
be constantly borne in mind by any one who wishes to realize
 how catastrophic the shortage oflabor in Russia
actually is, and to judge how sweeping may be the
changes in  the social configuration of the country if that shortage
continues to increase.  Here are the figures:
Workmen in Moscow in 1913............159,344
Workmen in Moscow in 1918 ...........157,282
Workmen in Moscow in 1919............105,210
That is to say, that one-third of the workmen of Moscow
ceased to live there, or ceased to be workmen, in the course
of a single year.  A similar phenomenon is observable in
each one of the big industrial districts.
What has become of those workmen?
A partial explanation is obvious.  The main impulse of the
revolution came from the town workers.  Of these, the metal
workers were the most decided, and those who most freely
joined the Red Guard in the early and the Red Army in the
later days of the revolution.  Many, in those early days, when
there was more enthusiasm than discipline, when there were
hardly any experienced officers, and those without much
authority, were slaughtered during the German advance of
1918.  The first mobilizations, when conscription was
introduced, were among the workers in the great industrial
districts.  The troops from Petrograd and Moscow,
exclusively workmen’s regiments, have suffered more than
any other during the civil war, being the most dependable
and being thrown, like the guards of old time, into the worst
place at any serious crisis.  Many thousands of them have
died for the sake of the revolution which, were they living,
they would be hard put to it to save. (The special shortage of
skilled workers is also partially to be explained by the
indiscriminate mobilizations of 1914-15, when great
numbers of the most valuable engineers and other skilled
workers were thrown into the front line, and it was not
until their loss was already felt that the Tsar’s Government in this
matter came belatedly to its senses.)
But these explanations are only partial.  The more general
answer to the question, What has become of the workmen?
lies in the very economic crisis which their absence
accentuates.  Russia is unlike England, where starvation of
the towns would be practically starvation of the whole
island.  In Russia, if a man is hungry, he has only to
walk far enough and he will come to a place where there is
plenty to eat.  Almost every Russian worker retains in some
form or other connection with a village, where, if he returns,
he will not be an entire stranger, but at worst a poor relation,
and quite possibly an honored guest.  It is not surprising that
many thousands have “returned to the land” in this way.
Further, if a workman retains his connection, both with a
distant village and with a town, he can keep himself and his
family fat and prosperous by ceasing to be a workman, and,
instead, traveling on the buffers or the roof of a railway
wagon, and bringing back with him sacks of flour and
potatoes for sale in the town at fantastic prices. Thereby he
is lost to productive labor, and his uncomfortable but
adventurous life becomes directly harmful, tending to
increase the strain on transport, since it is obviously
more economical to transport a thousand sacks than to transport a
thousand sacks with an idle workman attached to each sack.
Further, his activities actually make it more difficult for the
town population to get food.  By keeping open for the
village the possibility of selling at fantastic prices, he lessens
the readiness of the peasants to part with their
flour at the lower prices of the Government.  Nor  is it as if
his activities benefited the working population.  The food he
brings in goes for the most part to those who have plenty of
money or have things to exchange for it.  And honest men in
Russia to-day have not much money, and those who have
things to exchange are not as a rule workmen.  The theory
of this man’s harmfulness is, I know, open to argument, but
the practice at least is exactly as I have stated it, and is
obviously attractive to the individual who prefers adventure
on a full stomach to useful work on an empty.  Setting aside
the theory with its latent quarrel between Free Trade and
State control, we can still recognize that each workman
engaged in these pursuits has become an unproductive
middleman, one of that very parasitic species which the
revolutionaries had hoped to make unnecessary.  It is bad
from the revolutionary point of view if a workman is so
employed, but it is no less bad from the point of view of
people who do not care twopence about the revolution one
way or the other, but do care about getting Russia on her
feet again and out of her economic crisis.  It is bad
enough if an unskilled workman is so employed.  It is far
worse if a skilled workman finds he can do better for himself
as a “food speculator” than by the exercise of his legitimate
craft.  From mines, from every kind of factory come
complaints of the decreasing proportion of skilled to
unskilled workmen.  The superior intelligence of the skilled
worker offers him definite advantages should he engage in
these pursuits, and his actual skill gives him other advantages
in the villages.  He can leave his factory and go to the
village, there on the spot to ply his trade or variations of it,
when as a handy man, repairing tools, etc., he will make an
easy living and by lessening the dependence of the village on
the town do as much as the “food speculator” in worsening
the conditions of the workman he has left behind.
And with that we come to the general changes in the social
geography of Russia which are threatened if the processes
now at work continue unchecked.  The relations between
town and village are the fundamental problem of the
revolution.  Town and countryside are in sharp contradiction
daily intensified by the inability of the towns to supply
the country’s needs.  The town may be considered as a single
productive organism, with feelers stretching into the country,
and actual outposts there in the form of agricultural
enterprises taking their directives from the centre and
working as definite parts of the State organism.  All round
this town organism, in all its interstices, it too, with its feelers
in the form of “food speculators,” is the anarchic chaos of
the country, consisting of a myriad independent units,
regulated by no plan, without a brain centre of any kind.
Either the organized town will hold its own against and
gradually dominate and systematize the country chaos, or
that chaos little by little will engulf the town organism.
Every workman who leaves the town automatically places
himself on the side of the country in that struggle.  And
when a town like Moscow loses a third of its working
population in a year, it is impossible not to see that, so far,
the struggle is going in favor of that huge chaotic,
unconscious but immensely powerful countryside.  There is
even a danger that the town may become divided against
itself.  Just as scarcity of food leads to food speculation, so
the shortage of labor is making possible a sort of
speculation in labor.  The urgent need of labor has led to a
resurrection of the methods of the direct recruiting of
workmen in the villages by the agents of particular factories,
who by exceptional terms succeed in getting workmen where
the Government organs fail.  And, of course, this recruiting
is not confined to the villages.  Those enterprises which are
situated in the corn districts are naturally able to offer better
conditions, for the sake of which workmen are ready to
leave their jobs and skilled workmen to do unskilled work,
and the result can only be a drainage of good workmen away
from the hungry central industrial districts where they are
most of all needed.
Summing up the facts collected in this chapter and in the
first on the lack of things and the lack of men, I think the
economic crisis in Russia may be fairly stated as follows:
Owing to the appalling condition of Russian transport, and
owing to the fact that since 1914 Russia has been practically
in a state of blockade, the towns have lost their power of
supplying, either as middlemen or as producers, the simplest
needs of the villages.  Partly owing to this, partly again
because of the condition of transport, the towns are not
receiving the necessaries of life in sufficient quantities.  The
result of this is a serious fall in the productivity of labor, and
a steady flow of skilled and unskilled workmen from the
towns towards the villages, and from employments the
exercise of which tends to assist the towns in recovering
their old position as essential sources of supply to
employments that tend to have the opposite effect.  If this
continues unchecked, it will make impossible the
regeneration of Russian industry, and will result in the
increasing independence of the villages, which will tend to
become entirely self-supporting communities, tilling the
ground in a less and less efficient manner, with ruder tools,
with less and less incentive to produce more than is wanted
for the needs of the village itself.  Russia, in these
circumstances, may sink into something very like barbarism,
for with the decay of the economic importance of the towns
would decay also their authority, and free-booting on a small
and large scale would become profitable and not very
dangerous.  It would be possible, no doubt, for foreigners to
trade with the Russians as with the natives of the cannibal
islands, bartering  looking-glasses and cheap tools, but,
should such a state of things come to be, it would mean long
years of colonization, with all the new  possibilities and risks
involved in the subjugation of a free people, before Western
Europe could count once more on getting a considerable
portion of its food from Russian corn lands.
That is the position, those the natural tendencies at work.
But opposed to these tendencies are the united efforts of the
Communists and of those who, leaving the question of
Communism discreetly aside, work with them for the sake of
preventing such collapse of Russian civilization.  They
recognize the existence of every one of the tendencies I have
described, but they are convinced that every one of these
tendencies will be arrested.  They believe that the country
will not conquer the town but the reverse.  So far from
expecting the unproductive stagnation described in the last
paragraph, they think of Russia as of the natural food supply
of Europe, which the Communists among them believe will,
in course of time, be made up for “Working Men’s
Republics” (though, for the sake of their own Republic, they
are not inclined to postpone trade with Europe until that
epoch arrives).  At the very time when spades and sickles are
wearing out or worn out, these men are determined that the
food output of Russia shall sooner or later be increased by
the introduction of better methods of agriculture and
farming on a larger scale.  We are witnessing in Russia the
first stages of a titanic struggle, with on one side all the
forces of nature leading apparently to an inevitable collapse
of civilization, and on the other side nothing but the
incalculable force of human will.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
