Presented by
Authorama
Public Domain Books
To William Peters
of Aberdeen
THE characteristic of a revolutionary country is that change
is a quicker process there than elsewhere.  As the revolution
recedes into the past the process of change slackens speed.
Russia is no longer the dizzying kaleidoscope that it was in
1917.  No longer does it change visibly from week to week
as it changed in 19l8.  Already, to get a clear vision of the
direction in which it is changing, it is necessary to visit it at
intervals of six months, and quite useless to tap the political
barometer several times a day as once upon a time one used
to do. . . . But it is still changing very fast. My journal of
"Russia in 1919, “while giving as I believe a fairly accurate
pictureof the state of affairs in February and March of
1919, pictures a very different stage in the development of
the revolution from that which would be found by observers
today.
The  prolonged state of crisis in which the country has
been kept by external war, while strengthening the ruling
party by rallying even their enemies to their support, has had
the other effects that a national crisis always has on the
internal politics of a country. Methods of government which
in normal times would no doubt be softened or disguised by
ceremonial usage are used nakedly and justified by necessity.
We have seen the same thing in belligerent and non-revolutionary
countries, and, for the impartial student, it has
been interesting to observe that, when this test of crisis is
applied, the actual governmental machine in every country
looks very much like that in every other. They wave
different flags to stimulate enthusiasm and to justify
submission.  But that is all.  Under the stress of war, “
constitutional safeguards” go by the board “for the public
good,” in Moscow as elsewhere. Under that stress it
becomes clear that, in spite of its novel constitution, Russia
is governed much as other countries are governed, the real
directive power lying in the hands of a comparatively small
body which is able by hook or crook to infect with its
conscious will a population largely indifferent and inert. A
visitor to Moscow to-day would find much of the
constitutional machinery that was in full working order in the
spring of 1919 now  falling into rust and disrepair.  He would
 not be able once a week or so to attend All-Russian
Executive and hear discussions in this parliament of the
questions of the day.  No one tries to shirk the fact that the
Executive Committee has fallen into desuetude, from which,
when the stress slackens enough to permit ceremonial that
has not an immediate agitational value, it may some day be
revived. The bulk of its members have been at the front or
here and there about the country wrestling with the
economic problem, and their work is more useful than their
chatter.  Thus brutally is the thing stated.  The continued
stress has made the muscles, the actual works, of the
revolution more visible than formerly.  The working of the
machine is not only seen more clearly, but is also more
frankly stated (perhaps simply because they too see it now
more clearly), by the leaders themselves.
I want in this book to describe the working of the machine as
I now see it.  But it is not only the machine which is more
nakedly visible than  it was.  The stress to which it is
being subjected has also not so much changed its character
as become easier of analysis.  At least, I seem to myself to
see it differently.  In the earlier days it seemed quite simply
the struggle between a revolutionary and non-revolutionary
countries. I now think that that struggle is a foolish,
unnecesary, lunatic incident which disguised from us the
existence of a far more serious struggle, in which the
revolutionary and non-revolutionary governments are
fighting on the same side.  They fight without cooperation,
and throw insults and bullets at each other in the middle of
the struggle, but they are fighting for the same thing. They
are fighting the same enemy.  Their quarrel with each other
is for both parties merely a harassing accompaniment of the
struggle to which all Europe is committed, for the salvage of
what is left of European civilization.
The threat of a complete collapse of civilization is more
imminent in Russia than elsewhere. But it is clear enough in
Poland, it cannot be disregarded in Germany, there is no
doubt of its existence in Italy, France is conscious of it; it is
only in England and America that this threat  is  not
among the waking nightmares of everybody.  Unless the
struggle, which has hitherto been going against us, takes a
turn for the better, we shall presently be quite unable to
ignore it ourselves.
I have tried to state the position in Russia today: on the one
hand to describe the crisis itself, the threat which is forcing
these people to an extreme of effort, and on the other hand
to describe the organization that is facing that threat; on the
one hand to set down what are the main characteristics of
the crisis, on the other hand to show how the comparatively
small body of persons actually supplying the Russian people
with its directives set about the stupendous task of moving
that vast inert mass, not along the path of least resistance,
but along a path which, while alike unpleasant and extremely
difficult, does seem to them to promise some sort of
eventual escape.
No book is entirely objective, so I do not in the least mind
stating my own reason for writing this one (which has taken
time that I should have liked to spend on other and very
different things).  Knowledge of this reason will permit the
reader to  make allowances for such bias I have been
unable to avoid, and so, by judicious reading, to make my
book perhaps nearly as objective as I should myself wish it
to be.
It has been said that when two armies face  each other across
a battle front and engage in  mutual slaughter, they may be
considered as a single army engaged in suicide.  Now it
seems to me that when countries, each one severally doing
its best to arrest its private economic ruin, do their utmost to
accelerate the economic ruin of each other, we are
witnessing something very like the suicide of civilization
itself. There are people in both camps who believe that
armed and economic conflict between revolutionary and
non-revolutionary Europe, or if you like between Capitalism
and Communism, is inevitable. These people, in both camps,
are doing their best to make it inevitable. Sturdy pessimists,
in Moscow no less than in London and Paris, they go so far
as to say “the sooner the better,” and by all means in their
power try to precipitate a conflict. Now the main effort in
Russia to-day, the struggle which absorbs the chief attention
of all but the few Communist Churchills and Communist
Millerands who, blind to all else, demand an immediate
pitched battle over the prostrate body of civilization, is
directed to finding a way for   Russia herself out of the
crisis, the severity of which can hardly be realized by people
who have not visited the country again and again, and to
bringing her as quickly as possible into a state in which she
can export her raw materials and import the manufactured
goods of which she stands in need. I believe that this struggle
is ours as well as Russia’s, though we to whom the threat is
less imminent, are less desperately engaged.  Victory or
defeat in this struggle in Russia, or anywhere else on the
world’s surface, is victory or defeat for every one. The
purpose of my book is to make that clear. For, bearing that
in mind, I cannot but think that every honest man, of
whatever parity, who cares more for humanity than for
politics, must do his utmost to postpone the conflict which a
few extremists on each side of the barricades so fanatically
desire. If that conflict is indeed inevitable, its consequences
will be less devastating to a Europe cured of her wounds
than to a Europe scarcely, even by the most hopeful, to be
described as convalescent.  But the conflict may not be
inevitable after all.  No man not purblind but sees that
Communist Europe is changing no less than Capitalist
Europe.  If we succeed in postponing the struggle long
enough, we  may well succeed in postponing it until the
war-like on both sides look in vain for the reasons of their
bellicosity.
Nothing can be more futile than to describe conditions in
Russia as a sort of divine punishment for revolution, or
indeed to describe them at all without emphasizing the fact
that the crisis in Russia is part of the crisis in Europe, and
has been in the main brought about like the revolution itself,
by the same forces that have caused, for example, the crisis
in Germany or the crisis in Austria.
No country in Europe is capable of complete economic
independence.  In spite of her huge variety of natural
resources, the Russian organism seemed in 1914 to have
been built up on the generous assumption that with Europe
at least the country was to be permanently at peace, or at the
lost to engage in military squabbles which could be reckoned
in months, and would keep up the prestige of the
autocracy without seriously hampering imports and exports.
Almost every country in Europe, with the exception of
England, was better fitted to stand alone, was less
completely specialized in a single branch of production.
England, fortunately for herself, was not isolated during the
war, and will not become isolated unless the development of
the crisis abroad deprives her of her markets.  England
produces practically no food, but great quantities of coal,
steel and manufactured goods.  Isolate her absolutely, and
she will not only starve, but will stop producing
manufactured goods, steel and coal, because those who
usually produce these things will be getting nothing for their
labor except money which they will be unable to use to buy
dinners, because there will be no dinners to buy.  That
supposititious case is a precise parallel to what has happened
in Russia.  Russia produced practically no manufactured
goods (70 per cent. of her machinery she received from
abroad), but great quantities of food.  The blockade isolated
her.  By the blockade I do not mean merely the childish
stupidity committed by ourselves, but the blockade, steadily
increasing in strictness,  which began in August, 1914,
and has been unnecessarily prolonged by our stupidity.  The
war, even while for Russia it was not nominally a blockade,
was so actually.  The use of tonnage was perforce restricted
to the transport of the necessaries of war, and these were
narrowly defined as shells, guns and so on, things which do
not tend to improve a country economically, but rather the
reverse.  The imports from Sweden through Finland were no
sort of make-weight for the loss of Poland and Germany.
The war meant that Russia’s ordinary imports practically
ceased.  It meant a strain on Russia, comparable to that
which would have been put on England if the German
submarine campaign had succeeded in putting an end to our
imports of food from the Americas.  From the moment of
the Declaration of War, Russia was in the position of one
"holding out,” of a city standing a siege without a water
supply, for her imports were so necessary to her economy
that they may justly be considered as essential irrigation.
There could be no question for her of improvement, of
strengthening.  She was faced with the fact until the war
should end she had to do with what she had, and that the
things she had formerly  counted on importing would be
replaced by guns and shells, to be used, as it turned out, in
battering Russian property that happened to be in enemy
hands.  She even learned that she had to develop
gun-making and shell-making at home, at the expense of those
other industries which to some small extent might have
helped her to keep going.  And, just as in England such a
state of affairs would lead to a cessation of the output of iron
and coal in which England is rich, so in Russia, in spite of
her corn lands, it led to a shortage of food.
The Russian peasant formerly produced food, for which he
was paid in money.  With that money, formerly, he was able
to clothe himself, to buy the tools of his labor, and further,
though no doubt he never observed the fact, to pay for the
engines and wagons that took his food to market.  A huge
percentage of the clothes and the tools and the engines and
the wagons and the rails came from abroad, and even those
factories in Russia which were capable of producing such
things were, in many essentials, themselves dependent upon
imports.  Russian towns began to be hungry in 1915.  In
October of that year the Empress reported to the
Emperor that the shrewd Rasputin had seen in a vision that it
was necessary to bring wagons with flour, butter and sugar
from Siberia, and proposed that for three days nothing else
should be done.  Then there would be no strikes.  “He
blesses you for the arrangement of these trains.”  In 1916 the
peasants were burying their bread instead of bringing it to
market.  In the autumn of 1916 I remember telling certain
most incredulous members of the English Government that
there would be a most serious food shortage in Russia in the
near future.  In 1917 came the upheaval of the revolution, in
1918 peace, but for Russia, civil war and the continuance of
the blockade.  By July, 1919, the rarity of manufactured
goods was such that it was possible two hundred miles south
of Moscow to obtain ten eggs for a box of matches, and the
rarity of goods requiring distant transport became such that
in November, 1919, in Western Russia, the peasants would
sell me nothing for money, whereas my neighbor in the train
bought all he wanted in exchange for small quantities of salt.
It was not even as if, in vital matters, Russia  started the
war in a satisfactory condition.  The most vital of all
questions in a country of huge distances must necessarily be
that of transport.  It is no exaggerationto say that only by
fantastic efforts was Russian transport able to save its face
and cover its worst deficiencies even before the war began.
The extra strain put upon it by the transport of troops and
the maintenance of the armies exposed its weakness, and
with each succeeding week of war, although in 19l6 and
1917 Russia did receive 775 locomotives from abroad,
Russian transport went from bad to worse, making inevitable
a creeping paralysis of Russian economic life, during the
latter already acute stages of which the revolutionaries
succeeded to the disease that had crippled their precursors.
In 1914 Russia had in all 20,057 locomotives, of which
15,047 burnt coal, 4,072 burnt oil and 938 wood.  But that
figure of twenty thousand was more impressive for a
Government official, who had his own reasons for desiring
to be impressed, than for a practical railway engineer, since
of that number over five thousand engines were more than
twenty years old, over two thousand were more than thirty
years old, fifteen hundred were more than forty years
old, and 147 patriarchs had passed their fiftieth birthday.  Of
the whole twenty thousand only 7,108 were under ten years
of age.  That was six years ago.  In the meantime Russia has
been able to make in quantities decreasing during the last
five years by 40 and 50 per cent. annually, 2,990 new
locomotives.  In 1914 of the locomotives then in Russia
about 17,000 were in working condition.  In 1915 there
were, in spite of 800 new ones, only 16,500.  In 1916 the
number of healthy locomotives was slightly higher, owing
partly to the manufacture of 903 at home in the preceding
year and partly to the arrival of 400 from abroad.  In 1917 in
spite of the arrival of a further small contingent the number
sank to between 15,000 and 16,000.  Early in 1918 the
Germans in the Ukraine and elsewhere captured 3,000.
Others were lost in the early stages of the civil war. The
number of locomotives fell from 14,519 in January to 8,457
in April, after which the artificially instigated revolt of the
Czecho-Slovaks made possible the fostering of civil war on a
large scale, and the number fell swiftly to 4,679 in
December.  In 1919 the numbers varied less  markedly,
but the decline continued, and in December last year 4,141
engines were in working order.  In January this year the
number was 3,969, rising slightly in February, when the
number was 4,019.  A calculation was made before the war
that in the best possible conditions the maximum Russian
output of engines could be not more than1,800 annually.
At this rate in ten years the Russians could restore their
collection of engines to something like adequate numbers.
Today, thirty years would be an inadequate estimate, for
some factories, like the Votkinsky, have been purposely
ruined by the Whites, in others the lathes and other
machinery for building and repairing locomotives are worn
out, many of the skilled engineers were killed in the war with
Germany, many others in defending the revolution, and it
will be long before it will be possible to restore to the
workmen or to the factories the favorable material
conditions of 1912-13. Thus the main fact in the present
crisis is that Russia possesses one-fifth of the number of
locomotives which in 1914 was just sufficient to maintain
her railway system in a state of efficiency which to English
observers at that time was a joke.  For six years she has
been unable to import the necessary machinery for making
engines or repairing them.  Further, coal and oil have been,
until recently, cut off by the civil war.  The coal mines are
left, after the civil war, in such a condition that no
considerable output may be expected from them in the near
future.  Thus, even those engines which exist have had their
efficiency lessened by being adapted in a rough and ready
manner for burning wood fuel instead of that for which they
were designed.
Let us now examine the combined effect of ruined transport
and the six years’  blockade on Russian life in town and
country.  First of all was cut off the import of manufactured
goods from abroad.  That has had a cumulative effect
completed, as it were, and rounded off by the breakdown of
transport.  By making it impossible to bring food, fuel and
raw material to the factories, the wreck of transport makes it
impossible for Russian industry to produce even that
modicum which it contributed to the general supply of
manufactured goods which the Russian peasant was
accustomed to receive in exchange for his production of
food.  On the whole the peasant himself eats rather
more than he did before the war.  But he has no matches, no
salt, no clothes, no boots, no tools.  The Communists are
trying to put an end to illiteracy in Russia, and in the villages
the most frequent excuse for keeping children from school is
a request to come and see them, when they will be found, as
I have seen them myself, playing naked about the stove,
without boots or anything but a shirt, if that, in which to go
and learn to read and write.  Clothes and such things as
matches are, however, of less vital importance than tools, the
lack of which is steadily reducing Russia’s actual power of
food production.  Before the war Russia needed from
abroad huge quantities of agricultural implements, not only
machines, but simple things like axes, sickles, scythes.  In
1915 her own production of these things had fallen to 15.1
per cent. of her already inadequate peacetime output.  In
1917 it had fallen to 2.1 per cent.  The Soviet Government
is making efforts to raise it, and is planning new factories
exclusively for the making of these things.  But, with
transport in such a condition, a new factory means
merely a new demand for material and fuel which there are
neither engines nor wagons to bring.  Meanwhile, all over
Russia, spades are worn out, men are plowing with burnt
staves instead of with plowshares, scratching the surface of
the ground, and instead of harrowing with a steel-spiked
harrow of some weight, are brushing the ground with light
constructions of wooden spikes bound together with wattles.
The actual agricultural productive powers of Russia are
consequently sinking.  But things are no better if we turn from
the rye and corn lands to the forests.  Saws are worn
out.  Axes are worn out.  Even apart from that, the shortage
of transport affects the production of wood fuel, lack of
which reacts on transport and on the factories and so on in a
circle from which nothing but a large import of engines and
wagons will provide an outlet.  Timber can be floated down
the rivers.  Yes, but it must be brought to the rivers.  Surely
horses can do that.  Yes, but, horses must be fed, and oats
do not grow in the forests.  For example, this spring (1920)
the best organized timber production was in Perm
Government.  There sixteen thousand horses have been
mobilized for the work, but further development is
impossible for lack of forage.  A telegram bitterly reports,
"Two trains of oats from Ekaterinburg are expected day by
day.  If the oats arrive in time a considerable success will be
possible.”  And if the oats do not arrive in time?  Besides, not
horses alone require to be fed.  The men who cut the wood
cannot do it on empty stomachs.  And again rises a cry for
trains, that do not arrive, for food that exists somewhere, but
not in the forest where men work.  The general effect of the
wreck of transport on food is stated as follows: Less than 12
per cent. of the oats required, less than 5 per cent. of the
bread and salt required for really efficient working, were
brought to the forests.  Nonetheless three times as much
wood has been prepared as the available transport has
removed.
The towns suffer from lack of transport, and from the
combined effect on the country of their productive weakness
and of the loss of their old position as centres through which
the country received its imports from abroad.  Townsfolk
and factory workers lack food, fuel, raw materials and much
else that in a civilized State is considered a necessary of life.
Thus, ten million poods of fish were caught last year, but
there were no means of bringing them from the fisheries to
the great industrial centres where they were most needed.
Townsfolk are starving, and in winter, cold.  People living in
rooms in a flat, complete strangers to each other, by general
agreement bring all their beds into the kitchen.  In the
kitchen soup is made once a day.  There is a little warmth
there beside the natural warmth of several human beings in a
small room.  There it is possible to sleep.  During the whole
of last winter, in the case I have in mind, there were no
means of heating the other rooms, where the temperature
was almost always far below freezing point.  It is difficult to
make the conditions real except by individual examples.  The
lack of medicines, due directly to the blockade, seems to
have small effect on the imagination when simply stated as
such.  Perhaps people will realize what it means when
instead of talking of the wounded undergoing operations
without anesthetics I record the case of an acquaintance, a
Bolshevik, working in a Government office, who suffered
last summer from a slight derangement of the stomach due
to improper and inadequate feeding. His doctor
prescribed a medicine, and nearly a dozen different
apothecaries were unable to make up the prescription for
lack of one or several of the simple ingredients required.
Soap has become an article so rare (in Russia as in Germany
during the blockade and the war there is a terrible absence of
fats) that for the present it is to be treated as a means of
safeguarding labor, to be given to the workmen for washing
after and during their work, and in preference to miners,
chemical, medical and sanitary workers, for whose
efficiency and health it is essential.  The proper washing of
underclothes is impossible.  To induce the population of
Moscow to go to the baths during the typhus epidemic, it
was  sufficient bribe to promise to each person beside the
free bath a free scrap of soap.  Houses are falling into
disrepair for want of plaster, paint and tools.  Nor is it
possible to substitute one thing for another, for Russia’s
industries all suffer alike from their dependence on the West,
as well as from the inadequacy of the transport to bring to
factories the material they need.  People remind each other
that during the war the Germans, when similarly hard put to
it for clothes, made paper dresses, table-cloths, etc.  In
Russia the nets used in paper-making are worn out.  At last,
in April, 1920 (so Lenin told me), there seemed to be a hope
of getting new ones from abroad.  But the condition of the
paper industry is typical of all, in a country which, it should
not be forgotten, could be in a position to supply wood-pulp
for other countries besides itself.  The factories are able to
produce only sixty per cent. of demands that have
previously, by the strictest scrutiny, been reduced to a
minimum before they are made.  The reasons, apart from
the lack of nets and cloths, are summed up in absence of
food, forage and finally labor.  Even when wood is brought
by river the trouble is not yet overcome.  The horses are
dead and eaten or starved and weak.  Factories have to cease
working so that the workmen, themselves underfed, can drag
the wood from the barges to the mills.  It may well be
imagined what the effect of hunger, cold, and the
disheartenment consequent on such conditions of work and
the seeming hopelessness of the position have on the
productivity of labor, the fall in which reacts on all the
industries, on transport, on the general situation and so again
on itself.
Mr. J. M. Keynes, writing with Central Europe in his
mind (he is, I think, as ignorant of Russia as I am of
Germany), says: “What then is our picture of Europe?  A
country population able to support life on the fruits of its
own agricultural production, but without the accustomed
surplus for the towns, and also (as a result of the lack of
imported materials, and so of variety and amount in the
salable manufactures of the towns) without the usual
incentives to market food in exchange for other wares; an
industrial population unable to keep its strength for lack of
food, unable to earn a livelihood for lack of materials, and
so unable to make good by imports from abroad the failure
of productivity at home .”
Russia is an emphasized engraving, in which every
line of that picture is bitten in with repeated washes of acid.
Several new lines, however, are added to the drawing, for in Russia
the processes at work elsewhere have gone further than in
the rest of Europe, and it is possible to see dimly, in faint
outline, the new stage of decay which is threatened.  The
struggle to arrest decay is the real crisis of the revolution, of
Russia, and, not impossibly, of Europe.  For each
country that develops to the end in this direction is a
country lost to the economic comity of Europe.  And, as one
country follows another over the brink, so will the remaining
countries be faced by conditions of increasingly narrow
self-dependence, in fact by the very conditions which in
Russia, so far, have received their clearest, most forcible
illustration.
In the preceding chapter I wrote of Russia’s many wants, and
of the processes visibly at work, tending to make her
condition worse and not better.   But I wrote of things, not
of people.  I wrote of the shortage of this and of that, but
not of the most serious of all shortages, which, while itself
largely due to those already discussed, daily intensifies them,
and points the way to that further stage of decay which is
threatened in the near future in Russia, and, in the more
distant future in Europe.  I did not write of the shortage
deterioration of labor.
Shortage of labor is not peculiar to Russia.  It is among the
postwar phenomena common to all countries.  The war and
its accompanying eases have cost Europe, including Russia,
an enormous number of able-bodied men.  Many millions of
others have lost the habit of regular work.German
industrialists complain that they cannot get labor, and that
when they get it, it is not productive.  I heard complaints on
the same subject in England.  But just as the economic crisis,
due in the first instance to the war and the isolation it
imposed, has gone further in Russia than elsewhere, so the
shortage of labor, at present a handicap, an annoyance in
more fortunate countries, is in Russia perhaps the greatest of
the national dangers.  Shortage of labor cannot be measured
simply by the decreasing numbers of the workmen.  If it
takes two workmen as long to do a particular job in 1920 as
it took one man to do it in 1914, then, even if the  number
of workman has remained the same, the actual supply of
labor has been halved.  And in Russia the situation is worse
than that.  For example, in the group of State metal-working
factories, those, in fact which may be considered as the
weapon with which Russia is trying to cut her way out of her
transport difficulties, apart from the fact that there were in
19l6 81,600 workmen, whereas in 1920 there are only
42,500, labor has deteriorated in the most appalling manner.
In 1916 in these factories 92 per cent. of the nominal
working  hours were actually kept; in 1920 work goes on
during only 60 per cent. of the nominal hours.  It is
estimated that the labor of a single workman produces now
only one quarter of what it produced in 1916.  To take
another example, also from workmen engaged in transport,
that is to say, in the most important of all work at the present
time: in the Moscow junction of the Moscow Kazan
Railway, between November 1st and February 29th (1920),
292 workmen and clerks missed 12,048 working days, being
absent, on in average, forty days per man in the four
months.  In Moscow passenger-station on this line, 22
workmen missed in November 106 days, in December 273,
in January 338, and in February 380; in an appalling
crescendo further illustrated by the wagon department,
where 28 workmen missed in November 104 days and in
February 500.  In November workmen absented themselves
for single days.  In February the same workmen were absent
for the greater part of the month.  The invariable excuse was
illness.  Many cases of illness there undoubtedly were, since
this period was the worst of the typhus epidemic, but besides
illness, and besides mere obvious idleness which no
doubt accounts for a certain proportion of illegitimate
holidays, there is another explanation which goes nearer the
root of the matter.  Much of the time filched from the State
was in all probability spent in expeditions in search of food.
In Petrograd, the Council of Public Economy complain that
there is a tendency to turn the eight-hour day into a four-hour
day.  Attempts are being made to arrest this tendency
by making an additional food allowance conditional on the
actual fulfilment of working days.  In the Donetz coal basin,
the monthly output per man was in 1914 750 poods, in 1916
615 poods, in 1919 240 poods (figures taken from
Ekaterinoslav Government), and in 1920 theoutput per man
is estimated at being something near 220 poods.
In the shale mines on the Volga, where food conditions are
comparatively good, productivity is comparatively high.
Thus in a small mine near Simbirsk there are 230 workmen,
of’ whom 50 to 60 are skilled.  The output for the unskilled
is 28.9 poods in a shift, for the skilled 68.3.  But even there
25 per cent. of the workmen are regular absentees, and
actually the mine works only 17 or 18 days in a month, that
is, 70 per cent. of the normal number of working
days.  The remaining 30 per cent. of normal working time is
spent by the workmen in getting food.  Another small mine
in the same district is worked entirely by unskilled labor,
the wokers being peasants from the neighboring villages.  In this
mine the productivity per man is less, but all the men work
full time.  They do not have to waste time in securing food,
because, being local peasants, they are supplied by their own
villages and families.  In Moscow and Petrograd food is far
more difficult to secure, more time is wasted on that
hopeless task; even with that waste of time, the workman is
not properly fed, and it cannot be wondered at that his
productivity is low.
Something, no doubt, is due to the natural character of the
Russians, which led Trotsky to define man as an animal
distinguished by laziness.  Russians are certainly lazy, and
probably owe to their climate their remarkable incapacity for
prolonged effort.  The Russian climate is such that over
large areas of Russia the Russian peasant is accustomed, and
has been accustomed for hundreds of years, to perform
prodigies of labor during two short periods of sowing
and harvest, and to spend the immensely long and
monotonous winter in a hibernation like that of the snake or
the dormouse.  There is a much greater difference between a
Russian workman’s normal output and that of which he is
capable for a short time if he sets himself to it, than there is
between the normal and exceptional output of an
Englishman, whose temperate climate has not taught him to
regard a great part of the year as a period of mere waiting
for and resting from the extraordinary effort of a few
weeks.(*) [(*)Given any particular motive, any particula
enthusiasm, or visible, desirable object, even the hungry
Russian workmen of to-day are capable of sudden and
temporary increase of output. The “Saturdayings” (see p. 119)
provide endless illustrations of this.  They had something in
the character of a picnic, they were novel, they were out of
the routine, and the productivity of labor during a “Saturdaying"
was invariably higher than on a weekday.  For example,
there is a shortage of paper for cigarettes.  People roll
cigarettes in old newspapers.  It occurred to the Central Committee
of the Papermakers’ Union to organize a “Sundaying"
with the object of sending cigarette paper to the soldiers in
the Red Army. Six factories took part.  Here is a table showing the
output of these factories during the “Sundaying” and the average
weekday output.  The figures are in poods.
                           Made on      Average week
Factory               the Sunday     Day Output
Krasnogorodskaya.........615...............450
Griaznovskaya.............65................45
Medianskaya..............105................90
Dobruzhskaya.............186...............250
Belgiiskaya..............127................85
Ropshinskaya..............85................55]
But this uneven working temperament was characteristic of
the Russian before the war as well as now.  It has been said
that the revolution removed the stimulus to labor, and left the
Russian laziness to have its way.  In the first period
of the revolution that may have been true.  It is becoming
day by day less true.  The fundamental reasons of low
productivity will not be found in any sudden or unusual
efflorescence of idleness, but in economic conditions which
cannot but reduce the productivity of idle and industrious
alike.  Insufficient feeding is one such reason.  The
proportion of working time consumed in foraging is another.
But the whole of my first chapter may be taken as a compact
mass of reasons why the Russians at the present time should
not work with anything like a normal productivity.  It is said
that bad workmen complain of their tools, but even good
ones become disheartened if compelled to work with
makeshifts, mended tools, on a stock of materials that runs
out from one day to the next, in factories where the
machinery may come at any moment to a standstill from lack
of fuel. There would thus be a shortage of labor in Russia,
even if the numbers of workmen were the same today as
they were before the war.  Unfortunately that is not so.
Turning from the question of low productivity per man to
that of absolute shortage of men: the example given at the
beginning of this chapter, showing that in the most important
group of factories the number of workmen has fallen 50 per
cent. is by no means exceptional.  Walking through the
passages of what used to be the Club of the Nobles, and is
now the house of the Trades Unions during the recent
Trades Union Congress in Moscow,  I observed among a
number of pictorial diagrams on the walls, one in particular
illustrating the rise and fall of the working population of
Moscow during a number of years. Each year was
represented by the picture of a factory with a chimney which
rose and fell with the population.  From that diagram I took
the figures for 1913, 1918 and 1919.  These figures should
be constantly borne in mind by any one who wishes to realize
 how catastrophic the shortage oflabor in Russia
actually is, and to judge how sweeping may be the
changes in  the social configuration of the country if that shortage
continues to increase.  Here are the figures:
Workmen in Moscow in 1913............159,344
Workmen in Moscow in 1918 ...........157,282
Workmen in Moscow in 1919............105,210
That is to say, that one-third of the workmen of Moscow
ceased to live there, or ceased to be workmen, in the course
of a single year.  A similar phenomenon is observable in
each one of the big industrial districts.
What has become of those workmen?
A partial explanation is obvious.  The main impulse of the
revolution came from the town workers.  Of these, the metal
workers were the most decided, and those who most freely
joined the Red Guard in the early and the Red Army in the
later days of the revolution.  Many, in those early days, when
there was more enthusiasm than discipline, when there were
hardly any experienced officers, and those without much
authority, were slaughtered during the German advance of
1918.  The first mobilizations, when conscription was
introduced, were among the workers in the great industrial
districts.  The troops from Petrograd and Moscow,
exclusively workmen’s regiments, have suffered more than
any other during the civil war, being the most dependable
and being thrown, like the guards of old time, into the worst
place at any serious crisis.  Many thousands of them have
died for the sake of the revolution which, were they living,
they would be hard put to it to save. (The special shortage of
skilled workers is also partially to be explained by the
indiscriminate mobilizations of 1914-15, when great
numbers of the most valuable engineers and other skilled
workers were thrown into the front line, and it was not
until their loss was already felt that the Tsar’s Government in this
matter came belatedly to its senses.)
But these explanations are only partial.  The more general
answer to the question, What has become of the workmen?
lies in the very economic crisis which their absence
accentuates.  Russia is unlike England, where starvation of
the towns would be practically starvation of the whole
island.  In Russia, if a man is hungry, he has only to
walk far enough and he will come to a place where there is
plenty to eat.  Almost every Russian worker retains in some
form or other connection with a village, where, if he returns,
he will not be an entire stranger, but at worst a poor relation,
and quite possibly an honored guest.  It is not surprising that
many thousands have “returned to the land” in this way.
Further, if a workman retains his connection, both with a
distant village and with a town, he can keep himself and his
family fat and prosperous by ceasing to be a workman, and,
instead, traveling on the buffers or the roof of a railway
wagon, and bringing back with him sacks of flour and
potatoes for sale in the town at fantastic prices. Thereby he
is lost to productive labor, and his uncomfortable but
adventurous life becomes directly harmful, tending to
increase the strain on transport, since it is obviously
more economical to transport a thousand sacks than to transport a
thousand sacks with an idle workman attached to each sack.
Further, his activities actually make it more difficult for the
town population to get food.  By keeping open for the
village the possibility of selling at fantastic prices, he lessens
the readiness of the peasants to part with their
flour at the lower prices of the Government.  Nor  is it as if
his activities benefited the working population.  The food he
brings in goes for the most part to those who have plenty of
money or have things to exchange for it.  And honest men in
Russia to-day have not much money, and those who have
things to exchange are not as a rule workmen.  The theory
of this man’s harmfulness is, I know, open to argument, but
the practice at least is exactly as I have stated it, and is
obviously attractive to the individual who prefers adventure
on a full stomach to useful work on an empty.  Setting aside
the theory with its latent quarrel between Free Trade and
State control, we can still recognize that each workman
engaged in these pursuits has become an unproductive
middleman, one of that very parasitic species which the
revolutionaries had hoped to make unnecessary.  It is bad
from the revolutionary point of view if a workman is so
employed, but it is no less bad from the point of view of
people who do not care twopence about the revolution one
way or the other, but do care about getting Russia on her
feet again and out of her economic crisis.  It is bad
enough if an unskilled workman is so employed.  It is far
worse if a skilled workman finds he can do better for himself
as a “food speculator” than by the exercise of his legitimate
craft.  From mines, from every kind of factory come
complaints of the decreasing proportion of skilled to
unskilled workmen.  The superior intelligence of the skilled
worker offers him definite advantages should he engage in
these pursuits, and his actual skill gives him other advantages
in the villages.  He can leave his factory and go to the
village, there on the spot to ply his trade or variations of it,
when as a handy man, repairing tools, etc., he will make an
easy living and by lessening the dependence of the village on
the town do as much as the “food speculator” in worsening
the conditions of the workman he has left behind.
And with that we come to the general changes in the social
geography of Russia which are threatened if the processes
now at work continue unchecked.  The relations between
town and village are the fundamental problem of the
revolution.  Town and countryside are in sharp contradiction
daily intensified by the inability of the towns to supply
the country’s needs.  The town may be considered as a single
productive organism, with feelers stretching into the country,
and actual outposts there in the form of agricultural
enterprises taking their directives from the centre and
working as definite parts of the State organism.  All round
this town organism, in all its interstices, it too, with its feelers
in the form of “food speculators,” is the anarchic chaos of
the country, consisting of a myriad independent units,
regulated by no plan, without a brain centre of any kind.
Either the organized town will hold its own against and
gradually dominate and systematize the country chaos, or
that chaos little by little will engulf the town organism.
Every workman who leaves the town automatically places
himself on the side of the country in that struggle.  And
when a town like Moscow loses a third of its working
population in a year, it is impossible not to see that, so far,
the struggle is going in favor of that huge chaotic,
unconscious but immensely powerful countryside.  There is
even a danger that the town may become divided against
itself.  Just as scarcity of food leads to food speculation, so
the shortage of labor is making possible a sort of
speculation in labor.  The urgent need of labor has led to a
resurrection of the methods of the direct recruiting of
workmen in the villages by the agents of particular factories,
who by exceptional terms succeed in getting workmen where
the Government organs fail.  And, of course, this recruiting
is not confined to the villages.  Those enterprises which are
situated in the corn districts are naturally able to offer better
conditions, for the sake of which workmen are ready to
leave their jobs and skilled workmen to do unskilled work,
and the result can only be a drainage of good workmen away
from the hungry central industrial districts where they are
most of all needed.
Summing up the facts collected in this chapter and in the
first on the lack of things and the lack of men, I think the
economic crisis in Russia may be fairly stated as follows:
Owing to the appalling condition of Russian transport, and
owing to the fact that since 1914 Russia has been practically
in a state of blockade, the towns have lost their power of
supplying, either as middlemen or as producers, the simplest
needs of the villages.  Partly owing to this, partly again
because of the condition of transport, the towns are not
receiving the necessaries of life in sufficient quantities.  The
result of this is a serious fall in the productivity of labor, and
a steady flow of skilled and unskilled workmen from the
towns towards the villages, and from employments the
exercise of which tends to assist the towns in recovering
their old position as essential sources of supply to
employments that tend to have the opposite effect.  If this
continues unchecked, it will make impossible the
regeneration of Russian industry, and will result in the
increasing independence of the villages, which will tend to
become entirely self-supporting communities, tilling the
ground in a less and less efficient manner, with ruder tools,
with less and less incentive to produce more than is wanted
for the needs of the village itself.  Russia, in these
circumstances, may sink into something very like barbarism,
for with the decay of the economic importance of the towns
would decay also their authority, and free-booting on a small
and large scale would become profitable and not very
dangerous.  It would be possible, no doubt, for foreigners to
trade with the Russians as with the natives of the cannibal
islands, bartering  looking-glasses and cheap tools, but,
should such a state of things come to be, it would mean long
years of colonization, with all the new  possibilities and risks
involved in the subjugation of a free people, before Western
Europe could count once more on getting a considerable
portion of its food from Russian corn lands.
That is the position, those the natural tendencies at work.
But opposed to these tendencies are the united efforts of the
Communists and of those who, leaving the question of
Communism discreetly aside, work with them for the sake of
preventing such collapse of Russian civilization.  They
recognize the existence of every one of the tendencies I have
described, but they are convinced that every one of these
tendencies will be arrested.  They believe that the country
will not conquer the town but the reverse.  So far from
expecting the unproductive stagnation described in the last
paragraph, they think of Russia as of the natural food supply
of Europe, which the Communists among them believe will,
in course of time, be made up for “Working Men’s
Republics” (though, for the sake of their own Republic, they
are not inclined to postpone trade with Europe until that
epoch arrives).  At the very time when spades and sickles are
wearing out or worn out, these men are determined that the
food output of Russia shall sooner or later be increased by
the introduction of better methods of agriculture and
farming on a larger scale.  We are witnessing in Russia the
first stages of a titanic struggle, with on one side all the
forces of nature leading apparently to an inevitable collapse
of civilization, and on the other side nothing but the
incalculable force of human will.
How is that will expressed?  What is the organization welded
by adversity which, in this crisis, supersedes even the Soviet
Constitution, and stands between this people and chaos?
It is a commonplace to say that Russia is ruled, driven if you
like, cold, starving as she is, to effort after effort by the
dictatorship of a party.  It is a commonplace alike in the
mouths of those who wish to make the continued existence
of that organization impossible and in the mouths of the
Communists themselves.  At the second congress of the
Third International, Trotsky remarked.  “A party as such, in
the course of the development of a revolution, becomes
identical with the revolution.” Lenin, on the same occasion,
replying to a critic who said that he differed from, the
Communists in his understanding of what was meant by the
Dictatorship of the Proletariat, said, “He says that we
understand by the words ’Dictatorship of the Proletariat’
what is actually the dictatorship of its determined and
conscious minority.  And that is the fact.”  Later he asked,
"What is this minority?  It may be called a party.  If this
minority is actually conscious, if it is able to draw the
masses after it, if it shows itself capable of replying to every
question on the agenda list of the political day, it actually
constitutes a party.”  And Trotsky again, on the same
occasion, illustrated the relative positions of the Soviet
Constitution and the Communist Party when he said, “And
today, now that we have received an offer of peace from the
Polish Government, who decides the question?  Whither are
the workers to turn?  We have our Council of People’s
Commissaries, of course, but that, too, must be under a
certain control.  Whose control?  The control of the working
class as a formless chaotic mass?  No. The Central
Committee of the party is called together to discuss and
decide the question.  And when we have to wage war, to
form new divisions, to find the best elements for them-to
whom do we turn?  To the party, to the Central Committee.
And it gives directives to the local committees, ’Send
Communists to the front.’ The case is precisely the same
with the Agrarian question, with that of supply, and with all
other questions whatsoever.”
No one denies these facts, but their mere statement is quite
inadequate to explain what is being done in Russia and how
it is being done.  I do not think it would be a waste of time
to set down as briefly as possible, without the comments of
praise or blame that would be inevitable from one primarily
interested in the problem from the Capitalist or Communist
point of view what, from observation and inquiry, I believe
to be the main framework of the organization whereby that
dictatorship of the party works.
The Soviet Constitution is not so much moribund as in
abeyance.  The Executive Committee, for example, which
used to meet once a week or even oftener, now meets on the
rarest occasions.  Criticism on this account was met with the
reply  that the members of the Executive Committee, for
example, which used to meet once a week or even oftener,
now meets on the rarest occasions.  Criticism on this account
was met with the reply that the members of the Executive
Committee were busy on the front and in various parts of
Russia.  As a matter of fact, the work which that Committee
used to do is now done by Central Committee of the
Bolshevik Party, so that the bulk of the 150 members of
the Central Executive are actually free for other work, a
saving of something like 130 men.  This does not involve
any very great change, but merely an economy in the use of
men.  In the old days, as I well remember, the opening of a
session of the Executive Committee was invariably late, the
reason being that the various parties composing it had not
yet finished their preliminary and private discussions.  There
is now an overwhelming Communist majority in the
Executive Committee, as elsewhere.  I think it may be
regarded as proved that these majorities are not always
legitimately obtained.  Non-Communist delegates do
undoubtedly find every kind of difficulty put in their way by
the rather Jesuitical adherents of the faith.  But. no matter
how these majorities are obtained, the result is that when the
Communist Party has made up its mind on any subject, it is
so certain of being able to carry its point that the calling
together of the All-Russian Executive Committee is merely a
theatrical demonstration of the fact that it can do what it
likes.  When it does meet, the Communists allow the
microscopical opposition great liberty of speech, listen
quietly, cheer ironically, and vote like one man, proving
on every occasion that the meeting of the Executive
Committee was the idlest of forms, intended rather to satisfy
purists than for purposes of discussion, since the real
discussion has all taken place beforehand among the
Communists themselves.  Something like this must happen
with every representative assembly at which a single party
has a great preponderance and a rigid internal discipline.
The real interest is in the discussion inside the Party
Committees.
This state of affairs would probably be more actively
resented if the people were capable of resenting anything
but their own hunger, or of fearing anything but a general
collapse which would turn that hunger into starvation.  It
must be remembered that the urgency of the economic crisis
has driven political questions into the background.  The
Communists (compare Rykov’s remarks on this subject,
p. 175) believe that this is the natural result of social
revolution.  They think that political parties will disappear
altogether and that people will band together, not for the
victory of one of several contending political parties, but
solely for economic cooperation or joint enterprise in art
or science.  In support of this they point to the number of
their opponents who have become Communists, and to the
still greater number of non-Communists who are loyally
working with them for the economic reconstruction of the
country.  I do not agree with the Communists in this, nor yet
with their opponents, who attribute the death of political
discussion to fear of the Extraordinary Commission.  I think
that both the Communists and their opponents underestimate
the influence of the economic ruin that affects everybody.
The latter particularly, feeling that in some way they must
justify themselves to politically minded foreign visitors, seek
an excuse for their apathy in the one institution that is almost
universally unpopular.  I have many non-Communist friends
in Russia, but have never detected the least restraint that
could be attributed to fear of anybody in their criticisms of
the Communist regime.  The fear existed alike among
Communists and non-Communists, but it was like the fear of
people walking about in a particularly bad thunderstorm.
The activities and arrests of the Extraordinary Commission
are so haphazard, often so utterly illogical, that it is quite
idle for any one to say to himself that by following any given
line of conduct he will avoid molestation.  Also, there is
something in the Russian character which makes any
prohibition of discussion almost an invitation to discuss.  I
have never met a Russian who could be prevented from
saying whatever he liked whenever he liked, by any threats
or dangers whatsoever.  The only way to prevent a Russian
from talking is to cut out his tongue.  The real reason for the
apathy is that, for the moment, for almost everybody
political questions are of infinitesimal importance in
comparison with questions of food and warmth.  The
ferment of political discussion that filled the first years of the
revolution has died away, and people talk about little but
what they are able to get for dinner, or what somebody else
his been able to get.  I, like other foreign visitors coming to
Russia after feeding up in other countries, am all agog to
make people talk.  But the sort of questions which interest
me, with my full-fed stomach, are brushed aside almost
fretfully by men who have been more or less hungry for two
or three years on end.
I find, instead of an urgent desire to alter this or that at
once, to-morrow, in the political complexion of the country,
a general desire to do the best that can be done with things
as they are, a general fear of further upheaval of any kind, in
fact a general acquiescence in the present state of affairs
politically, in the hope of altering the present state of affairs
economically.  And this is entirely natural.  Everybody,
Communists included, rails bitterly at the inefficiencies of
the present system, but everybody, Anti-Communists
included, admits that there is nothing whatever capable of
taking its place.  Its failure is highly undesirable, not because
it itself is good, but because  such failure would be preceded
or followed by a breakdown of all existing organizations.
Food distribution, inadequate as it now is, would come to an
end.  The innumerable non-political committees, which are
rather like Boards of Directors controlling the Timber, Fur,
Fishery, Steel, Matches or other Trusts (since the
nationalized industries can be so considered) would collapse,
and with them would collapse not only yet one more hope of
keeping a breath of life in Russian industry, but also the
actual livelihoods of a great number of people, both
Communists and non-Communists.  I do not think it is
realized out-side Russia how large a proportion of the
educated classes have become civil servants of one kind or
another.  It is a rare thing when a whole family has left
Russia, and many of the most embittered partisans of war on
Russia have relations inside Russia who have long ago found
places under the new system, and consequently fear its
collapse as much as any one.  One case occurs to me in
which a father was an important minister in one of the
various White Governments which have received Allied
support, while his son inside Russia was doing pretty well as
a responsible official under the Communists.  Now in the
event of a violent change, the Communists would be outlaws
with a price on every head, and those who have worked with
them, being Russians, know their fellow countrymen well
enough to be pretty well convinced that the mere fact that
they are without cards of the membership of the Communist
Party, would not save them in the orgy of slaughter that
would follow any such collapse.
People may think that I underestimate the importance of, the
Extraordinary Commission.  I am perfectly aware that
without this police force with its spies, its prisons and its
troops, the difficulties of the Dictatorship would be
increased by every  kind of disorder, and the chaos, which  I
fear may come, would have begun long ago. I believe, too,
that the overgrown power of the Extraordinary Commission,
and the cure that must sooner or later be applied to it, may,
as in the French Revolution, bring about the collapse of the
whole system.  The Commission depends for its strength on
the fear of something else.  I have seen it weaken when there
was a hope of general peace.  I have seen it tighten its grip in
the presence of attacks from without and attempted
assassination within.  It is dreaded by everybody; not even
Communists are safe from it; but it does not suffice to
explain the Dictatorship, and is actually entirely irrelevant to
the most important process of that Dictatorship, namely, the
adoption of a single idea, a single argument, by the whole of
a very large body of men.  The whole power of the
Extraordinary Commission does not affect in the slightest
degree discussions inside the Communist Party, and those
discussions are the simple fact distinguishing the Communist
Dictatorship from any of the other dictatorships by
which it may be supplanted.
There are 600,000 members of the Communist Party
(611,978 on April 2, 1920). There are nineteen members of
the Central Committee of that party.  There are, I believe,
five who, when they agree, can usually sway the remaining
fourteen.  There is no need to wonder how these fourteen
can be argued into acceptance of the views of the still
smaller inner ring, but the process of persuading the six
hundred thousand of the desirability of, for example, such
measures as those involved in industrial conscription which,
at first sight, was certainly repugnant to most of them, is the
main secret of the Dictatorship, and is not in any way
affected by the existence of the Extraordinary Commission.
Thus the actual government of Russia at the present time
may be not unfairly considered as a small group inside the
Central Committee of the Communist Party.  This small
group is able to persuade the majority of the remaining
members of that Committee.  The Committee then sets
about persuading the majority of the party.  In the case of
important measures the process is elaborate. The
Committee issues a statement of its case, and the party
newspapers the Pravda and its affiliated organs are deluged
with its discussion.  When this discussion has had time to
spread through the country, congresses of Communists meet
in the provincial centres, and members of the Central
Committee go down to these conferences to defend the
"theses” which the Committee has issued.  These provincial
congresses, exclusively Communist, send their delegates of
an All-Russian Congress.  There the “theses” of the Central
Committee get altered, confirmed, or, in the case of an
obviously unpersuaded and large opposition in the party, are
referred back or in other ways shelved.  Then the delegates,
even those who have been in opposition at the congress, go
back to the country pledged to defend the position of the
majority.  This sometimes has curious results.  For example,
I heard Communist Trades Unionists fiercely arguing
against certain clauses in the theses on industrial conscription
at a Communist Congress at the Kremlin; less than a week
afterwards I heard these same men defending precisely these
clauses at a Trades Union Congress over the way, they
loyally abiding by the collective opinion of their fellow
Communists and subject to particularly uncomfortable
heckling from people who vociferously reminded them
(since the Communist debates had been published) that they
were now defending what, a few days before, they had
vehemently attacked.
The great strength of the Communist Party is comparable to
the strength of the Jesuits, who, similarly, put themselves
and their opinions at the disposal of the body politic of their
fellow members.  Until a decision had been made, a
Communist is perfectly free to do his best to prevent it being
made, to urge alterations in it,  or to supply a rival decision,
but once it has been made he will support it without
changing his private opinion.  In all mixed congresses, rather
than break the party discipline, he will give his vote for it,
speak in favor of it, and use against its adversaries the very
arguments that have been used against himself.  He has his
share in electing the local Communist Committee, and,
indirectly, in electing the all-powerful Central Committee of
the party, and he binds himself to do at any moment in his
life exactly what these Committees decide for him.
These Committees decide the use that is to be made of the
lives, not only of the rank and file of the party, but also of
their own members.  Even a member of the Central
Committee does not escape.  He may be voted by his fellow
members into leaving a job he likes and taking up another he
detests in which they think his particular talents will better
serve the party aims.  To become a member of the
Communist Party involves a kind of intellectual abdication,
or, to put it differently, a readiness at any moment to place
the collective wisdom of the party’s Committee above one’s
individual instincts or ideas.  You may influence its
decisions, you may even get it to endorse your own, but
Lenin himself, if he were to fail on any occasion to obtain
the agreement of a majority in the Central Committee,
would have to do precisely what the Committee should tell
him.  Lenin’s opinion carries great weight because he is
Lenin, but it carries less weight than that of the Central
Committee, of which he forms a nineteenth part.  On the
other hand, the opinion of Lenin and a very small group of
outstanding figures is supported by great prestige inside the
Committee, and that of the Committee is supported
by overwhelming prestige among the rank and file.  The
result is that this small group is nearly always sure of being
able to use the whole vote of 600,000 Communists, in the
realization of its decisions.
Now 600,000 men and women acting on the instructions of
a highly centralized directive, all the important decisions of
which have been thrashed out and re-thrashed until they
have general support within the party; 600,000 men and
women prepared, not only to vote in support of these
decisions, but with a carefully fostered readiness to sacrifice
their lives for them if necessary; 600,000 men and women
who are persuaded that by their way alone is humanity to be
saved; who are persuaded (to put it as cynically and
unsympathetically as possible) that the noblest death one can
die is in carrying out a decision of the Central Committee;
such a body, even in a country such as Russia, is an
enormously strong embodiment of human will, an
instrument of struggle capable of working something very
like miracles.  It can be and is controlled like an army in
battle.  It can mobilize its members, 10 per cent. of them,
50 per cent., the local Committees choosing them, and send
them to the front when the front is in danger, or to the
railways and repair shops when it is decided that the weakest
point is that of transport. If its only task were to fight those
organizations of loosely knit and only momentarily united
interests which are opposed to it, those jerry-built alliances
of Reactionaries with Liberals, United-Indivisible-Russians
with Ukrainians, Agrarians with Sugar-Refiners,
Monarchists with Republicans, that task would long ago
have been finished.  But it has to fight something infinitely
stronger than these in fighting the economic ruin of Russia,
which, if it is too strong, too powerful to be  arrested by the
Communists, would make short work of those who are
without any such fanatic single-minded and perfectly
disciplined organization.
I have already suggested that although the small Central
Committee of the Communist Party does invariably get its
own way, there are essential differences between this
Dictatorship and the dictatorship of, for example, a General.
The main difference is that whereas the General merely
writes an order about which most people hear for the first
time only when it is promulgated, the Central Committee
prepares the way for its dictation by a most elaborate series
of discussions and counter discussions throughout the
country, whereby it wins the bulk of the Communist Party to
its opinion, after which it proceeds through local and general
congresses to do the same with the Trades Unions.  This
done, a further series of propaganda meetings among the
people actually to be affected smooths the way for the
introduction of whatever new measure is being carried
through at the moment.  All this talk, besides lessening the
amount of physical force necessary in carrying out a
decision, must also avoid, at least in part, the deadening
effect that would be caused by mere compulsory obedience
to the unexplained orders of a military dictator.  Of the
reality of the Communist Dictatorship I have no sort of
doubt.  But its methods are such as tend towards the
awakening of a political consciousness which, if and when
normal conditions-of feeding and peace, for example-are
attained, will make dictatorship of any kind almost
impossible.
To illustrate these methods of the Dictatorship, I cannot do
better than copy into this book some pages of my diary
written in March of this year when I was present at one of
the provincial conferences which were held in preparation of
the All-Russian Communist Conference at the end of the
month.
At seven in the evening Radek called for me and took me to
the Jaroslavl station, where we met Larin, whom I had
known in 1918.  An old Menshevik, he was the originator
and most urgent supporter of the decree annulling the
foreign debts.  He is a very ill man, partially paralyzed,
having to use both hands even to get food to his mouth or to
turn over the leaves of a book.  In spite of this he is one of
the hardest workers in Russia, and although his obstinacy,
his hatred of compromise, and a sort of mixed originality
and perverseness keep him almost permanently at
loggerheads with the Central Committee, he retains
everybody’s respect because of the real heroism with which
he conquers physical disabilities which long ago would have
overwhelmed a less unbreakable spirit.  Both Radek and
Larin were going to the Communist Conference at Jaroslavl
which was to consider the new theses of the Central
Committee of the party with regard to Industrial
Conscription.  Radek was going to defend the position of the
Central Committee, Larin to defend his own.  Both are old
friends.  As Radek said to me, he intended to destroy Larin’s
position, but not, if he could help it, prevent Larin being
nominated among the Jaroslavl delegates to All-Russian
Conference which was in preparation.  Larin, whose work
keeps him continually traveling, has his own car, specially
arranged so that his  uninterrupted labor shall have as
little effect as possible on his dangerously frail body.  Radek
and I traveled in one of the special cars of the Central
Executive Committee, of which he is a member.
The car seemed very clean, but, as an additional precaution,
we began by rubbing turpentine on our necks and wrists and
angles for the discouragement of lice, now generally known
as “Semashki” from the name of Semashko, the Commissar
of Public Health, who wages unceasing war for their
destruction as the carriers of typhus germs.I rubbed the
turpentine so energetically into my neck that it burnt like a
collar of fire, and for a long time I was unable to get to sleep.
In the morning Radek, the two conductors who had charge
of the wagons and I sat down together to breakfast and had
a very merry meal, they providing cheese and bread and I a
tin of corned beef providently sent out from home by the
Manchester Guardian.  We cooked up some coffee on a
little spirit stove, which, in a neat basket together with plates,
knives, forks, etc. (now almost unobtainable in Russia) had been
a parting present from the German Spartacists to Radek when
he was released from prison in Berlin and allowed to leave Germany.
The morning was bright and clear, and we had an excellent
view of Jaroslavl when we drove from the station to the
town, which is a mile or so off the line of the railway.  The
sun poured down on the white snow, on the barges still
frozen into the Volga River, and on the gilt and painted
domes and cupolas of the town.  Many of the buildings had
been destroyed during the rising artificially provoked in July,
19l8, and its subsequent suppression.  More damage was
done then than was necessary, because the town was
recaptured by troops which had been deserted by most of
their officers, and therefore hammered away with artillery
without any very definite plan of attack.  The more
important of the damaged buildings, such as the waterworks
and the power station, have been repaired, the tramway was
working, and, after Moscow, the town seemed clean, but
plenty of ruins remained as memorials of that wanton and
unjustifiable piece of folly which, it was supposed, would be
the signal for a general rising.
We drove to the Hotel Bristol, now the headquarters of
the Jaroslavl Executive Committee, where Rostopchin, the
president, discussed with Larin and Radek the programme
arranged for the conference.  It was then proposed that we
should have something to eat, when a very curious state of
affairs (and one extremely Russian) was revealed.  Rostopchin
admitted that the commissariat arrangements of
the Soviet and its Executive Committee were very bad.  But
in the center of the town there is a nunnery which was very
badly damaged during the bombardment and is now used as
a sort of prison or concentration camp for a Labor
Regiment.  Peasants from the surrounding country who have
refused to give up their proper contribution of corn, or leave
otherwise disobeyed the laws, are, for punishment, lodged
here, and made to expiate their sins by work.  It so
happens, Rostopchin explained, that the officer in charge of the
prison feeding arrangements is a very energetic fellow, who had
served in the old army in a similar capacity, and the meals
served out to the prisoners are so much better than those
produced in the Soviet headquarters, that the members of
the Executive Committee  make a practice of walking
over to the prison to dine.  They invited us to do the
same.  Larin did not feel up to the walk, so he remained
in the Soviet House to eat an inferior meal, while Radek  and I,
with Rostopchin and three other members of the local
committee walked round to the prison.  The bell tower of
the old nunnery had been half shot away by artillery, and is
in such a precarious condition that it is proposed to pull it
down.  But on passing under it we came into a wide
courtyard surrounded by two-story whitewashed buildings
that seemed scarcely to have suffered at all.  We found the
refectory in one of these buildings.  It was astonishingly
clean. There were wooden tables, of course without cloths,
and each man had a wooden spoon and a hunk of bread.  A
great bowl of really excellent soup was put down in the
middle of table, and we fell to hungrily enough.  I made
more mess on the table than any one else, because it requires
considerable practice to convey almost boiling soup from a
distant bowl to one’s mouth without spilling it in a shallow
wooden spoon four inches in diameter, and, having got it to
one’s mouth, to get any of it in without slopping over on
either side.  The regular diners there seemed to find no
difficulty in it at all. One of the prisoners who mopped up
after my disasters said I had better join them for a week,
when I should find it quite easy.  The soup bowl was
followed by a fry of potatoes, quantities of which are grown
in the district.  For dealing with these I found the wooden
spoon quite efficient.  After that we had glasses of some sort
of substitute for tea.
The Conference was held in the town theatre.  There was a
hint of comedy in the fact that the orchestra was playing the
prelude to some very cheerful opera before the curtain rang
up.  Radek characteristically remarked that such music
should be followed by something more sensational than a
conference, proposed to me that we should form a tableau
to illustrate the new peaceful policy of England with regard to
Russia.  As it was a party conference, I had really no right to
be there, but Radek had arranged with Rostopchin that I
should come in with himself, and be allowed to sit in the
wings at the side of the stage.  On the stage were
Rostopchin, Radek, Larin and various members of the
Communist Party Committee in  the district.  Everything
was ready, but the orchestra went on with its jig music on
the other side of the curtain.  A message was sent to them.
The music stopped with a jerk.  The curtain rose, disclosing
a crowded auditorium.  Everbody stood up, both on the
stage and in the theater, and sang, accompanied by the
orchestra, first the “Internationale” and then the song for
those who had died for the revolution.  Then except for two
or three politically minded musicians , the orchestra vanished
away and the Conference began.
Unlike many of the meetings and conferences at which I
have been present in Russia, this Jaroslavl Conference
seemed to me to include practically none but men and
women who either were or had been actual manual workers.
I looked over row after row of faces in the theatre, and
could only find two faces which I thought might be Jewish,
and none that obviously  belonged to the “intelligentsia.”  I
found on inquiry that only three of the Communists present,
excluding Radek and Larin, were old exiled and imprisoned
revolutionaries of the educated class.  Of these, two were on
the platform.  All the rest were from the working class.
The great majority of them, of course, had joined the
Communists in 1917, but a dozen or so had been in the
party as long as the first Russian revolution of 1905.
Radek, who was tremendously cheered (his long
imprisonment in Germany, during which time few in Russia
thought that they would see him alive again, has made him
something of a popular hero) made a long, interesting and
pugnacious speech setting out the grounds on which the
Central Committee base their ideas about Industrial
Conscription.  These ideas are embodied in the series of
theses issued by the Central Committee in January (see p.
134).  Larin, who was very tired after the journey and
patently conscious that Radek was a formidable opponent,
made a speech setting out his reasons for differing with the
Central Committee, and proposed an ingenious resolution,
which, while expressing approval of the general position of
the Committee, included four supplementary modifications
which, as a matter of fact, nullified that position altogether.
It was then about ten at night, and the Conference
adjourned.  We drove round to the prison in sledges,
and by way of supper had some more soup and potatoes,
and so back to the railway station to sleep in the cars.
Next day the Conference opened about noon, when there
was a long discussion of the points at issue.  Workman after
workman came to the platform and gave his view.  Some of
the speeches were a little naive, as when one soldier said that
Comrades Lenin and Trotsky had often before pointed out
difficult roads, and that whenever they had been followed
they had shown the way to victory, and that therefore,
though there was much in the Central Committee’s theses
that was hard to digest, he was for giving them complete
support, confident that, as Comrades Lenin and Trotsky
were in favor of them, they were likely to be right this time,
as so often heretofore.  But for the most part the speeches
were directly concerned with the problem under discussion,
and showed a political consciousness which would have
been almost incredible three years ago.  The Red Army
served as a text for many, who said that the methods which
had produced that army and its victories over the Whites had
been proved successful and should be used to produce a
Red Army of Labor and similar victories on the bloodless
front against economic disaster.  Nobody seemed to question
the main idea of compulsory labor.  The contest that aroused
real bitterness was between the methods of individual and
collegiate command.  The new proposals lead eventually
towards individual command, and fears were expressed lest
this should mean putting summary powers into the hands  of
bourgeois specialists, thus nullifying “workers’ control”. In
reply, it was pointed out that individual command had
proved necessary in the army and had resulted in victory for
the revolution.  The question was not between specialists
and no specialists.  Everybody knew that specialists were
necessary.  The question was how to get the most out of
them.  Effective political control had secured that bourgeois
specialists, old officers, led to victory the army of the Red
Republic.  The same result could be secured in the factories
in the same way.  It was pointed out that in one year they
had succeeded in training 32,000 Red Commanders, that is
to say, officers from the working class itself, and that it was
not Utopian to hope and work for a similar output of
workmen specialists, technically trained, and therefore
themselves qualified for individual command in the factories.
Meanwhile there was nothing against the employment of
Political Commissars in the factories as formerly in the
regiments, to control in other than technical matters the
doings of the specialists.  On the other hand, it was said that
the appointment of Commissars would tend to make
Communists unpopular, since inevitably in many cases they
would have to support the specialists against the workmen,
and that the collegiate system made the workmen feel that
they were actually the masters, and so gave possibilities of
enthusiastic work not otherwise obtainable.  This last point
was hotly challenged.  It was said that collegiate control
meant little in effect, except waste of time and efficiency,
because at worst work was delayed by disputes and at best
the workmen members of the college merely countersigned
the orders decided upon by the specialists.  The enthusiastic
work was said to be a fairy story.  If it were really to be
found then there would be no need for a conference to
discover how to get it.
The most serious opposition, or at least the most serious
argument put forward, for there was less opposition than
actual discussion, came from some of the representatives of
the Trade Unionists.  A good deal was said about the
position of the Trades Unions in a Socialist State.  There
was general recognition that since the Trade Unions
themselves controlled the conditions of labor and wages, the
whole of their old work of organizing strikes against
capitalists had ceased to have any meaning, since to strike
now would be to strike against their own decisions.  At the
same time, certain tendencies to Syndicalism were still in
existence, tendencies which might well lead to conflict
between different unions, so that, for example, the match
makers or the metal worker, might wish to strike a bargain
with the State, as of one country with another, and this
might easily lead to a complete collapse of the socialist system.
The one thing on which the speakers were in complete
agreement was the absolute need of an effort in industry
equal to, if not greater than, the effort made in the army.  I
thought it significant that in many of the speeches the
importance of this effort was urged as the only possible
means of retaining the support of the peasants.  There
was a tacit recognition that the Conference represented town
workers only.  Larin, who had belonged to the old school
which had grown up with its eyes on the industrial countries
of the West and believed that revolution could be brought
about by the town workers alone, that it was exclusively their
affair, and that all else was of minor importance,
unguardedly spoke of the peasant as “our neighbor."
In Javoslavl, country and town are too near to allow the main
problem of the revolution to be thus easily dismissed.  It was
instantly pointed out that the relation was much more
intimate, and that, even if it were only “neighborly,” peace
could not long be preserved if it were continually necessary
for one neighbor to steal the chickens of the other.  These
town workers of a district for the most part agricultural were
very sure that the most urgent of all tasks was to raise
industry to the point at which the town would really be able
to supply the village with its needs.
Larin and Radek severally summed up and made final
attacks on each other’s positions, after which Radek’s
resolution approving the theses of the Central Committee
was passed almost unanimously.  Larin’s four amendments
received 1, 3, 7 and 1 vote apiece.  This result was received
with cheering throughout the theater, and showed the
importance of such Conferences in smoothing the way of
the Dictatorship, since it had been quite obvious when the
discussion began that a very much larger proportion of the
delegates than finally voted for his resolution had been more
or less in sympathy with Larin in his opposition to the
Central Committee.
There followed elections to the Party Conference in
Moscow.  Rostopchin, the president, read a list which had
been submitted by the various ouyezds in the Jaroslavl
Government.  They were to send to Moscow fifteen
delegates with the right to vote, together with another fifteen
with the right to speak but not to vote.  Larin, who had done
much work in the district, was mentioned as one of the
fifteen voting delegates, but he stood up and said that as the
Conference had so clearly expressed its disagreement with
his views, he thought it better to withdraw his candidature.
Rostopchin put it to the Conference that although they disagreed
with Larin, yet it would be as well that he should have
the opportunity of stating his views at the All-Russian Conference,
so that discussion there should be as final and as many-sided
as possible.  The Conference expressed its agreement with
this.  Larin withdrew his withdrawal, and was presently
elected.  The main object of these conferences in
unifying opinion and in arming Communists with
argument for the defence of this unified opinion a
mong the masses was again illustrated when the
Conference, in leaving it to the ouyezds to choose for
themselves the non-voting delegates urged them to select
wherever possible people who would have the widest
opportunities of explaining on their return to the district
whatever results might be reached in Moscow.
It was now pretty late in the evening, and after another very
satisfactory visit to the prison we drove back to the station.
Larin, who was very disheartened, realizing that he had lost
much support in the course of the discussion, settled down
to work, and buried himself in a mass of statistics.  I
prepared to go to bed, but we had hardly got into the car
when there was a tap at the door and a couple of
railwaymen came in. They explained that a few hundred
yards away along the line a concert and entertainment
arranged by the Jaroslavl railwaymen was going on, and that
their committee, hearing that Radek was at the station, had
sent them to ask him to come over and say a few words to
them if he were not too tired.
“Come along,” said Radek, and we walked in the dark along
the railway lines to a big one-story wooden shanty, where an
electric lamp lit a great placard, “Railwaymen’s Reading
Room.”  We went into a packed hall.  Every seat was
occupied by railway workers and their wives and children.
The gangways on either side were full of those who had not
found room on the benches.  We wriggled and pushed our
way through this crowd, who were watching a play staged
and acted by the railwaymen themselves, to a side door,
through which we climbed up into the wings, and slid across
the stage behind the scenery into a tiny dressing-room.
Here Radek was laid hold of by the Master of the Ceremonies,
who, it seemed, was also part editor of a railwaymen’s
newspaper, and made to give a long account of the
present situation of Soviet Russia’s Foreign Affairs.
The little box of a room filled to a solid mass as
policemen, generals and ladies of the old regime threw
off their costumes, and, in their working clothes,
plain signalmen and engine-drivers, pressed round to listen.
When the act ended, one of the railwaymen went to the front of
the stage and announced that Radek, who had lately come back
after imprisonment in Germany for the cause of revolution, was going
to talk to them about the general state of affairs.  I saw Radek
grin atthis forecast of his speech.  I understood why, when he
began to speak.  He led off by a direct and furious onslaught
on the railway workers in general, demanding work, work
and more work, telling them that as the Red Army had been
the vanguard of the revolution hitherto, and had starved and
fought and given lives to save those at home from Denikin
and Kolchak, so now it was the turn of the railway workers
on whose efforts not only the Red Army but also the whole
future of Russia depended.  He addressed himself to the
women, telling them in very bad Russian that unless their
men worked superhumanly they would see their babies die
from starvation next winter.  I saw women nudge their
husbands as they listened.  Instead of giving them a pleasant,
interesting sketch of the international position, which, no
doubt, was what they had expected, he took the opportunity
to tell them exactly how things stood at home.  And the
amazing thing was that they seemed to be pleased.  They
listened with extreme attention, wanted to turn out some one
who had a sneezing fit at the far end of the hall, and nearly
lifted the roof off with cheering when Radek had done.  I
wondered what sort of reception a man would have who in
another country interrupted a play to hammer home truths
about the need of work into an audience of working men
who had gathered solely for the purpose of legitimate
recreation.  It was not as if he sugared the medicine he gave
them.  His speech was nothing but demands for discipline
and work, coupled with prophecy of disaster in case work
and discipline failed.  It was delivered like all his speeches,
with a strong Polish accent and a steady succession of
mistakes in grammar.
As we walked home along the railway lines, half a dozen of
the railwaymen pressed around Radek, and almost fought
with each other as to who should walk next to him.
And Radek entirely happy, delighted at his success in
giving them a bombshell instead of a bouquet, with
one stout fellow on one arm, another on the other, two
or three more listening in front and behind, continued rubbing
it into them until we reached our wagon, when, after a
general handshaking, they disappeared into the night.
Trade Unions in Russia are in a different position from that
which is common to all other Trades Unions in the world.
In other countries the Trades Unions are a force with whose
opposition the Government must reckon.  In Russia the
Government reckons not on the possible opposition of the
Trades Unions, but on their help for realizing its most
difficult measures, and for undermining and overwhelming
any opposition which those measures may encounter.  The
Trades Unions in Russia, instead of being an organization
outside the State protecting the interests of a class against the
governing class, have become a part of the State
organization.  Since, during the present period of the
revolution the backbone of the State organization is the
Communist Party, the Trade Unions have come to be
practically an extension of the party organization.  This, of
course, would be indignantly denied both by Trade
Unionists and Communists.  Still, in the preface to the
All-Russian Trades Union Reports for 1919, Glebov, one of
the best-known Trade Union leaders whom I remember in
the spring of last year objecting to the use of bourgeois
specialists in their proper places, admits as much in the
following muddleheaded statement:-
“The base of the proletarian dictatorship is the Communist
Party, which in general directs all the political and economic
work of the State, leaning, first of all, on the Soviets as on
the more revolutionary form of dictatorship of the
proletariat, and secondly on the Trades Unions, as
organizations which economically unite the proletariat of
factory and workshop as the vanguard of the revolution, and
as organizations of the new socialistic construction of the
State.  Thus the Trade Unions must be considered as a base
of the Soviet State, as an organic form complementary to the
other forms of the Proletariat Dictatorship.”  These two elaborate
sentences constitute an admission of what I have just said.
Trades Unionists of other countries must regard the fate of
their Russian colleagues with horror or with satisfaction,
according to their views of events in Russia taken as a
whole.  If they do not believe that there has been a social
revolution in Russia, they must regard the present position of
the Russian Trades Unions as the reward of a complete
defeat of Trade Unionism, in which a Capitalist government
has been able to lay violent hands on the organization which
was protecting the workers against it.  If, on the other hand,
they believe that there has been a social revolution, so that
the class organized in Trades Unions is now, identical with
the governing, class (of employers, etc.) against which the
unions once struggled, then they must regard the present
position as a natural and satisfactory result of victory.
When I was in Moscow in the spring of this year the Russian
Trades Unions received a telegram from the Trades Union
Congress at Amsterdam, a telegram which admirably
illustrated the impossibility of separating judgment of the
present position of the Unions from judgments of the
Russian revolution as a whole.  It encouraged the Unions “in
their struggle” and promised support in that struggle.  The
Communists  immediately asked “What struggle?
Against the capitalist system in Russia which does not exist?
Or against capitalist systems outside Russia?”  They said that
either the telegram meant this latter only, or it meant that its
writers did not believe that there had been a social revolution
in Russia.  The point is arguable.  If one believes that
revolution is an impossibility, one can reason from that
belief and say that in spite of certain upheavals in Russia the
fundamental arrangement of society is the same there as in
other countries, so that the position of the Trade Unions
there must be the same, and, as in other countries they must
be still engaged in augmenting the dinners of their members
at the expense of the dinners of the capitalists which, in the
long run (if that were possible) they would abolish.  If, on
the other hand, one believes that social revolution has
actually occurred, to speak of Trades Unions continuing the
struggle in which they conquered something like three years
ago, is to urge them to a sterile fanaticism which has been
neatly described by Professor Santayana as a redoubling of
your effort when you have forgotten your aim.
It ’s probably true that the “aim” of the Trades Unions
was more clearly defined in Russia than elsewhere.  In
England during the greater part of their history the Trades
Unions have not been in conscious opposition to the State.
In Russia this position was forced on the Trades Unions
almost before they had time to get to work.  They were
born, so to speak, with red flags in their hands.  They grew
up under circumstances of extreme difficulty and
persecution.  From 1905 on they were in decided opposition
to the existing system, and were revolutionary rather than
merely mitigatory organizations.
Before 1905 they were little more than associations for
mutual help, very weak, spending most of their energies in
self-preservation from the police, and hiding their character
as class organizations by electing more or less Liberal
managers and employers as “honorary members.” 1905,
however, settled their revolutionary character.  In September
of that year there was a Conference at Moscow, where it
was decided to call an All-Russian Trades Union Congress.
Reaction in Russia made this impossible, and the most they
could do was to have another small Conference in
February, 1906, which, however, defined their object as that
of creating a general Trade Union Movement organized on
All-Russian lines.  The temper of the Trades Unions then,
and the condition of the country at that time, may be judged
from the fact that although they were merely working for the
right to form Unions, the right to strike, etc., they passed the
following significant resolution: “Neither from the present
Government nor from the future State Duma can be
expected realization of freedom of coalition.  This
Conference considers the legalization of the Trades Unions
under present conditions  absolutely impossible.”  The
Conference was right.  For twelve years after that there were
no Trades Unions Conferences in Russia.  Not until June,
1917, three months after the March Revolution, was the
third Trade Union Conference able to meet.  This Conference
reaffirmed the revolutionary character of the Russian Trades Unions.
At that time the dominant party in the Soviets was that of the
Mensheviks, who were opposed to the formation of a Soviet
Government, and were supporting the provisional Cabinet of
Kerensky. The Trades Unions were actually at that time
more revolutionary than the Soviets.  This third Conference
passed several resolutions, which show clearly enough that
the present position of the Unions has not been brought
about by any violence of the Communists from without, but
was definitely promised by tendencies inside the Unions at a
time when the Communists were probably the least
authoritative party in Russia.  This Conference of June,
1917, resolved that the Trades Unions should not only
"remain militant class organizations . . . but . . . should
support the activities of the Soviets of soldiers and
deputies.”  They thus clearly showed on which side they
stood in the struggle then proceeding.  Nor was this all. They
also, though the Mensheviks were  still the dominant party,
resolved on that system of internal organizations and
grouping, which has been actually realized under the
Communists.  I quote again from the resolution of this Conference:
“The evolution of the economic struggle demands from the
workers such forms of professional organization as, basing
themselves on the connection between various groups of
workers in the process of production, should unite
within a general organization, and under general leadership,
as large masses of workers as possible occupied in
enterprises of the same kind, or in similar professions.  With
this object the workers should organize themselves
professionally, not by shops or trades, but by productions, so
that all the workers of a given enterprise should belong to
one Union, even if they belong to different professions and
even different productions.”  That which was then no more
than a design is now an accurate description of Trades
Union organization in Russia.  Further, much that at present
surprises the foreign inquirer was planned and considered
desirable then, before the Communists had won a majority
either in the Unions or in the Soviet.  Thus this same third
Conference resolved that “in the interests of greater
efficiency and success in the economic struggle, a
professional organization should be built on the principle of
democratic centralism, assuring to every member a share in
the affairs of the organization and, at the same time,
obtaining unity in the leadership of the struggle.”  Finally,
“Unity in the direction (leadership) of the economic
struggle demands unity in the exchequer of the Trades
Unions.”
The point that I wish to make in thus illustrating the
pre-Communist tendencies of the Russian Trades Unions is not
simply that if their present position is undesirable they have
only themselves to thank for it, but that in Russia the Trades
Union movement before the October Revolution was
working in the direction of such a revolution, that the events
of October represented something like a Trade Union
victory, so that the present position of the Unions as part of
the organization defending that victory, as part of the system
of government set up by that revolution, is logical and was to
be expected.  I have illustrated this from resolutions, because
these give statements in words easily comparable with what
has come to pass.  It would be equally easy to point to deeds
instead of words if we need more forcible though less
accurate illustrations.
Thus, at the time of the Moscow Congress the Soviets, then
Mensheviks, who were represented at the Congress (the
object of the Congress was to whip up support for the
Coalition Government) were against strikes of protest.  The
Trades Unions took a point of view nearer that of
the Bolsheviks, and the strikes in Moscow took place in spite
of the Soviets.  After the Kornilov affair, when the Mensheviks
were still struggling for coalition with the bourgeois parties, the
Trades Unions quite definitely took the Bolshevik standpoint.
At the so-called Democratic Conference, intended as a
sort of life belt for the sinking Provisional Government,
only eight of the Trades Union delegates voted for a
continuance of the coalition, whereas seventy three voted against.
This consciously revolutionary character throughout their
much shorter existence has distinguished Russian from, for
example, English Trades Unions.  It has set their course for
them.
In October, 1917, they got the revolution for which they had
been asking since March.  Since then, one Congress after
another has illustrated the natural and inevitable development
of Trades Unions inside a revolutionary State
which, like most if not all revolutionary States, is attacked
simultaneously by hostile armies from without and by
economic paralysis from within.  The excited and
lighthearted Trades Unionists of three years ago, who
believed that the mere decreeing of “workers’ control” would
bring all difficulties automatically to an end, are now
unrecognizable.  We have seen illusion after illusion scraped
from them by the pumice-stone of experience, while the
appalling state of the industries which they now largely
control, and the ruin of the country in which they attained
that control, have forced them to alter their immediate aims
to meet immediate dangers, and have accelerated the process
of adaptation made inevitable by their victory.
The process of adaptation has had the natural result of
producing new internal cleavages.  Change after change in
their programme and theory of the Russian Trades Unionists
has been due to the pressure of life itself, to the urgency of
struggling against the worsening of conditions already almost
unbearable. It is perfectly natural that those Unions which
hold back from adaptation and resent the changes are
precisely those which, like that of the printers, are not
intimately concerned in any productive process, are
consequently outside the central struggle, and, while feeling
the discomforts of change, do not feel its need.
The opposition inside the productive Trades Unions is
of two kinds.  There is the opposition, which is of merely
psychological interest, of old Trades Union leaders who
have always thought of themselves as in opposition to the
Government, and feel themselves like watches without
mainsprings in their new role of Government supporters.
These are men in whom a natural intellectual stiffness makes
difficult the complete change of front which was the logical
result of the revolution for which they had been working.
But beside that there is a much more interesting opposition
based on political considerations.  The Menshevik standpoint
is one of disbelief in the permanence of the revolution, or
rather in the permanence of the victory of the town workers.
They point to the divergence in interests between the town
and country populations, and are convinced that sooner or
later the peasants will alter the government to suit
themselves, when, once more, it will be a government
against which the town workers will have to defend their
interests.  The Mensheviks object to the identification of the
Trades Unions with the Government apparatus on the
ground that when this change, which they expect comes
about, the Trade Union movement will be so far
emasculated as to be incapable of defending the town
workers against the peasants who will then be the ruling
class.  Thus they attack the present Trades Union leaders for
being directly influenced by the Government in fixing the
rate of wages, on the ground that this establishes  a
precedent from which, when the change comes, it will be
difficult to break away.  The Communists answer them by
insisting that it is to everybody’s interest to pull Russia
through the crisis, and that if the Trades Unions were for
such academic reasons to insist on their complete
independence instead of in every possible way collaborating
with the Government, they would be not only increasing the
difficulties of the revolution in its economic crisis, but
actually hastening that change which the Mensheviks,
though they regard it as inevitable, cannot be supposed to
desire.  This Menshevik opposition is strongest in the
Ukraine.  Its strength may be judged from the figures of the
Congress in Moscow this spring when, of 1,300 delegates,
over 1,000 were Communists or sympathizers with them; 63
were Mensheviks and 200 were non-party, the bulk of whom,
I fancy, on this point would agree with the Mensheviks.
But apart from opposition to the “stratification”  of the
Trades Unions, there is a cleavage cutting across the
Communist Party itself and uniting in opinion, though not in
voting, the Mensheviks and a section of their Communist
opponents.  This cleavage is over the question of “workers’
control.”  Most of those who, before the revolution, looked
forward to the “workers’ control”, thought of it as meaning
that the actual workers in a given factory would themselves
control that factory, just as a board of directors controls a
factory under the ordinary capitalist system.  The
Communists, I think, even today admit the ultimate
desirability of this, but insist that the important question is
not who shall give the orders, but in whose interest the
orders shall be given.  I have nowhere found this matter
properly thrashed out, though feeling upon it is extremely
strong.  Everybody whom I asked about it began at once to
address me as if I were a public meeting, so that I found
it extremely difficult to get from either side a statement not
free from electioneering bias.  I think, however, that it
may be fairly said that all but a few lunatics have abandoned
the ideas of 1917, which resulted in the workmen in a
factory deposing any technical expert or manager whose
orders were in the least irksome to them.  These ideas and
the miseries and unfairness they caused, the stoppages of
work, the managers sewn up in sacks, ducked in ponds and
trundled in wheelbarrows, have taken their places as
curiosities of history.  The change in these ideas has been
gradual.  The first step was the recognition that the State as a
whole was interested in the efficiency of each factory, and,
therefore, that the workmen of each factory had no right to
arrange things with no thought except for themselves.  The
Committee idea was still strong, and the difficulty was got
over by assuring that the technical staff should be
represented on the Committee, and that the casting vote
between workers and technical experts or managers should
belong to the central economic organ of the State.  The next
stage was when the management of a workshop was given a
so called “collegiate” character, the workmen appointing
representatives to share the responsibility of the “bourgeois
specialist.”  The bitter controversy now going on
concerns the seemingly inevitable transition to a later stage in
which, for all practical purposes, the bourgeois specialist will
be responsible solely to the State.  Many Communists,
including some of the best known, while recognizing the
need of greater efficiency if the revolution is to survive at all,
regard this step as definitely retrograde and likely in the long
run to make the revolution not worth preserving.*[(*)Thus
Rykov, President of the Supreme Council of Public Economy:
"There is a possibility of so constructing a State that in it
there will be a ruling caste consisting chiefly of administrative
engineers, technicians, etc.; that is, we should get a form of
State economy based on a small group of a ruling caste
whose privilege in this case would be the management of the
workersand peasants.”  That criticism of individual control, from
a communist, goes a good deal further than most of the
criticism from people avowedly in opposition.]  The enormous
importance attached by everybody to this question of individual
or collegiate control, may bejudged from the fact that at
every conference I attended, and every discussion to which
I listened, this point, which might seem of minor importance,
completely overshadowed the question of industrial conscription
which, at least inside the Communist Party, seemed generally
taken for granted.  It may be taken now as certain
that the majority of the Communists are in favor of
individual control.  They say that the object of “workers’
control” before the revolution was to ensure that factories
should be run in the interests of workers as well of
employers.  In Russia now there are no employers other
than the State as a whole, which is exclusively made
up of employees. (I am stating now the view of the
majority at the last Trades Union Congress at
which I was present, April, 1920.)  They say that “workers’
control” exists in a larger and more efficient manner than
was suggested by the old pre-revolutionary statements on
that question.  Further, they say that if workers’ control
ought to be identified with Trade Union control, the Trades
Unions are certainly supreme in all those matters with which
they have chiefly concerned themselves, since they dominate
the Commissariat of Labor, are very largely represented on
the Supreme Council of Public Economy, and fix the rates
of pay for their own members.*[(*)The wages of workmen are
decided by the Trades Unions, who draw up “tariffs” for the
whole country, basing their calculations on three criteria:
(I) The price of food in the open market in the district
where a workman is employed, (2)the price of food supplied
by the State on the card system, (3)the quality of the workman.
This last is decided by a special section of the Factory Committee,
which in each  factory is an organ of the Trades Union.]
The enormous Communist majority, together with the
fact that however much they may quarrel with each other
inside the party, the Communists will go to almost any
length to avoid breaking the party discipline, means that at
present the resolutions of Trades Union Congresses will not
be different from those of Communists Congresses on the
same subjects.  Consequently, the questions which really
agitate the members, the actual cleavages inside that
Communist majority, are comparatively invisible at a Trades
Union Congress.  They are fought over with great bitterness,
but they are not fought over in the Hall of the Unions-once
the Club of the Nobility, with on its walls on Congress days
the hammer and spanner of the engineers, the pestle and
trowel of the builders, and so on-but in the Communist
Congresses in the Kremlin and throughout the country.
And, in the problem with which in this book we are mainly
concerned, neither the regular business of the Unions nor
their internal squabbles affects the cardinal fact that in
the present crisis the Trades Unions are chiefly important as
part of that organization of human will with which the
Communists are attempting to arrest the steady progress of
Russia’s economic ruin.  Putting it brutally, so as to offend
Trades Unionists and Communists alike, they are an
important part of the Communist system of internal propaganda,
and their whole organization acts as a gigantic
megaphone through which the Communist Party makes
known its fears, its hopes and its decisions to the great
masses of the industrial workers.
When I crossed the Russian front in October, 1919, the first
thing I noticed in peasants’ cottages, in the villages, in the
little town where I took the railway to Moscow, in every
railway station along the line, was the elaborate pictorial
propaganda concerned with the war.  There were posters
showing Denizen standing straddle over Russia’s coal, while
the factory chimneys were smokeless and the engines idle in
the yards, with the simplest wording to show why it was
necessary to beat Denizen in order to get coal; there were
posters illustrating the treatment of the peasants by the
Whites; posters against desertion, posters illustrating the
Russian struggle against the rest of the world, showing a
workman, a peasant, a sailor and a soldier fighting in
self-defence against an enormous Capitalistic Hydra.  There
were also-and this I took as a sign of what might
be-posters encouraging the sowing of corn, and posters
explaining in simple pictures improved methods of
agriculture.  Our own recruiting propaganda during the war,
good as that was, was never developed to such a point of
excellence, and knowing the general slowness with which
the Russian centre reacts on its periphery, I was amazed not
only at the actual posters, but at their efficient distribution
thus far from Moscow.
I have had an opportunity of seeing two of the propaganda
trains, the object of which is to reduce the size of Russia
politically by bringing Moscow to the front and to the out of
the way districts, and so to lessen the difficulty of obtaining
that general unity of purpose which it is the object of
propaganda to produce.  The fact that there is some hope
that in the near future the whole of this apparatus may be
turned over to the propaganda of industry makes it perhaps
worth while to describe these trains in detail.
Russia, for purposes of this internal propaganda, is divided
into five sections, and each section has its own train,
prepared for the particular political needs of the section it
serves, bearing its own name, carrying its regular crew-a
propaganda unit, as corporate as the crew of a ship. The
five trains at present in existence are the “Lenin,” the
"Sverdlov,” the “October Revolution,” the “Red East,"
which is now in Turkestan, and the “Red Cossack,” which,
ready to start for Rostov and the Don, was standing, in the
sidings at the Kursk station, together with the “Lenin,"
returned for refitting and painting.
Burov, the organizer of these trains, a ruddy, enthusiastic
little man in patched leather coat and breeches, took a party
of foreigners-a Swede, a Norwegian, two Czechs, a German
and myself to visit his trains, together with Radek, in the
hope that Radek would induce Lenin to visit them, in which
case Lenin would be kinematographed for the delight of the
villagers, and possibly the Central Committee would, if
Lenin were interested, lend them more lively support.
We walked along the “Lenin” first, at Burov’s special
request.  Burov, it seems, has only recently escaped from
what he considered a bitter affliction due to the Department
of Proletarian Culture, who, in the beginning, for the
decoration of his trains, had delivered him bound hand
and foot to a number of Futurists.  For that reason
he wanted us to see the “Lenin” first, in order that we might
compare it with the result of his emancipation, the “Red
Cossack,” painted when the artists “had been brought under
proper control.”  The “Lenin” had been painted a year and a
half ago, when, as fading hoarding in the streets of Moscow
still testify, revolutionary art was dominated by the Futurist
movement.  Every carriage is decorated with most striking
but not very comprehensible pictures in the brightest colors,
and the proletariat was called upon to enjoy what the
pre-revolutionary artistic public had for the most part failed to
understand.  Its pictures are “art for art’s sake,” and cannot
have done more than astonish, and perhaps terrify, the
peasants and the workmen of the country towns who had the
luck to see them.  The “Red Cossack” is quite different.
As Burov put it with deep satisfaction, “At first we were in the
artists’ hands, and now the artists are in our hands,” a sentence
suggesting the most horrible possibilities of official
art under socialism, although, of course, bad art flourishes
pretty well even under other systems.
I inquired exactly how Burov and his
friends kept the artists in the right way, and received the
fullest explanation.  The political section of the organization
works out the main idea and aim for each picture, which
covers the whole side of a wagon.  This idea is then
submitted to a “collective” of artists, who are jointly
responsible for its realization in paint.  The artists compete
with each other for a prize which is awarded for the best
design, the judges being the artists themselves.  It is the art
of the poster, art with a purpose of the most definite kind.
The result is sometimes amusing, interesting, startling, but,
whatever else it does, hammers home a plain idea.
Thus the picture on the side of one wagon is divided into
two sections.  On the left is a representation of the peasants
and workmen of the Soviet Republic.  Under it are the
words, “Let us not find ourselves again...” and then, in
gigantic lettering under the right-hand section of the picture,
”... in the HEAVEN OF THE WHITES.”  This heaven is
shown by an epauletted officer hitting a soldier in the face,
as was done in the Tsar’s army and in at least one army of
the counter revolutionaries, and workmen tied to
stakes, as was done by the Whites in certain towns in the
south.  Then another wagon illustrating the methods of Tsardom,
with a State vodka shop selling its wares to wretched folk,
who, when drunk on the State vodka, are flogged by the
State police.  Then there is a wagon showing the different
Cossacks-of the Don, Terek, Kuban, Ural-riding in pairs.
The Cossack infantry is represented on the other side of
this wagon.  On another wagon is a very jolly picture of
Stenka Razin in his boat with little old-fashioned brass
cannon, rowing up the river.  Underneath is written the
words: “I attack only the rich, with the poor I divide
everything.”  On one side are the poor folk running from
their huts to join him, on the other the rich folk firing at him
from their castle.  One wagon is treated purely decoratively,
with a broad effective characteristically South Russian
design, framing a huge inscription to the effect that the
Cossacks need not fear that the Soviet Republic will
interfere with their religion, since under its regime every
man is to be free to believe exactly what he likes.
Then there is an entertaining wagon, showing Kolchak
sitting inside a fence in Siberia  with a Red soldier
on guard, Judenitch sitting in a little circle with a sign-post
to show it is  Esthonia, and Denikin running at full speed
to the asylum indicated by another sign-post on which is
the crescent of the Turkish Empire. Another lively picture
shows the young Cossack girls learning to read, with a
most realistic old Cossack woman telling them they had
better not.  But there is no point in describing every
wagon.  There are sixteen wagons in the “Red Cossack,"
and every one is painted all over on both sides.
The internal arrangements of the train are a sufficient proof
that Russians are capable of organization if they set their
minds to it.  We went through it, wagon by wagon.  One
wagon contains a wireless telegraphy station capable of
receiving news from such distant stations as those of
Carnarvon or Lyons.  Another is fitted up as a newspaper
office, with a mechanical press capable of printing an edition
of fifteen thousand daily, so that the district served by the
train, however out of the way, gets its news simultaneously
with Moscow, many days sometimes before the belated Izvestia
or Pravda finds its way to them.  And with its latest
news it gets its latest propaganda, and in order to get the
one it cannot help getting the other.  Next door to that there
is a kinematograph wagon, with benches to seat about one
hundred and fifty persons.  But indoor performances are
only given to children, who must come during the daytime,
or in summer when the evenings are too light to permit an
open air performance.  In the ordinary way, at night, a great
screen is fixed up in the open.  There is a special hole cut in
the side of the wagon, and through this the kinematograph
throws its picture on the great screen outside, so that several
thousands can see it at once.  The enthusiastic Burov insisted
on working through a couple of films for us, showing the
Communists boy scouts in their country camps, children’s
meetings in Petrograd, and the big demonstrations of last
year in honor of the Third International.  He was extremely
disappointed that Radek, being in a hurry, refused to wait
for a performance of “The Father and his Son,” a drama
which, he assured us with tears in his eyes, was so thrilling
that we should not regret being late for our appointments if
we stayed to witness it.  Another wagon is fitted up as an
electric power-station, lighting the train, working the
kinematograph and the printing machine,etc.  Then there is a
clean little kitchen and dining-room, where, before being
kinematographed-a horrible experience when one is first
quite seriously begged (of course by Burov) to assume an
expression of intelligent interest-we had soup, a plate of
meat and cabbage, and tea.  Then there is a wagon
bookshop, where, while customers buy books, a
gramophone sings the revolutionary songs of Demian
Bledny, or speaks with the eloquence ofTrotsky or the logic
of Lenin.  Other wagons are the living-rooms of the
personnel, divided up according to their duties-political,
military, instructional, and so forth.  For the train has not
merely an agitational purpose.  It carries with it a staff to
give advice to local authorities, to explain what has not been
understood, and so in every way to bring the ideas of
the Centre quickly to the backwoods of the Republic.  It works
also in the opposite direction, helping to make the voice of
the backwoods heard at Moscow.  This is illustrated by a
painted pillar-box on one of the wagons, with a slot for
letters, labelled, “For Complaits of Every Kind.”  Anybody
anywhere who has grievance, thinks he is being unfairly
treated, or has a suggestion to make, can speak with
the Centre in this way.  When the train is on a voyage
telegrams announce its arrival beforehand, so that the local
Soviets can make full use of its advantages, arranging meetings,
kinematograph shows, lectures.  It arrives, this amazing
picture train, and proceeds to publish and distribute its
newspapers, sell its books (the bookshop, they tell me, is
literally stormed at every stopping place), send books and
posters for forty versts on either side of the line with the
motor-cars which it carries with it, and enliven the
population with its kinematograph.
I doubt if a more effective instrument of propaganda has
ever been devised.  And in considering the question whether
or no the Russians will be able after organizing their military
defence to tackle with similar comparative success the much
more difficult problem of industrial rebirth, the existence of
such instruments, the use of such propaganda is a factor not
to be neglected.  In the spring of this year, when the civil
war seemed to be ending, when there was a general belief
that the Poles would accept the peace that Russia offered
(they ignored this offer, advanced, took Kiev, were
driven back to Warsaw, advanced again, and finally agreed
to terms which they could have had in March without
bloodshed any kind), two of these propaganda trains were
already being repainted with a new purpose.  It was hoped
that in the near future all five trains would be explaining not
the need to fight but the need to work.  Undoubtedly, at the
first possible moment, the whole machinery of agitation, of
posters, of broadsheets and of trains, will be turned over to
the task of explaining the Government’s plans for
reconstruction, and the need for extraordinary concentration,
now on transport, now on something else, that these plans
involve.
So much for the organization, with its Communist Party, its
system of meetings and counter-meetings, its adapted Trades
Unions, its infinitely various propaganda, which is doing its
best to make headway against ruin.  I want now to describe
however briefly, the methods it has adopted in tackling the
worst of all Russia’s problems-the non-productivity and
absolute shortage of labor.
I find a sort of analogy between these methods and those
which we used in England in tackling the similar cumulative
problem of finding men for war.  Just as we did not proceed
at once to conscription, but began by a great propaganda of
voluntary effort, so the Communists,  faced with a need at
least equally vital, did not turn at once to industrial
conscription.  It was understood from the beginning that the
Communists themselves were to set an example of
hard work, and I dare say a considerable proportion of them
did so. Every factory had its little Communist Committee,
which was supposed to leaven the factory with enthusiasm,
just as similar groups of Communists drafted into the armies
in moments of extreme danger did, on more than one
occasion, as the non-Communist Commander-in-Chief
admits, turn a rout into a stand and snatch victory from what
looked perilously like defeat.  But this was not enough,
arrears of work accumulated, enthusiasm waned,
productivity decreased, and some new move was obviously
necessary.  This first move in the direction of industrial
conscription, although no one perceived its tendency at the
time, was the inauguration of what have become known
as “Saturdayings”.
Early in 1919 the Central Committee of the Communist
Party put out a circular letter, calling upon the Communists
"to work revolutionally,” to emulate in the rear the heroism
of their brothers on the front, pointing out that nothing but
the most determined efforts and an increase in the
productivity of labor would enable Russia to win through her
difficulties of transport, etc. Kolchak, to quote from
English newspapers, was it “sweeping on to Moscow,” and
the situation was pretty threatening.  As a direct result of this
letter, on May 7th, a meeting of Communists in the sub-district
of the Moscow-Kazan railway passed a resolution
that, in view of the imminent danger to the Republic,
Communists and their sympathizers should give up an hour
a day of their leisure, and, lumping these hours together, do
every Saturday six hours of manual labor; and, further, that
these Communist “Saturdayings” should be continued “until
complete victory over Kolchak  should be assured.”  That
decision of a local committee was the actual beginning of a
movement which spread all over Russia, and though the
complete victory over Kolchak was long ago obtained, is
likely to continue so long as Soviet Russia is threatened by
any one else.
The decision was put into effect on May 10th, when the first
Communist “Saturdaying” in Russia took place on the
Moscow-Kazan railway.  The Commissar of the railway,
Communist clerks from the offices, and every one else who
wished to help, marched to work, 182 in all, and put in
1,012 hours of manual labor, in which they finished
the repairs of four locomotives and sixteen wagons and
loaded and unloaded 9,300 poods of engine and wagon parts
and material. It was found that the productivity of labor in
loading and unloading shown on this occasion was about
270 per cent. of the normal, and a similar superiority of
effort was shown in the other kinds of work.  This example
was immediately copied on other railways.  The Alexandrovsk
railway had its first “Saturdaying” on May 17th. Ninety-eight
persons worked for five hours, and here also did two or
three times as much is the usual amount of work done in the
same number of working hours under ordinary circumstances.
One of the workmen, in giving an account of the
performance, wrote: “The Comrades explain this by
saying that in ordinary times the work was dull and
they were sick of it, whereas this occasion they were
working willingly and with excitement.  But now it will be
shameful in ordinary hours to do less than in the Communist
’Saturdaying.’ “  The hope implied in this last sentence has
not been realized.
In Pravda of June 7th there is an article describing one of
these early “Saturdayings,” which gives a clear picture
of the infectious character of the proceedings, telling how
people who came out of curiosity to look on found
themselves joining in the work, and how a soldier with an
accordion after staring for a long time open-mouthed at
these lunatics working on a Saturday afternoon put up a tune
for them on his instrument, and, delighted by their delight,
played on while the workers all sang together.
The idea of the “Saturdayings” spread quickly from railways
to factories, and by the middle of the summer reports of
similar efforts were coming from all over Russia.  Then
Lenin became interested, seeing in these “Saturdayings” not
only a special effort in the face of common danger, but an
actual beginning of Communism and a sign that Socialism
could bring about a greater productivity of labor than could
be obtained under Capitalism.  He wrote: “This is a work of
great difficulty and requiring much time, but it has begun,
and that is the main thing.  If in hungry Moscow in the
summer of 1919 hungry workmen who have lived through
the difficult four years of the Imperialistic war, and then the
year and a half of the still more difficult civil war, have
been able to begin this great work, what will not be its
further development when we conquer in the civil war and
win peace.”  He sees in it a promise of work being done not
for the sake of individual gain, but because of a recognition
that such work is necessary for the general good, and in all
he wrote and spoke about it he emphasized the fact that
people worked better and harder when working thus than
under any of the conditions (piece-work, premiums for good
work, etc.) imposed by the revolution in its desperate
attempts to raise the productivity of labor.  For this reason
alone, he wrote, the first “Saturdaying” on the Moscow-Kazan
railway was an event of historical significance, and not for
Russia alone.
Whether Lenin was right or wrong in so thinking, “Saturdayings"
became a regular institution, like Dorcas meetings in Victorian
England, like the thousands of collective working parties
instituted in England during the war with Germany.  It
remains to be seen how long they will continue, and if
they will survive peace when that comes.  At present
the most interesting point about them is the large proportion
of non-Communists who take an enthusiastic part in them.
In many cases not more than ten per cent. of Communists
are concerned, though they take the iniative in organizing the
parties and in finding the work to be done.  The movement
spread like fire in dry grass, like the craze for roller-skating
swept over England some years ago, and efforts were made
to control it, so that the fullest use might be made of it.
In Moscow it was found worth while to set up a special
Bureau for “Saturdayings.”  Hospitals, railways, factories, or
any other concerns working for the public good, notify
this bureau that they need the sort of work a “Saturdaying"
provides.  The bureau informs the local Communists where
their services are required, and thus there is a minimum
of wasted energy.  The local Communists arrange the
"Saturdayings,” and any one else joins in who wants.
These “Saturdayings” are a hardship to none because
they are voluntary, except for members of the Communist
Party, who are considered to have broken the party
discipline if they refrain.  But they can avoid the
"Saturdayings” if they wish to by leaving the party.  Indeed,
Lenin points, out that the “Saturdayings” are likely to assist
in clearing out of the party those elements which
joined it with the hope of personal gain.  He  points out that
the privileges of a Communists now consist in doing more
work than other people in the rear, and, on the front, in
having the certainty of being killed when other folk are
merely taken prisoners.
The following are a few examples of the sort of work done
in the “Saturdayings.”  Briansk hospitals were improperly
heated because of lack of the local transport necessary to
bring them wood.  The Communists organized a “Saturdaying,"
in which 900 persons took part, including military specialists
(officers of the old army serving in the new), soldiers, a
chief of staff, workmen and women.  Having no horses, they
harnessed themselves to sledges in groups of ten, and brought
in the wood required.  At Nijni 800 persons spent their Saturday
afternoon in unloading barges.  In the Basman district of
Moscow there was a gigantic “Saturdaying” and “Sundaying"
in which 2,000 persons (in this case all but a little over 500
being Communists) worked in the heavy artillery shops, shifting
materials, cleaning tramlines for bringing in fuel, etc.
Then there was a “Saturdaying” the main object of which
was a general autumn cleaning of the hospitals for the
wounded.  One form of “Saturdaying” for women is going
to the hospitals, talking with the wounded and writing letters
for them, mending their clothes, washing sheets, etc.  The
majority of “Saturdayings” at present are concerned with
transport work and with getting and shifting wood, because
at the moment these are the chief difficulties.  I have talked
to many “Saturdayers,” Communist and non-Communist,
and all alike spoke of these Saturday afternoons of as kind of
picnic.  On the other hand, I have met  Communists who
were accustomed to use every kind off ingenuity to find
excuses not to take part in them and yet to preserve the good
opinion of their local committee.
But even if the whole of the Communist Party did actually
indulge in a working picnic once a week, it would not suffice
to meet Russia’s tremendous needs.  And, as I pointed out in
the chapter specially devoted to the shortage of labor, the
most serious need at present is to keep skilled workers
at their jobs instead of letting them drift away into non-productive
labor.  No amount of Saturday picnics could do that, and it
was obvious long ago that some other means, would have to
be devised.
The general principle of industrial conscription recognized
by the Russian Constitution, section ii, chapter v, paragraph
18, which reads: “The Russian Socialist Federate Soviet
Republic recognizes that work is an obligation on every
citizen of the Republic,” and proclaims, “He who does not
work shall not eat.”  It is, however, one thing to proclaim
such a principle and quite another to put it into action.
On December 17, 1919, the moment it became clear that
there was a real possibility that the civil war was drawing to
an end, Trotsky allowed the Pravda to print a memorandum
of his, consisting of “theses” or reasoned notes about
industrial conscription and the militia system.  He points out
that a Socialist State demands a general plan for the
utilization of all the resources of a country, including its
human energy.  At the same time, “in the present economic
chaos in which are mingled the broken fragments of the
past and the beginnings of the future,” a sudden jump to a
complete centralized economy of the country as a whole is
impossible.  Local initiative, local effort must not be
sacrificed for the sake of a plan.  At the same time industrial
conscription is necessary for complete socialization.  It
cannot be regardless of individuality like military
conscription.  He suggests a subdivision of the State into
territorial productive districts which should coincide with the
territorial districts of the militia system which shall replace
the regular army.  Registration of labor necessary.
Necessary also to coordinate military and industrial
registration.  At demobilization the cadres of regiments,
divisions, etc., should form the fundamental cadres of the
militia.  Instruction to this end should be included in the
courses for workers and peasants who are training to
become officers in every district.  Transition to the militia
system must be carefully and gradually accomplished so as
not for a moment to leave the Republic defenseless.  While
not losing sight of these ultimate aims, it is necessary to
decide on immediate needs and to ascertain exactly what
amount of labor is necessary for their limited
realization. He suggests the registration of skilled labor in the
army.  He suggests that a Commission under general
direction of the Council of Public Economy should work out
a preliminary plan and then hand it over to the War
Department, so that means should be worked out for using
the military apparatus for this new industrial purpose.
Trotsky’s twenty-four theses or notes must have been written
in odd moments, now here now there, on the way from one
front to another.  They do not form a connected whole.
Contradictions jostle each other, and it is quite clear that
Trotsky himself had no very definite plan in his head.  But
his notes annoyed and stimulated so many other people that
they did perhaps precisely the work they were intended to
do. Pravada printed them with a note from the editor
inviting discussion.  The Ekonomitcheskaya Jizn printed
letter after letter from workmen, officials and others,
attacking, approving and bringing new suggestions.
Larin, Semashko, Pyatakov, Bucharin all took a hand in the
discussion.  Larin saw in the proposals the beginning of the
end of the revolution, being convinced that authority
would pass from the democracy of the workers into the
hands of the specialists.  Rykov fell upon them with sturdy
blows on behalf of the Trades Unions.  All, however, agreed
on the one point-that something of the sort was neccesary.
On December 27th a Commission for studying the question
of industrial conscription was formed under the presidency
of Trotsky.  This Commission included the People’s
Commissars, or Ministers, of Labor, Ways of
Communication, Supply, Agriculture, War, and the
Presidents of the Central Council of the Trades Unions and
of the Supreme Council of Public Economy.  They compiled
a list of the principal questions before them, and invited
anybody interested to bring them suggestions and material
for discussion.
But the discussion was not limited to the newspapers or to
this Commission.  The question was discussed in Soviets and
Conferences of every kind all over the country.  Thus, on
January 1st an All-Russian Conference of local
"departments for the registration and distribution of labor,"
after prolonged argument, contributed their views.  They
pointed out (1) the need of bringing to work numbers
of persons who instead of doing the skilled labor for which
they were qualified were engaged in petty profiteering, etc.;
(2) that there evaporation of skilled labor into unproductive
speculation  could at least be checked by the introduction of
labor books, which would give some sort of registration of
each citizen’s work; (3) that workmen can be brought back
from the villages only for enterprises which are supplied
with provisions or are situated in districts where there is
plenty. ("The opinion that, in the absence of these
preliminary conditions, it will be possible to draw workmen
from the villages by measures of compulsion or mobilization
is profoundly mistaken.”) (4) that there should be a census
of labor and that the Trades Unions should be invited to
protect the interests of the conscripted.  Finally, this
Conference approved the idea of using the already existing
military organization for carrying out a labor census of the
Red Army, and for the turning over to labor of parts of the
army during demobilization, but opposed the idea of giving
the military organization the work of labor registration and
industrial conscription in general.
On January 22, 1920, the Central Committee of the
Communist Party, after prolonged discussion  of Trotsky’s
rough memorandum, finally adopted and published a new
edition of the “theses,” expanded, altered, almost
unrecognizable, a reasoned body of theory entirely different
from the bundle of arrows loosed at a venture by Trotsky.
They definitely accepted the principle of industrial
conscription, pointing out the immediate reasons for it in the
fact that Russia cannot look for much help from without and
must somehow or other help herself.
Long before the All-Russian Congress of the Communist
Party approved the theses of the Committee, one form of
industrial conscription was already being tested at work.
Very early in January, when the discussion on the subject
was at its height, the Soviet of the Third Army addressed
itself to the Council of Defense of the Republic with an
invitation to make use of this army (which at least for the
moment had finished its military task) and to experiment
with it as a labor army.  The Council of Defense agreed.
Representatives of the Commissariats of Supply,
Agriculture, Ways and Communications, Labor and the
Supreme Council of Public Economy were sent to assist the
Army Soviet.  The army was proudly re-named “The First
Revolutionary Army of Labor,” and began to issue communiques
from the Labor front,” precisely like the communiques of an army
in the field.  I translate as a curiosity the first communique issued
by a Labor Army’s Soviet:
“Wood prepared in the districts of Ishim, Karatulskaya, Omutinskaya,
Zavodoutovskaya, Yalutorovska, Iushaly, Kamuishlovo, Turinsk,
Altynai, Oshtchenkovo, Shadrinsk, 10,180 cubic sazhins.
Working days, 52,651.  Taken to the railway stations, 5,334 cubic
sazhins.  Working days on transport, 22,840.  One hundred carpenters
detailed for the Kizelovsk mines.  One hundred carpenters detailed for
the bridge at Ufa.  One engineer specialist detailed to the
Government Council of Public Economy for repairing the mills of
Chelyabinsk Government.  One instructor accountant detailed for
auditing the accounts of the economic organizations of Kamuishlov.
Repair of locomotives procceding in the works at Ekaterinburg.
January 20, 1920, midnight.”
The Labor Army’s Soviet received a report on the state
of the district covered by the army with regard to supply and
needed work.  By the end of January it had already carried
out a labor census of the army, and found that it included
over 50,000 laborers, of whom a considerable number were
skilled.  It decided on a general plan of work in
reestablishing industry in the Urals, which suffered severely
during the Kolchak regime and the ebb and flow of the civil
war, and was considering a suggestion of one of its members
that if the scheme worked well the army should be increased
to 300,000 men by way of mobilization.
On January 23rd the Council of Defense of the Republic,
encouraged to proceed further, decided to make use of the
Reserve Army for the improvement of railway transport on
the Moscow-Kazan railway, one of the chief arteries
between eastern food districts and Moscow.  The main
object is to be the reestablishment of through traffic between
Moscow and Ekaterinburg and the repair of the Kazan-Ekaterinburg
line, which particularly suffered during the war.  An attempt was
to be made to rebuild the bridge over the Kama River
before the ice melts.  The Commander of the Reserve Army
was appointed Commissar of the eastern part of the Moscow-Kazan
railway, retaining his position as Commander of the Army.
With a view of coordination between the Army Soviet and
the railway authorities, a member of the Soviet was also appointed
Commissar of the railway.  On January 25th it was
announced that a similar experiment was being made in the
Ukraine.  A month before the ice broke the first train
actually crossed the Kama River by the rebuilt bridge.
By April of this year the organization of industrial
conscription had gone far beyond the original labor armies.
A decree of February 5th had created a Chief Labor
Committee, consisting of five members, Serebryakov and Danilov,
from the Commissariat of War; Vasiliev, from the
Commissariat of the Interior; Anikst, from the Commissariat
of Labor; Dzerzhinsky, from the Commissariat of Internal
Affairs.  Dzerzhinsky was President, and his appointment
was possibly made in the hope that the reputation he had
won as President of the Extraordinary Committee for
Fighting Counter-Revolution would frighten people into
taking this Committee seriously.  Throughout the country in
each government or province similar committees, called
"Troikas,” were created, each of three members, one from
the Commissariat of War, one from the Department of
Labor, one from the Department of Management, in each
case from the local Commissariats and Departments attached
to the local Soviet.  Representatives of the Central Statistical
Office and its local organs had a right to be present at the
meeting of these committees of three, or “Troikas,” but had
not the right to vote.  An organization or a factory requiring
labor, was to apply to the Labor Department of the local
Soviet.  This Department was supposed to do its best to
satisfy demands upon it by voluntary methods first.  If these
proved insufficient they were to apply to the local “Troika,"
or Labor Conscription Committee.  If this found that its
resources also were insufficient, it was to refer back the
request to the Labor Department of the Soviet, which was
then to apply to its corresponding Department in the
Government Soviet, which again, first voluntarily and then
through the Government Committee of Labor Conscription, was
to try to satisfy the demands.  I fancy the object of
this arrangement was to prevent local “Troikas” from
referring to Government “Troikas,” and so directly to Dzerzhinsky’s
Central Committee.  If they had been able to
do this there would obviously have been danger lest a new
network of independent and powerful organizations should
be formed.  Experience with the overgrown and
insuppressible Committees for Fighting Counter-Revolution
had taught people how serious such a development might be.
Such was the main outline of the scheme for conscripting
labor.  A similar scheme was prepared for superintending
and safeguarding labor when conscripted.  In every factory
of over 1,000 workmen, clerks, etc., there was formed a
Commission (to distinguish it from the Committee) of
Industrial Conscription.  Smaller factories shared such
Commissions or were joined for the purpose to larger
factories near by.  These Commissions were to be under the
direct control of a Factory Committee, thereby preventing
squabbles between conscripted and non-conscripted labor.
They were to be elected for six months, but their members
could be withdrawn and replaced by the Factory
Committee with the approval of the local “Troika."
These Commissions, like the “Troikas,” consisted of three
members: (1) from the management of the factory, (2) from
the Factory Committee, (3) from the Executive Committee
of the workers. (It was suggested in the directions that one
of these should be from the group which “has been
organizing ’Saturdayings,’ that is to say that he or she should
be a Communist.)The payment of conscripted workers was
to be by production, with prizes for specially good work.
Specially bad work was also foreseen in the detailed scheme
of  possible punishments.  Offenders were to be brought
before the “People’s Court” (equivalent to the ordinary Civil
Court), or, in the case of repeated or very bad offenses,
were to be brought before the far more dreaded
Revolutionary Tribunals.  Six categories of possible offenses
were placed upon the new code:
(1)Avoiding registration, absenteeism, or desertion.
(2)The preparation of false documents or the use of such.
(3)Officials giving false information to facilitate these crimes.
(4)Purposeful damage of instruments or material.
(5)Uneconomical or careless work.
(6)(Probably the most serious of all) Instigation to any of
these actions.
The “Troikas” have the right to deal administratively with the
less important crimes by deprival of freedom for not more
than two weeks.  No one can be brought to trial except by
the Committee for Industrial Conscription on the initiative of
the responsible director of work, and with the approval
either of the local labor inspection authorities or with that of
the local Executive Committee.
No one with the slightest knowledge of Russia will suppose
for a moment that this elaborate mechanism sprang suddenly
into existence when the decree was signed.  On the contrary,
all stages of industrial conscription exist simultaneously even
today, and it would be possible by going from one part of
Russia to another to collect a series of specimens of industrial
conscription at every stage of evolution, just as one
can collect all stages of man from a baboon to a company
director or a Communist.  Some of the more primitive
kinds of conscription were not among the least successful.
For example, at the time(in the spring of the year)when the
Russians still hoped that the Poles would be content with the
huge area of non-Polish territory they had already seized, the
army on the western front was without any elaborate system
of decrees being turned into a labor army.  The work done
was at first ordinary country work, mainly woodcutting.
They tried to collaborate with the local “Troikas,” sending
help when these Committees asked for it.  This, however,
proved unsatisfactory, so, disregarding the “Troikas,” they
organized things for themselves in the whole area
immediately behind the front.  They divided up the forests
into definite districts, and they worked these with soldiers
and with deserters.  Gradually their work developed, and
they built themselves narrow-gauge railways for the
transport of the wood.  Then they needed wagons and
locomotives, and of course immediately found themselves at
loggerheads with the railway authorities.  Finally, they
struck a bargain with the railwaymen, and were allowed to
take broken-down wagons which the railway people were
not in a position to mend. Using such skilled labor as
they had, they mended such wagons as were given them,
and later made a practice of going to the railway yards and
in    inspecting “sick” wagons for themselves, taking out any
that they thought had a chance even of temporary
convalescence.  Incidentally they caused great scandal by
finding in the Smolensk sidings among the locomotives and
wagons supposed to be sick six good locomotives and
seventy perfectly healthy wagons.  Then they began to
improve the feeding of their army by sending the wood they
had cut, in the trains they had mended, to people who
wanted wood and could give them provisions.  One such
train went to Turkestan and back from the army near Smolensk.
Their work continually increased, and since they
had to remember that they were an army and not merely a
sort of nomadic factory, they began themselves to mobilize,
exclusively for purposes of work, sections of the civil
population.  I asked Unshlicht, who had much to do with
this organization, if the peasants came willingly.  He said,
"Not very,” but added that they did not mind when they
found that they got well fed and were given packets of salt
as prizes for good work.  “The peasants,” he said, “do
not grumble against the Government when it shows the sort
of common sense that they themselves can understand.  We
found that when we said definitely how many carts and men
a village must provide, and used them without delay for a
definite purpose, they were perfectly satisfied and
considered it right and proper.  In every case, however,
when they saw people being mobilized and sent thither
without obvious purpose or result, they became hostile at
once.”  I asked Unshlicht how it was that their army still
contained skilled workmen when one of the objects of
industrial conscription was to get the skilled workmen back
into the factories.  He said: “We have an accurate census of
the army, and when we get asked for skilled workmen for
such and such a factory, they go there knowing that they still
belong to the army.”
That, of course, is the army point of view, and indicates one
of the main squabbles which industrial conscription has
produced.  Trotsky would like the various armies to turn into
units of a territorial militia, and at the same time to be an
important part of the labor organization of each district.
His opponents do not regard the labor armies as a permanent
manifestation, and many have gone so far as to say that the
productivity of labor in one of these armies is lower than
among ordinary workmen.  Both sides produce figures on
this point, and Trotsky goes so far as to say that if his
opponents are right, then not only are labor armies damned,
but also the whole principle of industrial conscription.  “If
compulsory labor-independently of social condition-is
unproductive, that is a condemnation not of the labor
armies, but of industrial conscription in general, and with it
of the whole Soviet system, the further development of
which is unthinkable except on a basis of universal industrial
conscription.”
But, of course, the question of the permanence of the labor
armies is not so important as the question of getting the
skilled workers back to the factories.  The comparative
success or failure of soldiers or mobilized peasants in cutting
wood is quite irrelevant to this recovery of the vanished
workmen.  And that recovery will take time, and will be
entirely useless unless it is possible to feed these workers
when they have been collected.  There have already
been several attempts, not wholly successful, to collect the
straying workers of particular industries.  Thus, after the freeing
of the oil-wells from the Whites, there was a general
mobilization of naphtha workers.  Many of these had bolted
on or after the arrival of Krasnov or Denikin and gone far
into Central Russia, settling where they could.  So months
passed before the Red Army definitely pushed the area of
civil war beyond the oil-wells, that many of these refugees
had taken new root and were unwilling to return.  I believe,
that in spite of the mobilization, the oil-wells are still short of
men.  In the coal districts also, which have passed through
similar experiences, the proportion of skilled to unskilled
labor is very much smaller than it was before the war.
There have also been two mobilizations of railway workers,
and these, I think, may be partly responsible for the
undoubted improvement noticeable during the year,
although this is partly at least due to other things beside
conscription.  In the first place Trotsky carried with him into
the Commissariat of Transport the same ferocious energy
that he has shown in the Commissariat of War, together
with the prestige that he had gained there.  Further, he
was well able in the councils of the Republic to defend the
needs of his particular Commissariat against those of all
others.  He was, for example able to persuade the
Communist Party to treat the transport crisis precisely as
they had treated each crisis on the front-that is to say, to
mobilize great numbers of professed Communists to meet it,
giving them in this case the especial task of getting engines
mended and, somehow or other, of keeping trains on the
move.
But neither the bridges mended and the wood cut by the
labor armies, nor the improvement in transport, are any final
proof of the success of industrial conscription.  Industrial
conscription in the proper sense of the words is impossible
until a Government knows what it has to conscript.  A
beginning was made early this year by the introduction of
labor books, showing what work people were doing and
where, and serving as a kind of industrial passports.  But in
April this year these had not yet become general in Moscow
although the less unwieldy population of Petrograd was
already supplied with them.  It will be long even if it is
possible at all, before any  considerable proportion of
the people not living in these two cities are registered in this
way.  A more useful step was taken at the end of August, in a
general census throughout Russia. There has been no
Russian census since 1897.  There was to have been another
about the time the war began. It was postponed for obvious
reasons.  If the Communists carry through the census with
even moderate success (they will of course have to meet
every kind of evasion), they will at least get some of the
information without which industrial conscription on a
national scale must be little more than a farce.  The census
should show them where the skilled workers are.  Industrial
conscription should enable them to collect them and put
them at their own skilled work.  Then if, besides
transplanting them, they are able to feed them, it will be
possible to judge of the success or failure of a scheme which
in most countries would bring a Government toppling to the
ground.
“In most countries"; yes, but then the economic crisis has
gone further in Russia than in most countries.  There is talk
of introducing industrial conscription (one year’s service) in
Germany, where things have not gone nearly so far.
And perhaps industrial conscription, like Communism itself,
becomes a thing of desperate hope only in a country actually
face to face with ruin.  I remember saying to Trotsky, when
talking of possible opposition, that I, as an Englishman, with
the tendencies to practical anarchism belonging to my race,
should certainly object most strongly if I were mobilized and
set to work in a particular factory, and might even want to
work in some other factory just for the sake of not doing
what I was forced to do.  Trotsky replied: “You would now.
But you would not if you had been through a revolution,
and seen your country in such a state that only the united,
concentrated effort of everybody could possibly reestablish
it.  That is the position here.  Everybody knows the position
and that there is no other way.”
WHAT THE COMMUNISTS ARE TRYING TO
DO IN RUSSIA
We come now to the Communist plans for reconstruction.
We have seen, in the first two chapters, something of the
appalling paralysis which is the most striking factor in the
economic problem to-day.  We have seen how Russia is
suffering from a lack of things and from a lack of labor, how
these two shortages react on each other, and how nothing
but a vast improvement in transport can again set in motion
what was one of the great food-producing machines of the
world.  We have also seen something of the political
organization which, with far wider ambitions before it, is at
present struggling to prevent temporary paralysis from
turning into permanent atrophy.  We have seen that it
consists of a political party so far dominant that the Trades
Unions and all that is articulate in the country may be
considered as  part of a machinery of propaganda, for
getting those things done which that political party considers
should be done.  In a country fighting, literally, for its life,
no man can call his soul his own, and we have seen how this
fact-a fact that has become obvious again and again in the
history of the world, whenever a nation has had its back to
the wall-is expressed in Russia in terms of industrial
conscription; in measures, that is to say, which would be
impossible in any country not reduced to such extremities; in
measures which may prove to be the inevitable
accompaniment of national crisis, when such crisis is
economic rather than military.  Let us now see what the
Russians, with that machinery at their disposal are trying to do.
It is obvious that since this machinery is dominated by a
political party, it will be impossible to understand the
Russian plans, without understanding that particular political
party’s estimate of the situation in general.  It is obvious that
the Communist plans for Russia must be largely affected by
their view of Europe as a whole.  This view is gloomy in the
extreme.  The Communists believe that Europe is steadily
shaking itself to pieces.  They believe that this
process has already gone so far that, even given good will on
the part of European Governments, the manufacturers of
Western countries are already incapable of supplying them
with all the things which Russia was importing before the
war, still less make up the enormous arrears which have
resulted from six years of blockade.  They do not agree with
M. Clemenceau that “revolution is a disease attacking
defeated countries only.”  Or, to put it as I have heard it
stated in Moscow, they believe that President Wilson’s
aspiration towards a peace in which should be neither
conqueror nor conquered has been at least partially realized
in the sense that every country ended the struggle
economically defeated, with the possible exception of
America, whose signature, after all, is still to be ratified.
They believe that even in seemingly prosperous countries the
seeds of economic disaster are already fertilized.  They think
that the demands of labor will become greater and more
difficult to fulfill until at last they become incompatible with
a continuance of the capitalist system.  They think that strike
after strike, irrespective of whether it is successful or
not, will gradually widen the cracks and flaws already
apparent in the damaged economic structure of Western
Europe.  They believe that conflicting interests will involve
our nations in new national wars, and that each of these will
deepen the cleavage between capital and labor.  They think
that even if exhaustion makes mutual warfare on a large
scale impossible, these conflicting interests will produce such
economic conflicts, such refusals of cooperation, as will turn
exhaustion to despair.  They believe, to put it briefly, that
Russia has passed through the worst stages of a process to
which every country in Europe will be submitted in turn by
its desperate and embittered inhabitants.  We may disagree
with them, but we shall not understand them if we refuse to
take that belief into account.  If, as they imagine, the next
five years are to be years of disturbance and growing
resolution, Russia will get very little from abroad.  If, for
example, there is to be a serious struggle in England, Russia
will get practically nothing.  They not only believe that these
things are going to be, but make the logical deductions as to
the effect of such disturbances on their own chances of
importing what they need.  For example, Lenin said to me
that “the shock of revolution in England would ensure the
final defeat of capitalism,” but he said at the same time that
it would be felt at once throughout the world and cause such
reverberations as would paralyze industry everywhere.  And
that is why, although Russia is an agricultural country, the
Communist plans for her reconstruction are concerned first
of all not with agriculture, but with industry.  In their
schemes for the future of the world, Russia’s part is that of a
gigantic farm, but in their schemes for the immediate future
of Russia, their eyes are fixed continually on the nearer
object of making her so far self-supporting that, even if
Western Europe is unable to help them, they may be able to
crawl out of their economic difficulties, as Krassin put it to
me before he left Moscow, “if necessary on all fours, but
somehow or other, crawl out.”
Some idea of the larger ambitions of the Communists with
regard to the development of Russia are given in a
conversation with Rykov, which follows this chapter.  The
most important characteristic of them is that they are
ambitions which cannot but find an echo in Russians of
any kind, quite regardless of their political convictions.  The
old anomalies of Russian industry, for example, the
distances of the industrial districts from their sources of fuel
and raw material are to be done away with.  These
anomalies were largely due to historical accidents, such as
the caprice of Peter the Great, and not to any economic
reasons.  The revolution, destructive as it has been, has at
least cleaned the slate and made it possible, if it is possible to
rebuild at all, to rebuild Russia on foundations laid by
common sense.  It may be said that the Communists are
merely doing flamboyantly and with a lot of flag-waving,
what any other Russian Government would be doing in their
place.  And without the flamboyance and the flag-waving, it
is doubtful whether in an exhausted country, it would be
possible to get anything done at all.  The result of this is that
in their work of economic reconstruction the Communists
get the support of most of the best engineers and other
technicians in the country, men who take no interest
whatsoever in the ideas of Karl Marx, but have a
professional interest in doing the best they can with their
knowledge, and a patriotic satisfaction in using
that knowledge for Russia.  These men, caring not at all
about Communism, want to make Russia once more a
comfortably habitable place, no matter under what
Government.  Their attitude is precisely comparable to that
of the officers of the old army who have contributed so
much to the success of the new.  These officers were not
Communists, but they disliked civil war, and fought to put
an end of it.  As Sergei Kamenev, the Commander-in-Chief,
and not a Communist, said to me, “I have not looked on the
civil war as on a struggle between two political ideas, for the
Whites have no definite idea.  I have considered it simply as
a struggle between the Russian Government and a number
of mutineers.” Precisely so do these “bourgeois” technicians
now working throughout Russia regard the task before them.
It will be small satisfaction to them if famine makes the
position of any Government impossible.  For them the
struggle is quite simply a struggle between Russia and the
economic forces tending towards a complete collapse of
civilization.
The Communists have thus practically the  whole
intelligence of the country to help them in their task of
reconstruction, or of salvage.  But the educated classes alone
cannot save a nation.  Muscle is wanted besides brain, and
the great bulk of those who can provide muscle are difficult
to move to enthusiasm by any broad schemes of economic
rearrangement that do not promise immediate improvement
in their own material conditions.  Industrial conscription
cannot be enforced in Russia unless there is among the
conscripted themselves an understanding, although a
resentful understanding, of its necessity.  The Russians have
not got an army of Martians to enforce effort on an alien
people.  The army and the people are one.  “We are bound
to admit,” says Trotsky, “that no wide industrial mobilization
will succeed, if we do not capture all that is honorable,
spiritual in the peasant working masses in explaining our
plan.” And the plan that he referred to was not the grandiose
(but obviously sensible) plan for the eventual electrification
of all Russia, but a programme of the struggle before them
in actually getting their feet clear of the morass of industrial
decay in which they are at present involved.  Such a
programme has actually been decided upon-a
programme the definite object of which is to reconcile the
workers to work not simply hand to mouth, each for himself,
but to concentrate first on those labors which will eventually
bring their reward in making other labors easier and
improving the position as a whole.
Early this year a comparatively unknown Bolshevik called Gusev,
to whom nobody had attributed any particular
intelligence, wrote, while busy on the staff of an army on the
southeast front, which was at the time being used partly as a
labor army, a pamphlet which has had an extraordinary
influence in getting such a programme drawn up.  The
pamphlet is based on Gusev’s personal observation both of a
labor army at work and of the attitude of the peasant
towards industrial conscription.  It was extremely frank, and
contained so much that might have been used by hostile
critics, that it was not published in the ordinary way but
printed at the army press on the Caucasian front and issued
exclusively to members of the Communist Party.  I got hold
of a copy of this pamphlet through a friend. It is called
"Urgent Questions of Economic Construction."Gusev sets
out in detail the sort of opposition he had met, and
says: “The Anarchists, Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
have a clear, simple economic plan which the great masses
can understand: ’Go about your own business and work
freely for yourself in your own place.’  They have a criticism
of labor mobilizations equally clear for the masses.  They
say to them, ’They are putting Simeon in Peter’s place, and
Peter in Simeon’s.  They are sending the men of Saratov to
dig the ground in the Government of Stavropol, and the
Stavropol men to the Saratov Government for the same
purpose.’  Then besides that there is ’nonparty’ criticism:
’When it is time to sow they will be shifting muck, and when
it is time to reap they will be told to cut timber.’ That is a
particularly clear expression of the peasants’ disbelief in our
ability to draw up a proper economic plan.  This belief is
clearly at the bottom of such questions as, ’Comrade Gusev,
have you ever done any plowing?’ or ’Comrade Orator, do
you know anything about peasant work?’  Disbelief in the
townsman who understands nothing about peasants is
natural to the peasant, and we shall have to conquer it, to get
through it, to get rid of it by showing the peasant, with
a clear plan in our hands that he can understand, that we are
not altogether fools in this matter and that we understand
more than he does.”  He then sets out the argument which he
himself had found successful in persuading the peasants to
do things the reward for which would not be obvious the
moment they were done.  He says, “I compared our State
economy to a colossal building with scores of stories and
tens of thousands of rooms.  The whole building has been
half smashed; in places the roof has tumbled down, the
beams have rotted, the ceilings are tumbling, the drains and
water pipes are burst; the stoves are falling to pieces, the
partitions are shattered, and, finally, the walls and
foundations are unsafe and the whole building is threatened
with collapse.  I asked, how, must one set about the repair of
this building?  With what kind of economic plan?  To this
question the inhabitants of different stories, and even of
different rooms on one and the same story will reply
variously.  Those who live on the  top floor will shout that
the rafters are rotten and the roof falling; that it is impossible
to live, there any longer, and that it is immediately
necessary, first of all, to put up new beams and to
repair the roof.  And from their point of view they will be
perfectly right.  Certainly it is not possible to live any longer
on that floor.  Certainly the repair of the roof is necessary.
The inhabitants of one of the lower stories in which the
water pipes have burst will cry out that it is impossible to
live without water, and therefore, first of all, the water pipes
must be mended.  And they, from their point of view, will
be perfectly right, since it certainly is impossible to live
without water.  The inhabitants of the floor where the stoves
have fallen to pieces will insist on an immediate mending of
the stoves, since they and their children are dying of cold
because there is nothing on which they can heat up water or
boil kasha for the children; and they, too, will be quite right.
But in spite of all these just demands, which arrive in
thousands from all sides, it is impossible to forget the most
important of all, that the foundation is shattered and that the
building is threatened with a collapse which will bury all the
inhabitants of the house together, and that, therefore, the
only immediate task is the strengthening of the foundation
and the walls. Extraordinary firmness, extraordinary
courage is necessary, not only not to listen to the cries and
groans of old men, women, children and sick, coming from
every floor, but also to decide on taking from the inhabitants
of all floors the instruments and materials necessary for the
strengthening of the foundations and walls, and to force
them to leave their corners and hearths, which they are
doing the best they can to make habitable, in order to drive
them to work on the strengthening of the walls and
foundations.”
Gusev’s main idea was that the Communists were asking
new sacrifices from a weary and exhausted people, that
without such sacrifices these people would presently find
themselves in even worse conditions, and that, to persuade
them to make the effort necessary to save themselves, it was
necessary to have a perfectly clear and easily understandable
plan which could be dinned into the whole nation and
silence the criticism of all possible opponents.  Copies of his
little book came to Moscow.  Lenin read it and caused
excruciating jealousy in the minds of several other
Communists, who had also been trying to find the
philosopher’s stone that should turn discouragement
into hope, by singling out Gusev for his special praise and
insisting that his plans should be fully discussed at the
Supreme Council in the Kremlin.  Trotsky followed Lenin’s
lead, and in the end a general programme for Russian
reconstruction was drawn up, differing only slightly from
that which Gusev had proposed.  I give this scheme in
Trotsky’s words, because they are a little fuller than those of
others, and knowledge of this plan will explain not only
what the Communists are trying to do in Russia, but
what they would like to get from us today and what
they will want to get tomorrow.  Trotsky says:-
“The fundamental task at this moment is improvement in
the condition of our transport, prevention of its further
deterioration and preparation of the most elementary
stores of food, raw material and fuel.  The whole of the first
period of our reconstruction will be completely occupied in
the concentration of labor on the solution of these
problems, which is a condition of further progress.
“The second period (it will be difficult to say now whether it
will be measured in months or years, since that depends on
many factors beginning with the international
situation and ending with the unanimity or the lack of it in
our own party) will be a period occupied in the building of
machines in the interest of transport, and the getting of raw
materials and provisions.
“The third period will be occupied in building machinery,
with a view to the production of articles in general demand,
and, finally, the fourth period will be that in which we are
able to produce these articles.”
Does it not occur, even to the most casual reader, that there
is very little politics in that program, and that, no matter
what kind of Government should be in Russia, it would have
to endorse that programme word for word?  I would ask any
who doubt this to turn again to my first two chapters
describing the nature of the economic crisis in Russia, and to
remind themselves how, not only the lack of things but the
lack of men, is intimately connected with the lack of
transport, which keeps laborers ill fed, factories ill supplied
with material, and in this way keeps the towns incapable of
supplying the needs of the country, with the result that the
country is most unwilling to supply the needs of the town.
No Russian Government unwilling to allow Russia to
subside definitely to a lower level of civilization can do
otherwise than to concentrate upon the improvement of
transport.  Labor in Russia must be used first of all for that,
in order to increase its own productivity.  And, if purchase
of help from abroad is to be allowed, Russia must “control"
the outflow of her limited assets, so that, by healing
transport first of all, she may increase her power of making
new assets.  She must spend in such a way as eventually
to increase her power of spending.  She must prevent the
frittering away of her small purse on things which, profitable
to the vendor and doubtless desirable by the purchaser,
satisfy only individual needs and do not raise the producing
power of the community as a whole.
RYKOV ON ECONOMIC PLANS AND ON THE
TRANSFORMATION OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY
Alexei Rykov, the President of the Supreme Council of
Public Economy, is one of the hardest worked men in
Russia, and the only time I was able to have a long talk with
him (although more than once he snatched moments to
answer particular questions) was on a holiday, when the old
Siberian Hotel, now the offices of the Council, was
deserted, and I walked through empty corridors until I found
the President and his secretary at work as usual.
After telling of the building of the new railway from
Alexandrovsk Gai to the Emba, the prospects of developing
the oil industry in that district, the relative values of those
deposits and of those at Baku, and the possible decreasing
significance of Baku in Russian industry generally, we
passed to   broader perspectives.  I asked him what he
thought of the relations between agriculture  and industry in
Russia, and supposed that he did not imagine that Russia
would ever become a great industrial country.  His answer
was characteristic of the tremendous hopes that nerve these
people in their almost impossible task, and I set it down as
nearly as I can in his own words.  For him, of course, the
economic problem was the first, and he spoke of it as the
director of a huge trust might have spoken.  But, as he
passed on to talk of what he thought would result from the
Communist method of tackling that problem, and spoke of
the eventual disappearance of political parties, I felt I was
trying to read a kind of palimpsest of the Economist and
News from Nowhere, or listening to a strange compound of
William Morris and, for example, Sir Eric Geddes.  He said:
"We may have to wait a long time before the inevitable
arrives and there is a Supreme Economic Council dealing
with Europe as with a single economic whole.  If that should
come about we should, of course, from the very nature of
our country, be called upon in the first place to provide
food for Europe, and we should hope enormously to
improve our agriculture, working on a larger and larger
scale, using mechanical plows and tractors, which would be
supplied us by the West.  But in the meantime we have to
face the fact that events may cause us to be, for all practical
purposes, in a state of blockade for perhaps a score of years,
and, so far as we can, we must be ready to depend on
ourselves alone.  For example, we want mechanical plows
which could be procured abroad.  We have had to start
making them ourselves.  The first electric plow made in
Russia and used in Russia started work last year, and this
year we shall have a number of such plows made in our
country, not because it is economic so to make them, but
because we could get them in no other way.  In so far as is
possible, we shall have to make ourselves self-supporting, so
as somehow or other to get along even if the blockade,
formal or perhaps willy-nilly (imposed by the inability of the
West to supply us), compels us to postpone cooperation with
the rest of Europe.  Every day of such postponement is one
in which the resources of Europe are not being used in the
most efficient manner to supply the needs not only of
our own country but of all.”
I referred to what he had told me last year about the
intended electrification of Moscow by a station using turf
fuel.
“That,” he said, “is one of the plans which, in spite of the
war, has gone a very long way towards completion.  We
have built the station in the Ryezan Government, on the
Shadul peat mosses, about 110 versts from Moscow.
Before the end of May that station should be actually at
work. (It was completed, opened and partially destroyed by
a gigantic fire.) Another station at Kashira in the Tula
Government (on the Oka), using the small coal produced
in the Moscow coalfields, will be at work before the autumn.
This year similar stations are being built at
Ivano-Voznesensk and at Nijni-Novgorod.  Also, with a
view to making the most economic use of what we already
possess, we have finished both in Petrograd and in Moscow
a general unification of all the private power-stations, which
now supply their current to a single main cable.  Similar
unification is nearly finished at Tula and at Kostroma.  The
big water-power station on the rapids of the Volkhov is
finished in so far as land construction goes, but we can
proceed no further until we have obtained the turbines,
which we hope to get from abroad.  As you know, we are
basing our plans in general on the assumption that in course
of time we shall supply the whole of Russian industry with
electricity, of which we also hope to make great use in
agriculture.  That, of course, will take a great number of
years.”
[Nothing could have been much more artificial than the
industrial geography of old Russia.  The caprice of history
had planted great industrial centers literally at the greatest
possible distance from the sources of their raw materials.
There was Moscow bringing its coal from Donetz, and Petrograd,
still further away, having to eke out a living by
importing coal from England.  The difficulty of transport
alone must have forced the Russians to consider how they
could do away with such anomalies.  Their main idea is that
the transport of coal in a modern State is an almost
inexcusable barbarism.  They have set themselves, these
ragged engineers, working in rooms which they can hardly
keep above freezing-point and walking home through the
snow in boots without soles, no less a task than the
electrification of the whole of Russia.  There is a State
Committee presided over by an extraordinary optimist called
Krzhizhanovsky, entrusted by the Supreme Council of
Public Economy and Commissariat of Agriculture with the
working out of a general plan.  This Committee includes,
besides a number of well-known practical engineers,
Professors Latsinsky, Klassen, Dreier, Alexandrov, Tcharnovsky,
Dend and Pavlov.  They are investigating the
water power available in different districts in Russia, the
possibilities of using turf, and a dozen similar questions
including, perhaps not the least important, investigation to
discover where they can do most with least dependence on
help from abroad.]
Considering the question of the import of machinery from
abroad, I asked him whether in existing conditions of
transport Russia was actually in a position to export the raw
materials with which alone the Russians could hope to buy
what they want.  He said:
“Actually we have in hand about two million poods (a pood
is a little over thirty-six English pounds) of flax, and any
quantity of light leather (goat, etc.), but the main
districts where we have raw material for ourselves or for
export are far away.  Hides, for example, we have in great
quantities in Siberia, in the districts of Orenburg and the
Ural River and in Tashkent.  I have myself made the
suggestion that we should offer to sell this stuff where it is,
that is to say not delivered at a seaport, and that the buyers
should provide their own trains, which we should eventually
buy from them with the raw material itself, so that after a
certain number of journeys the trains should become ours.
In the same districts we have any quantity of wool, and in
some of these districts corn.  We cannot, in the present
condition of our transport, even get this corn for ourselves.
In the same way we have great quantities of rice in Turkestan,
and actually are being offered rice from Sweden,
because we cannot transport our own.  Then we have over a
million poods of copper, ready for export on the same
conditions.  But it is clear that if the Western countries are
unable to help in the transport, they cannot expect to get raw
materials from us.”
I asked about platinum.  He laughed.
“That is a different matter.  In platinum we have a
world monopoly, and can consequently afford to wait.
Diamonds and gold, they can have as much as they want of
such rubbish; but platinum is different, and we are in no
hurry to part with it.  But diamonds and gold ornaments, the
jewelry of the Tsars, we are ready to give to any king in
Europe who fancies them, if he can give us some less
ornamental but more useful locomotives instead.”
I asked if Kolchak had damaged the platinum mines.  He
replied, “Not at all.  On the contrary, he was promising
platinum to everybody who wanted it, and he set the mines
going, so we arrived to find them in good condition, with a
considerable yield of platinum ready for use.”
(I am inclined to think that in spite of Rykov’s rather
intransigent attitude on the question, the Russians would
none the less be willing to export platinum, if only on
account of the fact in comparison with its great value it
requires little transport, and so would make possible for
them an immediate bargain with some of the machinery they
most urgently need.)
Finally we talked of the growing importance of the Council
of Public Economy.  Rykov was of opinion that it
would eventually become the centre of the whole State
organism, “it and Trades Unions organizing the actual
producers in each branch.”
“Then you think that as your further plans develop, with the
creation of more and more industrial centres, with special
productive populations concentrated round them, the
Councils of the Trades Unions will tend to become identical
with the Soviets elected in the same districts by the same
industrial units?”
“Precisely,” said Rykov, “and in that way the Soviets, useful
during the period of transition as an instrument of struggle
and dictatorship, will be merged with the Unions.” (One
important factor, as Lenin pointed out when considering the
same question, is here left out of count, namely the political
development of the enormous agricultural as opposed to
industrial population.)
“But if this merging of political Soviets with productive
Unions occurs, the questions that concern people will cease
to be political questions, but will be purely questions of
economics.”
“Certainly.  And we shall see the disappearance of political
parties.  That process is already apparent.  In the present
huge Trade Union Conference there are only sixty Mensheviks.
The Communists are swallowing one party after another.
Those who were not drawn over to us during the period
of struggle are now joining us during the process
of construction, and we find that our differences now are
not political at all, but concerned only with the practical
details of construction.”  He illustrated this by pointing out
the present constitution of the Supreme Council of Public
Economy.  There are under it fifty-three Departments or
Centres (Textile, Soap, Wool, Timber, Flax, etc.), each
controlled by a “College” of three or more persons.  There
are 232 members of these Colleges or Boards in all, and of
them 83 are workmen, 79 are engineers, 1 was an ex-director,
50 were from the clerical staff, and 19 unclassified.
Politically 115 were Communists, 105 were “non-party,"
and 12 were of non-Communist parties.  He continued,
"Further, in swallowing the other parties, the Communists
themselves will cease to exist as a political party.  Think only
that youths coming to their manhood during this year in
Russia and in the future will not be able to confirm from
their own experience the reasoning of Karl Marx,
because they will have had no experience of a capitalist
country.  What can they make of the class struggle?  The
class struggle here is already over, and the distinctions of
class have already gone altogether.  In the old days,
members of our party were men who had read, or tried to
read, Marx’s “Capital,” who knew the “Communist
Manifesto” by heart, and were occupied in continual
criticism of the basis of capitalist society.  Look at the new
members of our party.  Marx is quite unnecessary to them.
They join us, not for struggle in the interests of an oppressed
class, but simply because they understand our aims in
constructive work.  And, as this process continues, we old
social democrats shall disappear, and our places will be filled
by people of entirely different character grown up under
entirely new conditions.”
Rykov’s prophecies of the disappearance of Political parties
may be falsified by a development of that very non-partyism
on which he bases them.  It is true that the parties openly
hostile to the Communists in Russia have practically
disappeared. Many old-time Mensheviks have joined the
Communist Party.  Here and there in the country may be
found a Social Revolutionary stronghold.  Here and there in
the Ukraine the Mensheviks retain a footing, but I doubt
whether either of these parties has in it the vitality to make
itself once again a serious political factor.  There is,
however, a movement which, in the long run, may alter
Russia’s political complexion.  More and more delegates to
Soviets or Congresses of all kinds are explicitly described
as “Non-party.”  Non-partyism is perhaps a sign of revolt
against rigid discipline of any kind.  Now and then, of
course, a clever Menshevik or Social Revolutionary, by
trimming his sails carefully to the wind, gets himself elected
on a non-party ticket.  ’When this happens there is usually a
great hullabaloo as soon as he declares himself.  A section of
his electors agitates for his recall and presently some one else
is elected in his stead.  But non-partyism is much more than
a mere cloak of invisibility for enemies or conditional
supporters of the Communists.  I know of considerable
country districts which, in the face of every kind of agitation,
insist on returning exclusively non-party delegates.  The
local Soviets in these districts are also non-party, and they
elect usually a local Bolshevik to some responsible post to
act as it were as a buffer between themselves and the central
authority.  They manage local affairs in their own way, and,
through the use of tact on both sides, avoid falling foul of
the more rigid doctrinaires in Moscow.
Eager reactionaries outside Russia will no doubt point to
non-partyism as a symptom of friendship for themselves.  It
is nothing of the sort.  On all questions of the defense of the
Republic the non-party voting is invariably solid with that of the
Communists.  The non-party men do not want Denikin.
They do not want Baron Wrangel.  They have never heard
of Professor Struhve.  They do not particularly like the Communists.
They principally want to be left alone, and they principally fear any
enforced continuation of war of any kind.  If, in the course
of time, they come to have a definite political programme, I think
it not impossible that they may turn into a new kind of constitutional
democrat.  That does not mean that they will have any use for
M. Milukov or for a monarch with whom M. Milukov might be
ready to supply them.  The Constitution for which they will work
will be that very Soviet Constitution which is now in
abeyance, and the democracy which they associate with it
will be that form of democracy which were it to be
accurately observed in the present state of Russia, that
Constitution would provide.  The capitalist in Russia has
long ago earned the position in which, according to the
Constitution, he has a right to vote, since he has long ago
ceased to be a capitalist.  Supposing the Soviet Constitution
were today to be literally applied, it would be found that
practically no class except the priests would be excluded
from the franchise. And when this agitation swells in
volume, it will be an agitation extremely difficult to resist,
supposing Russia to be at peace, so that there will be no
valid excuse with which to meet it.  These new constitutional
democrats will be in the position of saying to the
Communists, “Give us, without change, that very
Constitution which you yourselves drew up.” I think they
will find many friends inside the Communist Party,
particularly among those Communists who are also Trade
Unionists.  I heard something very like the arguments of this
new variety of constitutional democrat in the Kremlin itself
at an All-Russian Conference of the Communist Party.  A
workman, Sapronov, turned suddenly aside in a speech on
quite another matter, and said with great violence that the
present system was in danger of running to seed and turning
into oligarchy, if not autocracy.  Until the moment when he
put his listeners against him by a personal attack on Lenin,
there was no doubt that he had with him the sympathies of
quite a considerable section of an exclusively Communist
audience.
Given peace, given an approximate return to normal
conditions, non-partyism may well profoundly modify the
activities of the Communists.  It would certainly be strong
enough to prevent the rasher spirits among them from
jeopardizing peace or from risking Russia’s chance of
convalescence for the sake of promoting in any way the
growth of revolution abroad.  Of course, so long as it is
perfectly obvious that Soviet Russia is attacked, no serious
growth of non-partyism is to be expected, but it is obvious
that any act of aggression on the part of the Soviet
Government, once Russia had attained  peace-which she has
not known since 1914-would provide just the basis of angry
discontent which might divide even the disciplined ranks of
the Communists and give non-partyism an active, instead of a
comparatively passive, backing throughout the country.
Non-partyism is already the peasants’ way of expressing their
aloofness from the revolution and, at the same time, their
readiness to defend that revolution against anybody who
attacks it from outside.  Lenin, talking to me about the
general attitude of the peasants, said: “Hegel wrote ’What is
the People?  The people is that part of the nation which does
not know what it wants.’ That is a good description of
the Russian peasantry at the present time, and it applies
equally well to your Arthur Hendersons and Sidney Webbs
in England, and to all other people like yourself who want
incompatible things.  The peasantry are individualists, but
they support us.  We have, in some degree, to thank Kolchak
and Denikin for that.  They are in favor of the Soviet
Government, but hanker after Free Trade, not understanding
that the two things are self-contradictory.  Of course, if they
were a united political force they could swamp us, but they
are disunited both in their interests and geographically.  The
interests of the poorer and middle class peasants are in
contradiction to those of the rich peasant farmer who
employs laborers.  The poorer and middle class see that we
support them against the rich peasant, and also see that he is
ready to support what is obviously not in their interests.”  I
said, “If State agriculture in Russia comes to be on a larger
scale, will there not be a sort of proletarianization of the
peasants so that, in the long run, their interests will come to
be more or less identical with those of the workers in other
than agricultural industry!”  He replied,  “Something in
that direction is being done, but it will have to be done very
carefully and must take a very long time.  When we are
getting many thousands of tractors from abroad, then
something of the sort would become possible.”  Finally I
asked him point blank, “Did he think they would pull
through far enough economically to be able to satisfy the
needs of the peasantry before that same peasantry had
organized a real political opposition that should overwhelm
them!” Lenin laughed.  “If I could answer that question,” he
said, “I could answer everything, for on the answer to that
question everything depends.  I think we can.  Yes, I think
we can.  But I do not know that we can.”
Non-partyism may well be the protoplasmic stage of the
future political opposition of the peasants.
I have done my best to indicate the essential facts in Russia’s
problem today, and to describe the organization and
methods with which she is attempting its solution.  I can give
no opinion as to whether by these means the Russians will
succeed in finding their way out of the quagmire of
industrial ruin in which they are involved.  I can only say
that they are unlikely to find their way out by any other
means.  I think this is instinctively felt in Russia.  Not
otherwise would it have been possible for the existing
organization, battling with one hand to save the towns front
starvation, to destroy with the other the various forces
clothed and armed by Western Europe, which have
attempted its undoing.  The mere fact of continued war has,
of course, made progress in the solution of the economic
problem almost impossible, but the fact that the economic
problem was unsolved, must have made war
impossible, if it were not that the instinct of the people was
definitely against Russian or foreign invaders.  Consider for
one moment the military position.
Although the enthusiasm for the Polish war began to subside
(even among the Communists) as soon as the Poles had
been driven back from Kiev to their own frontiers, although
the Poles are occupying an enormous area of non-Polish
territory, although the Communists have had to conclude
with Poland a peace obviously unstable, the military position
of Soviet Russia is infinitely better this time than it was in
1918 or 1919. In 1918 the Ukraine was held by German
troops and the district east of the Ukraine was in the hands
of General Krasnov, the author of a flattering letter to the
Kaiser.  In the northwest the Germans were at Pskov, Vitebsk
and Mohilev.  We ourselves were at Murmansk and
Archangel.  In the east, the front which became known as
that of Kolchak, was on the Volga.  Soviet Russia was a
little hungry island with every prospect of submersion.  A
year later the Germans had vanished, the flatterers of the
Kaiser had joined hands with those who were
temporarily flattering the Allies, Yudenitch’s troops were
within sight of Petrograd, Denikin was at Orel, almost within
striking distance of Moscow; there had been a stampede of
desertion from the Red Army.  There was danger that
Finland might strike at any moment.  Although in the east
Kolchak had been swept over the Urals to his ultimate
disaster, the situation of Soviet Russia seemed even more
desperate than in the year before.  What is the position
today!  Esthonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Finland are at peace
with Russia.  The Polish peace brings comparative quiet to
the western front, although the Poles, keeping the letter
rather than the spirit of their agreement, have given
Balahovitch the opportunity of establishing himself in Minsk,
where, it is said, that the pogroms of unlucky Jews show that
he has learnt nothing since his ejection from Pskov.
Balahovitch’s force is not important in itself, but its existence
will make it easy to start the war afresh along the whole new
frontier of Poland, and that frontier shuts into Poland so
large an anti-Polish population, that a moment may still
come when desperate Polish statesmen may again choose
war as the least of many threatening evils.  Still, for the
moment, Russia’s western frontier is comparatively quiet.
Her northern frontier is again the Arctic Sea.  Her eastern
frontier is in the neighborhood of the Pacific.  The Ukraine
is disorderly, but occupied by no enemy; the only front on
which serious fighting is proceeding is the small semi-circle
north of the Crimea.  There Denikin’s successor, supported
by the French but exultantly described by a German
conservative newspaper as a “German baron in Cherkass
uniform,” is holding the Crimea and a territory slightly larger
than the peninsula on the main land.  Only to the immense
efficiency of anti-Bolshevik propaganda can be ascribed the
opinion, common in England but comic to any one who
takes the trouble to look at a map, that Soviet Russia is on
the eve of military collapse.
In any case it is easy in a revolution to magnify the influence
of military events on internal affairs.  In the first place, no
one who has not actually crossed the Russian front during
the period of active operations can well realize how different
are the revolutionary wars from that which ended in
1918.  Advance on a broad front no longer means that a belt
of men in touch with each other has moved definitely
forward. It means that there have been a series of forward
movements at widely separated, and with the very haziest of
mutual, connections.  There will be violent fighting for a
village or a railway station or the passage of a river.  Small
hostile groups will engage in mortal combat to decide the
possession of a desirable hut in which to sleep, but, except at
these rare points of actual contact, the number of prisoners
is far in excess of the number of casualties.  Parties on each
side will be perfectly ignorant of events to right or left of
them, ignorant even of their gains and losses.  Last year I ran
into Whites in a village which the Reds had assured me was
strongly held by themselves, and these same Whites refused
to believe that the village where I had spent the preceding
night was in the possession of the Reds.  It is largely an
affair of scouting parties, of patrols dodging each other
through the forest tracks, of swift raids, of sudden
conviction (often entirely erroneous) on the part of one side
or the other, that it or the enemy has been “encircled.”  The
actual number of combatants to a mile of front is infinitely
less than during the German war.  Further, since an
immense proportion of these combatants on both sides have
no wish to fight at all, being without patriotic or political
convictions and very badly fed and clothed, and since it is
more profitable to desert than to be taken prisoner, desertion
in bulk is not uncommon, and the deserters, hurriedly
enrolled to fight on the other side, indignantly re-desert
when opportunity offers.  In this way the armies of Denikin
and Yudenitch swelled like mushrooms and decayed with
similar rapidity.  Military events of this kind, however
spectacular they may seem abroad, do not have the political
effect that might be expected.  I was in Moscow at the worst
moment of the crisis in 1919 when practically everybody
outside the Government believed that Petrograd had already
fallen, and I could not but realize that the Government was
stronger then than it had been in February of the same year,
when it had a series of victories and peace with the Allies
seemed for a moment to be in sight.  A sort of fate seems to
impel the Whites to neutralize with extraordinary rapidity
any good will for themelves which they may find
among the population.  This is true of both sides, but seems
to affect the Whites especially.  Although General Baron Wrangel
does indeed seem to have striven more successfully
than his predecessors not to set the population against him
and to preserve the loyalty of his army, it may be said with
absolute certainty that any large success on his part would
bring crowding to his banner the same crowd of stupid
reactionary officers who brought to nothing any mild desire
for moderation that may have been felt by General Denikin.
If the area he controls increases, his power of control over
his subordinates will decrease, and the forces that led to
Denikin’s collapse will be set in motion in his case also.*
[(*)On the day on which I send this book to the printers
news comes of Wrangel’s collapse and flight.  I leave
standing what I have written concerning him, since it
will apply to any successor he may have.  Each general
who has stepped into Kolchak’s shoes has eventually had
to run away in them, and always for the same reasons.
It may be taken almost as an axiom that the history of
 great country is that of its centre, not of its periphery.
The main course of English history throughout the troubled
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was never deflected
from London.  French history did not desert Paris, to
make a new start at Toulon or at Quiberon Bay.
And only a fanatic could suppose that Russian history
would run away from Moscow, to begin again in a semi-Tartar
peninsula in the Black Sea.  Moscow changes continually, and
may so change as to make easy the return of the “refugees."
Some have already returned.  But the refugees will not return as
conquerors.  Should a Russian Napoleon (an unlikely figure, even in
spite of our efforts) appear, he will not throw away the invaluable
asset of a revolutionary war-cry.  He will have to fight some one,
or he will not be a Napoleon.  And whom will he fight but the very
people who, by keeping up the friction, have rubbed Aladdin’s ring so hard
and so long that a Djinn, by no means kindly disposed towards them,
bursts forth at last to avenge the breaking of his sleep?]
And, of course, should hostilities flare up again on the
Polish frontier, should the lions and lambs and jackals and
eagles of Kossack, Russian, Ukrainian and Polish nationalists
temporarily join forces, no miracles of diplomacy will keep
them from coming to blows.  For all these reasons a military
collapse of the Soviet Government at the present time, even
a concerted military advance of its enemies, is unlikely.
It is undoubtedly true that the food situation in the towns is
likely to be worse this winter than it has yet been.  Forcible
attempts to get food from the peasantry will increase the
existing hostility between town and country.  There has been
a very bad harvest in Russia.  The bringing of food from
Siberia or the Kuban (if military activities do not make that
impossible) will impose an almost intolerable strain on
the inadequate transport.  Yet I think internal collapse
unlikely.  It may be said almost with certainty that
Governments do not collapse until there is no one left to
defend them.  That moment had arrived in the case of the
Tsar.  It had arrived in the case of Kerensky.  It has not
arrived in the case of the Soviet Government for certain
obvious reasons.  For one thing, a collapse of the Soviet
Government at the present time would be disconcerting, if not
disastrous, to its more respectable enemies.  It would, of
course, open the way to a practically unopposed military
advance, but at the same time it would present its enemies
with enormous territory, which would overwhelm the
organizing powers which they have shown again and again
to be quite inadequate to much smaller tasks.  Nor would
collapse of the present Government turn a bad harvest into a
good one.  Such a collapse would mean the breakdown of
all existing organizations, and would intensify the horrors of
famine for every town dweller.  Consequently, though the
desperation of hunger and resentment against inevitable
requisitions may breed riots and revolts here and there
throughout the country, the men who, in other
circumstances, might coordinate such events, will refrain
from doing anything of the sort.  I do not say that collapse is
impossible.  I do say that it would be extremely undesirable
from the point of view of almost everybody in Russia.
Collapse of the present Government would mean at best a
reproduction of the circumstances of 1917, with the
difference that no intervention from without would be
necessary to stimulate indiscriminate slaughter within.  I say
"at best” because I think it more likely that collapse would be
followed by a period of actual chaos.  Any Government that
followed the Communists would be faced by the same
economic problem, and would have to choose between
imposing measures very like those of the Communists and
allowing Russia to subside into a new area for colonization.
There are people who look upon this as a natural, even a
desirable, result of the revolution.  They forget that the
Russians have never been a subject race, that they have
immense powers of passive resistance, that they respond
very readily to any idea that they understand, and that the
idea of revolt against foreigners is difficult not to
understand.  Any country that takes advantage of the
Russian people in a moment of helplessness will find, sooner
or later, first that it has united Russia against it, and secondly
that it has given all Russians a single and undesirable view of
the history of the last three years.  There will not be a
Russian who will not believe that the artificial incubation of
civil war within the frontiers of old Russia was not
deliberately undertaken by Western Europe with the object
of so far weakening Russia as to make her exploitation easy.
Those who look with equanimity even on this prospect
forget that the creation in Europe of a new area for
colonization, a knocking out of one of the sovereign nations,
will create a vacuum, and that the effort to fill this vacuum
will set at loggerheads nations at present friendly and so
produce a struggle which may well do for Western Europe
what Western Europe will have done for Russia.
It is of course possible that in some such way the Russian
Revolution may prove to be  no more than the last desperate
gesture of a stricken civilization.  My point is that if that is
so, civilization in Russia will not die without infecting us
with its disease.  It seems to me that our own
civilization is ill already, slightly demented perhaps, and
liable, like a man in delirium, to do things which tend to
aggravate the malady.  I think that the whole of the Russian
war, waged directly or indirectly by Western Europe, is an
example of this sort of dementia, but I cannot help believing
that sanity will reassert itself in time.  At the present
moment, to use a modification of Gusev’s metaphor, Europe
may be compared to a burning house and the Governments
of Europe to fire brigades, each one engaged in trying to
salve a wing or a room of the building.  It seems a pity that
these fire brigades should be fighting each other, and
forgetting the fire in their resentment of the fact that some of
them wear red uniforms and some wear blue.  Any single
room to which the fire gains complete control increases the
danger of the whole building, and I hope that before the roof
falls in the firemen will come to their senses.
But turning from grim recognition of the danger, and from
speculations as to the chance of the Russian Government
collapsing, and as to the changes in it that time may bring, let
us consider what is likely to happen supposing it does
not collapse.  I have already said that I think collapse
unlikely.  Do the Russians show any signs of being able to
carry out their programme, or has the fire gone so far during
the quarrelling of the firemen as to make that task
impossible?
I think that there is still a hope.  There is as yet no sign of a
general improvement in Russia, nor is such an improvement
possible until the Russians have at least carried out the first
stage of their programme.  It would even not be surprising if
things in general were to continue to go to the bad during the
carrying out of that first stage.  Shortages of food, of men,
of tools, of materials, are so acute that they have had to
choose those factories which are absolutely indispensable for
the carrying out of this stage, and make of them “shock"
factories, like the “shock” troops of the war, giving them
equipment over and above their rightful share of the
impoverished stock, feeding their workmen even at the cost
of letting others go hungry.  That means that other factories
suffer.  No matter, say the Russians, if only that first stage
makes progress.  Consequently, the only test that can be
fairly applied is that of transport.  Are they or are they
not gaining on ruin in the matter of wagons and engines!
Here are the figures of wagon repairs in the seven chief
repairing shops up to the month of June:
December 1919............475 wagons were repaired.
January 1920.............656
February.................697
March...................1104
April...................1141
May.....................1154
June....................1161
After elaborate investigation last year, Trotsky, as temporary
Commissar of Transport, put out an order explaining that
the railways, to keep up their present condition, must repair
roughly 800 engines every month.  During the first six
months of 1920 they fulfilled this task in the following
percentages:
January..................32 per cent
February.................50
March....................66
April....................78
May......................98
June....................104
I think that is a proof that, supposing normal relations
existed between Russia and ourselves, the Russian would be
able to tackle the first stage of the problem that lies before
them, and would lie before them whatever their Government
might be.  Unfortunately there is no proof that this steady
improvement can be continued, except under conditions of
trade with Western Europe.  There are Russians who think
they can pull through without us, and, remembering the
miracles of which man is capable when his back is to the
wall, it would be rash to say that this is impossible.  But
other Russians point out gloomily that they have been using
certain parts taken from dead engines (engines past repair) in
order to mend sick engines.  They are now coming to the
mending, not of sick engines merely, but of engines on
which post-mortems have already been held.  They are
actually mending engines, parts of which have already been
taken out and used for the mending of other engines.  There
are consequently abnormal demands for such things as
shafts and piston rings.  They are particularly short of
Babbitt metal and boiler tubes.  In normal times the average
number of new tubes wanted for each engine put
through the repair shops was 25 (10 to 15 for engines used
in the more northerly districts, and 30 to 40 for engines in
the south where the water is not so good).  This number
must now be taken as much higher, because during recent
years tubes have not been regularly renewed.  Further, the
railways have been widely making use of tubes taken from
dead engines, that is to say, tubes already worn.  Putting
things at their very best, assuming that the average demand
for tubes per engine will be that of normal times, then, if
1,000 engines are to be repaired monthly, 150,000 tubes will
be wanted every six months.  Now on the 15th of June the
total stock of tubes ready for use was 58,000, and the
railways could not expect to get more than another 13,000 in
the near future.  Unless the factories are able to do better
(and their improvement depends on improvement in
transport), railway repairs must again deteriorate, since the
main source of materials for it in Russia, namely the dead
engines, will presently be exhausted.
On this there is only one thing to be said.  If, whether
because we do not trade with them, or from some other
cause, the Russians are unable to proceed even in this
first stage of their programme, it means an indefinite
postponement of the moment when Russia will be able to
export anything, and, consequently, that when at last we
learn that we need Russia as a market, she will be a market
willing to receive gifts, but unable to pay for anything at all.
And that is a state of affairs a great deal more serious to
ourselves than to the Russians, who can, after all, live by
wandering about their country and scratching the ground, whereas
we depend on the sale of our manufactured goods
for the possibility of buying the food we cannot grow
ourselves.  If the Russians fail, their failure will affect not us
alone.  It will, by depriving her of a market, lessen
Germany’s power of recuperation, and consequently her
power of fulfilling her engagements.  What, then, is to
happen to France?  And, if we are to lose our market in
Russia, and find very much weakened markets in Germany
and France, we shall be faced with an ever-increasing
burden of unemployment, with the growth, in fact, of the
very conditions in which alone we shall ourselves be unable
to recover from the war.  In such conditions, upheaval in
England would be possible, and, for the dispassionate
observer, there is a strange irony in the fact that the
Communists desire that upheaval, and, at the same time,
desire a rebirth of the Russian market which would tend to
make that upheaval unlikely, while those who most fear
upheaval are precisely those who urge us, by making
recovery in Russia impossible, to improve the chances of
collapse at home.  The peasants in Russia are not alone in
wanting incompatible things.

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.

Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
