


So much for the organization, with its Communist Party, its
system of meetings and counter-meetings, its adapted Trades
Unions, its infinitely various propaganda, which is doing its
best to make headway against ruin.  I want now to describe
however briefly, the methods it has adopted in tackling the
worst of all Russia’s problems-the non-productivity and
absolute shortage of labor.
I find a sort of analogy between these methods and those
which we used in England in tackling the similar cumulative
problem of finding men for war.  Just as we did not proceed
at once to conscription, but began by a great propaganda of
voluntary effort, so the Communists,  faced with a need at
least equally vital, did not turn at once to industrial
conscription.  It was understood from the beginning that the
Communists themselves were to set an example of
hard work, and I dare say a considerable proportion of them
did so. Every factory had its little Communist Committee,
which was supposed to leaven the factory with enthusiasm,
just as similar groups of Communists drafted into the armies
in moments of extreme danger did, on more than one
occasion, as the non-Communist Commander-in-Chief
admits, turn a rout into a stand and snatch victory from what
looked perilously like defeat.  But this was not enough,
arrears of work accumulated, enthusiasm waned,
productivity decreased, and some new move was obviously
necessary.  This first move in the direction of industrial
conscription, although no one perceived its tendency at the
time, was the inauguration of what have become known
as “Saturdayings”.
Early in 1919 the Central Committee of the Communist
Party put out a circular letter, calling upon the Communists
“to work revolutionally,” to emulate in the rear the heroism
of their brothers on the front, pointing out that nothing but
the most determined efforts and an increase in the
productivity of labor would enable Russia to win through her
difficulties of transport, etc. Kolchak, to quote from
English newspapers, was it “sweeping on to Moscow,” and
the situation was pretty threatening.  As a direct result of this
letter, on May 7th, a meeting of Communists in the sub-district
of the Moscow-Kazan railway passed a resolution
that, in view of the imminent danger to the Republic,
Communists and their sympathizers should give up an hour
a day of their leisure, and, lumping these hours together, do
every Saturday six hours of manual labor; and, further, that
these Communist “Saturdayings” should be continued “until
complete victory over Kolchak  should be assured.”  That
decision of a local committee was the actual beginning of a
movement which spread all over Russia, and though the
complete victory over Kolchak was long ago obtained, is
likely to continue so long as Soviet Russia is threatened by
any one else.
The decision was put into effect on May 10th, when the first
Communist “Saturdaying” in Russia took place on the
Moscow-Kazan railway.  The Commissar of the railway,
Communist clerks from the offices, and every one else who
wished to help, marched to work, 182 in all, and put in
1,012 hours of manual labor, in which they finished
the repairs of four locomotives and sixteen wagons and
loaded and unloaded 9,300 poods of engine and wagon parts
and material. It was found that the productivity of labor in
loading and unloading shown on this occasion was about
270 per cent. of the normal, and a similar superiority of
effort was shown in the other kinds of work.  This example
was immediately copied on other railways.  The Alexandrovsk
railway had its first “Saturdaying” on May 17th. Ninety-eight
persons worked for five hours, and here also did two or
three times as much is the usual amount of work done in the
same number of working hours under ordinary circumstances.
One of the workmen, in giving an account of the
performance, wrote: “The Comrades explain this by
saying that in ordinary times the work was dull and
they were sick of it, whereas this occasion they were
working willingly and with excitement.  But now it will be
shameful in ordinary hours to do less than in the Communist
’Saturdaying.’ “  The hope implied in this last sentence has
not been realized.
In Pravda of June 7th there is an article describing one of
these early “Saturdayings,” which gives a clear picture
of the infectious character of the proceedings, telling how
people who came out of curiosity to look on found
themselves joining in the work, and how a soldier with an
accordion after staring for a long time open-mouthed at
these lunatics working on a Saturday afternoon put up a tune
for them on his instrument, and, delighted by their delight,
played on while the workers all sang together.
The idea of the “Saturdayings” spread quickly from railways
to factories, and by the middle of the summer reports of
similar efforts were coming from all over Russia.  Then
Lenin became interested, seeing in these “Saturdayings” not
only a special effort in the face of common danger, but an
actual beginning of Communism and a sign that Socialism
could bring about a greater productivity of labor than could
be obtained under Capitalism.  He wrote: “This is a work of
great difficulty and requiring much time, but it has begun,
and that is the main thing.  If in hungry Moscow in the
summer of 1919 hungry workmen who have lived through
the difficult four years of the Imperialistic war, and then the
year and a half of the still more difficult civil war, have
been able to begin this great work, what will not be its
further development when we conquer in the civil war and
win peace.”  He sees in it a promise of work being done not
for the sake of individual gain, but because of a recognition
that such work is necessary for the general good, and in all
he wrote and spoke about it he emphasized the fact that
people worked better and harder when working thus than
under any of the conditions (piece-work, premiums for good
work, etc.) imposed by the revolution in its desperate
attempts to raise the productivity of labor.  For this reason
alone, he wrote, the first “Saturdaying” on the Moscow-Kazan
railway was an event of historical significance, and not for
Russia alone.
Whether Lenin was right or wrong in so thinking, “Saturdayings"
became a regular institution, like Dorcas meetings in Victorian
England, like the thousands of collective working parties
instituted in England during the war with Germany.  It
remains to be seen how long they will continue, and if
they will survive peace when that comes.  At present
the most interesting point about them is the large proportion
of non-Communists who take an enthusiastic part in them.
In many cases not more than ten per cent. of Communists
are concerned, though they take the iniative in organizing the
parties and in finding the work to be done.  The movement
spread like fire in dry grass, like the craze for roller-skating
swept over England some years ago, and efforts were made
to control it, so that the fullest use might be made of it.
In Moscow it was found worth while to set up a special
Bureau for “Saturdayings.”  Hospitals, railways, factories, or
any other concerns working for the public good, notify
this bureau that they need the sort of work a “Saturdaying"
provides.  The bureau informs the local Communists where
their services are required, and thus there is a minimum
of wasted energy.  The local Communists arrange the
“Saturdayings,” and any one else joins in who wants.
These “Saturdayings” are a hardship to none because
they are voluntary, except for members of the Communist
Party, who are considered to have broken the party
discipline if they refrain.  But they can avoid the
“Saturdayings” if they wish to by leaving the party.  Indeed,
Lenin points, out that the “Saturdayings” are likely to assist
in clearing out of the party those elements which
joined it with the hope of personal gain.  He  points out that
the privileges of a Communists now consist in doing more
work than other people in the rear, and, on the front, in
having the certainty of being killed when other folk are
merely taken prisoners.
The following are a few examples of the sort of work done
in the “Saturdayings.”  Briansk hospitals were improperly
heated because of lack of the local transport necessary to
bring them wood.  The Communists organized a “Saturdaying,"
in which 900 persons took part, including military specialists
(officers of the old army serving in the new), soldiers, a
chief of staff, workmen and women.  Having no horses, they
harnessed themselves to sledges in groups of ten, and brought
in the wood required.  At Nijni 800 persons spent their Saturday
afternoon in unloading barges.  In the Basman district of
Moscow there was a gigantic “Saturdaying” and “Sundaying"
in which 2,000 persons (in this case all but a little over 500
being Communists) worked in the heavy artillery shops, shifting
materials, cleaning tramlines for bringing in fuel, etc.
Then there was a “Saturdaying” the main object of which
was a general autumn cleaning of the hospitals for the
wounded.  One form of “Saturdaying” for women is going
to the hospitals, talking with the wounded and writing letters
for them, mending their clothes, washing sheets, etc.  The
majority of “Saturdayings” at present are concerned with
transport work and with getting and shifting wood, because
at the moment these are the chief difficulties.  I have talked
to many “Saturdayers,” Communist and non-Communist,
and all alike spoke of these Saturday afternoons of as kind of
picnic.  On the other hand, I have met  Communists who
were accustomed to use every kind off ingenuity to find
excuses not to take part in them and yet to preserve the good
opinion of their local committee.
But even if the whole of the Communist Party did actually
indulge in a working picnic once a week, it would not suffice
to meet Russia’s tremendous needs.  And, as I pointed out in
the chapter specially devoted to the shortage of labor, the
most serious need at present is to keep skilled workers
at their jobs instead of letting them drift away into non-productive
labor.  No amount of Saturday picnics could do that, and it
was obvious long ago that some other means, would have to
be devised.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
