


I have already suggested that although the small Central
Committee of the Communist Party does invariably get its
own way, there are essential differences between this
Dictatorship and the dictatorship of, for example, a General.
The main difference is that whereas the General merely
writes an order about which most people hear for the first
time only when it is promulgated, the Central Committee
prepares the way for its dictation by a most elaborate series
of discussions and counter discussions throughout the
country, whereby it wins the bulk of the Communist Party to
its opinion, after which it proceeds through local and general
congresses to do the same with the Trades Unions.  This
done, a further series of propaganda meetings among the
people actually to be affected smooths the way for the
introduction of whatever new measure is being carried
through at the moment.  All this talk, besides lessening the
amount of physical force necessary in carrying out a
decision, must also avoid, at least in part, the deadening
effect that would be caused by mere compulsory obedience
to the unexplained orders of a military dictator.  Of the
reality of the Communist Dictatorship I have no sort of
doubt.  But its methods are such as tend towards the
awakening of a political consciousness which, if and when
normal conditions-of feeding and peace, for example-are
attained, will make dictatorship of any kind almost
impossible.
To illustrate these methods of the Dictatorship, I cannot do
better than copy into this book some pages of my diary
written in March of this year when I was present at one of
the provincial conferences which were held in preparation of
the All-Russian Communist Conference at the end of the
month.
At seven in the evening Radek called for me and took me to
the Jaroslavl station, where we met Larin, whom I had
known in 1918.  An old Menshevik, he was the originator
and most urgent supporter of the decree annulling the
foreign debts.  He is a very ill man, partially paralyzed,
having to use both hands even to get food to his mouth or to
turn over the leaves of a book.  In spite of this he is one of
the hardest workers in Russia, and although his obstinacy,
his hatred of compromise, and a sort of mixed originality
and perverseness keep him almost permanently at
loggerheads with the Central Committee, he retains
everybody’s respect because of the real heroism with which
he conquers physical disabilities which long ago would have
overwhelmed a less unbreakable spirit.  Both Radek and
Larin were going to the Communist Conference at Jaroslavl
which was to consider the new theses of the Central
Committee of the party with regard to Industrial
Conscription.  Radek was going to defend the position of the
Central Committee, Larin to defend his own.  Both are old
friends.  As Radek said to me, he intended to destroy Larin’s
position, but not, if he could help it, prevent Larin being
nominated among the Jaroslavl delegates to All-Russian
Conference which was in preparation.  Larin, whose work
keeps him continually traveling, has his own car, specially
arranged so that his  uninterrupted labor shall have as
little effect as possible on his dangerously frail body.  Radek
and I traveled in one of the special cars of the Central
Executive Committee, of which he is a member.
The car seemed very clean, but, as an additional precaution,
we began by rubbing turpentine on our necks and wrists and
angles for the discouragement of lice, now generally known
as “Semashki” from the name of Semashko, the Commissar
of Public Health, who wages unceasing war for their
destruction as the carriers of typhus germs.I rubbed the
turpentine so energetically into my neck that it burnt like a
collar of fire, and for a long time I was unable to get to sleep.
In the morning Radek, the two conductors who had charge
of the wagons and I sat down together to breakfast and had
a very merry meal, they providing cheese and bread and I a
tin of corned beef providently sent out from home by the
Manchester Guardian.  We cooked up some coffee on a
little spirit stove, which, in a neat basket together with plates,
knives, forks, etc. (now almost unobtainable in Russia) had been
a parting present from the German Spartacists to Radek when
he was released from prison in Berlin and allowed to leave Germany.
The morning was bright and clear, and we had an excellent
view of Jaroslavl when we drove from the station to the
town, which is a mile or so off the line of the railway.  The
sun poured down on the white snow, on the barges still
frozen into the Volga River, and on the gilt and painted
domes and cupolas of the town.  Many of the buildings had
been destroyed during the rising artificially provoked in July,
19l8, and its subsequent suppression.  More damage was
done then than was necessary, because the town was
recaptured by troops which had been deserted by most of
their officers, and therefore hammered away with artillery
without any very definite plan of attack.  The more
important of the damaged buildings, such as the waterworks
and the power station, have been repaired, the tramway was
working, and, after Moscow, the town seemed clean, but
plenty of ruins remained as memorials of that wanton and
unjustifiable piece of folly which, it was supposed, would be
the signal for a general rising.
We drove to the Hotel Bristol, now the headquarters of
the Jaroslavl Executive Committee, where Rostopchin, the
president, discussed with Larin and Radek the programme
arranged for the conference.  It was then proposed that we
should have something to eat, when a very curious state of
affairs (and one extremely Russian) was revealed.  Rostopchin
admitted that the commissariat arrangements of
the Soviet and its Executive Committee were very bad.  But
in the center of the town there is a nunnery which was very
badly damaged during the bombardment and is now used as
a sort of prison or concentration camp for a Labor
Regiment.  Peasants from the surrounding country who have
refused to give up their proper contribution of corn, or leave
otherwise disobeyed the laws, are, for punishment, lodged
here, and made to expiate their sins by work.  It so
happens, Rostopchin explained, that the officer in charge of the
prison feeding arrangements is a very energetic fellow, who had
served in the old army in a similar capacity, and the meals
served out to the prisoners are so much better than those
produced in the Soviet headquarters, that the members of
the Executive Committee  make a practice of walking
over to the prison to dine.  They invited us to do the
same.  Larin did not feel up to the walk, so he remained
in the Soviet House to eat an inferior meal, while Radek  and I,
with Rostopchin and three other members of the local
committee walked round to the prison.  The bell tower of
the old nunnery had been half shot away by artillery, and is
in such a precarious condition that it is proposed to pull it
down.  But on passing under it we came into a wide
courtyard surrounded by two-story whitewashed buildings
that seemed scarcely to have suffered at all.  We found the
refectory in one of these buildings.  It was astonishingly
clean. There were wooden tables, of course without cloths,
and each man had a wooden spoon and a hunk of bread.  A
great bowl of really excellent soup was put down in the
middle of table, and we fell to hungrily enough.  I made
more mess on the table than any one else, because it requires
considerable practice to convey almost boiling soup from a
distant bowl to one’s mouth without spilling it in a shallow
wooden spoon four inches in diameter, and, having got it to
one’s mouth, to get any of it in without slopping over on
either side.  The regular diners there seemed to find no
difficulty in it at all. One of the prisoners who mopped up
after my disasters said I had better join them for a week,
when I should find it quite easy.  The soup bowl was
followed by a fry of potatoes, quantities of which are grown
in the district.  For dealing with these I found the wooden
spoon quite efficient.  After that we had glasses of some sort
of substitute for tea.
The Conference was held in the town theatre.  There was a
hint of comedy in the fact that the orchestra was playing the
prelude to some very cheerful opera before the curtain rang
up.  Radek characteristically remarked that such music
should be followed by something more sensational than a
conference, proposed to me that we should form a tableau
to illustrate the new peaceful policy of England with regard to
Russia.  As it was a party conference, I had really no right to
be there, but Radek had arranged with Rostopchin that I
should come in with himself, and be allowed to sit in the
wings at the side of the stage.  On the stage were
Rostopchin, Radek, Larin and various members of the
Communist Party Committee in  the district.  Everything
was ready, but the orchestra went on with its jig music on
the other side of the curtain.  A message was sent to them.
The music stopped with a jerk.  The curtain rose, disclosing
a crowded auditorium.  Everbody stood up, both on the
stage and in the theater, and sang, accompanied by the
orchestra, first the “Internationale” and then the song for
those who had died for the revolution.  Then except for two
or three politically minded musicians , the orchestra vanished
away and the Conference began.
Unlike many of the meetings and conferences at which I
have been present in Russia, this Jaroslavl Conference
seemed to me to include practically none but men and
women who either were or had been actual manual workers.
I looked over row after row of faces in the theatre, and
could only find two faces which I thought might be Jewish,
and none that obviously  belonged to the “intelligentsia.”  I
found on inquiry that only three of the Communists present,
excluding Radek and Larin, were old exiled and imprisoned
revolutionaries of the educated class.  Of these, two were on
the platform.  All the rest were from the working class.
The great majority of them, of course, had joined the
Communists in 1917, but a dozen or so had been in the
party as long as the first Russian revolution of 1905.
Radek, who was tremendously cheered (his long
imprisonment in Germany, during which time few in Russia
thought that they would see him alive again, has made him
something of a popular hero) made a long, interesting and
pugnacious speech setting out the grounds on which the
Central Committee base their ideas about Industrial
Conscription.  These ideas are embodied in the series of
theses issued by the Central Committee in January (see p.
134).  Larin, who was very tired after the journey and
patently conscious that Radek was a formidable opponent,
made a speech setting out his reasons for differing with the
Central Committee, and proposed an ingenious resolution,
which, while expressing approval of the general position of
the Committee, included four supplementary modifications
which, as a matter of fact, nullified that position altogether.
It was then about ten at night, and the Conference
adjourned.  We drove round to the prison in sledges,
and by way of supper had some more soup and potatoes,
and so back to the railway station to sleep in the cars.
Next day the Conference opened about noon, when there
was a long discussion of the points at issue.  Workman after
workman came to the platform and gave his view.  Some of
the speeches were a little naive, as when one soldier said that
Comrades Lenin and Trotsky had often before pointed out
difficult roads, and that whenever they had been followed
they had shown the way to victory, and that therefore,
though there was much in the Central Committee’s theses
that was hard to digest, he was for giving them complete
support, confident that, as Comrades Lenin and Trotsky
were in favor of them, they were likely to be right this time,
as so often heretofore.  But for the most part the speeches
were directly concerned with the problem under discussion,
and showed a political consciousness which would have
been almost incredible three years ago.  The Red Army
served as a text for many, who said that the methods which
had produced that army and its victories over the Whites had
been proved successful and should be used to produce a
Red Army of Labor and similar victories on the bloodless
front against economic disaster.  Nobody seemed to question
the main idea of compulsory labor.  The contest that aroused
real bitterness was between the methods of individual and
collegiate command.  The new proposals lead eventually
towards individual command, and fears were expressed lest
this should mean putting summary powers into the hands  of
bourgeois specialists, thus nullifying “workers’ control”. In
reply, it was pointed out that individual command had
proved necessary in the army and had resulted in victory for
the revolution.  The question was not between specialists
and no specialists.  Everybody knew that specialists were
necessary.  The question was how to get the most out of
them.  Effective political control had secured that bourgeois
specialists, old officers, led to victory the army of the Red
Republic.  The same result could be secured in the factories
in the same way.  It was pointed out that in one year they
had succeeded in training 32,000 Red Commanders, that is
to say, officers from the working class itself, and that it was
not Utopian to hope and work for a similar output of
workmen specialists, technically trained, and therefore
themselves qualified for individual command in the factories.
Meanwhile there was nothing against the employment of
Political Commissars in the factories as formerly in the
regiments, to control in other than technical matters the
doings of the specialists.  On the other hand, it was said that
the appointment of Commissars would tend to make
Communists unpopular, since inevitably in many cases they
would have to support the specialists against the workmen,
and that the collegiate system made the workmen feel that
they were actually the masters, and so gave possibilities of
enthusiastic work not otherwise obtainable.  This last point
was hotly challenged.  It was said that collegiate control
meant little in effect, except waste of time and efficiency,
because at worst work was delayed by disputes and at best
the workmen members of the college merely countersigned
the orders decided upon by the specialists.  The enthusiastic
work was said to be a fairy story.  If it were really to be
found then there would be no need for a conference to
discover how to get it.
The most serious opposition, or at least the most serious
argument put forward, for there was less opposition than
actual discussion, came from some of the representatives of
the Trade Unionists.  A good deal was said about the
position of the Trades Unions in a Socialist State.  There
was general recognition that since the Trade Unions
themselves controlled the conditions of labor and wages, the
whole of their old work of organizing strikes against
capitalists had ceased to have any meaning, since to strike
now would be to strike against their own decisions.  At the
same time, certain tendencies to Syndicalism were still in
existence, tendencies which might well lead to conflict
between different unions, so that, for example, the match
makers or the metal worker, might wish to strike a bargain
with the State, as of one country with another, and this
might easily lead to a complete collapse of the socialist system.
The one thing on which the speakers were in complete
agreement was the absolute need of an effort in industry
equal to, if not greater than, the effort made in the army.  I
thought it significant that in many of the speeches the
importance of this effort was urged as the only possible
means of retaining the support of the peasants.  There
was a tacit recognition that the Conference represented town
workers only.  Larin, who had belonged to the old school
which had grown up with its eyes on the industrial countries
of the West and believed that revolution could be brought
about by the town workers alone, that it was exclusively their
affair, and that all else was of minor importance,
unguardedly spoke of the peasant as “our neighbor."
In Javoslavl, country and town are too near to allow the main
problem of the revolution to be thus easily dismissed.  It was
instantly pointed out that the relation was much more
intimate, and that, even if it were only “neighborly,” peace
could not long be preserved if it were continually necessary
for one neighbor to steal the chickens of the other.  These
town workers of a district for the most part agricultural were
very sure that the most urgent of all tasks was to raise
industry to the point at which the town would really be able
to supply the village with its needs.
Larin and Radek severally summed up and made final
attacks on each other’s positions, after which Radek’s
resolution approving the theses of the Central Committee
was passed almost unanimously.  Larin’s four amendments
received 1, 3, 7 and 1 vote apiece.  This result was received
with cheering throughout the theater, and showed the
importance of such Conferences in smoothing the way of
the Dictatorship, since it had been quite obvious when the
discussion began that a very much larger proportion of the
delegates than finally voted for his resolution had been more
or less in sympathy with Larin in his opposition to the
Central Committee.
There followed elections to the Party Conference in
Moscow.  Rostopchin, the president, read a list which had
been submitted by the various ouyezds in the Jaroslavl
Government.  They were to send to Moscow fifteen
delegates with the right to vote, together with another fifteen
with the right to speak but not to vote.  Larin, who had done
much work in the district, was mentioned as one of the
fifteen voting delegates, but he stood up and said that as the
Conference had so clearly expressed its disagreement with
his views, he thought it better to withdraw his candidature.
Rostopchin put it to the Conference that although they disagreed
with Larin, yet it would be as well that he should have
the opportunity of stating his views at the All-Russian Conference,
so that discussion there should be as final and as many-sided
as possible.  The Conference expressed its agreement with
this.  Larin withdrew his withdrawal, and was presently
elected.  The main object of these conferences in
unifying opinion and in arming Communists with
argument for the defence of this unified opinion a
mong the masses was again illustrated when the
Conference, in leaving it to the ouyezds to choose for
themselves the non-voting delegates urged them to select
wherever possible people who would have the widest
opportunities of explaining on their return to the district
whatever results might be reached in Moscow.
It was now pretty late in the evening, and after another very
satisfactory visit to the prison we drove back to the station.
Larin, who was very disheartened, realizing that he had lost
much support in the course of the discussion, settled down
to work, and buried himself in a mass of statistics.  I
prepared to go to bed, but we had hardly got into the car
when there was a tap at the door and a couple of
railwaymen came in. They explained that a few hundred
yards away along the line a concert and entertainment
arranged by the Jaroslavl railwaymen was going on, and that
their committee, hearing that Radek was at the station, had
sent them to ask him to come over and say a few words to
them if he were not too tired.
“Come along,” said Radek, and we walked in the dark along
the railway lines to a big one-story wooden shanty, where an
electric lamp lit a great placard, “Railwaymen’s Reading
Room.”  We went into a packed hall.  Every seat was
occupied by railway workers and their wives and children.
The gangways on either side were full of those who had not
found room on the benches.  We wriggled and pushed our
way through this crowd, who were watching a play staged
and acted by the railwaymen themselves, to a side door,
through which we climbed up into the wings, and slid across
the stage behind the scenery into a tiny dressing-room.
Here Radek was laid hold of by the Master of the Ceremonies,
who, it seemed, was also part editor of a railwaymen’s
newspaper, and made to give a long account of the
present situation of Soviet Russia’s Foreign Affairs.
The little box of a room filled to a solid mass as
policemen, generals and ladies of the old regime threw
off their costumes, and, in their working clothes,
plain signalmen and engine-drivers, pressed round to listen.
When the act ended, one of the railwaymen went to the front of
the stage and announced that Radek, who had lately come back
after imprisonment in Germany for the cause of revolution, was going
to talk to them about the general state of affairs.  I saw Radek
grin atthis forecast of his speech.  I understood why, when he
began to speak.  He led off by a direct and furious onslaught
on the railway workers in general, demanding work, work
and more work, telling them that as the Red Army had been
the vanguard of the revolution hitherto, and had starved and
fought and given lives to save those at home from Denikin
and Kolchak, so now it was the turn of the railway workers
on whose efforts not only the Red Army but also the whole
future of Russia depended.  He addressed himself to the
women, telling them in very bad Russian that unless their
men worked superhumanly they would see their babies die
from starvation next winter.  I saw women nudge their
husbands as they listened.  Instead of giving them a pleasant,
interesting sketch of the international position, which, no
doubt, was what they had expected, he took the opportunity
to tell them exactly how things stood at home.  And the
amazing thing was that they seemed to be pleased.  They
listened with extreme attention, wanted to turn out some one
who had a sneezing fit at the far end of the hall, and nearly
lifted the roof off with cheering when Radek had done.  I
wondered what sort of reception a man would have who in
another country interrupted a play to hammer home truths
about the need of work into an audience of working men
who had gathered solely for the purpose of legitimate
recreation.  It was not as if he sugared the medicine he gave
them.  His speech was nothing but demands for discipline
and work, coupled with prophecy of disaster in case work
and discipline failed.  It was delivered like all his speeches,
with a strong Polish accent and a steady succession of
mistakes in grammar.
As we walked home along the railway lines, half a dozen of
the railwaymen pressed around Radek, and almost fought
with each other as to who should walk next to him.
And Radek entirely happy, delighted at his success in
giving them a bombshell instead of a bouquet, with
one stout fellow on one arm, another on the other, two
or three more listening in front and behind, continued rubbing
it into them until we reached our wagon, when, after a
general handshaking, they disappeared into the night.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
