


How is that will expressed?  What is the organization welded
by adversity which, in this crisis, supersedes even the Soviet
Constitution, and stands between this people and chaos?
It is a commonplace to say that Russia is ruled, driven if you
like, cold, starving as she is, to effort after effort by the
dictatorship of a party.  It is a commonplace alike in the
mouths of those who wish to make the continued existence
of that organization impossible and in the mouths of the
Communists themselves.  At the second congress of the
Third International, Trotsky remarked.  “A party as such, in
the course of the development of a revolution, becomes
identical with the revolution.” Lenin, on the same occasion,
replying to a critic who said that he differed from, the
Communists in his understanding of what was meant by the
Dictatorship of the Proletariat, said, “He says that we
understand by the words ’Dictatorship of the Proletariat’
what is actually the dictatorship of its determined and
conscious minority.  And that is the fact.”  Later he asked,
“What is this minority?  It may be called a party.  If this
minority is actually conscious, if it is able to draw the
masses after it, if it shows itself capable of replying to every
question on the agenda list of the political day, it actually
constitutes a party.”  And Trotsky again, on the same
occasion, illustrated the relative positions of the Soviet
Constitution and the Communist Party when he said, “And
today, now that we have received an offer of peace from the
Polish Government, who decides the question?  Whither are
the workers to turn?  We have our Council of People’s
Commissaries, of course, but that, too, must be under a
certain control.  Whose control?  The control of the working
class as a formless chaotic mass?  No. The Central
Committee of the party is called together to discuss and
decide the question.  And when we have to wage war, to
form new divisions, to find the best elements for them-to
whom do we turn?  To the party, to the Central Committee.
And it gives directives to the local committees, ’Send
Communists to the front.’ The case is precisely the same
with the Agrarian question, with that of supply, and with all
other questions whatsoever.”
No one denies these facts, but their mere statement is quite
inadequate to explain what is being done in Russia and how
it is being done.  I do not think it would be a waste of time
to set down as briefly as possible, without the comments of
praise or blame that would be inevitable from one primarily
interested in the problem from the Capitalist or Communist
point of view what, from observation and inquiry, I believe
to be the main framework of the organization whereby that
dictatorship of the party works.
The Soviet Constitution is not so much moribund as in
abeyance.  The Executive Committee, for example, which
used to meet once a week or even oftener, now meets on the
rarest occasions.  Criticism on this account was met with the
reply  that the members of the Executive Committee, for
example, which used to meet once a week or even oftener,
now meets on the rarest occasions.  Criticism on this account
was met with the reply that the members of the Executive
Committee were busy on the front and in various parts of
Russia.  As a matter of fact, the work which that Committee
used to do is now done by Central Committee of the
Bolshevik Party, so that the bulk of the 150 members of
the Central Executive are actually free for other work, a
saving of something like 130 men.  This does not involve
any very great change, but merely an economy in the use of
men.  In the old days, as I well remember, the opening of a
session of the Executive Committee was invariably late, the
reason being that the various parties composing it had not
yet finished their preliminary and private discussions.  There
is now an overwhelming Communist majority in the
Executive Committee, as elsewhere.  I think it may be
regarded as proved that these majorities are not always
legitimately obtained.  Non-Communist delegates do
undoubtedly find every kind of difficulty put in their way by
the rather Jesuitical adherents of the faith.  But. no matter
how these majorities are obtained, the result is that when the
Communist Party has made up its mind on any subject, it is
so certain of being able to carry its point that the calling
together of the All-Russian Executive Committee is merely a
theatrical demonstration of the fact that it can do what it
likes.  When it does meet, the Communists allow the
microscopical opposition great liberty of speech, listen
quietly, cheer ironically, and vote like one man, proving
on every occasion that the meeting of the Executive
Committee was the idlest of forms, intended rather to satisfy
purists than for purposes of discussion, since the real
discussion has all taken place beforehand among the
Communists themselves.  Something like this must happen
with every representative assembly at which a single party
has a great preponderance and a rigid internal discipline.
The real interest is in the discussion inside the Party
Committees.
This state of affairs would probably be more actively
resented if the people were capable of resenting anything
but their own hunger, or of fearing anything but a general
collapse which would turn that hunger into starvation.  It
must be remembered that the urgency of the economic crisis
has driven political questions into the background.  The
Communists (compare Rykov’s remarks on this subject,
p. 175) believe that this is the natural result of social
revolution.  They think that political parties will disappear
altogether and that people will band together, not for the
victory of one of several contending political parties, but
solely for economic cooperation or joint enterprise in art
or science.  In support of this they point to the number of
their opponents who have become Communists, and to the
still greater number of non-Communists who are loyally
working with them for the economic reconstruction of the
country.  I do not agree with the Communists in this, nor yet
with their opponents, who attribute the death of political
discussion to fear of the Extraordinary Commission.  I think
that both the Communists and their opponents underestimate
the influence of the economic ruin that affects everybody.
The latter particularly, feeling that in some way they must
justify themselves to politically minded foreign visitors, seek
an excuse for their apathy in the one institution that is almost
universally unpopular.  I have many non-Communist friends
in Russia, but have never detected the least restraint that
could be attributed to fear of anybody in their criticisms of
the Communist regime.  The fear existed alike among
Communists and non-Communists, but it was like the fear of
people walking about in a particularly bad thunderstorm.
The activities and arrests of the Extraordinary Commission
are so haphazard, often so utterly illogical, that it is quite
idle for any one to say to himself that by following any given
line of conduct he will avoid molestation.  Also, there is
something in the Russian character which makes any
prohibition of discussion almost an invitation to discuss.  I
have never met a Russian who could be prevented from
saying whatever he liked whenever he liked, by any threats
or dangers whatsoever.  The only way to prevent a Russian
from talking is to cut out his tongue.  The real reason for the
apathy is that, for the moment, for almost everybody
political questions are of infinitesimal importance in
comparison with questions of food and warmth.  The
ferment of political discussion that filled the first years of the
revolution has died away, and people talk about little but
what they are able to get for dinner, or what somebody else
his been able to get.  I, like other foreign visitors coming to
Russia after feeding up in other countries, am all agog to
make people talk.  But the sort of questions which interest
me, with my full-fed stomach, are brushed aside almost
fretfully by men who have been more or less hungry for two
or three years on end.
I find, instead of an urgent desire to alter this or that at
once, to-morrow, in the political complexion of the country,
a general desire to do the best that can be done with things
as they are, a general fear of further upheaval of any kind, in
fact a general acquiescence in the present state of affairs
politically, in the hope of altering the present state of affairs
economically.  And this is entirely natural.  Everybody,
Communists included, rails bitterly at the inefficiencies of
the present system, but everybody, Anti-Communists
included, admits that there is nothing whatever capable of
taking its place.  Its failure is highly undesirable, not because
it itself is good, but because  such failure would be preceded
or followed by a breakdown of all existing organizations.
Food distribution, inadequate as it now is, would come to an
end.  The innumerable non-political committees, which are
rather like Boards of Directors controlling the Timber, Fur,
Fishery, Steel, Matches or other Trusts (since the
nationalized industries can be so considered) would collapse,
and with them would collapse not only yet one more hope of
keeping a breath of life in Russian industry, but also the
actual livelihoods of a great number of people, both
Communists and non-Communists.  I do not think it is
realized out-side Russia how large a proportion of the
educated classes have become civil servants of one kind or
another.  It is a rare thing when a whole family has left
Russia, and many of the most embittered partisans of war on
Russia have relations inside Russia who have long ago found
places under the new system, and consequently fear its
collapse as much as any one.  One case occurs to me in
which a father was an important minister in one of the
various White Governments which have received Allied
support, while his son inside Russia was doing pretty well as
a responsible official under the Communists.  Now in the
event of a violent change, the Communists would be outlaws
with a price on every head, and those who have worked with
them, being Russians, know their fellow countrymen well
enough to be pretty well convinced that the mere fact that
they are without cards of the membership of the Communist
Party, would not save them in the orgy of slaughter that
would follow any such collapse.
People may think that I underestimate the importance of, the
Extraordinary Commission.  I am perfectly aware that
without this police force with its spies, its prisons and its
troops, the difficulties of the Dictatorship would be
increased by every  kind of disorder, and the chaos, which  I
fear may come, would have begun long ago. I believe, too,
that the overgrown power of the Extraordinary Commission,
and the cure that must sooner or later be applied to it, may,
as in the French Revolution, bring about the collapse of the
whole system.  The Commission depends for its strength on
the fear of something else.  I have seen it weaken when there
was a hope of general peace.  I have seen it tighten its grip in
the presence of attacks from without and attempted
assassination within.  It is dreaded by everybody; not even
Communists are safe from it; but it does not suffice to
explain the Dictatorship, and is actually entirely irrelevant to
the most important process of that Dictatorship, namely, the
adoption of a single idea, a single argument, by the whole of
a very large body of men.  The whole power of the
Extraordinary Commission does not affect in the slightest
degree discussions inside the Communist Party, and those
discussions are the simple fact distinguishing the Communist
Dictatorship from any of the other dictatorships by
which it may be supplanted.
There are 600,000 members of the Communist Party
(611,978 on April 2, 1920). There are nineteen members of
the Central Committee of that party.  There are, I believe,
five who, when they agree, can usually sway the remaining
fourteen.  There is no need to wonder how these fourteen
can be argued into acceptance of the views of the still
smaller inner ring, but the process of persuading the six
hundred thousand of the desirability of, for example, such
measures as those involved in industrial conscription which,
at first sight, was certainly repugnant to most of them, is the
main secret of the Dictatorship, and is not in any way
affected by the existence of the Extraordinary Commission.
Thus the actual government of Russia at the present time
may be not unfairly considered as a small group inside the
Central Committee of the Communist Party.  This small
group is able to persuade the majority of the remaining
members of that Committee.  The Committee then sets
about persuading the majority of the party.  In the case of
important measures the process is elaborate. The
Committee issues a statement of its case, and the party
newspapers the Pravda and its affiliated organs are deluged
with its discussion.  When this discussion has had time to
spread through the country, congresses of Communists meet
in the provincial centres, and members of the Central
Committee go down to these conferences to defend the
“theses” which the Committee has issued.  These provincial
congresses, exclusively Communist, send their delegates of
an All-Russian Congress.  There the “theses” of the Central
Committee get altered, confirmed, or, in the case of an
obviously unpersuaded and large opposition in the party, are
referred back or in other ways shelved.  Then the delegates,
even those who have been in opposition at the congress, go
back to the country pledged to defend the position of the
majority.  This sometimes has curious results.  For example,
I heard Communist Trades Unionists fiercely arguing
against certain clauses in the theses on industrial conscription
at a Communist Congress at the Kremlin; less than a week
afterwards I heard these same men defending precisely these
clauses at a Trades Union Congress over the way, they
loyally abiding by the collective opinion of their fellow
Communists and subject to particularly uncomfortable
heckling from people who vociferously reminded them
(since the Communist debates had been published) that they
were now defending what, a few days before, they had
vehemently attacked.
The great strength of the Communist Party is comparable to
the strength of the Jesuits, who, similarly, put themselves
and their opinions at the disposal of the body politic of their
fellow members.  Until a decision had been made, a
Communist is perfectly free to do his best to prevent it being
made, to urge alterations in it,  or to supply a rival decision,
but once it has been made he will support it without
changing his private opinion.  In all mixed congresses, rather
than break the party discipline, he will give his vote for it,
speak in favor of it, and use against its adversaries the very
arguments that have been used against himself.  He has his
share in electing the local Communist Committee, and,
indirectly, in electing the all-powerful Central Committee of
the party, and he binds himself to do at any moment in his
life exactly what these Committees decide for him.
These Committees decide the use that is to be made of the
lives, not only of the rank and file of the party, but also of
their own members.  Even a member of the Central
Committee does not escape.  He may be voted by his fellow
members into leaving a job he likes and taking up another he
detests in which they think his particular talents will better
serve the party aims.  To become a member of the
Communist Party involves a kind of intellectual abdication,
or, to put it differently, a readiness at any moment to place
the collective wisdom of the party’s Committee above one’s
individual instincts or ideas.  You may influence its
decisions, you may even get it to endorse your own, but
Lenin himself, if he were to fail on any occasion to obtain
the agreement of a majority in the Central Committee,
would have to do precisely what the Committee should tell
him.  Lenin’s opinion carries great weight because he is
Lenin, but it carries less weight than that of the Central
Committee, of which he forms a nineteenth part.  On the
other hand, the opinion of Lenin and a very small group of
outstanding figures is supported by great prestige inside the
Committee, and that of the Committee is supported
by overwhelming prestige among the rank and file.  The
result is that this small group is nearly always sure of being
able to use the whole vote of 600,000 Communists, in the
realization of its decisions.
Now 600,000 men and women acting on the instructions of
a highly centralized directive, all the important decisions of
which have been thrashed out and re-thrashed until they
have general support within the party; 600,000 men and
women prepared, not only to vote in support of these
decisions, but with a carefully fostered readiness to sacrifice
their lives for them if necessary; 600,000 men and women
who are persuaded that by their way alone is humanity to be
saved; who are persuaded (to put it as cynically and
unsympathetically as possible) that the noblest death one can
die is in carrying out a decision of the Central Committee;
such a body, even in a country such as Russia, is an
enormously strong embodiment of human will, an
instrument of struggle capable of working something very
like miracles.  It can be and is controlled like an army in
battle.  It can mobilize its members, 10 per cent. of them,
50 per cent., the local Committees choosing them, and send
them to the front when the front is in danger, or to the
railways and repair shops when it is decided that the weakest
point is that of transport. If its only task were to fight those
organizations of loosely knit and only momentarily united
interests which are opposed to it, those jerry-built alliances
of Reactionaries with Liberals, United-Indivisible-Russians
with Ukrainians, Agrarians with Sugar-Refiners,
Monarchists with Republicans, that task would long ago
have been finished.  But it has to fight something infinitely
stronger than these in fighting the economic ruin of Russia,
which, if it is too strong, too powerful to be  arrested by the
Communists, would make short work of those who are
without any such fanatic single-minded and perfectly
disciplined organization.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Crisis in Russia” by Ransome belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Russia in 1919 & The Crisis in RussiaBy Arthur RansomeAt Amazon
