


“The Omnipresent,” said a Rabbi, “is occupied in making marriages.” The
  levity of the saying lies in the ear of him who hears it; for by
  marriages the speaker meant all the wondrous combinations of the
  universe, whose issue makes our good and evil.
 George Eliot
The proverb that I have set at the head of these lines is popular in every
language of Europe. Need I add that a variant may be found in Chinese? The
Old Man of the Moon unites male and female with a silken, invisible thread,
and they cannot afterwards be separated, but are destined to become man and
wife. The remark of the Rabbi quoted in “Daniel Deronda” carries the
proverb back apparently to a Jewish origin; and it is, indeed, more than
probable that the Rabbinical literature is the earliest source to which
this piece of folk-philosophy can be traced.
George Eliot’s Rabbi was Jose bar Chalafta, and his remark was made to a
lady, possibly a Roman matron of high quality, in Sepphoris. Rabbi Jose was
evidently an adept in meeting the puzzling questions of women, for as many
as sixteen interviews between him and “matrons” are recorded in Agadic
literature. Whether because prophetic of its subsequent popularity, or for
some other reason, this particular dialogue in which Rabbi Jose bore so
conspicuous a part is repeated in the Midrash Rabba alone not less than
four times, besides appearing in other Midrashim. It will be as well, then,
to reproduce the passage in a summarized form, for it may be fairly
described as the locus classicus on the subject.
“How long,” she asked, “did it take God to create the world?” and Rabbi
  Jose informed her that the time occupied was six days. “What has God been
  doing since that time?” continued the matron. “The Holy One,” answered
  the Rabbi, “has been sitting in Heaven arranging marriages."–"Indeed!"
  she replied, “I could do as much myself. I have thousands of slaves, and
  could marry them off in couples in a single hour. It is easy enough."–"I
  hope that you will find it so,” said Rabbi Jose. “In Heaven it is thought
  as difficult as the dividing of the Red Sea.” He then took his departure,
  while she assembled one thousand men-servants and as many maid-servants,
  and, marking them off in pairs, ordered them all to marry. On the day
  following this wholesale wedding, the poor victims came to their mistress
  in a woeful plight. One had a broken leg, another a black eye, a third a
  swollen nose; all were suffering from some ailment, but with one voice
  they joined in the cry, “Lady, unmarry us again!” Then the matron sent
  for Rabbi Jose, admitted that she had underrated the delicacy and
  difficulty of match-making, and wisely resolved to leave Heaven for the
  future to do its work in its own way.
The moral conveyed by this story may seem, however, to have been idealized
by George Eliot almost out of recognition. This is hardly the case. Genius
penetrates into the heart, even from a casual glance at the face of things.
Though it is unlikely that she had ever seen the full passages in the
Midrash to which she was alluding, yet her insight was not at fault. For
the saying that God is occupied in making marriages is, in fact, associated
in some passages of the Midrash with the far wider problems of man’s
destiny, with the universal effort to explain the inequalities of fortune,
and the changes with which the future is heavy.
Rabbi Jose’s proverbial explanation of connubial happiness was not merely a
bon mot invented on the spur of the moment, to silence an awkward
questioner. It was a firm conviction, which finds expression in more than
one quaint utterance, but also in more than one matter-of-fact assertion.
To take the latter first:
“Rabbi Phineas in the name of Rabbi Abbahu said, We find in the Torah, in
  the Prophets, and in the Holy Writings, evidence that a man’s wife is
  chosen for him by the Holy One, blessed be He. Whence do we deduce it in
  the Torah? From Genesis xxiv. 50: Then Laban and Bethuel answered and
  said [in reference to Rebekah’s betrothal to Isaac], The thing
  proceedeth from the Lord. In the Prophets it is found in Judges xiv. 4
  [where it is related how Samson wished to mate himself with a woman in
  Timnath, of the daughters of the Philistines], But his father and mother
  knew not that it was of the Lord. In the Holy Writings the same may be
  seen, for it is written (Proverbs xix. 14), House and riches are the
  inheritance of fathers, but a prudent wife is from the Lord.“
Many years ago, a discussion was carried on in the columns of Notes and
Queries concerning the origin of the saying round which my present
desultory jottings are centred. One correspondent, with unconscious
plagiarism, suggested that the maxim was derived from Proverbs xix. 14.
Another text that might be appealed to is Tobit vi. 18. The Angel
encourages Tobit to marry Sarah, though her seven husbands, one after the
other, had died on their wedding eves. “Fear not,” said Raphael, “for she
is appointed unto thee from the beginning.”
Here we may, for a moment, pause to consider whether any parallels to the
belief in Heaven-made marriages exist in other ancient literatures. It
appears in English as early as Shakespeare:
  God, the best maker of all marriages,
  Combine your hearts in one.
 Henry V., v. 2.
This, however, is too late to throw any light on its origin. With a little
ingenuity, one might, perhaps, torture some such notion out of certain
fantastic sentences of Plato. In the Symposium (par. 192), however, God
is represented as putting obstacles in the way of the union of fitting
lovers, in consequence of the wickedness of mankind. When men become, by
their conduct, reconciled with God, they may find their true loves.
Astrological divinations on the subject are certainly common enough in
Eastern stories; a remarkable instance will be given later on. At the
present day, Lane tells us, the numerical value of the letters in the names
of the two parties to the contract are added for each name separately, and
one of the totals is subtracted from the other. If the remainder is uneven,
the inference drawn is favorable; but if even, the reverse. The pursuit of
Gematria is apparently not limited to Jews. Such methods, however, hardly
illustrate my present point, for the identity of the couple is not
discovered by the process. Whether the diviner’s object is to make this
discovery, or the future lot of the married pair is all that he seeks to
reveal, in both cases, though he charm never so wisely, it does not fall
within the scope of this inquiry. Without stretching one’s imagination too
much, some passages in the Pantschatantra seem to imply a belief that
marriage-making is under the direct control of Providence. Take, for
instance, the story of the beautiful princess who was betrothed to a
serpent, Deva Serma’s son. Despite the various attempts made to induce her
to break off so hideous a match, she declines steadfastly to go back from
her word, and bases her refusal on the ground that the marriage was
inevitable and destined by the gods.
As quaint illustrations may be instanced the following: “Raba heard a
certain man praying that he might marry a certain damsel; Raba rebuked him
with the words: ’If she be destined for thee, nothing will part thee from
her; if thou art not destined for her, thou art denying Providence in
praying for her.’ Afterwards Raba heard him say, ’If I am not destined to
marry her, I hope that either I or she may die,’” meaning that he could not
bear to witness her union with another. Despite Raba’s protest, other
instances are on record of prayers similar to the one of which he
disapproved. Or, again, the Midrash offers a curious illustration of Psalm
lxii. 10, “Surely men of low degree are a breath, and men of high degree a
lie.” The first clause of the verse alludes to those who say in the usual
way of the world, that a certain man is about to wed a certain maiden, and
the second clause to those who say that a certain maiden is about to wed a
certain man. In both cases people are in error in thinking that the various
parties are acting entirely of their own free will; as a matter of fact,
the whole affair is predestined. I am not quite certain whether the same
idea is intended by the Yalkut Reubeni, in which the following occurs:
“Know that all religious and pious men in this our generation are henpecked
by their wives, the reason being connected with the mystery of the Golden
Calf. The men on that occasion did not protest against the action of the
mixed multitude [at whose door the charge of making the calf is laid],
while the women were unwilling to surrender their golden ornaments for
idolatrous purposes. Therefore they rule over their husbands.” One might
also quote the bearing of the mystical theory of transmigration on the
predestination of bridal pairs. In the Talmud, on the other hand, the
virtues of a man’s wife are sometimes said to be in proportion to the
husband’s own; or in other words, his own righteousness is the cause of his
acquiring a good wife. The obvious objection, raised by the Talmud itself,
is that a man’s merits can hardly be displayed before his birth–and yet
his bride is destined for him at that early period.
Yet more quaint (I should perhaps rather term it consistent, were not
consistency rare enough to be indistinguishable from quaintness) was the
confident belief of a maiden of whom mention is made in the Sefer
ha-Chasidim (par. 384). She refused persistently to deck her person with
ornaments. People said to her, “If you go about thus unadorned, no one will
notice you nor court you.” She replied with firm simplicity, “It is the
Holy One, blessed be He, that settles marriages; I need have no concern on
the point myself.” Virtue was duly rewarded, for she married a learned and
pious husband. This passage in the “Book of the Pious” reminds me of the
circumstance under which the originator of the latter-day Chasidism, Israel
Baalshem, is said to have married. When he was offered the daughter of a
rich and learned man of Brody, named Abraham, he readily accepted the
alliance, because he knew that Abraham’s daughter was his bride destined by
heaven. For, like Moses Mendelssohn, in some other respects the antagonist
of the Chasidim, Baalshem accepted the declaration of Rabbi Judah in the
name of Rab: “Forty days before the creation of a girl, a proclamation
[Bath-Kol] is made in Heaven, saying, ’The daughter of such a one shall
marry such and such a one.’”
The belief in the Divine ordaining of marriages affected the medieval
Synagogue liturgy. To repeat what I have written elsewhere: When the
bridegroom, with a joyous retinue, visited the synagogue on the Sabbath
following his marriage, the congregation chanted the chapter of Genesis
(xxiv) that narrates the story of Isaac’s marriage, which, as Abraham’s
servant claimed, was providentially arranged. This chapter was sung, not
only in Hebrew, but in Arabic, in countries where the latter language was
the vernacular. These special readings, which were additional to the
regular Scripture lesson, seem to have fallen out of use in Europe in the
seventeenth century, but they are still retained in the East. But all over
Jewry the beautiful old belief is contained in the wording of the fourth of
the “seven benedictions” sung at the celebration of a wedding, “Blessed art
thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who hast made man in thine
image, after thy likeness, and hast prepared unto him out of his very self
a perpetual fabric.” Here is recalled the creation of Eve, of whom God
Himself said, “I will make for man a help meet unto him.” Not only the
marriage, but also the bride was Heaven-made, and the wonderful wedding
benediction enshrines this idea.
In an Agadic story, the force of this predestination is shown to be too
strong even for royal opposition. It does not follow that the
pre-arrangement of marriages implies that the pair cannot fall in love of
their own accord. On the contrary, just the right two eventually come
together; for once freewill and destiny need present no incompatibility.
The combination, here shadowed, of a predestined and yet true-love
marriage, is effectively illustrated in what follows:
“Solomon the king was blessed with a very beautiful daughter; she was the
  fairest maiden in the whole land of Israel. Her father observed the
  stars, to discover by astrology who was destined to be her mate in life
  and wed her, when lo! he saw that his future son-in-law would be the
  poorest man in the nation. Now, what did Solomon do? He built a high
  tower by the sea, and surrounded it on all sides with inaccessible walls;
  he then took his daughter and placed her in the tower under the charge of
  seventy aged guardians. He supplied the castle with provisions, but he
  had no door made in it, so that none could enter the fortress without the
  knowledge of the guard. Then the king said, ’I will watch in what way God
  will work the matter.’
“In course of time, a poor and weary traveller was walking on his way by
  night, his garments were ragged and torn, he was barefooted and ready to
  faint with hunger, cold, and fatigue. He knew not where to sleep, but,
  casting his eyes around him, he beheld the skeleton of an ox lying on a
  field hard by. The youth crept inside the skeleton to shelter himself
  from the wind, and, while he slept there, down swooped a great bird,
  which lifted up the carcass and the unconscious youth in it. The bird
  flew with its burden to the top of Solomon’s tower, and set it down on
  the roof before the very door of the imprisoned princess. She went forth
  on the morrow to walk on the roof according to her daily wont, and she
  descried the youth. She said to him, ’Who art thou? and who brought thee
  hither?’ He answered, ’I am a Jew of Acco, and a bird bore me to thee.’
  The kind-hearted maiden clothed him in new garments; they bathed and
  anointed him, and she saw that he was the handsomest youth in Israel.
  They loved one another, and his soul was bound up in hers. One day she
  said, ’Wilt thou marry me?’ He replied, ’Would it might be so!’ They
  resolved to marry. But there was no ink with which to write the Kethubah,
  or marriage certificate. Love laughs at obstacles. So, using some drops
  of his own blood as ink, the marriage was secretly solemnized, and he
  said, ’God is my witness to-day, and Michael and Gabriel likewise.’ When
  the matter leaked out, the dismayed custodians of the princess hastily
  summoned Solomon. The king at once obeyed their call, and asked for the
  presumptuous youth. He looked at his son-in-law, inquired of him as to
  his father and mother, family and dwelling-place, and from his replies
  the king recognized him for the selfsame man whom he had seen in the
  stars as the destined husband of his daughter. Then Solomon rejoiced with
  exceeding joy and exclaimed, Blessed is the Omnipresent who giveth a wife
  to man and establisheth him in his house.”
The moral of which seems to be that, though marriages are made in Heaven,
love must be made on earth.
Continue...

This complete e-book of “The Book of Delight and Other Papers"
by Israel Abrahams, M.A. (author of “Jewish Life in the Middle Ages,” “Chapters on Jewish Literature,” etc. – 1912)
is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
