


Joseph Zabara has only in recent times received the consideration justly
due to him. Yet his “Book of Delight,” finished about the year 1200, is
more than a poetical romance. It is a golden link between folk-literature
and imaginative poetry. The style is original, and the framework of the
story is an altogether fresh adaptation of a famous legend. The anecdotes
and epigrams introduced incidentally also partake of this twofold quality.
The author has made them his own, yet they are mostly adapted rather than
invented. Hence, the poem is as valuable to the folklorist as to the
literary critic. For, though Zabara’s compilation is similar to such
well-known models as the “Book of Sindbad,” the Kalilah ve-Dimnah, and
others of the same class, yet its appearance in Europe is half a century
earlier than the translations by which these other products of the East
became part of the popular literature of the Western world. At the least,
then, the “Book of Delight” is an important addition to the scanty store of
the folk-lore records of the early part of the thirteenth century. The
folk-lore interest of the book is, indeed, greater than was known formerly,
for it is now recognized as a variant of the Solomon-Marcolf legend. On
this more will be said below,
As a poet and as a writer of Hebrew, Joseph Zabara’s place is equally
significant. He was one of the first to write extended narratives in Hebrew
rhymed prose with interspersed snatches of verse, the form invented by
Arabian poets, and much esteemed as the medium for story-telling and for
writing social satire. The best and best-known specimens of this form of
poetry in Hebrew are Charizi’s Tachkemoni, and his translation of Hariri.
Zabara has less art than Charizi, and far less technical skill, yet in him
all the qualities are in the bud that Charizi’s poems present in the
fullblown flower. The reader of Zabara feels that other poets will develop
his style and surpass him; the reader of Charizi knows of a surety that in
him the style has reached its climax.
Of Joseph Zabara little is known beyond what may be gleaned from a
discriminating study of the “Book of Delight.” That this romance is largely
autobiographical in fact, as it is in form, there can be no reasonable
doubt. The poet writes with so much indignant warmth of the dwellers in
certain cities, of their manner of life, their morals, and their culture,
that one can only infer that he is relating his personal experiences.
Zabara, like the hero of his romance, travelled much during the latter
portion of the twelfth century, as is known from the researches of Geiger.
He was born in Barcelona, and returned there to die. In the interval, we
find him an apt pupil of Joseph Kimchi, in Narbonne. Joseph Kimchi, the
founder of the famous Kimchi family, carried the culture of Spain to
Provence; and Joseph Zabara may have acquired from Kimchi his mastery over
Hebrew, which he writes with purity and simplicity. The difficulties
presented in some passages of the “Book of Delight” are entirely due to the
corrupt state of the text. Joseph Kimchi, who flourished in Provence from
1150 to 1170, quotes Joseph Zabara twice, with approval, in explaining
verses in Proverbs. It would thus seem that Zabara, even in his student
days, was devoted to the proverb-lore on which he draws so lavishly in his
maturer work.
Dr. Steinschneider, to whom belongs the credit of rediscovering Zabara in
modern times, infers that the poet was a physician. There is more than
probability in the case; there is certainty. The romance is built by a
doctor; there is more talk of medicine in it than of any other topic of
discussion. Moreover, the author, who denies that he is much of a
Talmudist, accepts the compliment paid to him by his visitor, Enan, that he
is “skilled and well-informed in the science of medicine.” There is, too, a
professional tone about many of the quips and gibes in which Zabara
indulges concerning doctors. Here, for instance, is an early form of a
witticism that has been attributed to many recent humorists. “A
philosopher,” says Zabara, “was sick unto death, and his doctor gave him
up; yet the patient recovered. The convalescent was walking in the street
when the doctor met him. ’You come,’ said he, ’from the other world.’
’Yes,’ rejoined the patient, ’I come from there, and I saw there the awful
retribution that falls on doctors; for they kill their patients. Yet, do
not feel alarmed. You will not suffer. I told them on my oath that you are
no doctor.’”
Again, in one of the poetical interludes (found only in the Constantinople
edition) occurs this very professional sneer, “A doctor and the Angel of
Death both kill, but the former charges a fee.” Who but a doctor would
enter into a scathing denunciation of the current system of diagnosis, as
Zabara does in a sarcastic passage, which Erter may have imitated
unconsciously? And if further proof be needed that Zabara was a man of
science, the evidence is forthcoming; for Zabara appeals several times to
experiment in proof of his assertions. And to make assurance doubly sure,
the author informs his readers in so many words of his extensive medical
practice in his native place.
If Zabara be the author of the other, shorter poems that accompany the
“Book of Delight” in the Constantinople edition, though they are not
incorporated into the main work, we have a further indication that Zabara
was a medical man. There is a satirical introduction against the doctors
that slay a man before his time. The author, with mock timidity, explains
that he withholds his name, lest the medical profession turn its attention
to him with fatal results. “Never send for a doctor,” says the satirist,
“for one cannot expect a miracle to happen.” It is important, for our
understanding of another feature in Zabara’s work, to observe that his
invective, directed against the practitioners rather than the science of
medicine, is not more curious as coming from a medical man, than are the
attacks on women perpetrated by some Jewish poets (Zabara among them), who
themselves amply experienced, in their own and their community’s life, the
tender and beautiful relations that subsist between Jewish mother and son,
Jewish wife and husband.
The life of Joseph ben Meïr Zabara was not happy. He left Barcelona in
search of learning and comfort. He found the former, but the latter eluded
him. It is hard to say from the “Book of Delight” whether he was a
woman-hater, or not. On the one hand, he says many pretty things about
women. The moral of the first section of the romance is: Put your trust in
women; and the moral of the second section of the poem is: A good woman is
the best part of man. But, though this is so, Zabara does undoubtedly quote
a large number of stories full of point and sting, stories that tell of
women’s wickedness and infidelity, of their weakness of intellect and
fickleness of will. His philogynist tags hardly compensate for his
misogynist satires. He runs with the hare, but hunts energetically with the
hounds.
It is this characteristic of Zabara’s method that makes it open to doubt,
whether the additional stories referred to as printed with the
Constantinople edition did really emanate from our author’s pen. These
additions are sharply misogynist; the poet does not even attempt to blunt
their point. They include “The Widow’s Vow” (the widow, protesting undying
constancy to her first love, eagerly weds another) and “Woman’s
Contentions.” In the latter, a wicked woman is denounced with the wildest
invective. She has demoniac traits; her touch is fatal. A condemned
criminal is offered his life if he will wed a wicked woman. “O King,” he
cried, “slay me; for rather would I die once, than suffer many deaths every
day.” Again, once a wicked woman pursued a heroic man. He met some devils.
“What are you running from?” asked they. “From a wicked woman,” he
answered. The devils turned and ran away with him.
One rather longer story may be summarized thus: Satan, disguised in human
shape, met a fugitive husband, who had left his wicked wife. Satan told him
that he was in similar case, and proposed a compact. Satan would enter into
the bodies of men, and the other, pretending to be a skilful physician,
would exorcise Satan. They would share the profits. Satan begins on the
king, and the queen engages the confederate to cure the king within three
days, for a large fee, but in case of failure the doctor is to die. Satan
refuses to come out: his real plan is to get the doctor killed in this way.
The doctor obtains a respite, and collects a large body of musicians, who
make a tremendous din. Satan trembles. “What is that noise?” he asks. “Your
wife is coming,” says the doctor. Out sprang Satan and fled to the end of
the earth.
These tales and quips, it is true, are directed against “wicked” women, but
if Zabara really wrote them, it would be difficult to acquit him of
woman-hatred, unless the stories have been misplaced, and should appear, as
part of the “Book of Delight,” within the Leopard section, which rounds off
a series of unfriendly tales with a moral friendly to woman. In general,
Oriental satire directed against women must not be taken too seriously. As
Güdemann has shown, the very Jews that wrote most bitterly of women were
loud in praise of their own wives–the women whom alone they knew
intimately. Woman was the standing butt for men to hurl their darts at, and
one cannot help feeling that a good deal of the fun got its point from the
knowledge that the charges were exaggerated or untrue. You find the Jewish
satirists exhausting all their stores of drollery on the subject of
rollicking drunkenness. They roar till their sides creak over the humor of
the wine-bibber. They laugh at him and with him. They turn again and again
to the subject, which shares the empire with women in the Jewish poets. Yet
we know well enough that the writers of these Hebrew Anacreontic lyrics
were sober men, who rarely indulged in overmuch strong drink. In short, the
medieval Jewish satirists were gifted with much of what a little time ago
was foolishly styled “the new humor.” Joseph Zabara was a “new” humorist.
He has the quaint subtlety of the author of the “Ingoldsby Legends,” and
revelled in the exaggeration of trifles that is the stock-in-trade of the
modern funny man. Woman plays the part with the former that the
mother-in-law played a generation ago with the latter. In Zabara, again,
there is a good deal of mere rudeness, which the author seems to mistake
for cutting repartee. This, I take it, is another characteristic of the
so-called new humor.
The probable explanation of the marked divergence between Zabara’s stories
and the moral he draws from them lies, however, a little deeper. The
stories themselves are probably Indian in origin; hence they are marked by
the tone hostile to woman so characteristic of Indian folk-lore. On the
other hand, if Zabara himself was a friendly critic of woman, his own
moralizings in her favor are explained. This theory is not entirely upset
by the presence even of the additional stories, for these, too, are
translations, and Zabara cannot be held responsible for their contents. The
selection of good anecdotes was restricted in his day within very narrow
limits.
Yet Zabara’s reading must have been extensive. He knew something of
astronomy, philosophy, the science of physiognomy, music, mathematics, and
physics, and a good deal of medicine. He was familiar with Arabian
collections of proverbs and tales, for he informs his readers several times
that he is drawing on Arabic sources. He knew the “Choice of Pearls,” the
Midrashic “Stories of King Solomon,” the “Maxims of the Philosophers,” the
“Proverbs of the Wise"; but not “Sendabar” in its Hebrew form. His
acquaintance with the language of the Bible was thorough; but he makes one
or two blunders in quoting the substance of Scriptural passages. Though he
disclaimed the title of a Talmudic scholar, he was not ignorant of the
Rabbinic literature. Everyone quotes it: the fox, the woman, Enan, and the
author. He was sufficiently at home in this literature to pun therein. He
also knew the story of Tobit, but, as he introduces it as “a most
marvellous tale,” it is clear that this book of the Apocrypha was not
widely current in his day. The story, as Zabara tells it, differs
considerably from the Apocryphal version of it. The incidents are
misplaced, the story of the betrothal is disconnected from that of the
recovery of the money by Tobit, and the detail of the gallows occurs in no
other known text of the story. In one point, Zabara’s version strikingly
agrees with the Hebrew and Chaldee texts of Tobit as against the Greek;
Tobit’s son is not accompanied by a dog on his journey to recover his
father’s long-lost treasure.
One of the tales told by Zabara seems to imply a phenomenon of the
existence of which there is no other evidence. There seems to have been in
Spain a small class of Jews that were secret converts to Christianity. They
passed openly for Jews, but were in truth Christians. The motive for the
concealment is unexplained, and the whole passage may be merely satirical.
It remains for me to describe the texts now extant of the “Book of
Delight.” In 1865 the “Book of Delight” appeared, from a fifteenth century
manuscript in Paris, in the second volume of a Hebrew periodical called the
Lebanon. In the following year the late Senior Sachs wrote an
introduction to it and to two other publications, which were afterwards
issued together under the title Yen Lebanon (Paris, 1866). The editor was
aware of the existence of another text, but, strange to tell, he did not
perceive the need of examining it. Had he done this, his edition would have
been greatly improved. For the Bodleian Library possesses a copy of another
edition of the “Book of Delight,” undated, and without place of issue, but
printed in Constantinople, in 1577. One or two other copies of this edition
are extant elsewhere. The editor was Isaac Akrish, as we gather from a
marginal note to the version of Tobit given by Joseph Zabara. This Isaac
Akrish was a travelling bookseller, who printed interesting little books,
and hawked them about. Dr. Steinschneider points out that the date of Isaac
Akrish’s edition can be approximately fixed by the type. The type is that
of the Jaabez Press, established in Constantinople and Salonica in 1560.
This Constantinople edition is not only longer than the Paris edition, it
is, on the whole, more accurate. The verbal variations between the two
editions are extremely numerous, but the greater accuracy of the
Constantinople edition shows itself in many ways. The rhymes are much
better preserved, though the Paris edition is occasionally superior in this
respect. But many passages that are quite unintelligible in the Paris
edition are clear enough in the Constantinople edition.
The gigantic visitor of Joseph, the narrator, the latter undoubtedly the
author himself, is a strange being. Like the guide of Gil Bias on his
adventures, he is called a demon, and he glares and emits smoke and fire.
But he proves amenable to argument, and quotes the story of the
washerwoman, to show how it was that he became a reformed character. This
devil quotes the Rabbis, and is easily convinced that it is unwise for him
to wed an ignorant bride. It would seem as though Zabara were, on the one
hand, hurling a covert attack against some one who had advised him to leave
Barcelona to his own hurt, while, on the other hand, he is satirizing the
current beliefs of Jews and Christians in evil spirits. More than one
passage is decidedly anti-Christian, and it would not be surprising to find
that the framework of the romance had been adopted with polemic intention.
The character of the framework becomes more interesting when it is realized
that Zabara derived it from some version of the legends of which King
Solomon is the hero. The king had various adventures with a being more or
less demoniac in character, who bears several names: Asmodeus, Saturn,
Marcolf, or Morolf. That the model for Zabara’s visitor was Solomon’s
interlocutor, is not open to doubt. The Solomon legend occurs in many
forms, but in all Marcolf (or whatever other name he bears) is a keen
contester with the king in a battle of wits. No doubt, at first Marcolf
filled a serious, respectable rôle; in course of time, his character
degenerated into that of a clown or buffoon. It is difficult to summarize
the legend, it varies so considerably in the versions. Marcolf in the
best-known forms, which are certainly older than Zabara, is “right rude and
great of body, of visage greatly misshapen and foul.” Sometimes he is a
dwarf, sometimes a giant; he is never normal. He appears with his
counterpart, a sluttish wife, before Solomon, who, recognizing him as
famous for his wit and wisdom, challenges him to a trial of wisdom,
promising great rewards as the prize of victory. The two exchange a series
of questions and answers, which may be compared in spirit, though not in
actual content, with the questions and answers to be found in Zabara.
Marcolf succeeds in thoroughly tiring out the king, and though the
courtiers are for driving Marcolf off with scant courtesy, the king
interposes, fulfils his promise, and dismisses his adversary with gifts.
Marcolf leaves the court, according to one version, with the noble remark,
Ubi non est lex, ibi non est rex.
This does not exhaust the story, however. In another part of the legend, to
which, again, Zabara offers parallels, Solomon, being out hunting, comes
suddenly on Marcolf’s hut, and, calling upon him, receives a number of
riddling answers, which completely foil him, and tor the solution of which
he is compelled to have recourse to the proposer. He departs, however, in
good humor, desiring Marcolf to come to court the next day and bring a pail
of fresh milk and curds from the cow. Marcolf fails, and the king condemns
him to sit up all night in his company, threatening him with death in the
morning, should he fall asleep. This, of course, Marcolf does immediately,
and he snores aloud. Solomon asks, “Sleepest thou?"–And Marcolf replies,
“No, I think."–"What thinkest thou?"–"That there are as many vertebrae in
the hare’s tail as in his backbone."–The king, assured that he has now
entrapped his adversary, replies: “If thou provest not this, thou diest in
the morning!” Over and over again Marcolf snores, and is awakened by
Solomon, but he is always thinking. He gives various answers during the
night: There are as many white feathers as black in the magpie.–There is
nothing whiter than daylight, daylight is whiter than milk.–Nothing can be
safely entrusted to a woman.–Nature is stronger than education.
Next day Marcolf proves all his statements. Thus, he places a pan of milk
in a dark closet, and suddenly calls the king. Solomon steps into the milk,
splashes himself, and nearly falls. “Son of perdition! what does this
mean?” roars the monarch. “May it please Your Majesty,” says Marcolf,
“merely to show you that milk is not whiter than daylight.” That nature is
stronger than education, Marcolf proves by throwing three mice, one after
the other, before a cat trained to hold a lighted candle in its paws during
the king’s supper; the cat drops the taper, and chases the mice. Marcolf
further enters into a bitter abuse of womankind, and ends by inducing
Solomon himself to join in the diatribe. When the king perceives the trick,
he turns Marcolf out of court, and eventually orders him to be hanged. One
favor is granted to him: he may select his own tree. Marcolf and his guards
traverse the valley of Jehoshaphat, pass to Jericho over Jordan, through
Arabia and the Red Sea, but “never more could Marcolf find a tree that he
would choose to hang on.” By this device, Marcolf escapes from Solomon’s
hands, returns home, and passes the rest of his days in peace.
The legend, no doubt Oriental in origin, enjoyed popularity in the Middle
Ages largely because it became the frame into which could be placed
collections of proverbial lore. Hence, as happened also with the legend of
the Queen of Sheba and her riddles, the versions vary considerably as to
the actual content of the questions and answers bandied between Solomon and
Marcolf. In the German and English versions, the proverbs and wisdom are
largely Teutonic; in Zabara they are Oriental, and, in particular, Arabic.
Again, Marcolf in the French version of Mauclerc is much more completely
the reviler of woman. Mauclerc wrote almost contemporaneously with Zabara
(about 1216-1220, according to Kemble). But, on the other hand, Mauclerc
has no story, and his Marcolf is a punning clown rather than a cunning
sage. Marcolf, who is Solomon’s brother in a German version, has no trust
in a woman even when dead. So, in another version, Marcolf is at once
supernaturally cunning, and extremely skeptical as to the morality and
constancy of woman. But it is unnecessary to enter into the problem more
closely. Suffice it to have established that in Zabara’s “Book of Delight"
we have a hitherto unsuspected adaptation of the Solomon-Marcolf legend.
Zabara handles the legend with rare originality, and even ventures to cast
himself for the title rôle in place of the wisest of kings.
In the summary of the book which follows, the rhymed prose of the original
Hebrew is reproduced only in one case. This form of poetry is unsuited to
the English language. What may have a strikingly pleasing effect in
Oriental speech, becomes, in English, indistinguishable from doggerel. I
have not translated at full length, but I have endeavored to render Zabara
accurately, without introducing thoughts foreign to him.
I have not thought it necessary to give elaborate parallels to Zabara’s
stories, nor to compare minutely the various details of the Marcolf legend
with Zabara’s poem. On the whole, it may be said that the parallel is
general rather than specific. I am greatly mistaken, however, if the
collection of stories that follows does not prove of considerable interest
to those engaged in the tracking of fables to their native lairs. Here, in
Zabara, we have an earlier instance than was previously known in Europe, of
an intertwined series of fables and witticisms, partly Indian, partly
Greek, partly Semitic, in origin, welded together by the Hebrew poet by
means of a framework. The use of the framework by a writer in Europe in the
year 1200 is itself noteworthy. And when it is remembered what the
framework is, it becomes obvious that the “Book of Delight” occupies a
unique position in medieval literature.
Once on a night, I, Joseph, lay upon my bed; sleep was sweet upon me, my
  one return for all my toil. Things there are which weary the soul and
  rest the body, others that weary the body and rest the soul, but sleep
  brings calm to the body and the soul at once.... While I slept, I dreamt;
  and a gigantic but manlike figure appeared before me, rousing me from my
  slumber. “Arise, thou sleeper, rouse thyself and see the wine while it is
  red; come, sit thee down and eat of what I provide.” It was dawn when I
  hastily rose, and I saw before me wine, bread, and viands; and in the
  man’s hand was a lighted lamp, which cast a glare into every corner. I
  said, “What are these, my master?” “My wine, my bread, my viands; come,
  eat and drink with me, for I love thee as one of my mother’s sons.” And I
  thanked him, but protested: “I cannot eat or drink till I have prayed to
  the Orderer of all my ways; for Moses, the choice of the prophets, and
  the head of those called, hath ordained, ’Eat not with the blood’;
  therefore no son of Israel will eat until he prays for his soul, for the
  blood is the soul....”
Then said he, “Pray, if such be thy wish"; and I bathed my hands and
  face, and prayed. Then I ate of all that was before me, for my soul loved
  him.... Wine I would not drink, though he pressed me sore. “Wine,” I
  said, “blindeth the eyes, robbeth the old of wisdom and the body of
  strength, it revealeth the secrets of friends, and raiseth dissension
  between brothers.” The man’s anger was roused. “Why blasphemest thou
  against wine, and bearest false witness against it? Wine bringeth joy;
  sorrow and sighing fly before it. It strengtheneth the body, maketh the
  heart generous, prolongeth pleasure, and deferreth age; faces it maketh
  shine, and the senses it maketh bright.”
“Agreed, but let thy servant take the water first, as the ancient
  physicians advise; later I will take the wine, a little, without water.”
When I had eaten and drunk with him, I asked for his name and his
  purpose. “I come,” said he, “from a distant land, from pleasant and
  fruitful hills, my wisdom is as thine, my laws as thine, my name Enan
  Hanatash, the son of Arnan ha-Desh.” I was amazed at the name, unlike any
  I had ever heard. “Come with me from this land, and I will tell thee all
  my secret lore; leave this spot, for they know not here thy worth and thy
  wisdom. I will take thee to another place, pleasant as a garden, peopled
  by loving men, wise above all others.” But I answered: “My lord, I cannot
  go. Here are many wise and friendly; while I live, they bear me on the
  wing of their love; when I die, they will make my death sweet.... I fear
  thee for thy long limbs, and in thy face I see, clear-cut, the marks of
  unworthiness; I fear thee, and I will not be thy companion, lest there
  befall me what befell the leopard with the fox.” And I told him the
  story.
In this manner, illustrative tales are introduced throughout the poem.
Zabara displays rare ingenuity in fitting the illustrations into his
framework. He proceeds:
A leopard once lived in content and plenty; ever he found easy sustenance
  for his wife and children. Hard by there dwelt his neighbor and friend,
  the fox. The fox felt in his heart that his life was safe only so long as
  the leopard could catch other prey, and he planned out a method for
  ridding himself of this dangerous friendship. Before the evil cometh, say
  the wise, counsel is good. “Let me move him hence,” thought the fox; “I
  will lead him to the paths of death; for the sages say, ’If one come to
  slay thee, be beforehand with him, and slay him instead.’” Next day the
  fox went to the leopard, and told him of a spot he had seen, a spot of
  gardens and lilies, where fawns and does disported themselves, and
  everything was fair. The leopard went with him to behold this paradise,
  and rejoiced with exceeding joy. “Ah,” thought the fox, “many a smile
  ends in a tear.” But the leopard was charmed, and wished to move to this
  delightful abode; “but, first,” said he, “I will go to consult my wife,
  my lifelong comrade, the bride of my youth.” The fox was sadly
  disconcerted. Full well he knew the wisdom and the craft of the leopard’s
  wife. “Nay,” said he, “trust not thy wife. A woman’s counsel is evil and
  foolish, her heart hard like marble; she is a plague in a house. Yes, ask
  her advice, and do the opposite.”.... The leopard told his wife that he
  was resolved to go. “Beware of the fox,” she exclaimed; “two small
  animals there are, the craftiest they, by far–the serpent and the fox.
  Hast thou not heard how the fox bound the lion and slew him with
  cunning?” “How did the fox dare,” asked the leopard, “to come near enough
  to the lion to do it?”
The wife than takes up the parable, and cites the incident of
Then said the leopard’s wife: The lion loved the fox, but the fox had no
  faith in him, and plotted his death. One day the fox went to the lion
  whining that a pain had seized him in the head. “I have heard,” said the
  fox, “that physicians prescribe for a headache, that the patient shall be
  tied up hand and foot.” The lion assented, and bound up the fox with a
  cord. “Ah,” blithely said the fox, “my pain is gone.” Then the lion
  loosed him. Time passed, and the lion’s turn came to suffer in his head.
  In sore distress he went to the fox, fast as a bird to the snare, and
  exclaimed, “Bind me up, brother, that I, too, may be healed, as happened
  with thee.” The fox took fresh withes, and bound the lion up. Then he
  went to fetch great stones, which he cast on the lion’s head, and thus
  crushed him. “Therefore, my dear leopard,” concluded his wife, “trust not
  the fox, for I fear him and his wiles. If the place he tells of be so
  fair, why does not the fox take it for himself?” “Nay,” said the leopard,
  “thou art a silly prattler. I have often proved my friend, and there is
  no dross in the silver of his love.”
The leopard would not hearken to his wife’s advice, yet he was somewhat
moved by her warning, and he told the fox of his misgiving, adding, that
his wife refused to accompany him. “Ah,” replied the fox, “I fear your fate
will be like the silversmith’s; let me tell you his story, and you will
know how silly it is to listen to a wife’s counsel.”
A silversmith of Babylon, skilful in his craft, was one day at work.
  “Listen to me,” said his wife, “and I will make thee rich and honored.
  Our lord, the king, has an only daughter, and he loves her as his life.
  Fashion for her a silver image of herself, and I will bear it to her as a
  gift.” The statue was soon made, and the princess rejoiced at seeing it.
  She gave a cloak and earrings to the artist’s wife, and she showed them
  to her husband in triumph. “But where is the wealth and the honor?” he
  asked. “The statue was worth much more than thou hast brought.” Next day
  the king saw the statue in his daughter’s hand, and his anger was
  kindled. “Is it not ordered,” he cried, “that none should make an image?
  Cut off his right hand.” The king’s command was carried out, and daily
  the smith wept, and exclaimed, “Take warning from me, ye husbands, and
  obey not the voice of your wives.”
The leopard shuddered when he heard this tale; but the fox went on:
A hewer of wood in Damascus was cutting logs, and his wife sat spinning
  by his side. “My departed father,” she said, “was a better workman than
  thou. He could chop with both hands: when the right hand was tired, he
  used the left.” “Nay,” said he, “no woodcutter does that, he uses his
  right hand, unless he be a left-handed man.” “Ah, my dear,” she
  entreated, “try and do it as my father did.” The witless wight raised his
  left hand to hew the wood, but struck his right-hand thumb instead.
  Without a word he took the axe and smote her on the head, and she died.
  His deed was noised about; the woodcutter was seized and stoned for his
  crime. Therefore, continued the fox, I say unto thee, all women are
  deceivers and trappers of souls. And let me tell you more of these wily
  stratagems.
The fox reinforces his argument by relating an episode in which a contrast
is drawn between
A king of the Arabs, wise and well-advised, was one day seated with his
  counsellors, who were loud in the praise of women, lauding their virtues
  and their wisdom. “Cut short these words,” said the king. “Never since
  the world began has there been a good woman. They love for their own
  ends.” “But,” pleaded his sages, “O King, thou art hasty. Women there
  are, wise and faithful and spotless, who love their husbands and tend
  their children.” “Then,” said the king, “here is my city before you:
  search it through, and find one of the good women of whom you speak."
  They sought, and they found a woman, chaste and wise, fair as the moon
  and bright as the sun, the wife of a wealthy trader; and the counsellors
  reported about her to the king. He sent for her husband, and received him
  with favor. “I have something for thy ear,” said the king. “I have a good
  and desirable daughter: she is my only child; I will not give her to a
  king or a prince: let me find a simple, faithful man, who will love her
  and hold her in esteem. Thou art such a one; thou shalt have her. But
  thou art married: slay thy wife to-night, and to-morrow thou shalt wed my
  daughter.” “I am unworthy,” pleaded the man, “to be the shepherd of thy
  flock, much less the husband of thy daughter.” But the king would take no
  denial. “But how shall I kill my wife? For fifteen years she has eaten of
  my bread and drunk of my cup. She is the joy of my heart; her love and
  esteem grow day by day.” “Slay her,” said the king, “and be king
  hereafter.” He went forth from the presence, downcast and sad, thinking
  over, and a little shaken by, the king’s temptation. At home he saw his
  wife and his two babes. “Better,” he cried, “is my wife than a kingdom.
  Cursed be all kings who tempt men to sip sorrow, calling it joy.” The
  king waited his coming in vain; and then he sent messengers to the man’s
  shop. When he found that the man’s love had conquered his lust, he said,
  with a sneer, “Thou art no man: thy heart is a woman’s.”
In the evening the king summoned the woman secretly. She came, and the
  king praised her beauty and her wisdom. His heart, he said, was burning
  with love for her, but he could not wed another man’s wife. “Slay thy
  husband to-night, and tomorrow be my queen.” With a smile, the woman
  consented; and the king gave her a sword made of tin, for he knew the
  weak mind of woman. “Strike once,” he said to her; “the sword is sharp;
  you need not essay a second blow.” She gave her husband a choice repast,
  and wine to make him drunken. As he lay asleep, she grasped the sword and
  struck him on the head; and the tin bent, and he awoke. With some ado she
  quieted him, and he fell asleep again. Next morning the king summoned
  her, and asked whether she had obeyed his orders. “Yes,” said she, “but
  thou didst frustrate thine own counsel.” Then the king assembled his
  sages, and bade her tell all that she had attempted; and the husband,
  too, was fetched, to tell his story. “Did I not tell you to cease your
  praises of women?” asked the king, triumphantly.
The fox follows up these effective narratives with a lengthy string of
well-worn quotations against women, of which the following are a few:
Socrates, the wise and saintly, hated and despised them. His wife was thin
and short. They asked him, “How could a man like you choose such a woman
for your wrife?” “I chose,” said Socrates, “of the evil the least possible
amount.” “Why, then, do you look on beautiful women?” “Neither,” said
Socrates, “from love nor from desire, but to admire the handiwork of God in
their outward form. It is within that they are foul.” Once he was walking
by the way, and he saw a woman hanging from a fig-tree. “Would,” said
Socrates, “that all the fruit were like this."–A nobleman built a new
house, and wrote over the door, “Let nothing evil pass this way.” “Then how
does his wife go in?” asked Diogenes.–"Your enemy is dead,” said one to
another. “I would rather hear that he had got married,” was the reply.
“So much,” said the fox to the leopard, “I have told thee that thou mayest
know how little women are to be trusted. They deceive men in life, and
betray them in death.” “But,” queried the leopard, “what could my wife do
to harm me after I am dead?” “Listen,” rejoined the fox, “and I will tell
thee of a deed viler than any I have narrated hitherto.”
The kings of Rome, when they hanged a man, denied him burial until the
  tenth day. That the friends and relatives of the victim might not steal
  the body, an officer of high rank was set to watch the tree by night. If
  the body was stolen, the officer was hung up in its place. A knight of
  high degree once rebelled against the king, and he was hanged on a tree.
  The officer on guard was startled at midnight to hear a piercing shriek
  of anguish from a little distance; he mounted his horse, and rode towards
  the voice, to discover the meaning. He came to an open grave, where the
  common people were buried, and saw a weeping woman loud in laments for
  her departed spouse. He sent her home with words of comfort, accompanying
  her to the city gate. He then returned to his post. Next night the same
  scene was repeated, and as the officer spoke his gentle soothings to her,
  a love for him was born in her heart, and her dead husband was forgotten.
  And as they spoke words of love, they neared the tree, and lo! the body
  that the officer was set to watch was gone. “Begone,” he said, “and I
  will fly, or my life must pay the penalty of my dalliance.” “Fear not, my
  lord,” she said, “we can raise my husband from his grave and hang him
  instead of the stolen corpse.” “But I fear the Prince of Death. I cannot
  drag a man from his grave.” “I alone will do it then,” said the woman; “I
  will dig him out; it is lawful to cast a dead man from the grave, to keep
  a live man from being thrown in.” “Alas!” cried the officer, when she had
  done the fearsome deed, “the corpse I watched was bald, your husband has
  thick hair; the change will be detected.” “Nay,” said the woman, “I will
  make him bald,” and she tore his hair out, with execrations, and they
  hung him on the tree. But a few days passed and the pair were married.
And now the leopard interlude nears it close. Zabara narrates the
dénouement in these terms:
The leopard’s bones rattled while he listened to this tale. Angrily he
  addressed his wife, “Come, get up and follow me, or I will slay thee."
  Together they went with their young ones, and the fox was their guide,
  and they reached the promised place, and encamped by the waters. The fox
  bade them farewell, his head laughing at his tail. Seven days were gone,
  when the rains descended, and in the deep of the night the river rose and
  engulfed the leopard family in their beds. “Woe is me,” sighed the
  leopard, “that I did not listen to my wife.” And he died before his time.
The author has now finished his protest against his visitor’s design, to
make him join him on a roving expedition. Enan glares, and asks, “Am I a
fox, and thou a leopard, that I should fear thee?” Then his note changes,
and his tone becomes coaxing and bland. Joseph cannot resist his
fascination. Together they start, riding on their asses. Then says Enan
unto Joseph, “Carry thou me, or I will carry thee.” “But,” continues the
narrator, Joseph, “we were both riding on our asses. ’What dost thou mean?
Our asses carry us both. Explain thy words.’–’It is the story of the
peasant with the king’s officer.’”
A king with many wives dreamt that he saw a monkey among them; his face
  fell, and his spirit was troubled. “This is none other,” said he, “than a
  foreign king, who will invade my realm, and take my harem for his spoil."
  One of his officers told the king of a clever interpreter of dreams, and
  the king despatched him to find out the meaning of his ominous vision. He
  set forth on his mule, and met a countryman riding. “Carry me,” said the
  officer, “or I will carry thee.” The peasant was amazed. “But our asses
  carry us both,” he said. “Thou tiller of the earth,” said the officer,
  “thou art earth, and eatest earth. There is snow on the hill,” continued
  the officer, and as the month was Tammuz, the peasant laughed. They
  passed a road with wheat growing on each side. “A horse blind in one eye
  has passed here,” said the officer, “loaded with oil on one side, and
  with vinegar on the other.” They saw a field richly covered with
  abounding corn, and the peasant praised it. “Yes,” said the officer, “if
  the corn is not already eaten.” They went on a little further and saw a
  lofty tower. “Well fortified,” remarked the peasant. “Fortified without,
  if not ruined within,” replied the officer. A funeral passed them. “As to
  this old man whom they are burying,” said the officer, “I cannot tell
  whether he is alive or dead.” And the peasant thought his companion mad
  to make such unintelligible remarks. They neared a village where the
  peasant lived, and he invited the officer to stay with him overnight.
The peasant, in the dead of the night, told his wife and daughters of the
  foolish things the officer had said, though he looked quite wise. “Nay,"
  said the peasant’s youngest daughter, a maiden of fifteen years, “the man
  is no fool; thou didst not comprehend the depth of his meaning. The
  tiller of the earth eats food grown from the earth. By the ’snow on the
  hill’ is meant thy white beard (on thy head); thou shouldst have
  answered, ’Time caused it.’ The horse blind in one eye he knew had
  passed, because he saw that the wheat was eaten on one side of the way,
  and not on the other; and as for its burden, he saw that the vinegar had
  parched the dust, while the oil had not. His saying, ’Carry me, or I will
  carry thee,’ signifies that he who beguiles the way with stories and
  proverbs and riddles, carries his companion, relieving him from the
  tedium of the journey. The corn of the field you passed,” continued the
  girl, “was already eaten if the owner was poor, and had sold it before it
  was reaped. The lofty and stately tower was in ruins within, if it was
  without necessary stores. About the funeral, too, his remark was true. If
  the old man left a son, he was still alive; if he was childless, he was,
  indeed, dead.”
In the morning, the girl asked her father to give the officer the food
  she would prepare. She gave him thirty eggs, a dish full of milk, and a
  whole loaf. “Tell me,” said she, “how many days old the month is; is the
  moon new, and the sun at its zenith?” Her father ate two eggs, a little
  of the loaf, and sipped some of the milk, and gave the rest to the
  officer. “Tell thy daughter,” he said, “the sun is not full, neither is
  the moon, for the month is two days old.” “Ah,” laughed the peasant, as
  he told his daughter the answers of the officer, “ah, my girl, I told you
  he was a fool, for we are now in the middle of the month.” “Did you eat
  anything of what I gave you?” asked the girl of her father. And he told
  her of the two eggs, the morsel of bread, and the sip of milk that he had
  taken. “Now I know,” said the girl, “of a surety that the man is very
  wise.” And the officer, too, felt that she was wise, and so he told her
  the king’s dream. She went back with him to the king, for she told the
  officer that she could interpret the vision, but would do so only to the
  king in person, not through a deputy. “Search thy harem,” said the girl,
  “and thou wilt find among thy women a man disguised in female garb.” He
  searched, and found that her words were true. The man was slain, and the
  women, too, and the peasant’s daughter became the king’s sole queen, for
  he never took another wife besides her.
Thus Joseph and the giant Enan journey on, and they stay overnight in a
village inn. Then commences a series of semi-medical wrangles, which fill
up a large portion of the book. Joseph demands food and wine, and Enan
gives him a little of the former and none of the latter. “Be still,” says
Enan, “too much food is injurious to a traveller weary from the way. But
you cannot be so very hungry, or you would fall to on the dry bread. But
wine with its exciting qualities is bad for one heated by a long day’s
ride.” Even their asses are starved, and Joseph remarks sarcastically,
“Tomorrow it will be, indeed, a case of carry-thou-me-or-I-thee, for our
asses will not be able to bear us.” They sleep on the ground, without couch
or cover. At dawn Enan rouses him, and when he sees that his ass is still
alive, he exclaims, “Man and beast thou savest, O Lord!” The ass, by the
way, is a lineal descendant of Balaam’s animal.
They proceed, and the asses nod and bow as though they knew how to pray.
Enan weeps as they near a town. “Here,” says he, “my dear friend died, a
man of wisdom and judgment. I will tell thee a little of his cleverness.”
A man once came to him crying in distress. His only daughter was
  betrothed to a youth, and the bridegroom and his father came to the
  bride’s house on the eve of the wedding, to view her ornaments and
  beautiful clothes. When the bride’s parents rose next day, everything had
  vanished, jewels and trousseau together. They were in despair, for they
  had lavished all their possessions on their daughter. My friend
  [continued Enan] went back with the man to examine the scene of the
  robbery. The walls of the house were too high to scale. He found but one
  place where entry was possible, a crevice in a wall in which an orange
  tree grew, and its edge was covered with thorns and prickles. Next door
  lived a musician, Paltiel ben Agan [or Adan] by name, and my late friend,
  the judge, interviewed him, and made him strip. His body was covered with
  cuts and scratches; his guilt was discovered, and the dowry returned to
  the last shoe-latchet. “My son,” said he, “beware of singers, for they
  are mostly thieves; trust no word of theirs, for they are liars; they
  dally with women, and long after other people’s money. They fancy they
  are clever, but they know not their left hand from their right; they
  raise their hands all day and call, but know not to whom. A singer stands
  at his post, raised above all other men, and he thinks he is as lofty as
  his place. He constantly emits sounds, which mount to his brain, and dry
  it up; hence he is so witless.”
Then Enan tells Joseph another story of his friend the judge’s sagacity:
A man lived in Cordova, Jacob by name, the broker; he was a man of tried
  honesty. Once a jewelled necklet was entrusted to him for sale by the
  judge, the owner demanding five hundred pieces of gold as its price.
  Jacob had the chain in his hand when he met a nobleman, one of the king’s
  intimate friends. The nobleman offered four hundred pieces for the
  necklet, which Jacob refused. “Come with me to my house, and I will
  consider the price,” said the would-be purchaser. The Jew accompanied him
  home, and the nobleman went within. Jacob waited outside the gate till
  the evening, but no one came out. He passed a sleepless night with his
  wife and children, and next morning returned to the nobleman. “Buy the
  necklace,” said he, “or return it.” The nobleman denied all knowledge of
  the jewels, so Jacob went to the judge. He sent for the nobles, to
  address them as was his wont, and as soon as they had arrived, he said to
  the thief’s servant, “Take your master’s shoe and go to his wife. Show
  the shoe and say, Your lord bids me ask you for the necklace he bought
  yesterday, as he wishes to exhibit its beauty to his friends.” The wife
  gave the servant the ornament, the theft was made manifest, and it was
  restored to its rightful owner.
And Enan goes on:
A merchant of measureless wealth had an only son, who, when he grew up,
  said, “Father, send me on a voyage, that I may trade and see foreign
  lands, and talk with men of wisdom, to learn from their words.” The
  father purchased a ship, and sent him on a voyage, with much wealth and
  many friends. The father was left at home with his slave, in whom he put
  his trust, and who filled his son’s place in position and affection.
  Suddenly a pain seized him in the heart, and he died without directing
  how his property was to be divided. The slave took possession of
  everything; no one in the town knew whether he was the man’s slave or his
  son. Ten years passed, and the real son returned, with his ship laden
  with wealth. As they approached the harbor, the ship was wrecked. They
  had cast everything overboard, in a vain effort to save it; finally, the
  crew and the passengers were all thrown into the sea. The son reached the
  shore destitute, and returned to his father’s house; but the slave drove
  him away, denying his identity. They went before the judge. “Find the
  loathly merchant’s grave,” he said to the slave, “and bring me the dead
  man’s bones. I shall burn them for his neglect to leave a will, thus
  rousing strife as to his property.” The slave started to obey, but the
  son stayed him. “Keep all,” said he, “but disturb not my father’s bones."
  “Thou art the son,” said the judge; “take this other as thy lifelong
  slave.”
Joseph and Enan pass to the city of Tobiah. At the gate they are accosted
by an old and venerable man, to whom they explain that they have been on
the way for seven days. He invites them to his home, treats them
hospitably, and after supper tells them sweet and pleasant tales, “among
his words an incident wonderful to the highest degree.” This wonderful
story is none other than a distorted version of the Book of Tobit. I have
translated this in full, and in rhymed prose, as a specimen of the
original.
Here, in the days of the saints of old, in the concourse of elders of age
  untold, there lived a man upright and true, in all his doings good
  fortune he knew. Rich was he and great, his eyes looked ever straight:
  Tobiah, the son of Ahiah, a man of Dan, helped the poor, to each gave of
  his store; whene’er one friendless died, the shroud he supplied, bore the
  corpse to the grave, nor thought his money to save. The men of the place,
  a sin-ruled race, slandering, cried, “O King, these Jewish knaves open
  our graves! Our bones they burn, into charms to turn, health to earn."
  The king angrily spoke: “I will weighten their yoke, and their villainy
  repay; all the Jews who, from to-day, die in this town, to the pit take
  down, to the pit hurry all, without burial. Who buries a Jew, the hour
  shall rue; bitter his pang, on the gallows shall he hang.” Soon a
  sojourner did die, and no friends were by; but good Tobiah the corpse did
  lave, and dress it for the grave. Some sinners saw the deed, to the judge
  the word they gave, who Tobiah’s death decreed. Forth the saint they
  draw, to hang him as by law. But now they near the tree, lo! no man can
  see, a blindness falls on all, and Tobiah flies their thrall. Many
  friends his loss do weep, but homewards he doth creep, God’s mercies to
  narrate, and his own surprising fate, “Praise ye the Lord, dear friends,
  for His mercy never ends, and to His servants good intends.” Fear the
  king distressed, his heart beat at his breast, new decrees his fear
  expressed. “Whoe’er a Jew shall harm,” the king cried in alarm, “touching
  his person or personalty, touches the apple of my eye; let no man do this
  wrong, or I’ll hang him ’mid the throng, high though his rank, and his
  lineage long.” And well he kept his word, he punished those who erred;
  but on the Jews his mercies shone, the while he rilled the throne.
Once lay the saint at rest, and glanced upon the nest of a bird within
  his room. Ah! cruel was his doom! Into his eye there went the sparrow’s
  excrement. Tobiah’s sight was gone! He had an only son, whom thus he now
  addressed: “When business ventures pressed, I passed from clime to clime.
  Well I recall the time, when long I dwelt in Ind, of wealth full stores
  to find. But perilous was the road, and entrusted I my load with one of
  honest fame, Peër Hazeman his name. And now list, beloved son, go out and
  hire thee one, thy steps forthwith to guide unto my old friend’s side. I
  know his love’s full stream, his trust he will redeem; when heareth he my
  plight, when seeth he thy sight, then will he do the right.” The youth
  found whom he sought, a man by travel taught, the ways of Ind he knew; he
  knew them through and through, he knew them up and down, as a townsman
  knows his town. He brought him to his sire, who straightway did inquire,
  “Knowest thou an Indian spot, a city named Tobot?"–"Full well I know the
  place, I spent a two years’ space in various enterprise; its people all
  are wise, and honest men and true."–"What must I give to you,” asked
  Tobiah of his guest,” to take my son in quest?"–"Of pieces pure of
  gold, full fifty must be told."–"I’ll pay you that with joy; start forth
  now with my boy.” A script the son did write, which Tobiah did indite,
  and on his son bestow a sign his friend would know. The father kissed his
  son, “In peace,” said he, “get gone; may God my life maintain till thou
  art come again.” The youth and guide to Tobot hied, and reached anon Peër
  Hazeman. “Why askest thou my name?” Straight the answer came, “Tobiah is
  my sire, and he doth inquire of thy health and thy household’s.” Then the
  letter he unfolds. The contents Peër espies, every doubt flies, he
  regards the token with no word spoken. “’Tis the son of my friend, who
  greeting thus doth send. Is it well with him? Say."–"Well, well with him
  alway."–"Then dwell thou here a while, and hours sweet beguile with the
  tales which thou wilt tell of him I loved so well."–"Nay, I must
  forthwith part to soothe my father’s heart. I am his only trust, return
  at once I must.” Peër Hazeman agrees the lad to release; gives him all
  his father’s loan, and gifts adds of his own, raiment and two slaves. To
  music’s pleasant staves, the son doth homeward wend. By the shore of the
  sea went the lad full of glee, and the wind blew a blast, and a fish was
  upward cast. Then hastened the guide to ope the fish’s side, took the
  liver and the gall, for cure of evil’s thrall: liver to give demons
  flight, gall to restore men’s sight. The youth begged his friend these
  specifics to lend, then went he on his way to where his sick sire lay.
  Then spake the youth to his father all the truth. “Send not away the
  guide without pay.” The son sought the man, through the city he ran, but
  the man had disappeared. Said Tobiah, “Be not afeared, ’twas Elijah the
  seer, whom God sent here to stand by our side, our needs to provide.” He
  bathed both his eyes with the gall of the prize, and his sight was
  restored by the grace of the Lord.
Then said he to his son, “Now God His grace has shown, dost thou not
  yearn to do a deed in turn? My niece forthwith wed."–"But her husbands
  three are dead, each gave up his life as each made her his wife; to her
  shame and to her sorrow, they survived not to the morrow."–"Nay, a demon
  is the doer of this harm to every wooer. My son, obey my wish, take the
  liver of the fish, and burn it in full fume, at the door of her
  room,’twill give the demon his doom.” At his father’s command, with his
  life in his hand, the youth sought the maid, and wedded her unafraid. For
  long timid hours his prayer Tobiah pours; but the incense was alight, the
  demon took to flight, and safe was all the night. Long and happily wed,
  their lives sweetly sped.
Their entertainer tells Joseph and Enan another story of piety connected
with the burial of the dead:
Once upon a time there lived a saintly man, whose abode was on the way to
  the graveyard. Every funeral passed his door, and he would ever rise and
  join in the procession, and assist those engaged in the burial. In his
  old age his feet were paralyzed, and he could not leave his bed; the dead
  passed his doors, and he sighed that he could not rise to display his
  wonted respect. Then prayed he to the Lord: “O Lord, who givest eyes to
  the blind and feet to the lame, hear me from the corner of my sorrowful
  bed. Grant that when a pious man is borne to his grave, I may be able to
  rise to my feet.” An angel’s voice in a vision answered him, “Lo, thy
  prayer is heard.” And so, whenever a pious man was buried, he rose and
  prayed for his soul. On a day, there died one who had grown old in the
  world’s repute, a man of excellent piety, yet the lame man could not rise
  as his funeral passed. Next day died a quarrelsome fellow of ill fame for
  his notorious sins, and when his body was carried past the lame man’s
  door, the paralytic was able to stand. Every one was amazed, for hitherto
  the lame man’s rising or resting had been a gauge of the departed’s
  virtue. Two sage men resolved to get to the bottom of the mystery. They
  interviewed the wife of the fellow who had died second. The wife
  confirmed the worst account of him, but added: “He had an old father,
  aged one hundred years, and he honored and served him. Every day he
  kissed his hand, gave him drink, stripped and dressed him when, from old
  age, he could not turn himself on his couch; daily he brought ox and lamb
  bones, from which he drew the marrow, and made dainty foods of it.” And
  the people knew that honoring his father had atoned for his
  transgressions. Then the two inquisitors went to the house of the pious
  man, before whom the paralytic had been unable to rise. His widow gave
  him an excellent character; he was gentle and pious; prayed three times a
  day, and at midnight rose and went to a special chamber to say his
  prayers. No one had ever seen the room but himself, as he ever kept the
  key in his bosom. The two inquisitors opened the door of this chamber,
  and found a small box hidden in the window-sill; they opened the box, and
  found in it a golden figure bearing a crucifix. Thus the man had been one
  of those who do the deeds of Zimri, and expect the reward of Phineas.
Joseph and Enan then retire to rest, and their sleep is sweet and long. By
strange and devious ways they continue their journey on the morrow,
starting at dawn. Again they pass the night at the house of one of Enan’s
friends, Rabbi Judah, a ripe old sage and hospitable, who welcomes them
cordially, feeds them bountifully, gives them spiced dishes, wine of the
grape and the pomegranate, and then tells stories and proverbs “from the
books of the Arabs.”
A man said to a sage, “Thou braggest of thy wisdom, but it came from me."
  “Yes,” replied the sage, “and it forgot its way back."–Who is the worst
  of men? He who is good in his own esteem.–Said a king to a sage, “Sweet
  would be a king’s reign if it lasted forever.” “Had such been your
  predecessor’s lot,” replied the wise man, “how would you have reached the
  throne?"–A man laid a complaint before the king; the latter drove the
  suppliant out with violence. “I entered with one complaint,” sighed the
  man, “I leave with two."–What is style? Be brief and do not repeat
  yourself.–The king once visited a nobleman’s house, and asked the
  latter’s son, “Whose house is better, your father’s or mine?” “My
  father’s,” said the boy, “while the king is in it."–A king put on a new
  robe, which did not become him. “It is not good to wear,” said a
  courtier, “but it is good to put on.” The king put the robe on him.–A
  bore visited a sick man. “What ails thee?” he asked. “Thy presence,” said
  the sufferer.–A man of high lineage abused a wise man of lowly birth.
  “My lineage is a blot on me,” retorted a sage, “thou art a blot on thy
  lineage."–To another who reviled him for his lack of noble ancestry, he
  retorted, “Thy noble line ends with thee, with me mine begins."–Diogenes
  and Dives were attacked by robbers. “Woe is me,” said Dives, “if they
  recognize me.” “Woe is me,” said Diogenes, “if they do not recognize
  me."–A philosopher sat by the target at which the archers were shooting.
  “’Tis the safest spot,” said he.–An Arab’s brother died. “Why did he
  die?” one asked. “Because he lived,” was the answer.–"What hast thou
  laid up for the cold weather?” they asked a poor fellow. “Shivering,” he
  answered.–Death is the dread of the rich and the hope of the
  poor.–Which is the best of the beasts? Woman.–Hide thy virtues as thou
  hidest thy faults.–A dwarf brought a complaint to his king. “No one,"
  said the king, “would hurt such a pigmy.” “But,” retorted the dwarf, “my
  injurer is smaller than I am."–A dolt sat on a stone. “Lo, a blockhead
  on a block,” said the passers-by.–"What prayer make you by night?” they
  asked a sage. “Fear God by day, and by night you will sleep, not
  pray."–Rather a wise enemy than a foolish friend.–Not everyone who
  flees escapes, not everyone who begs has need.–A sage had weak eyes.
  “Heal them,” said they. “To see what?” he rejoined.–A fool quarrelled
  with a sage. Said the former, “For every word of abuse I hear from thee,
  I will retort ten.” “Nay,” replied the other, “for every ten words of
  abuse I hear from thee, I will not retort one."–An honest man cannot
  catch a thief.–All things grow with time except grief.–The character of
  the sent tells the character of the sender.–What is man’s best means of
  concealment? Speech.–"Why walkest thou so slowly?” asked the lad of the
  greybeard. “My years are a chain to my feet: and thy years are preparing
  thy chain."–Do not swallow poison because you know an antidote.–The
  king heard a woman at prayer. “O God,” she said, “remove this king from
  us.” “And put a better in his stead,” added the eavesdropping
  monarch.–Take measure for this life as though thou wilt live forever;
  prepare for the next world as though thou diest to-morrow.–"He will
  die,” said the doctor, but the patient recovered. “You have returned from
  the other world,” said the doctor when he met the man. “Yes,” said the
  latter, “and the doctors have a bad time there. But fear not. Thou art no
  doctor."–Three things weary: a lamp that will not burn, a messenger that
  dawdles, a table spread and waiting.
Then follows a string of sayings about threes:
Reason rules the body, wisdom is the pilot, law is its light. Might is
  the lion’s, burdens are the ox’s, wisdom is man’s; spinning the spider’s,
  building the bee’s, making stores the ant’s. In three cases lying is
  permissible: in war, in reconciling man to man, in appeasing one’s wife.
Their host concludes his lengthy list of sententious remarks thus:
A king had a signet ring, on which were engraved the words, “Thou hast
  bored me: rise!” and when a guest stayed too long, he showed the visitor
  the ring.-The heir of a wealthy man squandered his money, and a sage saw
  him eating bread and salted olives. “Hadst thou thought that this would
  be thy food, this would not be thy food."-Marry no widow. She will lament
  her first husband’s death.
This was the signal for the party to retire to rest.
Next day the wayfarers reach Enan’s own city, the place he had all along
desired Joseph to see. He shows Joseph his house; but the latter replies,
“I crave food, not sight-seeing.” “Surely,” says Enan, “the more hurry the
less speed.” At last the table is spread; the cloth is ragged, the dishes
contain unleavened bread, such as there is no pleasure in eating, and there
is a dish of herbs and vinegar. Then ensues a long wrangle, displaying much
medical knowledge, on the physiology of herbs and vegetables, on the eating
of flesh, much and fast. Enan makes sarcastic remarks on Joseph’s rapacious
appetite. He tells Joseph, he must not eat this or that. A joint of lamb is
brought on the table, Enan says the head is bad, and the feet, and the
flesh, and the fat; so that Joseph has no alternative but to eat it all. “I
fear that what happened to the king, will befall thee,” said Enan. “Let me
feed first,” said Joseph; “then you can tell me what happened to the king.”
A gardener came to his garden in the winter. It was the month of Tebet,
  and he found some roses in flower. He rejoiced at seeing them; and he
  plucked them, and put them on a precious dish, carried them to the king,
  and placed them before him. The king was surprised, and the flowers were
  goodly in his sight; and he gave the gardener one hundred pieces of gold.
  Then said the king in his heart, “To-day we will make merry, and have a
  feast.” All his servants and faithful ministers were invited to rejoice
  over the joy of the roses. And he sent for his only daughter, then with
  child; and she stretched forth her hand to take a rose, and a serpent
  that lay in the dish leapt at her and startled her, and she died before
  night.
But Joseph’s appetite was not to be stayed by such tales as this. So Enan
tells him of the “Lean Fox and the Hole"; but in vain. “Open not thy mouth
to Satan,” says Joseph. “I fear for my appetite, that it become smaller";
and goes on eating.
Now Enan tries another tack: he will question him, and put him through his
paces. But Joseph yawns and protests that he has eaten too much to keep his
eyes open.
“How canst thou sleep,” said Enan, “when thou hast eaten everything,
  fresh and stale? As I live, thou shalt not seek thy bed until I test thy
  wisdom-until I prove whether all this provender has entered the stomach
  of a wise man or a fool.”
Then follows an extraordinary string of anatomical, medical, scientific,
and Talmudic questions about the optic nerves; the teeth; why a man lowers
his head when thinking over things he has never known, but raises his head
when thinking over what he once knew but has forgotten; the physiology of
the digestive organs, the physiology of laughter; why a boy eats more than
a man; why it is harder to ascend a hill than to go down; why snow is
white; why babies have no teeth; why children’s first set of teeth fall
out; why saddest tears are saltest; why sea water is heavier than fresh;
why hail descends in summer; why the sages said that bastards are mostly
clever. To these questions, which Enan pours out in a stream, Joseph
readily gives answers. But now Enan is hoist with his own petard.
“I looked at him,” continues the poet, “and sleep entrapped his eyes, and
  his eyelids kissed the irides. Ah! I laughed in my heart. Now I will talk
  to him, and puzzle him as he has been puzzling me. He shall not sleep, as
  he would not let me sleep. ’My lord,’ said I, ’let me now question thee.’
  ’I am sleepy,’ said he, ’but ask on.’ ’What subject shall I choose?’ I
  said. ’Any subject,’ he replied; ’of all knowledge I know the half.’"
  Joseph asks him astronomical, musical, logical, arithmetical questions;
  to all of which Enan replies, “I do not know.” “But,” protests Joseph,
  “how couldst thou assert that thou knewest half of every subject, when it
  is clear thou knowest nothing?” “Exactly,” says Enan, “for Aristotle
  says, ’He who says, I do not know, has already attained the half of
  knowledge.’”
But he says he knows medicine; so Joseph proceeds to question him. Soon he
discovers that Enan is again deceiving him; and he abuses Enan roundly for
his duplicity.
Enan at length is moved to retort.
“I wonder at thy learning,” says Enan, “but more at thy appetite.” Then
  the lamp goes out, the servant falls asleep, and they are left in
  darkness till the morning. Then Joseph demands his breakfast, and goes
  out to see his ass. The ass attempts to bite Joseph, who strikes it, and
  the ass speaks. “I am one of the family of Balaam’s ass,” says the
  animal. “But I am not Balaam,” says Joseph, “to divine that thou hast
  eaten nothing all night.” The servant asserts that he fed the ass, but
  the animal had gobbled up everything, his appetite being equal to his
  owner’s. But Joseph will not believe this, and Enan is deeply hurt.
  “Peace!” he shouts, and his eyes shoot flames, and his nostrils distil
  smoke. “Peace, cease thy folly, or, as I live, and my ancestor Asmodeus,
  I will seize thee with my little finger, and will show thee the city of
  David.”
In timid tones Joseph asks him, “Who is this Asmodeus, thy kinsman?”
“Asmodeus,” said Enan, “the great prince who, on his wing, bore Solomon
  from his kingdom to a distant strand.” “Woe is me,” I moaned, “I thought
  thee a friend; now thou art a fiend. Why didst thou hide thy nature? Why
  didst thou conceal thy descent? Why hast thou taken me from my home in
  guile?” “Nay,” said Enan, “where was thy understanding? I gave thee my
  name, thou shouldst have inverted it” [i.e., transposeDesh to Shed.
  Enan at the beginning of the tale had announced himself as ha-Desh, he
  now explains that meant ha-Shed = the demon]. Then Enan gives his
  pedigree: “I am Enan, the Satan, son of Arnan the Demon, son of the Place
  of Death, son of Rage, son of Death’s Shadow, son of Terror, son of
  Trembling, son of Destruction, son of Extinction, son of Evil-name, son
  of Mocking, son of Plague, son of Deceit, son of Injury, son of
  Asmodeus.”
Nevertheless Enan quiets Joseph’s fears, and promises that no harm shall
befall him. He goes through Enan’s city, sees wizards and sorcerers, and
sinners and fools, all giants.
Then Enan introduces his own especial friend. “He is good and wise,” said
  Enan, “despite his tall stature. He shows his goodness in hating the wise
  and loving fools; he is generous, for he will give a beggar a crust of
  dry bread, and make him pay for it; he knows medicine, for he can tell
  that if a man is buried, he either has been sick, or has had an accident;
  he knows astronomy, for he can tell that it is day when the sun shines,
  and night when the stars appear; he knows arithmetic, for he can tell
  that one and one make two; he knows mensuration, for he can tell how many
  handbreadths his belly measures; he knows music, for he can tell the
  difference between the barking of a dog and the braying of an ass.” “But,
  said I,” continues Joseph, “how canst thou be the friend of such a one?
  Accursed is he, accursed his master.” “Nay,” answered Enan, “I love him
  not; I know his vile nature: ’tis his daughter that binds me to him, for
  she, with her raven locks and dove’s eyes and lily cheeks, is fair beyond
  my power to praise.” Yet I warned him against marrying the daughter of an
  uneducated man, an Am ha-Arez. Then follows a compilation of passages
  directed against ignorance. “Ah!” cries Enan, “your warning moves me. My
  love for her is fled. Thou fearest God and lovest me, my friend. What is
  a friend? One heart in two bodies. Then find me another wife, one who is
  beautiful and good. Worse than a plague is a bad woman. Listen to what
  once befell me with such a one.”
Thereupon Enan introduces the last of the stories incorporated into the
book:
Once upon a time, in my wanderings to and fro upon the earth, I came to a
  city whose inhabitants dwelt together, happy, prosperous, and secure. I
  made myself well acquainted with the place and the people, but, despite
  all my efforts, I was unable to entrap a single one. “This is no place
  for me,” I said, “I had better return to my own country.” I left the
  city, and, journeying on, came across a river, at the brink of which I
  seated myself. Scarcely had I done so, when a woman appeared bearing her
  garments to be washed in the river. She looked at me, and asked, “Art
  thou of the children of men or of demons?” “Well,” said I, “I have grown
  up among men, but I was born among demons.” “But what art thou after
  here?” “Ah,” I replied, “I have spent a whole month in yonder city. And
  what have I found? A city full of friends, enjoying every happiness in
  common. In vain have I tried to put a little of wickedness among them."
  Then the woman, with a supercilious air: “If I am to take thee for a
  specimen, I must have a very poor opinion of the whole tribe of demons.
  You seem mighty enough, but you haven’t the strength of women. Stop here
  and keep an eye on the wash; but mind, play me no tricks. I will go back
  to the city and kindle therein fire and fury, and pour over it a spirit
  of mischief, and thou shalt see how I can manage things.” “Agreed!” said
  I, “I will stay here and await thy coming, and watch how affairs turn out
  in thy hands.”
The washerwoman departed, went into the city, called upon one of the
  great families there residing, and requested to see the lady of the
  house. She asked for a washing order, which she promised to execute to
  the most perfect satisfaction. While the housemaid was collecting the
  linen, the washerwoman lifted her eyes to the beautiful face of the
  mistress, and exclaimed: “Yes, they are a dreadful lot, the men; they are
  all alike, a malediction on them! The best of them is not to be trusted.
  They love all women but their own wives.” “What dost thou mean?” asked
  the lady. “Merely this,” she answered. “Coming hither from my house, whom
  should I meet but thy husband making love to another woman, and such a
  hideous creature, too! How he could forsake beauty so rare and exquisite
  as thine for such disgusting ugliness, passes my understanding. But do
  not weep, dear lady, don’t distress thyself and give way. I know a means
  by which I shall bring that husband of thine to his senses, so that thou
  shalt suffer no reproach, and he shall never love any other woman than
  thee. This is what thou must do. When thy husband comes home, speak
  softly and sweetly to him; let him suspect nothing; and when he has
  fallen asleep, take a sharp razor and cut off three hairs from his beard;
  black or white hairs, it matters not. These thou must afterwards give to
  me, and with them I will compound such a remedy that his eyes shall be
  darkened in their sockets, so that he will look no more upon other lovely
  women, but cling to thee alone in mighty and manifest and enduring love."
  All this the lady promised, and gifts besides for the washerwoman, should
  her plan prosper.
Carrying the garments with her, the woman now sought out the lady’s
  husband. With every sign of distress in her voice and manner, she told
  him that she had a frightful secret to divulge to him. She knew not if
  she would have the strength to do so. She would rather die first The
  husband was all the more eager to know, and would not be refused. “Well,
  then,” she said, “I have just been to thy house, where my lady, thy wife,
  gave me these garments to wash; and, while I was yet standing there, a
  youth, of handsome mien and nobly attired, arrived, and the two withdrew
  into an adjoining room: so I inclined mine ear to listen to their speech,
  and this is what I overheard: The young man said to thy wife, ’Kill thy
  husband, and I will marry thee,’ She, however, declared that she was
  afraid to do such a dreadful deed. ’O,’ answered he, ’with a little
  courage it is quite easy. When thy husband is asleep, take a sharp razor
  and cut his throat.’” In fierce rage, but suppressing all outward
  indication of it, the husband returned home. Pretending to fall asleep,
  he watched his wife closely, saw her take a razor to sever the three
  hairs for the washerwoman’s spell, darted up suddenly, wrested the razor
  from her hands, and with it slew his wife on the spot.
The news spread; the relations of the wife united to avenge her death,
  and kill the husband. In their turn his relatives resolved to avenge him;
  both houses were embroiled, and before the feud was at an end, two
  hundred and thirty lives were sacrificed. The city resounded with a great
  cry, the like of which had never been heard. “From that day,” concluded
  Enan, “I decided to injure no man more. Yet for this very reason I fear
  to wed an evil woman.” “Fear not,” returned Joseph, “the girl I recommend
  is beautiful and good.” And Enan married her, and loved her.
Thus Enan is metamorphosed from a public demon into something of a domestic
saint. Zabara gives us an inverted Faust.
“After a while,” concludes Joseph, “I said to him, ’I have sojourned long
enough in this city, the ways of which please me not. Ignorance prevails,
and poetry is unknown; the law is despised; the young are set over the old;
they slander and are impudent. Let me go home after my many years of
wandering in a strange land. Fain would I seek the place where dwells the
great prince, Rabbi Sheshet Benveniste, of whom Wisdom says, Thou art my
teacher, and Faith, Thou art my friend.’ ’What qualitie,’ asked Enan,
’brought him to this lofty place of righteousness and power?’ ’His
simplicity and humility, his uprightness and saintliness.’”
And with this eulogy of the aged Rabbi of Barcelona, the poem somewhat
inconsequently ends. It may be that the author left the work without
putting in the finishing touches. This would account for the extra stories,
which, as was seen above, may belong to the book, though not incorporated
into it.
It will be thought, from the summary mode in which I have rendered these
stories, that I take Zabara to be rather a literary curiosity than a poet.
But Zabara’s poetical merits are considerable. If I have refrained from
attempting a literal rendering, it is mainly because the rhymed-prose
genre is so characteristically Oriental that its charm is incommunicable
in a Western language. Hence, to those who do not read Zabara in the
original, he is more easily appreciated as a conteur than as an
imaginative writer. To the Hebraist, too, something of the same remark
applies. Rhymed prose is not much more consistent with the genius of Hebrew
than it is with the genius of English. Arabic and Persian seem the only
languages in which rhymed prose assumes a natural and melodious shape. In
the new-Hebrew, rhymed prose has always been an exotic, never quite a
native flower. The most skilful gardeners failed to acclimatize it
thoroughly in European soil. Yet Zabara’s humor, his fluent simplicity, his
easy mastery over Hebrew, his invention, his occasional gleams of fancy,
his gift of satire, his unfailing charm, combine to give his poem some
right to the title by which he called it–"The Book of Delight.”
Continue...

This complete e-book of “The Book of Delight and Other Papers"
by Israel Abrahams, M.A. (author of “Jewish Life in the Middle Ages,” “Chapters on Jewish Literature,” etc. – 1912)
is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
