


Concerning the soothsayers of this nation, and persons as it were
possessed
There are certain persons in Cambria, whom you will find nowhere
else, called Awenddyon, (24) or people inspired; when consulted
upon any doubtful event, they roar out violently, are rendered
beside themselves, and become, as it were, possessed by a spirit.
They do not deliver the answer to what is required in a connected
manner; but the person who skilfully observes them, will find,
after many preambles, and many nugatory and incoherent, though
ornamented speeches, the desired explanation conveyed in some turn
of a word:  they are then roused from their ecstasy, as from a deep
sleep, and, as it were, by violence compelled to return to their
proper senses.  After having answered the questions, they do not
recover till violently shaken by other people; nor can they
remember the replies they have given.  If consulted a second or
third time upon the same point, they will make use of expressions
totally different; perhaps they speak by the means of fanatic and
ignorant spirits.  These gifts are usually conferred upon them in
dreams:  some seem to have sweet milk or honey poured on their
lips; others fancy that a written schedule is applied to their
mouths and on awaking they publicly declare that they have received
this gift.  Such is the saying of Esdras, “The Lord said unto me,
open thy mouth, and I opened my mouth, and behold a cup full of
water, whose colour was like fire; and when I had drank it, my
heart brought forth understanding, and wisdom entered into my
breast.”  They invoke, during their prophecies, the true and living
God, and the Holy Trinity, and pray that they may not by their sins
be prevented from finding the truth.  These prophets are only found
among the Britons descended from the Trojans.  For Calchas and
Cassandra, endowed with the spirit of prophecy, openly foretold,
during the siege of Troy, the destruction of that fine city; on
which account the high priest, Helenus, influenced by the prophetic
books of Calchas, and of others who had long before predicted the
ruin of their country, in the first year went over to the Greeks
with the sons of Priam (to whom he was high priest), and was
afterwards rewarded in Greece.  Cassandra, daughter of king Priam,
every day foretold the overthrow of the city; but the pride and
presumption of the Trojans prevented them from believing her word.
Even on the very night that the city was betrayed, she clearly
described the treachery and the method of it:
” - tales casus Cassandra canebat,”
as in the same manner, during the existence of the kingdom of the
Britons, both Merlin Caledonius and Ambrosius are said to have
foretold the destruction of their nation, as well as the coming of
the Saxons, and afterwards that of the Normans; and I think a
circumstance related by Aulus Gellius worth inserting in this
place.  On the day that Caius Caesar and Cneius Pompey, during the
civil war, fought a pitched battle in Thessalia, a memorable event
occurred in that part of Italy situated beyond the river Po.  A
priest named Cornelius, honourable from his rank, venerable for his
religion, and holy in his manners, in an inspired moment
proclaimed, “Caesar has conquered,” and named the day, the events,
the mutual attack, and the conflicts of the two armies.  Whether
such things are exhibited by the spirit, let the reader more
particularly inquire; I do not assert they are the acts of a
Pythonic or a diabolic spirit; for as foreknowledge is the property
of God alone, so is it in his power to confer knowledge of future
events.  There are differences of gifts, says the Apostle, but one
and the same spirit; whence Peter, in his second Epistle, writes,
“For the prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man, but
men spake as if they were inspired by the Holy Ghost:” to the same
effect did the Chaldeans answer king Nebuchadonazar on the
interpretation of his dream, which he wished to extort from them.
“There is not,” say they, “a man upon earth who can, O king,
satisfactorily answer your question; let no king therefore, however
great or potent, make a similar request to any magician,
astrologer, or Chaldean; for it is a rare thing that the king
requireth, and there is none other that can shew it before the
king, except the Gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.”  On this
passage Jerome remarks, “The diviners and all the learned of this
world confess, that the prescience of future events belongs to God
alone; the prophets therefore, who foretold things to come, spake
by the spirit of God.  Hence some persons object, that, if they
were under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, they would sometimes
premise, “Thus saith the Lord God,” or make use of some expression
in the prophetic style; and as such a mode of prophesying is not
taken notice of by Merlin, and no mention is made of his sanctity,
devotion, or faith, many think that he spake by a Pythonic spirit.
To which I answer, that the spirit of prophecy was given not only
to the holy, but sometimes to unbelievers and Gentiles, to Baal, to
the sibyls, and even to bad people, as to Caiaphas and Bela.  On
which occasion Origen says:  “Do not wonder, if he whom ye have
mentioned declares that the Scribes and Pharisees and doctors
amongst the Jews prophesied concerning Christ; for Caiaphas said:
“It is expedient for us that one man die for the people:” but
asserts at the same time, that because he was high priest for that
year, he prophesied.  Let no man therefore be lifted up, if he
prophesies, if he merits prescience; for prophecies shall fail,
tongues shall cease, knowledge shall vanish away; and now abideth,
faith, hope, and charity:  these three; but the greatest of these
is Charity, which never faileth.  But these bad men not only
prophesied, but sometimes performed great miracles, which others
could not accomplish.  John the Baptist, who was so great a
personage, performed no miracle, as John the Evangelist testifies:
“And many came to Jesus and said, Because John wrought no signs,"
etc.  Nor do we hear that the mother of God performed any miracle;
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the sons of Sheva cast
out devils in the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached; and in Matthew
and Luke we may find these words:  “Many shall say unto me in that
day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy
name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful
works? and then I will profess unto them, I never knew you.”  And
in another place, John says:  “Master, we saw a certain man casting
out devils in thy name, and forbade him, because he followeth not
with us.”  But Jesus said:  “Forbid him not; no man can do a
miracle in my name, and speak evil of me; for whoever is not
against me, is for me.”
Alexander of Macedon, a gentile, traversed the Caspian mountains,
and miraculously confined ten tribes within their promontories,
where they still remain, and will continue until the coming of
Elias and Enoch.  We read, indeed, the prophecies of Merlin, but
hear nothing either of his sanctity or his miracles.  Some say,
that the prophets, when they prophesied, did not become frantic, as
it is affirmed of Merlin Silvestris, and others possessed, whom we
have before mentioned.  Some prophesied by dreams, visions, and
enigmatical sayings, as Ezechiel and Daniel; others by acts and
words, as Noah, in the construction of the ark, alluded to the
church; Abraham, in the slaying of his son, to the passion of
Christ; and Moses by his speech, when he said, “A prophet shall the
Lord God raise up to you of your brethren; hear him;” meaning
Christ.  Others have prophesied in a more excellent way by the
internal revelation and inspiration of the Holy Spirit, as David
did when persecuted by Saul:  “When Saul heard that David had fled
to Naioth (which is a hill in Ramah, and the seat of the prophets),
he sent messengers to take him; and when they saw the company of
the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing at their head, the
Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they also
prophesied; and he sent messengers a second and again a third time,
and they also prophesied.  And Saul enraged went thither also; and
the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied
until he came to Naioth, and he stripped off his royal vestments,
and prophesied with the rest for all that day and all that night;
whilst David and Samuel secretly observed what passed.”  Nor is it
wonderful that those persons who suddenly receive the Spirit of
God, and so signal a mark of grace, should for a time seem
alienated from their earthly state of mind.
Continue...
This eBook of “Description of Wales” by G. Cambrensis belongs to the public domain.Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
