


Their love of high birth and ancient genealogy
The Welsh esteem noble birth and generous descent above all things,
(25) and are, therefore, more desirous of marrying into noble than
rich families.  Even the common people retain their genealogy, and
can not only readily recount the names of their grandfathers and
great-grandfathers, but even refer back to the sixth or seventh
generation, or beyond them, in this manner:  Rhys, son of Gruffydd,
son of Rhys, son of Tewdwr, son of Eineon, son of Owen, son of
Howel, son of Cadell, son of Roderic Mawr, and so on.
Being particularly attached to family descent, they revenge with
vehemence the injuries which may tend to the disgrace of their
blood; and being naturally of a vindictive and passionate
disposition, they are ever ready to avenge not only recent but
ancient affronts; they neither inhabit towns, villages, nor
castles, but lead a solitary life in the woods, on the borders of
which they do not erect sumptuous palaces, nor lofty stone
buildings, but content themselves with small huts made of the
boughs of trees twisted together, constructed with little labour
and expense, and sufficient to endure throughout the year.  They
have neither orchards nor gardens, but gladly eat the fruit of both
when given to them.  The greater part of their land is laid down to
pasturage; little is cultivated, a very small quantity is
ornamented with flowers, and a still smaller is sown.  They seldom
yoke less than four oxen to their ploughs; the driver walks before,
but backwards, and when he falls down, is frequently exposed to
danger from the refractory oxen.  Instead of small sickles in
mowing, they make use of a moderate-sized piece of iron formed like
a knife, with two pieces of wood fixed loosely and flexibly to the
head, which they think a more expeditious instrument; but since
“Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus,”
their mode of using it will be better known by inspection than by
any description.  The boats (26) which they employ in fishing or in
crossing the rivers are made of twigs, not oblong nor pointed, but
almost round, or rather triangular, covered both within and without
with raw hides.  When a salmon thrown into one of these boats
strikes it hard with his tail, he often oversets it, and endangers
both the vessel and its navigator.  The fishermen, according to the
custom of the country, in going to and from the rivers, carry these
boats on their shoulders; on which occasion that famous dealer in
fables, Bleddercus, who lived a little before our time, thus
mysteriously said:  “There is amongst us a people who, when they go
out in search of prey, carry their horses on their backs to the
place of plunder; in order to catch their prey, they leap upon
their horses, and when it is taken, carry their horses home again
upon their shoulders.”
Continue...
This eBook of “Description of Wales” by G. Cambrensis belongs to the public domain.Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
