


In what manner this nation is to be overcome
The prince who would wish to subdue this nation, and govern it
peaceably, must use this method.  He must be determined to apply a
diligent and constant attention to this purpose for one year at
least; for a people who with a collected force will not openly
attack the enemy in the field, nor wait to be besieged in castles,
is not to be overcome at the first onset, but to be worn out by
prudent delay and patience.  Let him divide their strength, and by
bribes and promises endeavour to stir up one against the other,
knowing the spirit of hatred and envy which generally prevails
amongst them; and in the autumn let not only the marches, but also
the interior part of the country be strongly fortified with
castles, provisions, and confidential families.  In the meantime
the purchase of corn, cloth, and salt, with which they are usually
supplied from England, should be strictly interdicted; and well-
manned ships placed as a guard on the coast, to prevent their
importation of these articles from Ireland or the Severn sea, and
to facilitate the supply of his own army.  Afterwards, when the
severity of winter approaches, when the trees are void of leaves,
and the mountains no longer afford pasturage - when they are
deprived of any hopes of plunder, and harassed on every side by the
repeated attacks of the enemy - let a body of light-armed infantry
penetrate into their woody and mountainous retreats, and let these
troops be supported and relieved by others; and thus by frequent
changes, and replacing the men who are either fatigued or slain in
battle, this nation may be ultimately subdued; nor can it be
overcome without the above precautions, nor without great danger
and loss of men.  Though many of the English hired troops may
perish in a day of battle, money will procure as many or more on
the morrow for the same service; but to the Welsh, who have neither
foreign nor stipendiary troops, the loss is for the time
irreparable.  In these matters, therefore, as an artificer is to be
trusted in his trade, so attention is to be paid to the counsel of
those who, having been long conversant in similar concerns, are
become acquainted with the manners and customs of their country,
and whom it greatly interests, that an enemy, for whom during long
and frequent conflicts they have contracted an implacable hatred,
should by their assistance be either weakened or destroyed.  Happy
should I have termed the borders of Wales inhabited by the English,
if their kings, in the government of these parts, and in their
military operations against the enemy, had rather employed the
marchers and barons of the country, than adopted the counsels and
policy of the people of Anjou and the Normans.  In this, as well as
in every other military expedition, either in Ireland or in Wales,
the natives of the marches, from the constant state of warfare in
which they are engaged, and whose manners are formed from the
habits of war, are bold and active, skilful on horseback, quick on
foot, not nice as to their diet, and ever prepared when necessity
requires to abstain both from corn and wine.  By such men were the
first hostile attacks made upon Wales as well as Ireland, and by
such men alone can their final conquest be accomplished.  For the
Flemings, Normans, Coterells, and Bragmans, are good and well-
disciplined soldiers in their own country; but the Gallic soldiery
is known to differ much from the Welsh and Irish.  In their country
the battle is on level, here on rough ground; there in an open
field, here in forests; there they consider their armour as an
honour, here as a burden; there soldiers are taken prisoners, here
they are beheaded; there they are ransomed, here they are put to
death.  Where, therefore, the armies engage in a flat country, a
heavy and complex armour, made of cloth and iron, both protects and
decorates the soldier; but when the engagement is in narrow
defiles, in woods or marshes, where the infantry have the advantage
over the cavalry, a light armour is preferable.  For light arms
afford sufficient protection against unarmed men, by whom victory
is either lost or won at the first onset; where it is necessary
that an active and retreating enemy should be overcome by a certain
proportional quantity of moderate armour; whereas with a more
complex sort, and with high and curved saddles, it is difficult to
dismount, more so to mount, and with the greatest difficulty can
such troops march, if required, with the infantry.  In order,
therefore, that
“Singula quaeque locum teneant sortita decenter,”
we maintain it is necessary to employ heavy-armed and strong troops
against men heavily armed, depending entirely upon their natural
strength, and accustomed to fight in an open plain; but against
light-armed and active troops, who prefer rough ground, men
accustomed to such conflicts, and armed in a similar manner, must
be employed.  But let the cities and fortresses on the Severn, and
the whole territory on its western banks towards Wales, occupied by
the English, as well as the provinces of Shropshire and Cheshire,
which are protected by powerful armies, or by any other special
privileges and honourable independence, rejoice in the provident
bounty of their prince.  There should be a yearly examination of
the warlike stores, of the arms, and horses, by good and discreet
men deputed for that purpose, and who, not intent on its plunder
and ruin, interest themselves in the defence and protection of
their country.  By these salutary measures, the soldiers, citizens,
and the whole mass of the people, being instructed and accustomed
to the use of arms, liberty may be opposed by liberty, and pride be
checked by pride.  For the Welsh, who are neither worn out by
laborious burdens, nor molested by the exactions of their lords,
are ever prompt to avenge an injury.  Hence arise their
distinguished bravery in the defence of their country; hence their
readiness to take up arms and to rebel.  Nothing so much excites,
encourages, and invites the hearts of men to probity as the
cheerfulness of liberty; nothing so much dejects and dispirits them
as the oppression of servitude.  This portion of the kingdom,
protected by arms and courage, might be of great use to the prince,
not only in these or the adjacent parts, but, if necessity
required, in more remote regions; and although the public treasury
might receive a smaller annual revenue from these provinces, yet
the deficiency would be abundantly compensated by the peace of the
kingdom and the honour of its sovereign; especially as the heavy
and dangerous expenses of one military expedition into Wales
usually amount to the whole income among from the revenues of the
province.
Continue...
This eBook of “Description of Wales” by G. Cambrensis belongs to the public domain.Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
