


Their living by plunder, and disregard of the bonds of peace and
friendship
This nation conceives it right to commit acts of plunder, theft,
and robbery, not only against foreigners and hostile nations, but
even against their own countrymen.  When an opportunity of
attacking the enemy with advantage occurs, they respect not the
leagues of peace and friendship, preferring base lucre to the
solemn obligations of oaths and good faith; to which circumstance
Gildas alludes in his book concerning the overthrow of the Britons,
actuated by the love of truth, and according to the rules of
history, not suppressing the vices of his countrymen.  “They are
neither brave in war, nor faithful in peace.”  But when Julius
Caesar, great as the world itself,
“Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis,”
were they not brave under their leader Cassivellaunus?  And when
Belinus and Brennus added the Roman empire to their conquests?
What were they in the time of Constantine, son of our Helen?  What,
in the reign of Aurelius Ambrosius, whom even Eutropius commends?
What were they in the time of our famous prince Arthur?  I will not
say fabulous.  On the contrary, they, who were almost subdued by
the Scots and Picts, often harassed with success the auxiliary
Roman legions, and exclaimed, as we learn from Gildas, “The
barbarians drove us to the sea, the sea drove us again back to the
barbarians; on one side we were subdued, on the other drowned, and
here we were put to death.  Were they not,” says he, “at that time
brave and praiseworthy?”  When attacked and conquered by the
Saxons, who originally had been called in as stipendiaries to their
assistance, were they not brave?  But the strongest argument made
use of by those who accuse this nation of cowardice, is, that
Gildas, a holy man, and a Briton by birth, has handed down to
posterity nothing remarkable concerning them, in any of his
historical works.  We promise, however, a solution of the contrary
in our British Topography, if God grants us a continuance of life.
As a further proof, it may be necessary to add, that from the time
when that illustrious prince of the Britons, mentioned at the
beginning of this book, totally exhausted the strength of the
country, by transporting the whole armed force beyond the seas;
that island, which had before been so highly illustrious for its
incomparable valour, remained for many subsequent years destitute
of men and arms, and exposed to the predatory attacks of pirates
and robbers.  So distinguished, indeed, were the natives of this
island for their bravery, that, by their prowess, that king subdued
almost all Cisalpine Gaul, and dared even to make an attack on the
Roman empire.
In process of time, the Britons, recovering their long-lost
population and knowledge of the use of arms, re-acquired their high
and ancient character.  Let the different aeras be therefore
marked, and the historical accounts will accord.  With regard to
Gildas, who inveighs so bitterly against his own nation, the
Britons affirm that, highly irritated at the death of his brother,
the prince of Albania, whom king Arthur had slain, he wrote these
invectives, and upon the same occasion threw into the sea many
excellent books, in which he had described the actions of Arthur,
and the celebrated deeds of his countrymen; from which cause it
arises, that no authentic account of so great a prince is any where
to be found.
Continue...
This eBook of “Description of Wales” by G. Cambrensis belongs to the public domain.Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
