


Meet Teddy Finsworth, an old schoolfellow.  We have a pleasant and
quiet dinner at his uncle’s, marred only by a few awkward mistakes
on my part respecting Mr. Finsworth’s pictures.  A discussion on
dreams.

April 27. - Kept a little later than usual at the office, and as I
was hurrying along a man stopped me, saying:  “Hulloh!  That’s a
face I know.”  I replied politely:  “Very likely; lots of people
know me, although I may not know them.”  He replied:  “But you know
me - Teddy Finsworth.”  So it was.  He was at the same school with
me.  I had not seen him for years and years.  No wonder I did not
know him!  At school he was at least a head taller than I was; now
I am at least a head taller than he is, and he has a thick beard,
almost grey.  He insisted on my having a glass of wine (a thing I
never do), and told me he lived at Middlesboro’, where he was
Deputy Town Clerk, a position which was as high as the Town Clerk
of London - in fact, higher.  He added that he was staying for a
few days in London, with his uncle, Mr. Edgar Paul Finsworth (of
Finsworth and Pultwell).  He said he was sure his uncle would be
only too pleased to see me, and he had a nice house, Watney Lodge,
only a few minutes’ walk from Muswell Hill Station.  I gave him our
address, and we parted.
In the evening, to my surprise, he called with a very nice letter
from Mr. Finsworth, saying if we (including Carrie) would dine with
them to-morrow (Sunday), at two o’clock, he would be delighted.
Carrie did not like to go; but Teddy Finsworth pressed us so much
we consented.  Carrie sent Sarah round to the butcher’s and
countermanded our half-leg of mutton, which we had ordered for to-
morrow.
April 28, Sunday. - We found Watney Lodge farther off than we
anticipated, and only arrived as the clock struck two, both feeling
hot and uncomfortable.  To make matters worse, a large collie dog
pounced forward to receive us.  He barked loudly and jumped up at
Carrie, covering her light skirt, which she was wearing for the
first time, with mud.  Teddy Finsworth came out and drove the dog
off and apologised.  We were shown into the drawing-room, which was
beautifully decorated.  It was full of knick-knacks, and some
plates hung up on the wall.  There were several little wooden milk-
stools with paintings on them; also a white wooden banjo, painted
by one of Mr. Paul Finsworth’s nieces - a cousin of Teddy’s.
Mr. Paul Finsworth seemed quite a distinguished-looking elderly
gentleman, and was most gallant to Carrie.  There were a great many
water-colours hanging on the walls, mostly different views of
India, which were very bright.  Mr. Finsworth said they were
painted by “Simpz,” and added that he was no judge of pictures
himself but had been informed on good authority that they were
worth some hundreds of pounds, although he had only paid a few
shillings apiece for them, frames included, at a sale in the
neighbourhood.
There was also a large picture in a very handsome frame, done in
coloured crayons.  It looked like a religious subject.  I was very
much struck with the lace collar, it looked so real, but I
unfortunately made the remark that there was something about the
expression of the face that was not quite pleasing.  It looked
pinched.  Mr. Finsworth sorrowfully replied:  “Yes, the face was
done after death - my wife’s sister.”
I felt terribly awkward and bowed apologetically, and in a whisper
said I hoped I had not hurt his feelings.  We both stood looking at
the picture for a few minutes in silence, when Mr. Finsworth took
out a handkerchief and said:  “She was sitting in our garden last
summer,” and blew his nose violently.  He seemed quite affected, so
I turned to look at something else and stood in front of a portrait
of a jolly-looking middle-aged gentleman, with a red face and straw
hat.  I said to Mr. Finsworth:  “Who is this jovial-looking
gentleman?  Life doesn’t seem to trouble him much.”  Mr. Finsworth
said:  “No, it doesn’t.  HE IS DEAD TOO - my brother.”
I was absolutely horrified at my own awkwardness.  Fortunately at
this moment Carrie entered with Mrs. Finsworth, who had taken her
upstairs to take off her bonnet and brush her skirt.  Teddy said:
“Short is late,” but at that moment the gentleman referred to
arrived, and I was introduced to him by Teddy, who said:  “Do you
know Mr. Short?”  I replied, smiling, that I had not that pleasure,
but I hoped it would not be long before I knew Mr. SHORT.  He
evidently did not see my little joke, although I repeated it twice
with a little laugh.  I suddenly remembered it was Sunday, and Mr.
Short was perhaps VERY PARTICULAR.  In this I was mistaken, for he
was not at all particular in several of his remarks after dinner.
In fact I was so ashamed of one of his observations that I took the
opportunity to say to Mrs. Finsworth that I feared she found Mr.
Short occasionally a little embarrassing.  To my surprise she said:
“Oh! he is privileged you know.”  I did not know as a matter of
fact, and so I bowed apologetically.  I fail to see why Mr. Short
should be privileged.
Another thing that annoyed me at dinner was that the collie dog,
which jumped up at Carrie, was allowed to remain under the dining-
room table.  It kept growling and snapping at my boots every time I
moved my foot.  Feeling nervous rather, I spoke to Mrs. Finsworth
about the animal, and she remarked:  “It is only his play.”  She
jumped up and let in a frightfully ugly-looking spaniel called
Bibbs, which had been scratching at the door.  This dog also seemed
to take a fancy to my boots, and I discovered afterwards that it
had licked off every bit of blacking from them.  I was positively
ashamed of being seen in them.  Mrs. Finsworth, who, I must say, is
not much of a Job’s comforter, said:  “Oh! we are used to Bibbs
doing that to our visitors.”
Mr. Finsworth had up some fine port, although I question whether it
is a good thing to take on the top of beer.  It made me feel a
little sleepy, while it had the effect of inducing Mr. Short to
become “privileged” to rather an alarming extent.  It being cold
even for April, there was a fire in the drawing-room; we sat round
in easy-chairs, and Teddy and I waxed rather eloquent over the old
school days, which had the effect of sending all the others to
sleep.  I was delighted, as far as Mr. Short was concerned, that it
did have that effect on him.
We stayed till four, and the walk home was remarkable only for the
fact that several fools giggled at the unpolished state of my
boots.  Polished them myself when I got home.  Went to church in
the evening, and could scarcely keep awake.  I will not take port
on the top of beer again.
April 29. - I am getting quite accustomed to being snubbed by
Lupin, and I do not mind being sat upon by Carrie, because I think
she has a certain amount of right to do so; but I do think it hard
to be at once snubbed by wife, son, and both my guests.
Gowing and Cummings had dropped in during the evening, and I
suddenly remembered an extraordinary dream I had a few nights ago,
and I thought I would tell them about it.  I dreamt I saw some huge
blocks of ice in a shop with a bright glare behind them.  I walked
into the shop and the heat was overpowering.  I found that the
blocks of ice were on fire.  The whole thing was so real and yet so
supernatural I woke up in a cold perspiration.  Lupin in a most
contemptuous manner, said:  “What utter rot.”
Before I could reply, Gowing said there was nothing so completely
uninteresting as other people’s dreams.
I appealed to Cummings, but he said he was bound to agree with the
others and my dream was especially nonsensical.  I said:  “It
seemed so real to me.”  Gowing replied:  “Yes, to YOU perhaps, but
not to US.”  Whereupon they all roared.
Carrie, who had hitherto been quiet, said:  “He tells me his stupid
dreams every morning nearly.”  I replied:  “Very well, dear, I
promise you I will never tell you or anybody else another dream of
mine the longest day I live.”  Lupin said:  “Hear! hear!” and
helped himself to another glass of beer.  The subject was
fortunately changed, and Cummings read a most interesting article
on the superiority of the bicycle to the horse.
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
