


Gowing explains his conduct.  Lupin takes us for a drive, which we
don’t enjoy.  Lupin introduces us to Mr. Murray Posh.

February 8. - It does seem hard I cannot get good sausages for
breakfast.  They are either full of bread or spice, or are as red
as beef.  Still anxious about the 20 pounds I invested last week by
Lupin’s advice.  However, Cummings has done the same.
February 9. - Exactly a fortnight has passed, and I have neither
seen nor heard from Gowing respecting his extraordinary conduct in
asking us round to his house, and then being out.  In the evening
Carrie was engaged marking a half-dozen new collars I had
purchased.  I’ll back Carrie’s marking against anybody’s.  While I
was drying them at the fire, and Carrie was rebuking me for
scorching them, Cummings came in.
He seemed quite well again, and chaffed us about marking the
collars.  I asked him if he had heard from Gowing, and he replied
that he had not.  I said I should not have believed that Gowing
could have acted in such an ungentlemanly manner.  Cummings said:
“You are mild in your description of him; I think he has acted like
a cad.”
The words were scarcely out of his mouth when the door opened, and
Gowing, putting in his head, said:  “May I come in?”  I said:
“Certainly.”  Carrie said very pointedly:  “Well, you ARE a
stranger.”  Gowing said:  “Yes, I’ve been on and off to Croydon
during the last fortnight.”  I could see Cummings was boiling over,
and eventually he tackled Gowing very strongly respecting his
conduct last Saturday week.  Gowing appeared surprised, and said:
“Why, I posted a letter to you in the morning announcing that the
party was ’off, very much off.’”  I said:  “I never got it."
Gowing, turning to Carrie, said:  “I suppose letters sometimes
MISCARRY, don’t they, MRS. Carrie?”  Cummings sharply said:  “This
is not a time for joking.  I had no notice of the party being put
off.”  Gowing replied:  “I told Pooter in my note to tell you, as I
was in a hurry.  However, I’ll inquire at the post-office, and we
must meet again at my place.”  I added that I hoped he would be
present at the next meeting.  Carrie roared at this, and even
Cummings could not help laughing.
February 10, Sunday. - Contrary to my wishes, Carrie allowed Lupin
to persuade her to take her for a drive in the afternoon in his
trap.  I quite disapprove of driving on a Sunday, but I did not
like to trust Carrie alone with Lupin, so I offered to go too.
Lupin said:  “Now, that is nice of you, Guv., but you won’t mind
sitting on the back-seat of the cart?”
Lupin proceeded to put on a bright-blue coat that seemed miles too
large for him.  Carrie said it wanted taking in considerably at the
back.  Lupin said:  “Haven’t you seen a box-coat before?  You can’t
drive in anything else.”
He may wear what he likes in the future, for I shall never drive
with him again.  His conduct was shocking.  When we passed Highgate
Archway, he tried to pass everything and everybody.  He shouted to
respectable people who were walking quietly in the road to get out
of the way; he flicked at the horse of an old man who was riding,
causing it to rear; and, as I had to ride backwards, I was
compelled to face a gang of roughs in a donkey-cart, whom Lupin had
chaffed, and who turned and followed us for nearly a mile,
bellowing, indulging in coarse jokes and laughter, to say nothing
of occasionally pelting us with orange-peel.
Lupin’s excuse - that the Prince of Wales would have to put up with
the same sort of thing if he drove to the Derby - was of little
consolation to either Carrie or myself.  Frank Mutlar called in the
evening, and Lupin went out with him.
February 11. - Feeling a little concerned about Lupin, I mustered
up courage to speak to Mr. Perkupp about him.  Mr. Perkupp has
always been most kind to me, so I told him everything, including
yesterday’s adventure.  Mr. Perkupp kindly replied:  “There is no
necessity for you to be anxious, Mr. Pooter.  It would be
impossible for a son of such good parents to turn out erroneously.
Remember he is young, and will soon get older.  I wish we could
find room for him in this firm.”  The advice of this good man takes
loads off my mind.  In the evening Lupin came in.
After our little supper, he said:  “My dear parents, I have some
news, which I fear will affect you considerably.”  I felt a qualm
come over me, and said nothing.  Lupin then said:  “It may distress
you - in fact, I’m sure it will - but this afternoon I have given
up my pony and trap for ever.”  It may seem absurd, but I was so
pleased, I immediately opened a bottle of port.  Gowing dropped in
just in time, bringing with him a large sheet, with a print of a
tailless donkey, which he fastened against the wall.  He then
produced several separate tails, and we spent the remainder of the
evening trying blindfolded to pin a tail on in the proper place.
My sides positively ached with laughter when I went to bed.
February 12. - In the evening I spoke to Lupin about his engagement
with Daisy Mutlar.  I asked if he had heard from her.  He replied:
“No; she promised that old windbag of a father of hers that she
would not communicate with me.  I see Frank Mutlar, of course; in
fact, he said he might call again this evening.”  Frank called, but
said he could not stop, as he had a friend waiting outside for him,
named Murray Posh, adding he was quite a swell.  Carrie asked Frank
to bring him in.
He was brought in, Gowing entering at the same time.  Mr. Murray
Posh was a tall, fat young man, and was evidently of a very nervous
disposition, as he subsequently confessed he would never go in a
hansom cab, nor would he enter a four-wheeler until the driver had
first got on the box with his reins in his hands.
On being introduced, Gowing, with his usual want of tact, said:
“Any relation to ’Posh’s three-shilling hats’?”  Mr. Posh replied:
“Yes; but please understand I don’t try on hats myself.  I take no
ACTIVE part in the business.”  I replied:  “I wish I had a business
like it.”  Mr. Posh seemed pleased, and gave a long but most
interesting history of the extraordinary difficulties in the
manufacture of cheap hats.
Murray Posh evidently knew Daisy Mutlar very intimately from the
way he was talking of her; and Frank said to Lupin once,
laughingly:  “If you don’t look out, Posh will cut you out!”  When
they had all gone, I referred to this flippant conversation; and
Lupin said, sarcastically:  “A man who is jealous has no respect
for himself.  A man who would be jealous of an elephant like Murray
Posh could only have a contempt for himself.  I know Daisy.  She
WOULD wait ten years for me, as I said before; in fact, if
necessary, SHE WOULD WAIT TWENTY YEARS FOR ME.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
