


The ball at the Mansion House.

April 30. - Perfectly astounded at receiving an invitation for
Carrie and myself from the Lord and Lady Mayoress to the Mansion
House, to “meet the Representatives of Trades and Commerce.”  My
heart beat like that of a schoolboy’s.  Carrie and I read the
invitation over two or three times.  I could scarcely eat my
breakfast.  I said - and I felt it from the bottom of my heart, -
“Carrie darling, I was a proud man when I led you down the aisle of
the church on our wedding-day; that pride will be equalled, if not
surpassed, when I lead my dear, pretty wife up to the Lord and Lady
Mayoress at the Mansion House.”  I saw the tears in Carrie’s eyes,
and she said:  “Charlie dear, it is I who have to be proud of you.
And I am very, very proud of you.  You have called me pretty; and
as long as I am pretty in your eyes, I am happy.  You, dear old
Charlie, are not handsome, but you are GOOD, which is far more
noble.”  I gave her a kiss, and she said:  “I wonder if there will
be any dancing?  I have not danced with you for years.”
I cannot tell what induced me to do it, but I seized her round the
waist, and we were silly enough to be executing a wild kind of
polka when Sarah entered, grinning, and said:  “There is a man,
mum, at the door who wants to know if you want any good coals."
Most annoyed at this.  Spent the evening in answering, and tearing
up again, the reply to the Mansion House, having left word with
Sarah if Gowing or Cummings called we were not at home.  Must
consult Mr. Perkupp how to answer the Lord Mayor’s invitation.
May 1. - Carrie said:  “I should like to send mother the invitation
to look at.”  I consented, as soon as I had answered it.  I told
Mr. Perkupp, at the office, with a feeling of pride, that we had
received an invitation to the Mansion House; and he said, to my
astonishment, that he himself gave in my name to the Lord Mayor’s
secretary.  I felt this rather discounted the value of the
invitation, but I thanked him; and in reply to me, he described how
I was to answer it.  I felt the reply was too simple; but of course
Mr. Perkupp knows best.
May 2. - Sent my dress-coat and trousers to the little tailor’s
round the corner, to have the creases taken out.  Told Gowing not
to call next Monday, as we were going to the Mansion House.  Sent
similar note to Cummings.
May 3. - Carrie went to Mrs. James, at Sutton, to consult about her
dress for next Monday.  While speaking incidentally to Spotch, one
of our head clerks, about the Mansion House, he said:  “Oh, I’m
asked, but don’t think I shall go.”  When a vulgar man like Spotch
is asked, I feel my invitation is considerably discounted.  In the
evening, while I was out, the little tailor brought round my coat
and trousers, and because Sarah had not a shilling to pay for the
pressing, he took them away again.
May 4. - Carrie’s mother returned the Lord Mayor’s invitation,
which was sent to her to look at, with apologies for having upset a
glass of port over it.  I was too angry to say anything.
May 5. - Bought a pair of lavender kid-gloves for next Monday, and
two white ties, in case one got spoiled in the tying.
May 6, Sunday. - A very dull sermon, during which, I regret to say,
I twice thought of the Mansion House reception to-morrow.
May 7. - A big red-letter day; viz., the Lord Mayor’s reception.
The whole house upset.  I had to get dressed at half-past six, as
Carrie wanted the room to herself.  Mrs. James had come up from
Sutton to help Carrie; so I could not help thinking it unreasonable
that she should require the entire attention of Sarah, the servant,
as well.  Sarah kept running out of the house to fetch “something
for missis,” and several times I had, in my full evening-dress, to
answer the back-door.
The last time it was the greengrocer’s boy, who, not seeing it was
me, for Sarah had not lighted the gas, pushed into my hands two
cabbages and half-a-dozen coal-blocks.  I indignantly threw them on
the ground, and felt so annoyed that I so far forgot myself as to
box the boy’s ears.  He went away crying, and said he should
summons me, a thing I would not have happen for the world.  In the
dark, I stepped on a piece of the cabbage, which brought me down on
the flags all of a heap.  For a moment I was stunned, but when I
recovered I crawled upstairs into the drawing-room and on looking
into the chimney-glass discovered that my chin was bleeding, my
shirt smeared with the coal-blocks, and my left trouser torn at the
knee.
However, Mrs. James brought me down another shirt, which I changed
in the drawing-room.  I put a piece of court-plaster on my chin,
and Sarah very neatly sewed up the tear at the knee.  At nine
o’clock Carrie swept into the room, looking like a queen.  Never
have I seen her look so lovely, or so distinguished.  She was
wearing a satin dress of sky-blue - my favourite colour - and a
piece of lace, which Mrs. James lent her, round the shoulders, to
give a finish.  I thought perhaps the dress was a little too long
behind, and decidedly too short in front, but Mrs. James said it
was E LA MODE.  Mrs. James was most kind, and lent Carrie a fan of
ivory with red feathers, the value of which, she said, was
priceless, as the feathers belonged to the Kachu eagle - a bird now
extinct.  I preferred the little white fan which Carrie bought for
three-and-six at Shoolbred’s, but both ladies sat on me at once.
We arrived at the Mansion House too early, which was rather
fortunate, for I had an opportunity of speaking to his lordship,
who graciously condescended to talk with me some minutes; but I
must say I was disappointed to find he did not even know Mr.
Perkupp, our principal.
I felt as if we had been invited to the Mansion House by one who
did not know the Lord Mayor himself.  Crowds arrived, and I shall
never forget the grand sight.  My humble pen can never describe it.
I was a little annoyed with Carrie, who kept saying:  “Isn’t it a
pity we don’t know anybody?”
Once she quite lost her head.  I saw someone who looked like
Franching, from Peckham, and was moving towards him when she seized
me by the coat-tails, and said quite loudly:  “Don’t leave me,"
which caused an elderly gentleman, in a court-suit, and a chain
round him, and two ladies, to burst out laughing.  There was an
immense crowd in the supper-room, and, my stars! it was a splendid
supper - any amount of champagne.
Carrie made a most hearty supper, for which I was pleased; for I
sometimes think she is not strong.  There was scarcely a dish she
did not taste.  I was so thirsty, I could not eat much.  Receiving
a sharp slap on the shoulder, I turned, and, to my amazement, saw
Farmerson, our ironmonger.  He said, in the most familiar way:
“This is better than Brickfield Terrace, eh?”  I simply looked at
him, and said coolly:  “I never expected to see you here.”  He
said, with a loud, coarse laugh:  “I like that - if YOU, why not
ME?”  I replied:  “Certainly,” I wish I could have thought of
something better to say.  He said:  “Can I get your good lady
anything?”  Carrie said:  “No, I thank you,” for which I was
pleased.  I said, by way of reproof to him:  “You never sent to-day
to paint the bath, as I requested.”  Farmerson said:  “Pardon me,
Mr. Pooter, no shop when we’re in company, please.”
Before I could think of a reply, one of the sheriffs, in full Court
costume, slapped Farmerson on the back and hailed him as an old
friend, and asked him to dine with him at his lodge.  I was
astonished.  For full five minutes they stood roaring with
laughter, and stood digging each other in the ribs.  They kept
telling each other they didn’t look a day older.  They began
embracing each other and drinking champagne.
To think that a man who mends our scraper should know any member of
our aristocracy!  I was just moving with Carrie, when Farmerson
seized me rather roughly by the collar, and addressing the sheriff,
said:  “Let me introduce my neighbour, Pooter.”  He did not even
say “Mister.”  The sheriff handed me a glass of champagne.  I felt,
after all, it was a great honour to drink a glass of wine with him,
and I told him so.  We stood chatting for some time, and at last I
said:  “You must excuse me now if I join Mrs. Pooter.”  When I
approached her, she said:  “Don’t let me take you away from
friends.  I am quite happy standing here alone in a crowd, knowing
nobody!”
As it takes two to make a quarrel, and as it was neither the time
nor the place for it, I gave my arm to Carrie, and said:  “I hope
my darling little wife will dance with me, if only for the sake of
saying we had danced at the Mansion House as guests of the Lord
Mayor.”  Finding the dancing after supper was less formal, and
knowing how much Carrie used to admire my dancing in the days gone
by, I put my arm round her waist and we commenced a waltz.
A most unfortunate accident occurred.  I had got on a new pair of
boots.  Foolishly, I had omitted to take Carrie’s advice; namely,
to scratch the soles of them with the points of the scissors or to
put a little wet on them.  I had scarcely started when, like
lightning, my left foot slipped away and I came down, the side of
my head striking the floor with such violence that for a second or
two I did not know what had happened.  I needly hardly say that
Carrie fell with me with equal violence, breaking the comb in her
hair and grazing her elbow.
There was a roar of laughter, which was immediately checked when
people found that we had really hurt ourselves.  A gentleman
assisted Carrie to a seat, and I expressed myself pretty strongly
on the danger of having a plain polished floor with no carpet or
drugget to prevent people slipping.  The gentleman, who said his
name was Darwitts, insisted on escorting Carrie to have a glass of
wine, an invitation which I was pleased to allow Carrie to accept.
I followed, and met Farmerson, who immediately said, in his loud
voice “Oh, are you the one who went down?”
I answered with an indignant look.
With execrable taste, he said:  “Look here, old man, we are too old
for this game.  We must leave these capers to the youngsters.  Come
and have another glass, that is more in our line.”
Although I felt I was buying his silence by accepting, we followed
the others into the supper-room.
Neither Carrie nor I, after our unfortunate mishap, felt inclined
to stay longer.  As we were departing, Farmerson said:  “Are you
going? if so, you might give me a lift.”
I thought it better to consent, but wish I had first consulted
Carrie.
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
