


Our first important Party.  Old Friends and New Friends.  Gowing is
a little annoying; but his friend, Mr. Stillbrook, turns out to be
quite amusing.  Inopportune arrival of Mr. Perkupp, but he is most
kind and complimentary.  Party a great success.

November 15. - A red-letter day.  Our first important party since
we have been in this house.  I got home early from the City.  Lupin
insisted on having a hired waiter, and stood a half-dozen of
champagne.  I think this an unnecessary expense, but Lupin said he
had had a piece of luck, having made three pounds out a private
deal in the City.  I hope he won’t gamble in his new situation.
The supper-room looked so nice, and Carrie truly said:  “We need
not be ashamed of its being seen by Mr. Perkupp, should he honour
us by coming.”
I dressed early in case people should arrive punctually at eight
o’clock, and was much vexed to find my new dress-trousers much too
short.
Lupin, who is getting beyond his position, found fault with my
wearing ordinary boots instead of dress-boots.
I replied satirically:  “My dear son, I have lived to be above that
sort of thing.”
Lupin burst out laughing, and said:  “A man generally was above his
boots.”
This may be funny, or it may NOT; but I was gratified to find he
had not discovered the coral had come off one of my studs.  Carrie
looked a picture, wearing the dress she wore at the Mansion House.
The arrangement of the drawing-room was excellent.  Carrie had hung
muslin curtains over the folding-doors, and also over one of the
entrances, for we had removed the door from its hinges.
Mr. Peters, the waiter, arrived in good time, and I gave him strict
orders not to open another bottle of champagne until the previous
one was empty.  Carrie arranged for some sherry and port wine to be
placed on the drawing-room sideboard, with some glasses.  By-the-
by, our new enlarged and tinted photographs look very nice on the
walls, especially as Carrie has arranged some Liberty silk bows on
the four corners of them.
The first arrival was Gowing, who, with his usual taste, greeted me
with:  “Hulloh, Pooter, why your trousers are too short!”
I simply said:  “Very likely, and you will find my temper ’sHORT’
also.”
He said:  “That won’t make your trousers longer, Juggins.  You
should get your missus to put a flounce on them.”
I wonder I waste my time entering his insulting observations in my
diary.
The next arrivals were Mr. and Mrs. Cummings.  The former said:
“As you didn’t say anything about dress, I have come ’half dress.’"
He had on a black frock-coat and white tie.  The James’, Mr.
Merton, and Mr. Stillbrook arrived, but Lupin was restless and
unbearable till his Daisy Mutlar and Frank arrived.
Carrie and I were rather startled at Daisy’s appearance.  She had a
bright-crimson dress on, cut very low in the neck.  I do not think
such a style modest.  She ought to have taken a lesson from Carrie,
and covered her shoulders with a little lace.  Mr. Nackles, Mr.
Sprice-Hogg and his four daughters came; so did Franching, and one
or two of Lupin’s new friends, members of the “Holloway Comedians."
Some of these seemed rather theatrical in their manner, especially
one, who was posing all the evening, and leant on our little round
table and cracked it.  Lupin called him “our Henry,” and said he
was “our lead at the H.C.’s,” and was quite as good in that
department as Harry Mutlar was as the low-comedy merchant.  All
this is Greek to me.
We had some music, and Lupin, who never left Daisy’s side for a
moment, raved over her singing of a song, called “Some Day.”  It
seemed a pretty song, but she made such grimaces, and sang, to my
mind, so out of tune, I would not have asked her to sing again; but
Lupin made her sing four songs right off, one after the other.
At ten o’clock we went down to supper, and from the way Gowing and
Cummings ate you would have thought they had not had a meal for a
month.  I told Carrie to keep something back in case Mr. Perkupp
should come by mere chance.  Gowing annoyed me very much by filling
a large tumbler of champagne, and drinking it straight off.  He
repeated this action, and made me fear our half-dozen of champagne
would not last out.  I tried to keep a bottle back, but Lupin got
hold of it, and took it to the side-table with Daisy and Frank
Mutlar.
We went upstairs, and the young fellows began skylarking.  Carrie
put a stop to that at once.  Stillbrook amused us with a song,
“What have you done with your Cousin John?”  I did not notice that
Lupin and Frank had disappeared.  I asked Mr. Watson, one of the
Holloways, where they were, and he said:  “It’s a case of ’Oh, what
a surprise!’”
We were directed to form a circle - which we did.  Watson then
said:  “I have much pleasure in introducing the celebrated Blondin
Donkey.”  Frank and Lupin then bounded into the room.  Lupin had
whitened his face like a clown, and Frank had tied round his waist
a large hearthrug.  He was supposed to be the donkey, and he looked
it.  They indulged in a very noisy pantomime, and we were all
shrieking with laughter.
I turned round suddenly, and then I saw Mr Perkupp standing half-
way in the door, he having arrived without our knowing it.  I
beckoned to Carrie, and we went up to him at once.  He would not
come right into the room.  I apologised for the foolery, but Mr.
Perkupp said:  “Oh, it seems amusing.”  I could see he was not a
bit amused.
Carrie and I took him downstairs, but the table was a wreck.  There
was not a glass of champagne left - not even a sandwich.  Mr.
Perkupp said he required nothing, but would like a glass of seltzer
or soda water.  The last syphon was empty.  Carrie said:  “We have
plenty of port wine left.”  Mr. Perkupp said, with a smile:  “No,
thank you.  I really require nothing, but I am most pleased to see
you and your husband in your own home.  Good-night, Mrs. Pooter -
you will excuse my very short stay, I know.”  I went with him to
his carriage, and he said:  “Don’t trouble to come to the office
till twelve to-morrow.”
I felt despondent as I went back to the house, and I told Carrie I
thought the party was a failure.  Carrie said it was a great
success, and I was only tired, and insisted on my having some port
myself.  I drank two glasses, and felt much better, and we went
into the drawing-room, where they had commenced dancing.  Carrie
and I had a little dance, which I said reminded me of old days.
She said I was a spooney old thing.
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
