


Trouble with a stylographic pen.  We go to a Volunteer Ball, where
I am let in for an expensive supper.  Grossly insulted by a cabman.
An odd invitation to Southend.

April 8. - No events of any importance, except that Gowing strongly
recommended a new patent stylographic pen, which cost me nine-and-
sixpence, and which was simply nine-and-sixpence thrown in the mud.
It has caused me constant annoyance and irritability of temper.
The ink oozes out of the top, making a mess on my hands, and once
at the office when I was knocking the palm of my hand on the desk
to jerk the ink down, Mr. Perkupp, who had just entered, called
out:  “Stop that knocking!  I suppose that is you, Mr. Pitt?”  That
young monkey, Pitt, took a malicious glee in responding quite
loudly:  “No, sir; I beg pardon, it is Mr. Pooter with his pen; it
has been going on all the morning.”  To make matters worse, I saw
Lupin laughing behind his desk.  I thought it wiser to say nothing.
I took the pen back to the shop and asked them if they would take
it back, as it did not act.  I did not expect the full price
returned, but was willing to take half.  The man said he could not
do that - buying and selling were two different things.  Lupin’s
conduct during the period he has been in Mr. Perkupp’s office has
been most exemplary.  My only fear is, it is too good to last.
April 9. - Gowing called, bringing with him an invitation for
Carrie and myself to a ball given by the East Acton Rifle Brigade,
which he thought would be a swell affair, as the member for East
Acton (Sir William Grime) had promised his patronage.  We accepted
of his kindness, and he stayed to supper, an occasion I thought
suitable for trying a bottle of the sparkling Algera that Mr. James
(of Sutton) had sent as a present.  Gowing sipped the wine,
observing that he had never tasted it before, and further remarked
that his policy was to stick to more recognised brands.  I told him
it was a present from a dear friend, and one mustn’t look a gift-
horse in the mouth.  Gowing facetiously replied:  “And he didn’t
like putting it in the mouth either.”
I thought the remarks were rude without being funny, but on tasting
it myself, came to the conclusion there was some justification for
them.  The sparkling Algera is very like cider, only more sour.  I
suggested that perhaps the thunder had turned it a bit acid.  He
merely replied:  “Oh! I don’t think so.”  We had a very pleasant
game of cards, though I lost four shillings and Carrie lost one,
and Gowing said he had lost about sixpence:  how he could have
lost, considering that Carrie and I were the only other players,
remains a mystery.
April 14, Sunday. - Owing, I presume, to the unsettled weather, I
awoke with a feeling that my skin was drawn over my face as tight
as a drum.  Walking round the garden with Mr. and Mrs. Treane,
members of our congregation who had walked back with us, I was much
annoyed to find a large newspaper full of bones on the gravel-path,
evidently thrown over by those young Griffin boys next door; who,
whenever we have friends, climb up the empty steps inside their
conservatory, tap at the windows, making faces, whistling, and
imitating birds.
April 15. - Burnt my tongue most awfully with the Worcester sauce,
through that stupid girl Sarah shaking the bottle violently before
putting it on the table.
April 16. - The night of the East Acton Volunteer Ball.  On my
advice, Carrie put on the same dress that she looked so beautiful
in at the Mansion House, for it had occurred to me, being a
military ball, that Mr. Perkupp, who, I believe, is an officer in
the Honorary Artillery Company, would in all probability be
present.  Lupin, in his usual incomprehensible language, remarked
that he had heard it was a “bounders’ ball.”  I didn’t ask him what
he meant though I didn’t understand.  Where he gets these
expressions from I don’t know; he certainly doesn’t learn them at
home.
The invitation was for half-past eight, so I concluded if we
arrived an hour later we should be in good time, without being
“unfashionable,” as Mrs. James says.  It was very difficult to find
- the cabman having to get down several times to inquire at
different public-houses where the Drill Hall was.  I wonder at
people living in such out-of-the-way places.  No one seemed to know
it.  However, after going up and down a good many badly-lighted
streets we arrived at our destination.  I had no idea it was so far
from Holloway.  I gave the cabman five shillings, who only
grumbled, saying it was dirt cheap at half-a-sovereign, and was
impertinent enough to advise me the next time I went to a ball to
take a ’bus.
Captain Welcut received us, saying we were rather late, but that it
was better late than never.  He seemed a very good-looking
gentleman though, as Carrie remarked, “rather short for an
officer.”  He begged to be excused for leaving us, as he was
engaged for a dance, and hoped we should make ourselves at home.
Carrie took my arm and we walked round the rooms two or three times
and watched the people dancing.  I couldn’t find a single person I
knew, but attributed it to most of them being in uniform.  As we
were entering the supper-room I received a slap on the shoulder,
followed by a welcome shake of the hand.  I said:  “Mr. Padge, I
believe;” he replied, “That’s right.”
I gave Carrie a chair, and seated by her was a lady who made
herself at home with Carrie at once.
There was a very liberal repast on the tables, plenty of champagne,
claret, etc., and, in fact, everything seemed to be done regardless
of expense.  Mr. Padge is a man that, I admit, I have no particular
liking for, but I felt so glad to come across someone I knew, that
I asked him to sit at our table, and I must say that for a short
fat man he looked well in uniform, although I think his tunic was
rather baggy in the back.  It was the only supper-room that I have
been in that was not over-crowded; in fact we were the only people
there, everybody being so busy dancing.
I assisted Carrie and her newly-formed acquaintance, who said her
name was Lupkin, to some champagne; also myself, and handed the
bottle to Mr. Padge to do likewise, saying:  “You must look after
yourself.”  He replied:  “That’s right,” and poured out half a
tumbler and drank Carrie’s health, coupled, as he said, “with her
worthy lord and master.”  We all had some splendid pigeon pie, and
ices to follow.
The waiters were very attentive, and asked if we would like some
more wine.  I assisted Carrie and her friend and Mr. Padge, also
some people who had just come from the dancing-room, who were very
civil.  It occurred to me at the time that perhaps some of the
gentlemen knew me in the City, as they were so polite.  I made
myself useful, and assisted several ladies to ices, remembering an
old saying that “There is nothing lost by civility.”
The band struck up for the dance, and they all went into the ball-
room.  The ladies (Carrie and Mrs. Lupkin) were anxious to see the
dancing, and as I had not quite finished my supper, Mr. Padge
offered his arms to them and escorted them to the ball-room,
telling me to follow.  I said to Mr. Padge:  “It is quite a West
End affair,” to which remark Mr. Padge replied:  “That’s right.”
When I had quite finished my supper, and was leaving, the waiter
who had been attending on us arrested my attention by tapping me on
the shoulder.  I thought it unusual for a waiter at a private ball
to expect a tip, but nevertheless gave a shilling, as he had been
very attentive.  He smilingly replied:  “I beg your pardon, sir,
this is no good,” alluding to the shilling.  “Your party’s had four
suppers at 5s. a head, five ices at 1s., three bottles of champagne
at 11s. 6d., a glass of claret, and a sixpenny cigar for the stout
gentleman - in all 3 pounds 0s. 6d.!”
I don’t think I was ever so surprised in my life, and had only
sufficient breath to inform him that I had received a private
invitation, to which he answered that he was perfectly well aware
of that; but that the invitation didn’t include eatables and
drinkables.  A gentleman who was standing at the bar corroborated
the waiter’s statement, and assured me it was quite correct.
The waiter said he was extremely sorry if I had been under any
misapprehension; but it was not his fault.  Of course there was
nothing to be done but to pay.  So, after turning out my pockets, I
just managed to scrape up sufficient, all but nine shillings; but
the manager, on my giving my card to him, said:  “That’s all
right.”
I don’t think I ever felt more humiliated in my life, and I
determined to keep this misfortune from Carrie,  for it would
entirely destroy the pleasant evening she was enjoying.  I felt
there was no more enjoyment for me that evening, and it being late,
I sought Carrie and Mrs. Lupkin.  Carrie said she was quite ready
to go, and Mrs. Lupkin, as we were wishing her “Good-night,” asked
Carrie and myself if we ever paid a visit to Southend?  On my
replying that I hadn’t been there for many years, she very kindly
said:  “Well, why don’t you come down and stay at our place?”  As
her invitation was so pressing, and observing that Carrie wished to
go, we promised we would visit her the next Saturday week, and stay
till Monday.  Mrs. Lupkin said she would write to us to-morrow,
giving us the address and particulars of trains, etc.
When we got outside the Drill Hall it was raining so hard that the
roads resembled canals, and I need hardly say we had great
difficulty in getting a cabman to take us to Holloway.  After
waiting a bit, a man said he would drive us, anyhow, as far as “The
Angel,” at Islington, and we could easily get another cab from
there.  It was a tedious journey; the rain was beating against the
windows and trickling down the inside of the cab.
When we arrived at “The Angel” the horse seemed tired out.  Carrie
got out and ran into a doorway, and when I came to pay, to my
absolute horror I remembered I had no money, nor had Carrie.  I
explained to the cabman how we were situated.  Never in my life
have I ever been so insulted; the cabman, who was a rough bully and
to my thinking not sober, called me every name he could lay his
tongue to, and positively seized me by the beard, which he pulled
till the tears came into my eyes.  I took the number of a policeman
(who witnessed the assault) for not taking the man in charge.  The
policeman said he couldn’t interfere, that he had seen no assault,
and that people should not ride in cabs without money.
We had to walk home in the pouring rain, nearly two miles, and when
I got in I put down the conversation I had with the cabman, word
for word, as I intend writing to the TELEGRAPH for the purpose of
proposing that cabs should be driven only by men under Government
control, to prevent civilians being subjected to the disgraceful
insult and outrage that I had had to endure.
April 17. - No water in our cistern again.  Sent for Putley, who
said he would soon remedy that, the cistern being zinc.
April 18. - Water all right again in the cistern.  Mrs. James, of
Sutton, called in the afternoon.  She and Carrie draped the
mantelpiece in the drawing-room, and put little toy spiders, frogs
and beetles all over it, as Mrs. James says it’s quite the fashion.
It was Mrs. James’ suggestion, and of course Carrie always does
what Mrs. James suggests.  For my part, I preferred the mantelpiece
as it was; but there, I’m a plain man, and don’t pretend to be in
the fashion.
April 19. - Our next-door neighbour, Mr. Griffin, called, and in a
rather offensive tone accused me, or “someone,” of boring a hole in
his cistern and letting out his water to supply our cistern, which
adjoined his.  He said he should have his repaired, and send us in
the bill.
April 20. - Cummings called, hobbling in with a stick, saying he
had been on his back for a week.  It appears he was trying to shut
his bedroom door, which is situated just at the top of the
staircase, and unknown to him a piece of cork the dog had been
playing with had got between the door, and prevented it shutting;
and in pulling the door hard, to give it an extra slam, the handle
came off in his hands, and he fell backwards downstairs.
On hearing this, Lupin suddenly jumped up from the couch and rushed
out of the room sideways.  Cummings looked very indignant, and
remarked it was very poor fun a man nearly breaking his back; and
though I had my suspicions that Lupin was laughing, I assured
Cummings that he had only run out to open the door to a friend he
expected.  Cummings said this was the second time he had been laid
up, and we had never sent to inquire.  I said I knew nothing about
it.  Cummings said:  “It was mentioned in the BICYCLE NEWS.”
April 22. - I have of late frequently noticed Carrie rubbing her
nails a good deal with an instrument, and on asking her what she
was doing, she replied:  “Oh, I’m going in for manicuring.  It’s
all the fashion now.”  I said:  “I suppose Mrs. James introduced
that into your head.”  Carrie laughingly replied:  “Yes; but
everyone does it now.”
I wish Mrs. James wouldn’t come to the house.  Whenever she does
she always introduces some new-fandangled rubbish into Carrie’s
head.  One of these days I feel sure I shall tell her she’s not
welcome.  I am sure it was Mrs. James who put Carrie up to writing
on dark slate-coloured paper with white ink.  Nonsense!
April 23. - Received a letter from Mrs. Lupkin, of Southend,
telling us the train to come by on Saturday, and hoping we will
keep our promise to stay with her.  The letter concluded:  “You
must come and stay at our house; we shall charge you half what you
will have to pay at the Royal, and the view is every bit as good."
Looking at the address at the top of the note-paper, I found it was
“Lupkin’s Family and Commercial Hotel.”
I wrote a note, saying we were compelled to “decline her kind
invitation.”  Carrie thought this very satirical, and to the point.
By-the-by, I will never choose another cloth pattern at night.  I
ordered a new suit of dittos for the garden at Edwards’, and chose
the pattern by gaslight, and they seemed to be a quiet pepper-and-
salt mixture with white stripes down.  They came home this morning,
and, to my horror, I found it was quite a flash-looking suit.
There was a lot of green with bright yellow-coloured stripes.
I tried on the coat, and was annoyed to find Carrie giggling.  She
said:  “What mixture did you say you asked for?”
I said:  “A quiet pepper and salt.”
Carrie said:  “Well, it looks more like mustard, if you want to
know the truth.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
