


Tradesmen and the scraper still troublesome.  Gowing rather
tiresome with his complaints of the paint.  I make one of the best
jokes of my life.  Delights of Gardening.  Mr. Stillbrook, Gowing,
Cummings, and I have a little misunderstanding.  Sarah makes me
look a fool before Cummings

April 9. - Commenced the morning badly.  The butcher, whom we
decided NOT to arrange with, called and blackguarded me in the most
uncalled-for manner.  He began by abusing me, and saying he did not
want my custom.  I simply said:  “Then what are you making all this
fuss about it for?”  And he shouted out at the top of his voice, so
that all the neighbours could hear:  “Pah! go along.  Ugh!  I could
buy up ’things’ like you by the dozen!”
I shut the door, and was giving Carrie to understand that this
disgraceful scene was entirely her fault, when there was a violent
kicking at the door, enough to break the panels.  It was the
blackguard butcher again, who said he had cut his foot over the
scraper, and would immediately bring an action against me.  Called
at Farmerson’s, the ironmonger, on my way to town, and gave him the
job of moving the scraper and repairing the bells, thinking it
scarcely worth while to trouble the landlord with such a trifling
matter.
Arrived home tired and worried.  Mr. Putley, a painter and
decorator, who had sent in a card, said he could not match the
colour on the stairs, as it contained Indian carmine.  He said he
spent half-a-day calling at warehouses to see if he could get it.
He suggested he should entirely repaint the stairs.  It would cost
very little more; if he tried to match it, he could only make a bad
job of it.  It would be more satisfactory to him and to us to have
the work done properly.  I consented, but felt I had been talked
over.  Planted some mustard-and-cress and radishes, and went to bed
at nine.
April 10. - Farmerson came round to attend to the scraper himself.
He seems a very civil fellow.  He says he does not usually conduct
such small jobs personally, but for me he would do so.  I thanked
him, and went to town.  It is disgraceful how late some of the
young clerks are at arriving.  I told three of them that if Mr.
Perkupp, the principal, heard of it, they might be discharged.
Pitt, a monkey of seventeen, who has only been with us six weeks,
told me “to keep my hair on!”  I informed him I had had the honour
of being in the firm twenty years, to which he insolently replied
that I “looked it.”  I gave him an indignant look, and said:  “I
demand from you some respect, sir.”  He replied:  “All right, go on
demanding.”  I would not argue with him any further.  You cannot
argue with people like that.  In the evening Gowing called, and
repeated his complaint about the smell of paint.  Gowing is
sometimes very tedious with his remarks, and not always cautious;
and Carrie once very properly reminded him that she was present.
April 11. - Mustard-and-cress and radishes not come up yet.  To-day
was a day of annoyances.  I missed the quarter-to-nine ’bus to the
City, through having words with the grocer’s boy, who for the
second time had the impertinence to bring his basket to the hall-
door, and had left the marks of his dirty boots on the fresh-
cleaned door-steps.  He said he had knocked at the side door with
his knuckles for a quarter of an hour.  I knew Sarah, our servant,
could not hear this, as she was upstairs doing the bedrooms, so
asked the boy why he did not ring the bell?  He replied that he did
pull the bell, but the handle came off in his hand.
I was half-an-hour late at the office, a thing that has never
happened to me before.  There has recently been much irregularity
in the attendance of the clerks, and Mr. Perkupp, our principal,
unfortunately choose this very morning to pounce down upon us
early.  Someone had given the tip to the others.  The result was
that I was the only one late of the lot.  Buckling, one of the
senior clerks, was a brick, and I was saved by his intervention.
As I passed by Pitt’s desk, I heard him remark to his neighbour:
“How disgracefully late some of the head clerks arrive!”  This was,
of course, meant for me.  I treated the observation with silence,
simply giving him a look, which unfortunately had the effect of
making both of the clerks laugh.  Thought afterwards it would have
been more dignified if I had pretended not to have heard him at
all.  Cummings called in the evening, and we played dominoes.
April 12. - Mustard-and-cress and radishes not come up yet.  Left
Farmerson repairing the scraper, but when I came home found three
men working.  I asked the meaning of it, and Farmerson said that in
making a fresh hole he had penetrated the gas-pipe.  He said it was
a most ridiculous place to put the gas-pipe, and the man who did it
evidently knew nothing about his business.  I felt his excuse was
no consolation for the expense I shall be put to.
In the evening, after tea, Gowing dropped in, and we had a smoke
together in the breakfast-parlour.  Carrie joined us later, but did
not stay long, saying the smoke was too much for her.  It was also
rather too much for me, for Gowing had given me what he called a
green cigar, one that his friend Shoemach had just brought over
from America.  The cigar didn’t look green, but I fancy I must have
done so; for when I had smoked a little more than half I was
obliged to retire on the pretext of telling Sarah to bring in the
glasses.
I took a walk round the garden three or four times, feeling the
need of fresh air.  On returning Gowing noticed I was not smoking:
offered me another cigar, which I politely declined.  Gowing began
his usual sniffing, so, anticipating him, I said:  “You’re not
going to complain of the smell of paint again?”  He said:  “No, not
this time; but I’ll tell you what, I distinctly smell dry rot.”  I
don’t often make jokes, but I replied:  “You’re talking a lot of
DRY ROT yourself.”  I could not help roaring at this, and Carrie
said her sides quite ached with laughter.  I never was so immensely
tickled by anything I have ever said before.  I actually woke up
twice during the night, and laughed till the bed shook.
April 13. - An extraordinary coincidence:  Carrie had called in a
woman to make some chintz covers for our drawing-room chairs and
sofa to prevent the sun fading the green rep of the furniture.  I
saw the woman, and recognised her as a woman who used to work years
ago for my old aunt at Clapham.  It only shows how small the world
is.
April 14. - Spent the whole of the afternoon in the garden, having
this morning picked up at a bookstall for fivepence a capital
little book, in good condition, on GARDENING.  I procured and sowed
some half-hardy annuals in what I fancy will be a warm, sunny
border.  I thought of a joke, and called out Carrie.  Carrie came
out rather testy, I thought.  I said:  “I have just discovered we
have got a lodging-house.”  She replied:  “How do you mean?”  I
said:  “Look at the BOARDERS.”  Carrie said:  “Is that all you
wanted me for?”  I said:  “Any other time you would have laughed at
my little pleasantry.”  Carrie said:  “Certainly - AT ANY OTHER
TIME, but not when I am busy in the house.”  The stairs looked very
nice.  Gowing called, and said the stairs looked ALL RIGHT, but it
made the banisters look ALL WRONG, and suggested a coat of paint on
them also, which Carrie quite agreed with.  I walked round to
Putley, and fortunately he was out, so I had a good excuse to let
the banisters slide.  By-the-by, that is rather funny.


Stillbrooks lags behind. Going up hill.

April 15, Sunday. - At three o’clock Cummings and Gowing called for
a good long walk over Hampstead and Finchley, and brought with them
a friend named Stillbrook.  We walked and chatted together, except
Stillbrook, who was always a few yards behind us staring at the
ground and cutting at the grass with his stick.
As it was getting on for five, we four held a consultation, and
Gowing suggested that we should make for “The Cow and Hedge” and
get some tea.  Stillbrook said:  “A brandy-and-soda was good enough
for him.”  I reminded them that all public-houses were closed till
six o’clock.  Stillbrook said, “That’s all right - BONA-FIDE
travellers.”
We arrived; and as I was trying to pass, the man in charge of the
gate said:  “Where from?”  I replied:  “Holloway.”  He immediately
put up his arm, and declined to let me pass.  I turned back for a
moment, when I saw Stillbrook, closely followed by Cummings and
Gowing, make for the entrance.  I watched them, and thought I would
have a good laugh at their expense, I heard the porter say:  “Where
from?”  When, to my surprise, in fact disgust, Stillbrook replied:
“Blackheath,” and the three were immediately admitted.
Gowing called to me across the gate, and said:  “We shan’t be a
minute.”  I waited for them the best part of an hour.  When they
appeared they were all in most excellent spirits, and the only one
who made an effort to apologise was Mr. Stillbrook, who said to me:
“It was very rough on you to be kept waiting, but we had another
spin for S. and B.’s.”  I walked home in silence; I couldn’t speak
to them.  I felt very dull all the evening, but deemed it advisable
NOT to say anything to Carrie about the matter.
April 16. - After business, set to work in the garden.  When it got
dark I wrote to Cummings and Gowing (who neither called, for a
wonder; perhaps they were ashamed of themselves) about yesterday’s
adventure at “The Cow and Hedge.”  Afterwards made up my mind not
to write YET.
April 17. - Thought I would write a kind little note to Gowing and
Cummings about last Sunday, and warning them against Mr.
Stillbrook.  Afterwards, thinking the matter over, tore up the
letters and determined not to WRITE at all, but to SPEAK quietly to
them.  Dumfounded at receiving a sharp letter from Cummings, saying
that both he and Gowing had been waiting for an explanation of MY
(mind you, MY) extraordinary conduct coming home on Sunday.  At
last I wrote:  “I thought I was the aggrieved party; but as I
freely forgive you, you - feeling yourself aggrieved - should
bestow forgiveness on me.”  I have copied this VERBATIM in the
diary, because I think it is one of the most perfect and thoughtful
sentences I have ever written.  I posted the letter, but in my own
heart I felt I was actually apologising for having been insulted.
April 18. - Am in for a cold.  Spent the whole day at the office
sneezing.  In the evening, the cold being intolerable, sent Sarah
out for a bottle of Kinahan.  Fell asleep in the arm-chair, and
woke with the shivers.  Was startled by a loud knock at the front
door.  Carrie awfully flurried.  Sarah still out, so went up,
opened the door, and found it was only Cummings.  Remembered the
grocer’s boy had again broken the side-bell.  Cummings squeezed my
hand, and said:  “I’ve just seen Gowing.  All right.  Say no more
about it.”  There is no doubt they are both under the impression I
have apologised.
While playing dominoes with Cummings in the parlour, he said:  “By-
the-by, do you want any wine or spirits?  My cousin Merton has just
set up in the trade, and has a splendid whisky, four years in
bottle, at thirty-eight shillings.  It is worth your while laying
down a few dozen of it.”  I told him my cellars, which were very
small, were full up.  To my horror, at that very moment, Sarah
entered the room, and putting a bottle of whisky, wrapped in a
dirty piece of newspaper, on the table in front of us, said:
“Please, sir, the grocer says he ain’t got no more Kinahan, but
you’ll find this very good at two-and-six, with twopence returned
on the bottle; and, please, did you want any more sherry? as he has
some at one-and-three, as dry as a nut!”


’Please, sir, the grocer says he ain’t got no more Kinahan, but you’ll find this very good at two-and-six.’

Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
