


One of the happiest days of my life.

July 10. - The excitement and anxiety through which I have gone the
last few days have been almost enough to turn my hair grey.  It is
all but settled.  To-morrow the die will be cast.  I have written a
long letter to Lupin - feeling it my duty to do so, - regarding his
attention to Mrs. Posh, for they drove up to our house again last
night.
July 11. - I find my eyes filling with tears as I pen the note of
my interview this morning with Mr. Perkupp.  Addressing me, he
said:  “My faithful servant, I will not dwell on the important
service you have done our firm.  You can never be sufficiently
thanked.  Let us change the subject.  Do you like your house, and
are you happy where you are?”
I replied:  “Yes, sir; I love my house and I love the
neighbourhood, and could not bear to leave it.”
Mr. Perkupp, to my surprise, said:  “Mr. Pooter, I will purchase
the freehold of that house, and present it to the most honest and
most worthy man it has ever been my lot to meet.”
He shook my hand, and said he hoped my wife and I would be spared
many years to enjoy it.  My heart was too full to thank him; and,
seeing my embarrassment, the good fellow said:  “You need say
nothing, Mr. Pooter,” and left the office.
I sent telegrams to Carrie, Gowing, and Cummings (a thing I have
never done before), and asked the two latter to come round to
supper.
On arriving home I found Carrie crying with joy, and I sent Sarah
round to the grocer’s to get two bottles of “Jackson Freres.”
My two dear friends came in the evening, and the last post brought
a letter from Lupin in reply to mine.  I read it aloud to them all.
It ran:
“My dear old Guv., - Keep your hair on.  You are on the
wrong tack again.  I am engaged to be married to ’Lillie Girl.’  I
did not mention it last Thursday, as it was not definitely settled.
We shall be married in August, and amongst our guests we hope to
see your old friends Gowing and Cummings.  With much love to all,
from
The same old Lupin.”
 

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
