


Lupin is discharged.  We are in great trouble.  Lupin gets engaged
elsewhere at a handsome salary.

May 13. - A terrible misfortune has happened:  Lupin is discharged
from Mr. Perkupp’s office; and I scarcely know how I am writing my
diary.  I was away from office last Sat., the first time I have
been absent through illness for twenty years.  I believe I was
poisoned by some lobster.  Mr. Perkupp was also absent, as Fate
would have it; and our most valued customer, Mr. Crowbillon, went
to the office in a rage, and withdrew his custom.  My boy Lupin not
only had the assurance to receive him, but recommended him the firm
of Gylterson, Sons and Co. Limited.  In my own humble judgment, and
though I have to say it against my own son, this seems an act of
treachery.
This morning I receive a letter from Perkupp, informing me that
Lupin’s services are no longer required, and an interview with me
is desired at eleven o’clock.  I went down to the office with an
aching heart, dreading an interview with Mr. Perkupp, with whom I
have never had a word.  I saw nothing of Lupin in the morning.  He
had not got up when it was time for me to leave, and Carrie said I
should do no good by disturbing him.  My mind wandered so at the
office that I could not do my work properly.
As I expected, I was sent for by Mr. Perkupp, and the following
conversation ensued as nearly as I can remember it.
Mr. Perkupp said:  “Good-morning, Mr. Pooter!  This is a very
serious business.  I am not referring so much to the dismissal of
your son, for I knew we should have to part sooner or later.  I am
the head of this old, influential, and much-respected firm; and
when I consider the time has come to revolutionise the business, I
will do it myself.”
I could see my good master was somewhat affected, and I said:  “I
hope, sir, you do not imagine that I have in any way countenanced
my son’s unwarrantable interference?”  Mr. Perkupp rose from his
seat and took my hand, and said:  “Mr. Pooter, I would as soon
suspect myself as suspect you.”  I was so agitated that in the
confusion, to show my gratitude I very nearly called him a “grand
old man.”
Fortunately I checked myself in time, and said he was a “grand old
master.”  I was so unaccountable for my actions that I sat down,
leaving him standing.  Of course, I at once rose, but Mr. Perkupp
bade me sit down, which I was very pleased to do.  Mr. Perkupp,
resuming, said:  “You will understand, Mr. Pooter, that the high-
standing nature of our firm will not admit of our bending to
anybody.  If Mr. Crowbillon chooses to put his work into other
hands - I may add, less experienced hands - it is not for us to
bend and beg back his custom.”  “You SHALL not do it, sir,” I said
with indignation.  “Exactly,” replied Mr. Perkupp; “I shall NOT do
it.  But I was thinking this, Mr. Pooter.  Mr. Crowbillon is our
most valued client, and I will even confess - for I know this will
not go beyond ourselves - that we cannot afford very well to lose
him, especially in these times, which are not of the brightest.
Now, I fancy you can be of service.”
I replied:  “Mr. Perkupp, I will work day and night to serve you!”
Mr. Perkupp said:  “I know you will.  Now, what I should like you
to do is this.  You yourself might write to Mr. Crowbillon - you
must not, of course, lead him to suppose I know anything about your
doing so - and explain to him that your son was only taken on as a
clerk - quite an inexperienced one in fact - out of the respect the
firm had for you, Mr. Pooter.  This is, of course, a fact.  I don’t
suggest that you should speak in too strong terms of your own son’s
conduct; but I may add, that had he been a son of mine, I should
have condemned his interference with no measured terms.  That I
leave to you.  I think the result will be that Mr. Crowbillon will
see the force of the foolish step he has taken, and our firm will
neither suffer in dignity nor in pocket.”
I could not help thinking what a noble gentleman Mr. Perkupp is.
His manners and his way of speaking seem to almost thrill one with
respect.
I said:  “Would you like to see the letter before I send it?”
Mr. Perkupp said:  “Oh no!  I had better not.  I am supposed to
know nothing about it, and I have every confidence in you.  You
must write the letter carefully.  We are not very busy; you had
better take the morning to-morrow, or the whole day if you like.  I
shall be here myself all day to-morrow, in fact all the week, in
case Mr. Crowbillon should call.”
I went home a little more cheerful, but I left word with Sarah that
I could not see either Gowing or Cummings, nor in fact anybody, if
they called in the evening.  Lupin came into the parlour for a
moment with a new hat on, and asked my opinion of it.  I said I was
not in the mood to judge of hats, and I did not think he was in a
position to buy a new one.  Lupin replied carelessly:  “I didn’t
buy it; it was a present.”
I have such terrible suspicions of Lupin now that I scarcely like
to ask him questions, as I dread the answers so.  He, however,
saved me the trouble.
He said:  “I met a friend, an old friend, that I did not quite
think a friend at the time; but it’s all right.  As he wisely said,
’all is fair in love and war,’ and there was no reason why we
should not be friends still.  He’s a jolly, good, all-round sort of
fellow, and a very different stamp from that inflated fool of a
Perkupp.”
I said:  “Hush, Lupin!  Do not pray add insult to injury.”
Lupin said:  “What do you mean by injury?  I repeat, I have done no
injury.  Crowbillon is simply tired of a stagnant stick-in-the-mud
firm, and made the change on his own account.  I simply recommended
the new firm as a matter of biz - good old biz!”
I said quietly:  “I don’t understand your slang, and at my time of
life have no desire to learn it; so, Lupin, my boy, let us change
the subject.  I will, if it please you, TRY and be interested in
your new hat adventure.”
Lupin said:  “Oh! there’s nothing much about it, except I have not
once seen him since his marriage, and he said he was very pleased
to see me, and hoped we should be friends.  I stood a drink to
cement the friendship, and he stood me a new hat - one of his own.”
I said rather wearily:  “But you have not told me your old friend’s
name?”
Lupin said, with affected carelessness:  “Oh didn’t I?  Well, I
will.  It was MURRAY POSH.”
May 14. - Lupin came down late, and seeing me at home all the
morning, asked the reason of it.  Carrie and I both agreed it was
better to say nothing to him about the letter I was writing, so I
evaded the question.
Lupin went out, saying he was going to lunch with Murray Posh in
the City.  I said I hoped Mr. Posh would provide him with a berth.
Lupin went out laughing, saying:  “I don’t mind WEARING Posh’s one-
priced hats, but I am not going to SELL them.”  Poor boy, I fear he
is perfectly hopeless.
It took me nearly the whole day to write to Mr. Crowbillon.  Once
or twice I asked Carrie for suggestions; and although it seems
ungrateful, her suggestions were none of them to the point, while
one or two were absolutely idiotic.  Of course I did not tell her
so.  I got the letter off, and took it down to the office for Mr.
Perkupp to see, but he again repeated that he could trust me.
Gowing called in the evening, and I was obliged to tell him about
Lupin and Mr. Perkupp; and, to my surprise, he was quite inclined
to side with Lupin.  Carrie joined in, and said she thought I was
taking much too melancholy a view of it.  Gowing produced a pint
sample-bottle of Madeira, which had been given him, which he said
would get rid of the blues.  I dare say it would have done so if
there had been more of it; but as Gowing helped himself to three
glasses, it did not leave much for Carrie and me to get rid of the
blues with.
May 15. - A day of great anxiety, for I expected every moment a
letter from Mr. Crowbillon.  Two letters came in the evening - one
for me, with “Crowbillon Hall” printed in large gold-and-red
letters on the back of the envelope; the other for Lupin, which I
felt inclined to open and read, as it had “Gylterson, Sons, and Co.
Limited,” which was the recommended firm.  I trembled as I opened
Mr. Crowbillon’s letter.  I wrote him sixteen pages, closely
written; he wrote me less than sixteen lines.
His letter was:
“Sir, - I totally disagree with you.  Your son, in
the course of five minutes’ conversation, displayed more
intelligence than your firm has done during the last five years. -
Yours faithfully, Gilbert E. Gillam O. Crowbillon.“
What am I to do?  Here is a letter that I dare not show to Mr.
Perkupp, and would not show to Lupin for anything.  The crisis had
yet to come; for Lupin arrived, and, opening his letter, showed a
cheque for 25 pounds as a commission for the recommendation of Mr.
Crowbillon, whose custom to Mr. Perkupp is evidently lost for ever.
Cummings and Gowing both called, and both took Lupin’s part.
Cummings went so far as to say that Lupin would make a name yet.  I
suppose I was melancholy, for I could only ask:  “Yes, but what
sort of a name?”
May 16. - I told Mr. Perkupp the contents of the letter in a
modified form, but Mr. Perkupp said:  “Pray don’t discuss the
matter; it is at an end.  Your son will bring his punishment upon
himself.”  I went home in the evening, thinking of the hopeless
future of Lupin.  I found him in most extravagant spirits and in
evening dress.  He threw a letter on the table for me to read.
To my amazement, I read that Gylterson and Sons had absolutely
engaged Lupin at a salary of 200 pounds a year, with other
advantages.  I read the letter through three times and thought it
must have been for me.  But there it was - Lupin Pooter - plain
enough.  I was silent.  Lupin said:  “What price Perkupp now?  You
take my tip, Guv. - ’off’ with Perkupp and freeze on to Gylterson,
the firm of the future!  Perkupp’s firm?  The stagnant dummies have
been standing still for years, and now are moving back.  I want to
go on.  In fact I must go OFF, as I am dining with the Murray Poshs
to-night.”
In the exuberance of his spirits he hit his hat with his stick,
gave a loud war “Whoo-oop,” jumped over a chair, and took the
liberty of rumpling my hair all over my forehead, and bounced out
of the room, giving me no chance of reminding him of his age and
the respect which was due to his parent.  Gowing and Cummings came
in the evening, and positively cheered me up with congratulations
respecting Lupin.
Gowing said:  “I always said he would get on, and, take my word, he
has more in his head than we three put together.”
Carrie said:  “He is a second Hardfur Huttle.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
