


Marriage of Daisy Mutlar and Murray Posh.  The dream of my life
realised.  Mr. Perkupp takes Lupin into the office.

March 20. - To-day being the day on which Daisy Mutlar and Mr.
Murray Posh are to be married, Lupin has gone with a friend to
spend the day at Gravesend.  Lupin has been much cut-up over the
affair, although he declares that he is glad it is off.  I wish he
would not go to so many music-halls, but one dare not say anything
to him about it.  At the present moment he irritates me by singing
all over the house some nonsense about “What’s the matter with
Gladstone?  He’s all right!  What’s the matter with Lupin?  He’s
all right!”  I don’t think either of them is.  In the evening
Gowing called, and the chief topic of conversation was Daisy’s
marriage to Murray Posh.  I said:  “I was glad the matter was at an
end, as Daisy would only have made a fool of Lupin.”  Gowing, with
his usual good taste, said:  “Oh, Master Lupin can make a fool of
himself without any assistance.”  Carrie very properly resented
this, and Gowing had sufficient sense to say he was sorry.
March 21. - To-day I shall conclude my diary, for it is one of the
happiest days of my life.  My great dream of the last few weeks -
in fact, of many years - has been realised.  This morning came a
letter from Mr. Perkupp, asking me to take Lupin down to the office
with me.  I went to Lupin’s room; poor fellow, he seemed very pale,
and said he had a bad headache.  He had come back yesterday from
Gravesend, where he spent part of the day in a small boat on the
water, having been mad enough to neglect to take his overcoat with
him.  I showed him Mr. Perkupp’s letter, and he got up as quickly
as possible.  I begged of him not to put on his fast-coloured
clothes and ties, but to dress in something black or quiet-looking.
Carrie was all of a tremble when she read the letter, and all she
could keep on saying was:  “Oh, I DO hope it will be all right."
For myself, I could scarcely eat any breakfast.  Lupin came down
dressed quietly, and looking a perfect gentleman, except that his
face was rather yellow.  Carrie, by way of encouragement said:
“You do look nice, Lupin.”  Lupin replied:  “Yes, it’s a good make-
up, isn’t it?  A regular-downright-respectable-funereal-first-
class-City-firm-junior-clerk.”  He laughed rather ironically.
In the hall I heard a great noise, and also Lupin shouting to Sarah
to fetch down his old hat.  I went into the passage, and found
Lupin in a fury, kicking and smashing a new tall hat.  I said:
“Lupin, my boy, what are you doing?  How wicked of you!  Some poor
fellow would be glad to have it.”  Lupin replied:  “I would not
insult any poor fellow by giving it to him.”
When he had gone outside, I picked up the battered hat, and saw
inside “Posh’s Patent.”  Poor Lupin!  I can forgive him.  It seemed
hours before we reached the office.  Mr. Perkupp sent for Lupin,
who was with him nearly an hour.  He returned, as I thought,
crestfallen in appearance.  I said:  “Well, Lupin, how about Mr.
Perkupp?”  Lupin commenced his song:  “What’s the matter with
Perkupp?  He’s all right!”  I felt instinctively my boy was
engaged.  I went to Mr. Perkupp, but I could not speak.  He said:
“Well, Mr. Pooter, what is it?”  I must have looked a fool, for all
I could say was:  “Mr. Perkupp, you are a good man.”  He looked at
me for a moment, and said:  “No, Mr. Pooter, YOU are the good man;
and we’ll see if we cannot get your son to follow such an excellent
example.”  I said:  “Mr. Perkupp, may I go home?  I cannot work any
more to-day.”
My good master shook my hand warmly as he nodded his head.  It was
as much as I could do to prevent myself from crying in the ’bus; in
fact, I should have done so, had my thoughts not been interrupted
by Lupin, who was having a quarrel with a fat man in the ’bus, whom
he accused of taking up too much room.
In the evening Carrie sent round for dear old friend Cummings and
his wife, and also to Gowing.  We all sat round the fire, and in a
bottle of “Jackson Freres,” which Sarah fetched from the grocer’s,
drank Lupin’s health.  I lay awake for hours, thinking of the
future.  My boy in the same office as myself - we can go down
together by the ’bus, come home together, and who knows but in the
course of time he may take great interest in our little home.  That
he may help me to put a nail in here or a nail in there, or help
his dear mother to hang a picture.  In the summer he may help us in
our little garden with the flowers, and assist us to paint the
stands and pots.  (By-the-by, I must get in some more enamel
paint.)  All this I thought over and over again, and a thousand
happy thoughts beside.  I heard the clock strike four, and soon
after fell asleep, only to dream of three happy people - Lupin,
dear Carrie, and myself.
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
