


I receive an insulting Christmas card.  We spend a pleasant
Christmas at Carrie’s mother’s.  A Mr. Moss is rather too free.  A
boisterous evening, during which I am struck in the dark.  I
receive an extraordinary letter from Mr. Mutlar, senior, respecting
Lupin.  We miss drinking out the Old Year.

December 24. - I am a poor man, but I would gladly give ten
shillings to find out who sent me the insulting Christmas card I
received this morning.  I never insult people; why should they
insult me?  The worst part of the transaction is, that I find
myself suspecting all my friends.  The handwriting on the envelope
is evidently disguised, being written sloping the wrong way.  I
cannot think either Gowing or Cummings would do such a mean thing.
Lupin denied all knowledge of it, and I believe him; although I
disapprove of his laughing and sympathising with the offender.  Mr.
Franching would be above such an act; and I don’t think any of the
Mutlars would descend to such a course.  I wonder if Pitt, that
impudent clerk at the office, did it?  Or Mrs. Birrell, the
charwoman, or Burwin-Fosselton?  The writing is too good for the
former.
Christmas Day. - We caught the 10.20 train at Paddington, and spent
a pleasant day at Carrie’s mother’s.  The country was quite nice
and pleasant, although the roads were sloppy.  We dined in the
middle of the day, just ten of us, and talked over old times.  If
everybody had a nice, UNinterfering mother-in-law, such as I have,
what a deal of happiness there would be in the world.  Being all in
good spirits, I proposed her health, and I made, I think, a very
good speech.
I concluded, rather neatly, by saying:  “On an occasion like this -
whether relatives, friends, or acquaintances, - we are all inspired
with good feelings towards each other.  We are of one mind, and
think only of love and friendship.  Those who have quarrelled with
absent friends should kiss and make it up.  Those who happily have
not fallen out, can kiss all the same.”
I saw the tears in the eyes of both Carrie and her mother, and must
say I felt very flattered by the compliment.  That dear old
Reverend John Panzy Smith, who married us, made a most cheerful and
amusing speech, and said he should act on my suggestion respecting
the kissing.  He then walked round the table and kissed all the
ladies, including Carrie.  Of course one did not object to this;
but I was more than staggered when a young fellow named Moss, who
was a stranger to me, and who had scarcely spoken a word through
dinner, jumped up suddenly with a sprig of misletoe, and exclaimed:
“Hulloh!  I don’t see why I shouldn’t be on in this scene.”  Before
one could realise what he was about to do, he kissed Carrie and the
rest of the ladies.
Fortunately the matter was treated as a joke, and we all laughed;
but it was a dangerous experiment, and I felt very uneasy for a
moment as to the result.  I subsequently referred to the matter to
Carrie, but she said:  “Oh, he’s not much more than a boy.”  I said
that he had a very large moustache for a boy.  Carrie replied:  “I
didn’t say he was not a nice boy.”
December 26. - I did not sleep very well last night; I never do in
a strange bed.  I feel a little indigestion, which one must expect
at this time of the year.  Carrie and I returned to Town in the
evening.  Lupin came in late.  He said he enjoyed his Christmas,
and added:  “I feel as fit as a Lowther Arcade fiddle, and only
require a little more ’oof’ to feel as fit as a 500 pounds
Stradivarius.”  I have long since given up trying to understand
Lupin’s slang, or asking him to explain it.
December 27. - I told Lupin I was expecting Gowing and Cummings to
drop in to-morrow evening for a quiet game.  I was in hope the boy
would volunteer to stay in, and help to amuse them.  Instead of
which, he said:  “Oh, you had better put them off, as I have asked
Daisy and Frank Mutlar to come.”  I said I could not think of doing
such a thing.  Lupin said:  “Then I will send a wire, and put off
Daisy.”  I suggested that a post-card or letter would reach her
quite soon enough, and would not be so extravagant.
Carrie, who had listened to the above conversation with apparent
annoyance, directed a well-aimed shaft at Lupin.  She said:
“Lupin, why do you object to Daisy meeting your father’s friends?
Is it because they are not good enough for her, or (which is
equally possible) SHE is not good enough for them?”  Lupin was
dumbfounded, and could make no reply.  When he left the room, I
gave Carrie a kiss of approval.
December 28 - Lupin, on coming down to breakfast, said to his
mother:  “I have not put off Daisy and Frank, and should like them
to join Gowing and Cummings this evening.”  I felt very pleased
with the boy for this.  Carrie said, in reply:  “I am glad you let
me know in time, as I can turn over the cold leg of mutton, dress
it with a little parsley, and no one will know it has been cut."
She further said she would make a few custards, and stew some
pippins, so that they would be cold by the evening.
Finding Lupin in good spirits, I asked him quietly if he really had
any personal objection to either Gowing or Cummings.  He replied:
“Not in the least.  I think Cummings looks rather an ass, but that
is partly due to his patronising ’the three-and-six-one-price hat
company,’ and wearing a reach-me-down frock-coat.  As for that
perpetual brown velveteen jacket of Gowing’s - why, he resembles an
itinerant photographer.”
I said it was not the coat that made the gentleman; whereupon
Lupin, with a laugh, replied:  “No, and it wasn’t much of a
gentleman who made their coats.”
We were rather jolly at supper, and Daisy made herself very
agreeable, especially in the earlier part of the evening, when she
sang.  At supper, however, she said:  “Can you make tee-to-tums
with bread?” and she commenced rolling up pieces of bread, and
twisting them round on the table.  I felt this to be bad manners,
but of course said nothing.  Presently Daisy and Lupin, to my
disgust, began throwing bread-pills at each other.  Frank followed
suit, and so did Cummings and Gowing, to my astonishment.  They
then commenced throwing hard pieces of crust, one piece catching me
on the forehead, and making me blink.  I said:  “Steady, please;
steady!”  Frank jumped up and said:  “Tum, tum; then the band
played.”
I did not know what this meant, but they all roared, and continued
the bread-battle.  Gowing suddenly seized all the parsley off the
cold mutton, and threw it full in my face.  I looked daggers at
Gowing, who replied:  “I say, it’s no good trying to look
indignant, with your hair full of parsley.”  I rose from the table,
and insisted that a stop should be put to this foolery at once.
Frank Mutlar shouted:  “Time, gentlemen, please! time!” and turned
out the gas, leaving us in absolute darkness.
I was feeling my way out of the room, when I suddenly received a
hard intentional punch at the back of my head.  I said loudly:
“Who did that?”  There was no answer; so I repeated the question,
with the same result.  I struck a match, and lighted the gas.  They
were all talking and laughing, so I kept my own counsel; but, after
they had gone, I said to Carrie; “The person who sent me that
insulting post-card at Christmas was here to-night.”
December 29. - I had a most vivid dream last night.  I woke up, and
on falling asleep, dreamed the same dream over again precisely.  I
dreamt I heard Frank Mutlar telling his sister that he had not only
sent me the insulting Christmas card, but admitted that he was the
one who punched my head last night in the dark.  As fate would have
it, Lupin, at breakfast, was reading extracts from a letter he had
just received from Frank.
I asked him to pass the envelope, that I might compare the writing.
He did so, and I examined it by the side of the envelope containing
the Christmas card.  I detected a similarity in the writing, in
spite of the attempted disguise.  I passed them on to Carrie, who
began to laugh.  I asked her what she was laughing at, and she said
the card was never directed to me at all.  It was “L. Pooter,” not
“C. Pooter.”  Lupin asked to look at the direction and the card,
and exclaimed, with a laugh:  “Oh yes, Guv., it’s meant for me.”
I said:  “Are you in the habit of receiving insulting Christmas
cards?”  He replied:  “Oh yes, and of SENDING them, too.”
In the evening Gowing called, and said he enjoyed himself very much
last night.  I took the opportunity to confide in him, as an old
friend, about the vicious punch last night.  He burst out laughing,
and said:  “Oh, it was YOUR HEAD, was it?  I know I accidentally
hit something, but I thought it was a brick wall.”  I told him I
felt hurt, in both senses of the expression.
December 30, Sunday. - Lupin spent the whole day with the Mutlars.
He seemed rather cheerful in the evening, so I said:  “I’m glad to
see you so happy, Lupin.”  He answered:  “Well, Daisy is a splendid
girl, but I was obliged to take her old fool of a father down a
peg.  What with his meanness over his cigars, his stinginess over
his drinks, his farthing economy in turning down the gas if you
only quit the room for a second, writing to one on half-sheets of
note-paper, sticking the remnant of the last cake of soap on to the
new cake, putting two bricks on each side of the fireplace, and his
general ’outside-halfpenny-’bus-ness,’ I was compelled to let him
have a bit of my mind.”  I said:  “Lupin, you are not much more
than a boy; I hope you won’t repent it.”
December 31. - The last day of the Old Year.  I received an
extraordinary letter from Mr. Mutlar, senior.  He writes:  “Dear
Sir, - For a long time past I have had considerable difficulty
deciding the important question, ’Who is the master of my own
house?  Myself, or YOUR SON Lupin?’  Believe me, I have no
prejudice one way or the other; but I have been most reluctantly
compelled to give judgment to the effect that I am the master of
it.  Under the circumstances, it has become my duty to forbid your
son to enter my house again.  I am sorry, because it deprives me of
the society of one of the most modest, unassuming, and gentlemanly
persons I have ever had the honour of being acquainted with.”
I did not desire the last day to wind up disagreeably, so I said
nothing to either Carrie or Lupin about the letter.
A most terrible fog came on, and Lupin would go out in it, but
promised to be back to drink out the Old Year - a custom we have
always observed.  At a quarter to twelve Lupin had not returned,
and the fog was fearful.  As time was drawing close, I got out the
spirits.  Carrie and I deciding on whisky, I opened a fresh bottle;
but Carrie said it smelt like brandy.  As I knew it to be whisky, I
said there was nothing to discuss.  Carrie, evidently vexed that
Lupin had not come in, did discuss it all the same, and wanted me
to have a small wager with her to decide by the smell.  I said I
could decide it by the taste in a moment.  A silly and unnecessary
argument followed, the result of which was we suddenly saw it was a
quarter-past twelve, and, for the first time in our married life,
we missed welcoming in the New Year.  Lupin got home at a quarter-
past two, having got lost in the fog - so he said.
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
