


Reflections.  I make another Good Joke.  Am annoyed at the constant
serving-up of the “Blanc-Mange.”  Lupin expresses his opinion of
Weddings.  Lupin falls out with Daisy Mutlar.

November 16. - Woke about twenty times during the night, with
terrible thirst.  Finished off all the water in the bottle, as well
as half that in the jug.  Kept dreaming also, that last night’s
party was a failure, and that a lot of low people came without
invitation, and kept chaffing and throwing things at Mr. Perkupp,
till at last I was obliged to hide him in the box-room (which we
had just discovered), with a bath-towel over him.  It seems absurd
now, but it was painfully real in the dream.  I had the same dream
about a dozen times.
Carrie annoyed me by saying:  “You know champagne never agrees with
you.”  I told her I had only a couple of glasses of it, having kept
myself entirely to port.  I added that good champagne hurt nobody,
and Lupin told me he had only got it from a traveller as a favour,
as that particular brand had been entirely bought up by a West-End
club.
I think I ate too heartily of the “side dishes,” as the waiter
called them.  I said to Carrie:  “I wish I had put those ’side
dishes’ ASIDE.”  I repeated this, but Carrie was busy, packing up
the teaspoons we had borrowed of Mrs. Cummings for the party.  It
was just half-past eleven, and I was starting for the office, when
Lupin appeared, with a yellow complexion, and said:  “Hulloh! Guv.,
what priced head have you this morning?”  I told him he might just
as well speak to me in Dutch.  He added:  “When I woke this
morning, my head was as big as Baldwin’s balloon.”  On the spur of
the moment I said the cleverest thing I think I have ever said;
viz.:  “Perhaps that accounts for the paraSHOOTING pains.”  We
roared.
November 17. - Still feel tired and headachy!  In the evening
Gowing called, and was full of praise about our party last
Wednesday.  He said everything was done beautifully, and he enjoyed
himself enormously.  Gowing can be a very nice fellow when he
likes, but you never know how long it will last.  For instance, he
stopped to supper, and seeing some BLANC-MANGE on the table,
shouted out, while the servant was in the room:  “Hulloh!  The
remains of Wednesday?”
November 18. - Woke up quite fresh after a good night’s rest, and
feel quite myself again.  I am satisfied a life of going-out and
Society is not a life for me; we therefore declined the invitation
which we received this morning to Miss Bird’s wedding.  We only met
her twice at Mrs. James’, and it means a present.  Lupin said:  “I
am with you for once.  To my mind a wedding’s a very poor play.
There are only two parts in it - the bride and bridegroom.  The
best man is only a walking gentleman.  With the exception of a
crying father and a snivelling mother, the rest are SUPERS who have
to dress well and have to PAY for their insignificant parts in the
shape of costly presents.”  I did not care for the theatrical
slang, but thought it clever, though disrespectful.
I told Sarah not to bring up the BLANC-MANGE again for breakfast.
It seems to have been placed on our table at every meal since
Wednesday.  Cummings came round in the evening, and congratulated
us on the success of our party.  He said it was the best party he
had been to for many a year; but he wished we had let him know it
was full dress, as he would have turned up in his swallow-tails.
We sat down to a quiet game of dominoes, and were interrupted by
the noisy entrance of Lupin and Frank Mutlar.  Cummings and I asked
them to join us.  Lupin said he did not care for dominoes, and
suggested a game of “Spoof.”  On my asking if it required counters,
Frank and Lupin in measured time said:  “One, two, three; go!  Have
you an estate in Greenland?”  It was simply Greek to me, but it
appears it is one of the customs of the “Holloway Comedians” to do
this when a member displays ignorance.
In spite of my instructions, that BLANC-MANGE was brought up again
for supper.  To make matters worse, there had been an attempt to
disguise it, by placing it in a glass dish with jam round it.
Carrie asked Lupin if he would have some, and he replied:  “No
second-hand goods for me, thank you.”  I told Carrie, when we were
alone, if that BLANC-MANGE were placed on the table again I should
walk out of the house.
November 19, Sunday. - A delightfully quiet day.  In the afternoon
Lupin was off to spend the rest of the day with the Mutlars.  He
departed in the best of spirits, and Carrie said:  “Well, one
advantage of Lupin’s engagement with Daisy is that the boy seems
happy all day long.  That quite reconciles me to what I must
confess seems an imprudent engagement.”
Carrie and I talked the matter over during the evening, and agreed
that it did not always follow that an early engagement meant an
unhappy marriage.  Dear Carrie reminded me that we married early,
and, with the exception of a few trivial misunderstandings, we had
never had a really serious word.  I could not help thinking (as I
told her) that half the pleasures of life were derived from the
little struggles and small privations that one had to endure at the
beginning of one’s married life.  Such struggles were generally
occasioned by want of means, and often helped to make loving
couples stand together all the firmer.
Carrie said I had expressed myself wonderfully well, and that I was
quite a philosopher.
We are all vain at times, and I must confess I felt flattered by
Carrie’s little compliment.  I don’t pretend to be able to express
myself in fine language, but I feel I have the power of expressing
my thoughts with simplicity and lucidness.  About nine o’clock, to
our surprise.  Lupin entered, with a wild, reckless look, and in a
hollow voice, which I must say seemed rather theatrical, said:
“Have you any brandy?”  I said:  “No; but here is some whisky."
Lupin drank off nearly a wineglassful without water, to my horror.
We all three sat reading in silence till ten, when Carrie and I
rose to go to bed.  Carrie said to Lupin:  “I hope Daisy is well?”
Lupin, with a forced careless air that he must have picked up from
the “Holloway Comedians,” replied:  “Oh, Daisy?  You mean Miss
Mutlar.  I don’t know whether she is well or not, but please NEVER
TO MENTION HER NAME AGAIN IN MY PRESENCE.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Diary of a Nobody by George and Weedon Grossmith,
with illustrations by Weedon Grossmith, is in the public domain.


This book can be ordered at Amazon:
The Diary of a Nobody.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Diary of a NobodyBy George and Weedon GrossmithAt Amazon
