


For a month this unpleasant state of affairs continued, every day
growing worse, and Clotilde suffered especially at seeing that Pascal
now locked up everything. He had no longer the same tranquil
confidence in her as before, and this wounded her so deeply that, if
she had at any time found the press open, she would have thrown the
papers into the fire as her grandmother Felicite had urged her to do.
And the disagreements began again, so that they often remained without
speaking to each other for two days together.
One morning, after one of these misunderstandings which had lasted
since the day before, Martine said as she was serving the breakfast:
“Just now as I was crossing the Place de la Sous-Prefecture, I saw a
stranger whom I thought I recognized going into Mme. Felicite’s house.
Yes, mademoiselle, I should not be surprised if it were your brother.”
On the impulse of the moment, Pascal and Clotilde spoke.
“Your brother! Did your grandmother expect him, then?”
“No, I don’t think so, though she has been expecting him at any time
for the past six months, I know that she wrote to him again a week
ago.”
They questioned Martine.
“Indeed, monsieur, I cannot say; since I last saw M. Maxime four years
ago, when he stayed two hours with us on his way to Italy, he may
perhaps have changed greatly–I thought, however, that I recognized
his back.”
The conversation continued, Clotilde seeming to be glad of this event,
which broke at last the oppressive silence between them, and Pascal
ended:
“Well, if it is he, he will come to see us.”
It was indeed Maxime. He had yielded, after months of refusal, to the
urgent solicitations of old Mme. Rougon, who had still in this quarter
an open family wound to heal. The trouble was an old one, and it grew
worse every day.
Fifteen years before, when he was seventeen, Maxime had had a child by
a servant whom he had seduced. His father Saccard, and his stepmother
Renee–the latter vexed more especially at his unworthy choice–had
acted in the matter with indulgence. The servant, Justine Megot,
belonged to one of the neighboring villages, and was a fair-haired
girl, also seventeen, gentle and docile; and they had sent her back to
Plassans, with an allowance of twelve hundred francs a year, to bring
up little Charles. Three years later she had married there a
harness-maker of the faubourg, Frederic Thomas by name, a good workman
and a sensible fellow, who was tempted by the allowance. For the rest
her conduct was now most exemplary, she had grown fat, and she
appeared to be cured of a cough that had threatened a hereditary
malady due to the alcoholic propensities of a long line of
progenitors. And two other children born of her marriage, a boy who
was now ten and a girl who was seven, both plump and rosy, enjoyed
perfect health; so that she would have been the most respected and the
happiest of women, if it had not been for the trouble which Charles
caused in the household. Thomas, notwithstanding the allowance,
execrated this son of another man and gave him no peace, which made
the mother suffer in secret, being an uncomplaining and submissive
wife. So that, although she adored him, she would willingly have given
him up to his father’s family.
Charles, at fifteen, seemed scarcely twelve, and he had the infantine
intelligence of a child of five, resembling in an extraordinary degree
his great-great-grandmother, Aunt Dide, the madwoman at the Tulettes.
He had the slender and delicate grace of one of those bloodless little
kings with whom a race ends, crowned with their long, fair locks,
light as spun silk. His large, clear eyes were expressionless, and on
his disquieting beauty lay the shadow of death. And he had neither
brain nor heart–he was nothing but a vicious little dog, who rubbed
himself against people to be fondled. His great-grandmother Felicite,
won by this beauty, in which she affected to recognize her blood, had
at first put him in a boarding school, taking charge of him, but he
had been expelled from it at the end of six months for misconduct.
Three times she had changed his boarding school, and each time he had
been expelled in disgrace. Then, as he neither would nor could learn
anything, and as his health was declining rapidly, they kept him at
home, sending him from one to another of the family. Dr. Pascal, moved
to pity, had tried to cure him, and had abandoned the hopeless task
only after he had kept him with him for nearly a year, fearing the
companionship for Clotilde. And now, when Charles was not at his
mother’s, where he scarcely ever lived at present, he was to be found
at the house of Felicite, or that of some other relative, prettily
dressed, laden with toys, living like the effeminate little dauphin of
an ancient and fallen race.
Old Mme. Rougon, however, suffered because of this bastard, and she
had planned to get him away from the gossiping tongues of Plassans, by
persuading Maxime to take him and keep him with him in Paris. It would
still be an ugly story of the fallen family. But Maxime had for a long
time turned a deaf ear to her solicitations, in the fear which
continually haunted him of spoiling his life. After the war, enriched
by the death of his wife, he had come back to live prudently on his
fortune in his mansion on the avenue of the Bois de Boulogne,
tormented by the hereditary malady of which he was to die young,
having gained from his precocious debauchery a salutary fear of
pleasure, resolved above all to shun emotions and responsibilities, so
that he might last as long as possible. Acute pains in the limbs,
rheumatic he thought them, had been alarming him for some time past;
he saw himself in fancy already an invalid tied down to an easy-chair;
and his father’s sudden return to France, the fresh activity which
Saccard was putting forth, completed his disquietude. He knew well
this devourer of millions; he trembled at finding him again bustling
about him with his good-humored, malicious laugh. He felt that he was
being watched, and he had the conviction that he would be cut up and
devoured if he should be for a single day at his mercy, rendered
helpless by the pains which were invading his limbs. And so great a
fear of solitude had taken possession of him that he had now yielded
to the idea of seeing his son again. If he found the boy gentle,
intelligent, and healthy, why should he not take him to live with him?
He would thus have a companion, an heir, who would protect him against
the machinations of his father. Gradually he came to see himself, in
his selfish forethought, loved, petted, and protected; yet for all
that he might not have risked such a journey, if his physician had not
just at that time sent him to the waters of St. Gervais. Thus, having
to go only a few leagues out of his way, he had dropped in
unexpectedly that morning on old Mme. Rougon, firmly resolved to take
the train again in the evening, after having questioned her and seen
the boy.
At two o’clock Pascal and Clotilde were still beside the fountain
under the plane trees where they had taken their coffee, when Felicite
arrived with Maxime.
“My dear, here’s a surprise! I have brought you your brother.”
Startled, the young girl had risen, seeing this thin and sallow
stranger, whom she scarcely recognized. Since their parting in 1854
she had seen him only twice, once at Paris and again at Plassans. Yet
his image, refined, elegant, and vivacious, had remained engraven on
her mind; his face had grown hollow, his hair was streaked with silver
threads. But notwithstanding, she found in him still, with his
delicately handsome head, a languid grace, like that of a girl, even
in his premature decrepitude.
“How well you look!” he said simply, as he embraced his sister.
“But,” she responded, “to be well one must live in the sunshine. Ah,
how happy it makes me to see you again!”
Pascal, with the eye of the physician, had examined his nephew
critically. He embraced him in his turn.
“Goodday, my boy. And she is right, mind you; one can be well only out
in the sunshine–like the trees.”
Felicite had gone hastily to the house. She returned, crying:
“Charles is not here, then?”
“No,” said Clotilde. “We went to see him yesterday. Uncle Macquart has
taken him, and he is to remain for a few days at the Tulettes.”
Felicite was in despair. She had come only in the certainty of finding
the boy at Pascal’s. What was to be done now? The doctor, with his
tranquil air, proposed to write to Uncle Macquart, who would bring him
back in the morning. But when he learned that Maxime wished positively
to go away again by the nine o’clock train, without remaining over
night, another idea occurred to him. He would send to the livery
stable for a landau, and all four would go to see Charles at Uncle
Macquart’s. It would even be a delightful drive. It was not quite
three leagues from Plassans to the Tulettes–an hour to go, and an
hour to return, and they would still have almost two hours to remain
there, if they wished to be back by seven. Martine would get dinner,
and Maxime would have time enough to dine and catch his train.
But Felicite objected, visibly disquieted by this visit to Macquart.
“Oh, no, indeed! If you think I am going down there in this frightful
weather, you are mistaken. It is much simpler to send some one to
bring Charles to us.”
Pascal shook his head. Charles was not always to be brought back when
one wished. He was a boy without reason, who sometimes, if the whim
seized him, would gallop off like an untamed animal. And old Mme.
Rougon, overruled and furious at having been unable to make any
preparation, was at last obliged to yield, in the necessity in which
she found herself of leaving the matter to chance.
“Well, be it as you wish, then! Good Heavens, how unfortunately things
have turned out!”
Martine hurried away to order the landau, and before three o’clock had
struck the horses were on the Nice road, descending the declivity
which slopes down to the bridge over the Viorne. Then they turned to
the left, and followed the wooded banks of the river for about two
miles. After this the road entered the gorges of the Seille, a narrow
pass between two giant walls of rock scorched by the ardent rays of
the summer sun. Pine trees pushed their way through the clefts; clumps
of trees, scarcely thicker at the roots than tufts of grass, fringed
the crests and hung over the abyss. It was a chaos; a blasted
landscape, a mouth of hell, with its wild turns, its droppings of
blood-colored earth sliding down from every cut, its desolate solitude
invaded only by the eagles’ flight.
Felicite did not open her lips; her brain was at work, and she seemed
completely absorbed in her thoughts. The atmosphere was oppressive,
the sun sent his burning rays from behind a veil of great livid
clouds. Pascal was almost the only one who talked, in his passionate
love for this scorched land–a love which he endeavored to make his
nephew share. But it was in vain that he uttered enthusiastic
exclamations, in vain that he called his attention to the persistence
of the olives, the fig trees, and the thorn bushes in pushing through
the rock; the life of the rock itself, that colossal and puissant
frame of the earth, from which they could almost fancy they heard a
sound of breathing arise. Maxime remained cold, filled with a secret
anguish in presence of those blocks of savage majesty, whose mass
seemed to crush him. And he preferred to turn his eyes toward his
sister, who was seated in front of him. He was becoming more and more
charmed with her. She looked so healthy and so happy, with her pretty
round head, with its straight, well-molded forehead. Now and then
their glances met, and she gave him an affectionate smile which
consoled him.
But the wildness of the gorge was beginning to soften, the two walls
of rock to grow lower; they passed between two peaceful hills, with
gentle slopes covered with thyme and lavender. It was the desert
still, there were still bare spaces, green or violet hued, from which
the faintest breeze brought a pungent perfume.
Then abruptly, after a last turn they descended to the valley of the
Tulettes, which was refreshed by springs. In the distance stretched
meadows dotted by large trees. The village was seated midway on the
slope, among olive trees, and the country house of Uncle Macquart
stood a little apart on the left, full in view. The landau turned into
the road which led to the insane asylum, whose white walls they could
see before them in the distance.
Felicite’s silence had grown somber, for she was not fond of
exhibiting Uncle Macquart. Another whom the family would be well rid
of the day when he should take his departure. For the credit of every
one he ought to have been sleeping long ago under the sod. But he
persisted in living, he carried his eighty-three years well, like an
old drunkard saturated with liquor, whom the alcohol seemed to
preserve. At Plassans he had left a terrible reputation as a
do-nothing and a scoundrel, and the old men whispered the execrable
story of the corpses that lay between him and the Rougons, an act of
treachery in the troublous days of December, 1851, an ambuscade in
which he had left comrades with their bellies ripped open, lying on
the bloody pavement. Later, when he had returned to France, he had
preferred to the good place of which he had obtained the promise this
little domain of the Tulettes, which Felicite had bought for him. And
he had lived comfortably here ever since; he had no longer any other
ambition than that of enlarging it, looking out once more for the good
chances, and he had even found the means of obtaining a field which he
had long coveted, by making himself useful to his sister-in-law at the
time when the latter again reconquered Plassans from the legitimists–
another frightful story that was whispered also, of a madman secretly
let loose from the asylum, running in the night to avenge himself,
setting fire to his house in which four persons were burned. But these
were old stories and Macquart, settled down now, was no longer the
redoubtable scoundrel who had made all the family tremble. He led a
perfectly correct life; he was a wily diplomat, and he had retained
nothing of his air of jeering at the world but his bantering smile.
“Uncle is at home,” said Pascal, as they approached the house.
This was one of those Provencal structures of a single story, with
discolored tiles and four walls washed with a bright yellow. Before
the facade extended a narrow terrace shaded by ancient mulberry trees,
whose thick, gnarled branches drooped down, forming an arbor. It was
here that Uncle Macquart smoked his pipe in the cool shade, in summer.
And on hearing the sound of the carriage, he came and stood at the
edge of the terrace, straightening his tall form neatly clad in blue
cloth, his head covered with the eternal fur cap which he wore from
one year’s end to the other.
As soon as he recognized his visitors, he called out with a sneer:
“Oh, here come some fine company! How kind of you; you are out for an
airing.”
But the presence of Maxime puzzled him. Who was he? Whom had he come
to see? They mentioned his name to him, and he immediately cut short
the explanations they were adding, to enable him to straighten out the
tangled skein of relationship.
“The father of Charles–I know, I know! The son of my nephew Saccard,
pardi! the one who made a fine marriage, and whose wife died–”
He stared at Maxime, seeming happy to find him already wrinkled at
thirty-two, with his hair and beard sprinkled with snow.
“Ah, well!” he added, “we are all growing old. But I, at least, have
no great reason to complain. I am solid.”
And he planted himself firmly on his legs with his air of ferocious
mockery, while his fiery red face seemed to flame and burn. For a long
time past ordinary brandy had seemed to him like pure water; only
spirits of 36 degrees tickled his blunted palate; and he took such
draughts of it that he was full of it–his flesh saturated with it–
like a sponge. He perspired alcohol. At the slightest breath whenever
he spoke, he exhaled from his mouth a vapor of alcohol.
“Yes, truly; you are solid, uncle!” said Pascal, amazed. “And you have
done nothing to make you so; you have good reason to ridicule us. Only
there is one thing I am afraid of, look you, that some day in lighting
your pipe, you may set yourself on fire–like a bowl of punch.”
Macquart, flattered, gave a sneering laugh.
“Have your jest, have your jest, my boy! A glass of cognac is worth
more than all your filthy drugs. And you will all touch glasses with
me, hey? So that it may be said truly that your uncle is a credit to
you all. As for me, I laugh at evil tongues. I have corn and olive
trees, I have almond trees and vines and land, like any bourgeois.
In summer I smoke my pipe under the shade of my mulberry trees; in
winter I go to smoke it against my wall, there in the sunshine. One
has no need to blush for an uncle like that, hey? Clotilde, I have
syrup, if you would like some. And you, Felicite, my dear, I know that
you prefer anisette. There is everything here, I tell you, there is
everything here!”
He waved his arm as if to take possession of the comforts he enjoyed,
now that from an old sinner he had become a hermit, while Felicite,
whom he had disturbed a moment before by the enumeration of his
riches, did not take her eyes from his face, waiting to interrupt him.
“Thank you, Macquart, we will take nothing; we are in a hurry. Where
is Charles?”
“Charles? Very good, presently! I understand, papa has come to see his
boy. But that is not going to prevent you taking a glass.”
And as they positively refused he became offended, and said, with his
malicious laugh:
“Charles is not here; he is at the asylum with the old woman.”
Then, taking Maxime to the end of the terrace, he pointed out to him
the great white buildings, whose inner gardens resembled prison yards.
“Look, nephew, you see those three trees in front of you? Well, beyond
the one to the left, there is a fountain in a court. Follow the ground
floor, and the fifth window to the right is Aunt Dide’s. And that is
where the boy is. Yes, I took him there a little while ago.”
This was an indulgence of the directors. In the twenty years that she
had been in the asylum the old woman had not given a moment’s
uneasiness to her keeper. Very quiet, very gentle, she passed the days
motionless in her easy-chair, looking straight before her; and as the
boy liked to be with her, and as she herself seemed to take an
interest in him, they shut their eyes to this infraction of the rules
and left him there sometimes for two or three hours at a time, busily
occupied in cutting out pictures.
But this new disappointment put the finishing stroke to Felicite’s
ill-humor; she grew angry when Macquart proposed that all five should
go in a body in search of the boy.
“What an idea! Go you alone, and come back quickly. We have no time to
lose.”
Her suppressed rage seemed to amuse Uncle Macquart, and perceiving how
disagreeable his proposition was to her, he insisted, with his
sneering laugh:
“But, my children, we should at the same time have an opportunity of
seeing the old mother; the mother of us all. There is no use in
talking; you know that we are all descended from her, and it would
hardly be polite not to go wish her a good-day, when my grandnephew,
who has come from such a distance, has perhaps never before had a good
look at her. I’ll not disown her, may the devil take me if I do. To be
sure she is mad, but all the same, old mothers who have passed their
hundredth year are not often to be seen, and she well deserves that we
should show ourselves a little kind to her.”
There was silence for a moment. A little shiver had run through every
one. And it was Clotilde, silent until now, who first declared in a
voice full of feeling:
“You are right, uncle; we will all go.”
Felicite herself was obliged to consent. They re-entered the landau,
Macquart taking the seat beside the coachman. A feeling of disquietude
had given a sallow look to Maxime’s worn face; and during the short
drive he questioned Pascal concerning Charles with an air of paternal
interest, which concealed a growing anxiety. The doctor constrained by
his mother’s imperious glances, softened the truth. Well, the boy’s
health was certainly not very robust; it was on that account, indeed,
that they were glad to leave him for weeks together in the country
with his uncle: but he had no definite disease. Pascal did not add
that he had for a moment cherished the dream of giving him a brain and
muscles by treating him with his hypodermic injections of nerve
substance, but that he had always been met by the same difficulty; the
slightest puncture brought on a hemorrhage which it was found
necessary to stop by compresses; there was a laxness of the tissues,
due to degeneracy; a bloody dew which exuded from the skin; he had
especially, bleedings at the nose so sudden and so violent that they
did not dare to leave him alone, fearing lest all the blood in his
veins should flow out. And the doctor ended by saying that although
the boy’s intelligence had been sluggish, he still hoped that it would
develop in an environment of quicker mental activity.
They arrived at the asylum and Macquart, who had been listening to the
doctor, descended from his seat, saying:
“He is a gentle little fellow, a very gentle little fellow! And then,
he is so beautiful–an angel!”
Maxime, who was still pale, and who shivered in spite of the stifling
heat, put no more questions. He looked at the vast buildings of the
asylum, the wings of the various quarters separated by gardens, the
men’s quarters from those of the women, those of the harmless insane
from those of the violent insane. A scrupulous cleanliness reigned
everywhere, a gloomy silence–broken from time to time by footsteps
and the noise of keys. Old Macquart knew all the keepers. Besides, the
doors were always to open to Dr. Pascal, who had been authorized to
attend certain of the inmates. They followed a passage and entered a
court; it was here–one of the chambers on the ground floor, a room
covered with a light carpet, furnished with a bed, a press, a table,
an armchair, and two chairs. The nurse, who had orders never to quit
her charge, happened just now to be absent, and the only occupants of
the room were the madwoman, sitting rigid in her armchair at one side
of the table, and the boy, sitting on a chair on the opposite side,
absorbed in cutting out his pictures.
“Go in, go in!” Macquart repeated. “Oh, there is no danger, she is
very gentle!”
The grandmother, Adelaide Fouque, whom her grandchildren, a whole
swarm of descendants, called by the pet name of Aunt Dide, did not
even turn her head at the noise. In her youth hysterical troubles had
unbalanced her mind. Of an ardent and passionate nature and subject to
nervous attacks, she had yet reached the great age of eighty-three
when a dreadful grief, a terrible moral shock, destroyed her reason.
At that time, twenty-one years before, her mind had ceased to act; it
had become suddenly weakened without the possibility of recovery. And
now, at the age of 104 years, she lived here as if forgotten by the
world, a quiet madwoman with an ossified brain, with whom insanity
might remain stationary for an indefinite length of time without
causing death. Old age had come, however, and had gradually atrophied
her muscles. Her flesh was as if eaten away by age. The skin only
remained on her bones, so that she had to be carried from her chair to
her bed, for it had become impossible for her to walk or even to move.
And yet she held herself erect against the back of her chair, a
yellow, dried-up skeleton–like an ancient tree of which the bark only
remains–with only her eyes still living in her thin, long visage, in
which the wrinkles had been, so to say, worn away. She was looking
fixedly at Charles.
Clotilde approached her a little tremblingly.
“Aunt Dide, it is we; we have come to see you. Don’t you know me,
then? Your little girl who comes sometimes to kiss you.”
But the madwoman did not seem to hear. Her eyes remained fixed upon
the boy, who was finishing cutting out a picture–a purple king in a
golden mantle.
“Come, mamma,” said Macquart, “don’t pretend to be stupid. You may
very well look at us. Here is a gentleman, a grandson of yours, who
has come from Paris expressly to see you.”
At this voice Aunt Dide at last turned her head. Her clear,
expressionless eyes wandered slowly from one to another, then rested
again on Charles with the same fixed look as before.
They all shivered, and no one spoke again.
“Since the terrible shock she received,” explained Pascal in a low
voice, “she has been that way; all intelligence, all memory seem
extinguished in her. For the most part she is silent; at times she
pours forth a flood of stammering and indistinct words. She laughs and
cries without cause, she is a thing that nothing affects. And yet I
should not venture to say that the darkness of her mind is complete,
that no memories remain stored up in its depths. Ah! the poor old
mother, how I pity her, if the light has not yet been finally
extinguished. What can her thoughts have been for the last twenty-one
years, if she still remembers?”
With a gesture he put this dreadful past which he knew from him. He
saw her again young, a tall, pale, slender girl with frightened eyes,
a widow, after fifteen months of married life with Rougon, the clumsy
gardener whom she had chosen for a husband, throwing herself
immediately afterwards into the arms of the smuggler Macquart, whom
she loved with a wolfish love, and whom she did not even marry. She
had lived thus for fifteen years, with her three children, one the
child of her marriage, the other two illegitimate, a capricious and
tumultuous existence, disappearing for weeks at a time, and returning
all bruised, her arms black and blue. Then Macquart had been killed,
shot down like a dog by a gendarme; and the first shock had
paralyzed her, so that even then she retained nothing living but her
water-clear eyes in her livid face; and she shut herself up from the
world in the hut which her lover had left her, leading there for forty
years the dead existence of a nun, broken by terrible nervous attacks.
But the other shock was to finish her, to overthrow her reason, and
Pascal recalled the atrocious scene, for he had witnessed it–a poor
child whom the grandmother had taken to live with her, her grandson
Silvere, the victim of family hatred and strife, whose head another
gendarme shattered with a pistol shot, at the suppression of the
insurrectionary movement of 1851. She was always to be bespattered
with blood.
Felicite, meanwhile, had approached Charles, who was so engrossed with
his pictures that all these people did not disturb him.
“My darling, this gentleman is your father. Kiss him,” she said.
And then they all occupied themselves with Charles. He was very
prettily dressed in a jacket and short trousers of black velvet,
braided with gold cord. Pale as a lily, he resembled in truth one of
those king’s sons whose pictures he was cutting out, with his large,
light eyes and his shower of fair curls. But what especially struck
the attention at this moment was his resemblance to Aunt Dide; this
resemblance which had overleaped three generations, which had passed
from this withered centenarian’s countenance, from these dead features
wasted by life, to this delicate child’s face that was also as if
worn, aged, and wasted, through the wear of the race. Fronting each
other, the imbecile child of a deathlike beauty seemed the last of the
race of which she, forgotten by the world, was the ancestress.
Maxime bent over to press a kiss on the boy’s forehead; and a chill
struck to his heart–this very beauty disquieted him; his uneasiness
grew in this chamber of madness, whence, it seemed to him, breathed a
secret horror come from the far-off past.
“How beautiful you are, my pet! Don’t you love me a little?”
Charles looked at him without comprehending, and went back to his
play.
But all were chilled. Without the set expression of her countenance
changing Aunt Dide wept, a flood of tears rolled from her living eyes
over her dead cheeks. Her gaze fixed immovably upon the boy, she wept
slowly, endlessly. A great thing had happened.
And now an extraordinary emotion took possession of Pascal. He caught
Clotilde by the arm and pressed it hard, trying to make her
understand. Before his eyes appeared the whole line, the legitimate
branch and the bastard branch, which had sprung from this trunk
already vitiated by neurosis. Five generations were there present–the
Rougons and the Macquarts, Adelaide Fouque at the root, then the
scoundrelly old uncle, then himself, then Clotilde and Maxime, and
lastly, Charles. Felicite occupied the place of her dead husband.
There was no link wanting; the chain of heredity, logical and
implacable, was unbroken. And what a world was evoked from the depths
of the tragic cabin which breathed this horror that came from the
far-off past in such appalling shape that every one, notwithstanding
the oppressive heat, shivered.
“What is it, master?” whispered Clotilde, trembling.
“No, no, nothing!” murmured the doctor. “I will tell you later.”
Macquart, who alone continued to sneer, scolded the old mother. What
an idea was hers, to receive people with tears when they put
themselves out to come and make her a visit. It was scarcely polite.
And then he turned to Maxime and Charles.
“Well, nephew, you have seen your boy at last. Is it not true that he
is pretty, and that he is a credit to you, after all?”
Felicite hastened to interfere. Greatly dissatisfied with the turn
which affairs were taking, she was now anxious only to get away.
“He is certainly a handsome boy, and less backward than people think.
Just see how skilful he is with his hands. And you will see when you
have brightened him up in Paris, in a different way from what we have
been able to do at Plassans, eh?”
“No doubt,” murmured Maxime. “I do not say no; I will think about it.”
He seemed embarrassed for a moment, and then added:
“You know I came only to see him. I cannot take him with me now as I
am to spend a month at St. Gervais. But as soon as I return to Paris I
will think of it, I will write to you.”
Then, taking out his watch, he cried:
“The devil! Half-past five. You know that I would not miss the nine
o’clock train for anything in the world.”
“Yes, yes, let us go,” said Felicite brusquely. “We have nothing more
to do here.”
Macquart, whom his sister-in-law’s anger seemed still to divert,
endeavored to delay them with all sorts of stories. He told of the
days when Aunt Dide talked, and he affirmed that he had found her one
morning singing a romance of her youth. And then he had no need of the
carriage, he would take the boy back on foot, since they left him to
him.
“Kiss your papa, my boy, for you know now that you see him, but you
don’t know whether you shall ever see him again or not.”
With the same surprised and indifferent movement Charles raised his
head, and Maxime, troubled, pressed another kiss on his forehead.
“Be very good and very pretty, my pet. And love me a little.”
“Come, come, we have no time to lose,” repeated Felicite.
But the keeper here re-entered the room. She was a stout, vigorous
girl, attached especially to the service of the madwoman. She carried
her to and from her bed, night and morning; she fed her and took care
of her like a child. And she at once entered into conversation with
Dr. Pascal, who questioned her. One of the doctor’s most cherished
dreams was to cure the mad by his treatment of hypodermic injections.
Since in their case it was the brain that was in danger, why should
not hypodermic injections of nerve substance give them strength and
will, repairing the breaches made in the organ? So that for a moment
he had dreamed of trying the treatment with the old mother; then he
began to have scruples, he felt a sort of awe, without counting that
madness at that age was total, irreparable ruin. So that he had chosen
another subject–a hatter named Sarteur, who had been for a year past
in the asylum, to which he had come himself to beg them to shut him up
to prevent him from committing a crime. In his paroxysms, so strong an
impulse to kill seized him that he would have thrown himself upon the
first passer-by. He was of small stature, very dark, with a retreating
forehead, an aquiline face with a large nose and a very short chin,
and his left cheek was noticeably larger than his right. And the
doctor had obtained miraculous results with this victim of emotional
insanity, who for a month past had had no attack. The nurse, indeed
being questioned, answered that Sarteur had become quiet and was
growing better every day.
“Do you hear, Clotilde?” cried Pascal, enchanted. “I have not the time
to see him this evening, but I will come again to-morrow. It is my
visiting day. Ah, if I only dared; if she were young still–”
His eyes turned toward Aunt Dide. But Clotilde, whom his enthusiasm
made smile, said gently:
“No, no, master, you cannot make life anew. There, come. We are the
last.”
It was true; the others had already gone. Macquart, on the threshold,
followed Felicite and Maxime with his mocking glance as they went
away. Aunt Dide, the forgotten one, sat motionless, appalling in her
leanness, her eyes again fixed upon Charles with his white, worn face
framed in his royal locks.
The drive back was full of constraint. In the heat which exhaled from
the earth, the landau rolled on heavily to the measured trot of the
horses. The stormy sky took on an ashen, copper-colored hue in the
deepening twilight. At first a few indifferent words were exchanged;
but from the moment in which they entered the gorges of the Seille all
conversation ceased, as if they felt oppressed by the menacing walls
of giant rock that seemed closing in upon them. Was not this the end
of the earth, and were they not going to roll into the unknown, over
the edge of some abyss? An eagle soared by, uttering a shrill cry.
Willows appeared again, and the carriage was rolling lightly along the
bank of the Viorne, when Felicite began without transition, as if she
were resuming a conversation already commenced.
“You have no refusal to fear from the mother. She loves Charles
dearly, but she is a very sensible woman, and she understands
perfectly that it is to the boy’s advantage that you should take him
with you. And I must tell you, too, that the poor boy is not very
happy with her, since, naturally, the husband prefers his own son and
daughter. For you ought to know everything.”
And she went on in this strain, hoping, no doubt, to persuade Maxime
and draw a formal promise from him. She talked until they reached
Plassans. Then, suddenly, as the landau rolled over the pavement of
the faubourg, she said:
“But look! there is his mother. That stout blond at the door there.”
At the threshold of a harness-maker’s shop hung round with horse
trappings and halters, Justine sat, knitting a stocking, taking the
air, while the little girl and boy were playing on the ground at her
feet. And behind them in the shadow of the shop was to be seen Thomas,
a stout, dark man, occupied in repairing a saddle.
Maxime leaned forward without emotion, simply curious. He was greatly
surprised at sight of this robust woman of thirty-two, with so
sensible and so commonplace an air, in whom there was not a trace of
the wild little girl with whom he had been in love when both of the
same age were entering their seventeenth year. Perhaps a pang shot
through his heart to see her plump and tranquil and blooming, while he
was ill and already aged.
“I should never have recognized her,” he said.
And the landau, still rolling on, turned into the Rue de Rome. Justine
had disappeared; this vision of the past–a past so different from the
present–had sunk into the shadowy twilight, with Thomas, the
children, and the shop.
At La Souleiade the table was set; Martine had an eel from the Viorne,
a sauted rabbit, and a leg of mutton. Seven o’clock was striking,
and they had plenty of time to dine quietly.
“Don’t be uneasy,” said Dr. Pascal to his nephew. “We will accompany
you to the station; it is not ten minutes’ walk from here. As you left
your trunk, you have nothing to do but to get your ticket and jump on
board the train.”
Then, meeting Clotilde in the vestibule, where she was hanging up her
hat and her umbrella, he said to her in an undertone:
“Do you know that I am uneasy about your brother?”
“Why so?”
“I have observed him attentively. I don’t like the way in which he
walks; and have you noticed what an anxious look he has at times? That
has never deceived me. In short, your brother is threatened with
ataxia.”
“Ataxia!” she repeated turning very pale.
A cruel image rose before her, that of a neighbor, a man still young,
whom for the past ten years she had seen driven about in a little
carriage by a servant. Was not this infirmity the worst of all ills,
the ax stroke that separates a living being from social and active
life?
“But,” she murmured, “he complains only of rheumatism.”
Pascal shrugged his shoulders; and putting a finger to his lip he went
into the dining-room, where Felicite and Maxime were seated.
The dinner was very friendly. The sudden disquietude which had sprung
up in Clotilde’s heart made her still more affectionate to her
brother, who sat beside her. She attended to his wants gayly, forcing
him to take the most delicate morsels. Twice she called back Martine,
who was passing the dishes too quickly. And Maxime was more and more
enchanted by this sister, who was so good, so healthy, so sensible,
whose charm enveloped him like a caress. So greatly was he captivated
by her that gradually a project, vague at first, took definite shape
within him. Since little Charles, his son, terrified him so greatly
with his deathlike beauty, his royal air of sickly imbecility, why
should he not take his sister Clotilde to live with him? The idea of
having a woman in his house alarmed him, indeed, for he was afraid of
all women, having had too much experience of them in his youth; but
this one seemed to him truly maternal. And then, too, a good woman in
his house would make a change in it, which would be a desirable thing.
He would at least be left no longer at the mercy of his father, whom
he suspected of desiring his death so that he might get possession of
his money at once. His hatred and terror of his father decided him.
“Don’t you think of marrying, then?” he asked, wishing to try the
ground.
The young girl laughed.
“Oh, there is no hurry,” she answered.
Then, suddenly, looking at Pascal, who had raised his head, she added:
“How can I tell? Oh, I shall never marry.”
But Felicite protested. When she saw her so attached to the doctor,
she often wished for a marriage that would separate her from him, that
would leave her son alone in a deserted home, where she herself might
become all powerful, mistress of everything. Therefore she appealed to
him. Was it not true that a woman ought to marry, that it was against
nature to remain an old maid?
And he gravely assented, without taking his eyes from Clotilde’s face.
“Yes, yes, she must marry. She is too sensible not to marry.”
“Bah!” interrupted Maxime, “would it be really sensible in her to
marry? In order to be unhappy, perhaps; there are so many ill-assorted
marriages!”
And coming to a resolution, he added:
“Don’t you know what you ought to do? Well, you ought to come and live
with me in Paris. I have thought the matter over. The idea of taking
charge of a child in my state of health terrifies me. Am I not a child
myself, an invalid who needs to be taken care of? You will take care
of me; you will be with me, if I should end by losing the use of my
limbs.”
There was a sound of tears in his voice, so great a pity did he feel
for himself. He saw himself, in fancy, sick; he saw his sister at his
bedside, like a Sister of Charity; if she consented to remain
unmarried he would willingly leave her his fortune, so that his father
might not have it. The dread which he had of solitude, the need in
which he should perhaps stand of having a sick-nurse, made him very
pathetic.
“It would be very kind on your part, and you should have no cause to
repent it.”
Martine, who was serving the mutton, stopped short in surprise; and
the proposition caused the same surprise at the table. Felicite was
the first to approve, feeling that the girl’s departure would further
her plans. She looked at Clotilde, who was still silent and stunned,
as it were; while Dr. Pascal waited with a pale face.
“Oh, brother, brother,” stammered the young girl, unable at first to
think of anything else to say.
Then her grandmother cried:
“Is that all you have to say? Why, the proposition your brother has
just made you is a very advantageous one. If he is afraid of taking
Charles now, why, you can go with him, and later on you can send for
the child. Come, come, that can be very well arranged. Your brother
makes an appeal to your heart. Is it not true, Pascal, that she owes
him a favorable answer?”
The doctor, by an effort, recovered his self-possession. The chill
that had seized him made itself felt, however, in the slowness with
which he spoke.
“The offer, in effect, is very kind. Clotilde, as I said before, is
very sensible and she will accept it, if it is right that she should
do so.”
The young girl, greatly agitated, rebelled at this.
“Do you wish to send me away, then, master? Maxime is very good, and I
thank him from the bottom of my heart. But to leave everything, my
God! To leave all that love me, all that I have loved until now!”
She made a despairing gesture, indicating the place and the people,
taking in all La Souleiade.
“But,” responded Pascal, looking at her fixedly, “what if Maxime
should need you, what if you had a duty to fulfil toward him?”
Her eyes grew moist, and she remained for a moment trembling and
desperate; for she alone understood. The cruel vision again arose
before her–Maxime, helpless, driven, about in a little carriage by a
servant, like the neighbor whom she used to pity. Had she indeed any
duty toward a brother who for fifteen years had been a stranger to
her? Did not her duty lie where her heart was? Nevertheless, her
distress of mind continued; she still suffered in the struggle.
“Listen, Maxime,” she said at last, “give me also time to reflect. I
will see. Be assured that I am very grateful to you. And if you should
one day really have need of me, well, I should no doubt decide to go.”
This was all they could make her promise. Felicite, with her usual
vehemence, exhausted all her efforts in vain, while the doctor now
affected to say that she had given her word. Martine brought a cream,
without thinking of hiding her joy. To take away mademoiselle! what an
idea, in order that monsieur might die of grief at finding himself all
alone. And the dinner was delayed, too, by this unexpected incident.
They were still at the dessert when half-past eight struck.
Then Maxime grew restless, tapped the floor with his foot, and
declared that he must go.
At the station, whither they all accompanied him he kissed his sister
a last time, saying:
“Remember!”
“Don’t be afraid,” declared Felicite, “we are here to remind her of
her promise.”
The doctor smiled, and all three, as soon as the train was in motion,
waved their handkerchiefs.
On this day, after accompanying the grandmother to her door, Dr.
Pascal and Clotilde returned peacefully to La Souleiade, and spent a
delightful evening there. The constraint of the past few weeks, the
secret antagonism which had separated them, seemed to have vanished.
Never had it seemed so sweet to them to feel so united, inseparable.
Doubtless it was only this first pang of uneasiness suffered by their
affection, this threatened separation, the postponement of which
delighted them. It was for them like a return to health after an
illness, a new hope of life. They remained for long time in the warm
night, under the plane trees, listening to the crystal murmur of the
fountain. And they did not even speak, so profoundly did they enjoy
the happiness of being together.
Continue...

This eBook of “Doctor Pascal” by Emile Zola (translated by Mary J. Serrano) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Doctor Pascal (Rougon-Macquart)By Emile ZolaAt Amazon
