
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




MANY have made witty invectives against
usury.  They say that it is a pity, the devil
should have God’s part, which is the tithe.  That the
usurer is the greatest Sabbath-breaker, because his
plough goeth every Sunday.  That the usurer is the
drone, that Virgil speaketh of;
Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent.
That the usurer breaketh the first law, that was
made for mankind after the fall, which was, in
sudore vultus tui comedes panem tuum; not, in
sudore vultus alieni.  That usurers should have
orange-tawny bonnets, because they do judaize.
That it is against nature for money to beget money;
and the like.  I say this only, that usury is a concessum propter duritiem cordis; for since there must
be borrowing and lending, and men are so hard
of heart, as they will not lend freely, usury must
be permitted.  Some others, have made suspicious
and cunning propositions of banks, discovery of
men’s estates, and other inventions.  But few have
spoken of usury usefully.  It is good to set before us,
the incommodities and commodities of usury, that
the good, may be either weighed out or culled out;
and warily to provide, that while we make forth
to that which is better, we meet not with that
which is worse.
The discommodities of usury are, First, that it
makes fewer merchants.  For were it not for this
lazy trade of usury, money would not he still, but
would in great part be employed upon merchandizing; which is the vena porta of wealth in a state.
The second, that it makes poor merchants.  For, as
a farmer cannot husband his ground so well, if he
sit at a great rent; so the merchant cannot drive
his trade so well, if he sit at great usury.  The third
is incident to the other two; and that is the decay of
customs of kings or states, which ebb or flow, with
merchandizing.  The fourth, that it bringeth the
treasure of a realm, or state, into a few hands.  For
the usurer being at certainties, and others at uncertainties, at the end of the game, most of the money
will be in the box; and ever a state flourisheth,
when wealth is more equally spread.  The fifth,
that it beats down the price of land; for the employment of money, is chiefly either merchandizing or purchasing; and usury waylays both.  The
sixth, that it doth dull and damp all industries, improvements, and new inventions, wherein money
would be stirring, if it were not for this slug.  The
last, that it is the canker and ruin of many men’s
estates; which, in process of time, breeds a public
poverty.
On the other side, the commodities of usury are,
first, that howsoever usury in some respect hindereth merchandizing, yet in some other it advanceth
it; for it is certain that the greatest part of trade is
driven by young merchants, upon borrowing at
interest; so as if the usurer either call in, or keep
back, his money, there will ensue, presently, a
great stand of trade.  The second is, that were it not
for this easy borrowing upon interest, men’s necessities would draw upon them a most sudden undoing; in that they would be forced to sell their
means (be it lands or goods) far under foot; and so,
whereas usury doth but gnaw upon them, bad
markets would swallow them quite up.  As for
mortgaging or pawning, it will little mend the
matter: for either men will not take pawns without use; or if they do, they will look precisely for
the forfeiture.  I remember a cruel moneyed man
in the country, that would say, The devil take this
usury, it keeps us from forfeitures, of mortgages
and bonds.  The third and last is, that it is a vanity
to conceive, that there would be ordinary borrowing without profit; and it is impossible to conceive,
the number of inconveniences that will ensue, if
borrowing be cramped.  Therefore to speak of the
abolishing of usury is idle.  All states have ever had
it, in one kind or rate, or other.  So as that opinion
must be sent to Utopia.
To speak now of the reformation, and reiglement, of usury; how the discommodities of it may
be best avoided, and the commodities retained.  It
appears, by the balance of commodities and discommodities of usury, two things are to be reconciled.  The one, that the tooth of usury be grinded,
that it bite not too much; the other, that there be
left open a means, to invite moneyed men to lend
to the merchants, for the continuing and quickening of trade.  This cannot be done, except you introduce two several sorts of usury, a less and a greater.
For if you reduce usury to one low rate, it will ease
the common borrower, but the merchant will be
to seek for money.  And it is to be noted, that the
trade of merchandize, being the most lucrative,
may bear usury at a good rate; other contracts
not so.
To serve both intentions, the way would be
briefly thus.  That there be two rates of usury:
the one free, and general for all; the other under
license only, to certain persons, and in certain
places of merchandizing.  First, therefore, let usury
in general, be reduced to five in the hundred; and
let that rate be proclaimed, to be free and current;
and let the state shut itself out, to take any penalty
for the same.  This will preserve borrowing, from
any general stop or dryness.  This will ease infinite
borrowers in the country.  This will, in good part,
raise the price of land, because land purchased
at sixteen years’ purchase will yield six in the
hundred, and somewhat more; whereas this rate
of interest, yields but five.  This by like reason
will encourage, and edge, industrious and profitable improvements; because many will rather
venture in that kind, than take five in the hundred, especially having been used to greater profit.
Secondly, let there be certain persons licensed,
to lend to known merchants, upon usury at a
higher rate; and let it be with the cautions following.  Let the rate be, even with the merchant
himself, somewhat more easy than that he used
formerly to pay; for by that means, all borrowers, shall have some ease by this reformation,
be he merchant, or whosoever.  Let it be no
bank or common stock, but every man be master
of his own money.  Not that I altogether mislike banks, but they will hardly be brooked, in
regard of certain suspicions.  Let the state be
answered some small matter for the license, and
the rest left to the lender; for if the abatement be
but small, it will no whit discourage the lender.
For he, for example, that took before ten or nine in
the hundred, will sooner descend to eight in the
hundred than give over his trade of usury, and go
from certain gains, to gains of hazard.  Let these
licensed lenders be in number indefinite, but restrained to certain principal cities and towns of
merchandizing; for then they will be hardly able
to color other men’s moneys in the country: so as
the license of nine will not suck away the current
rate of five; for no man will send his moneys far
off, nor put them into unknown hands.
If it be objected that this doth in a sort authorize
usury, which before, was in some places but permissive; the answer is, that it is better to mitigate
usury, by declaration, than to suffer it to rage, by
connivance.

Of Youth
AND AGE
A MAN that is young in years, may be old in
hours, if he have lost no time.  But that happeneth rarely.  Generally, youth is like the first
cogitations, not so wise as the second.  For there is
a youth in thoughts, as well as in ages.  And yet the
invention of young men, is more lively than that
of old; and imaginations stream into their minds
better, and, as it were, more divinely.  Natures that
have much heat, and great and violent desires and
perturbations, are not ripe for action, till they have
passed the meridian of their years; as it was with
Julius Caesar and Septimius Severus.  Of the latter,
of whom it is said, Juventutem egit erroribus, imo
furoribus, plenam.  And yet he was the ablest emperor, almost, of all the list.  But reposed natures
may do well in youth.  As it is seen in Augustus
Caesar, Cosmus Duke of Florence, Gaston de Foix,
and others.  On the other side, heat and vivacity in
age, is an excellent composition for business.
Young men are fitter to invent, than to judge; fitter
for execution, than for counsel; and fitter for new
projects, than for settled business.  For the experience of age, in things that fall within the compass
of it, directeth them; but in new things, abuseth
them.
The errors of young men, are the ruin of business; but the errors of aged men, amount but to
this, that more might have been done, or sooner.
Young men, in the conduct and manage of actions,
embrace more than they can hold; stir more than
they can quiet; fly to the end, without consideration of the means and degrees; pursue some
few principles, which they have chanced upon
absurdly; care not to innovate, which draws unknown inconveniences; use extreme remedies at
first; and, that which doubleth all errors, will not
acknowledge or retract them; like an unready
horse, that will neither stop nor turn.  Men of age
object too much, consult too long, adventure too
little, repent too soon, and seldom drive business
home to the full period, but content themselves
with a mediocrity of success.  Certainly it is good to
compound employments of both; for that will be
good for the present, because the virtues of either
age, may correct the defects of both; and good for
succession, that young men may be learners, while
men in age are actors; and, lastly, good for extern
accidents, because authority followeth old men,
and favor and popularity, youth.  But for the moral
part, perhaps youth will have the pre-eminence, as
age hath for the politic.  A certain rabbin, upon the
text, Your young men shall see visions, and your
old men shall dream dreams, inferreth that young
men, are admitted nearer to God than old, because
vision, is a clearer revelation, than a dream.  And
certainly, the more a man drinketh of the world,
the more it intoxicateth; and age doth profit rather
in the powers of understanding, than in the virtues
of the will and affections.  There be some, have an
over-early ripeness in their years, which fadeth
betimes.  These are, first, such as have brittle wits,
the edge whereof is soon turned; such as was Hermogenes the rhetorician, whose books are exceeding subtle; who afterwards waxed stupid.  A second
sort, is of those that have some natural dispositions
which have better grace in  youth, than in age;
such as is a fluent and luxuriant speech; which
becomes youth well, but not age: so Tully saith of
Hortensius, Idem manebat, neque idem decebat.
The third is of such, as take too high a strain at the
first, and are magnanimous, more than tract of
years can uphold.  As was Scipio Africanus, of
whom Livy saith in effect, Ultima primis cedebant.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
