
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




I TAKE goodness in this sense, the affecting of
the weal of men, which is that the Grecians
call philanthropia; and the word humanity (as
it is used) is a little too light to express it.  Goodness I call the habit, and goodness of nature, the
inclination.  This of all virtues, and dignities of the
mind, is the greatest; being the character of the
Deity: and without it, man is a busy, mischievous,
wretched thing; no better than a kind of vermin.
Goodness answers to the theological virtue, charity, and admits no excess, but error.  The desire of
power in excess, caused the angels to fall; the desire
of knowledge in excess, caused man to fall: but in
charity there is no excess; neither can angel, nor
man, come in dan ger by it.  The inclination to goodness, is imprinted deeply in the nature of man; insomuch, that if it issue not towards men, it will
take unto other living creatures; as it is seen in the
Turks, a cruel people, who nevertheless are kind
to beasts, and give alms, to dogs and birds; insomuch, as Busbechius reporteth, a Christian boy, in
Constantinople, had like to have been stoned, for
gagging in a waggishness a long-billed fowl.
Errors indeed in this virtue of goodness, or charity,
may be committed.  The Italians have an ungracious proverb, Tanto buon che val niente: so
good, that he is good for nothing.  And one of
the doctors of Italy, Nicholas Machiavel, had
the confidence to put in writing, almost in plain
terms, That the Christian faith, had given up good
men, in prey to those that are tyrannical and unjust.  Which he spake, because indeed there was
never law, or sect, or opinion, did so much magnify goodness, as the Christian religion doth.
Therefore, to avoid the scandal and the danger
both, it is good, to take knowledge of the errors of
an habit so excellent.  Seek the good of other men,
but be not in bondage to their faces or fancies; for
that is but facility, or softness; which taketh an
honest mind prisoner.  Neither give thou AEsop’s
cock a gem, who would be better pleased, and happier, if he had had a barley-corn.  The example of
God, teacheth the lesson truly: He sendeth his rain,
and maketh his sun to shine, upon the just and
unjust; but he doth not rain wealth, nor shine
honor and virtues, upon men equally.  Common
benefits, are to be communicate with all; but peculiar benefits, with choice.  And beware how in
making the portraiture, thou breakest the pattern.
For divinity, maketh the love of ourselves the pattern; the love of our neighbors, but the portraiture.
Sell all thou hast, and give it to the poor, and follow me: but, sell not all thou hast, except thou
come and follow me; that is, except thou have a
vocation, wherein thou mayest do as much good,
with little means as with great; for otherwise, in
feeding the streams, thou driest the fountain.
Neither is there only a habit of goodness, directed
by right reason; but there is in some men, even in
nature, a disposition towards it; as on the other
side, there is a natural malignity.  For there be,
that in their nature do not affect the good of others.
The lighter sort of malignity, turneth but to a
crassness, or frowardness, or aptness to oppose, or
difficulties, or the like; but the deeper sort, to envy
and mere mischief.  Such men, in other men’s calamities, are, as it were, in season, and are ever on
the loading part: not so good as the dogs, that licked
Lazarus’ sores; but like flies, that are still buzzing
upon any thing that is raw; misanthropi, that
make it their practice, to bring men to the bough,
and yet never a tree for the purpose in their gardens, as Timon had.  Such dispositions, are the very
errors of human nature; and yet they are the fittest
timber, to make great politics of; like to knee timber, that is good for ships, that are ordained to be
tossed; but not for building houses, that shall stand
firm.  The parts and signs of goodness, are many.  If
a man be gracious and courteous to strangers, it
shows he is a citizen of the world, and that his heart
is no island, cut off from other lands, but a continent, that joins to them.  If he be compassionate
towards the afflictions of others, it shows that his
heart is like the noble tree, that is wounded itself,
when it gives the balm.  If he easily pardons, and
remits offences, it shows that his mind is planted
above injuries; so that he cannot be shot.  If he be
thankful for small benefits, it shows that he weighs
men’s minds, and not their trash.  But above all, if
he have St. Paul’s perfection, that he would wish
to be anathema from Christ, for the salvation of
his brethren, it shows much of a divine nature, and
a kind of conformity with Christ himself
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
