
Samuel Butler (1835 - 1902)
English composer, novelist, and satiric author




Walking the other day in Cheapside I saw some turtles in Mr.
Sweeting’s window, and was tempted to stay and look at them.  As I
did so I was struck not more by the defences with which they were
hedged about, than by the fatuousness of trying to hedge that in at
all which, if hedged thoroughly, must die of its own defencefulness.
The holes for the head and feet through which the turtle leaks out,
as it were, on to the exterior world, and through which it again
absorbs the exterior world into itself—"catching on” through them
to things that are thus both turtle and not turtle at one and the
same time—these holes stultify the armour, and show it to have been
designed by a creature with more of faithfulness to a fixed idea,
and hence one-sidedness, than of that quick sense of relative
importances and their changes, which is the main factor of good
living.
The turtle obviously had no sense of proportion; it differed so
widely from myself that I could not comprehend it; and as this word
occurred to me, it occurred also that until my body comprehended its
body in a physical material sense, neither would my mind be able to
comprehend its mind with any thoroughness.  For unity of mind can
only be consummated by unity of body; everything, therefore, must be
in some respects both knave and fool to all that which has not eaten
it, or by which it has not been eaten.  As long as the turtle was in
the window and I in the street outside, there was no chance of our
comprehending one another.
Nevertheless I knew that I could get it to agree with me if I could
so effectually button-hole and fasten on to it as to eat it.  Most
men have an easy method with turtle soup, and I had no misgiving but
that if I could bring my first premise to bear I should prove the
better reasoner.  My difficulty lay in this initial process, for I
had not with me the argument that would alone compel Mr. Sweeting
think that I ought to be allowed to convert the turtles—I mean I
had no money in my pocket.  No missionary enterprise can be carried
on without any money at all, but even so small a sum as half-a-crown
would, I suppose, have enabled me to bring the turtle partly round,
and with many half-crowns I could in time no doubt convert the lot,
for the turtle needs must go where the money drives.  If, as is
alleged, the world stands on a turtle, the turtle stands on money.
No money no turtle.  As for money, that stands on opinion, credit,
trust, faith—things that, though highly material in connection with
money, are still of immaterial essence.
The steps are perfectly plain.  The men who caught the turtles
brought a fairly strong and definite opinion to bear upon them, that
passed into action, and later on into money.  They thought the
turtles would come that way, and verified their opinion; on this,
will and action were generated, with the result that the men turned
the turtles on their backs and carried them off.  Mr. Sweeting
touched these men with money, which is the outward and visible sign
of verified opinion.  The customer touches Mr. Sweeting with money,
Mr. Sweeting touches the waiter and the cook with money.  They touch
the turtle with skill and verified opinion.  Finally, the customer
applies the clinching argument that brushes all sophisms aside, and
bids the turtle stand protoplasm to protoplasm with himself, to know
even as it is known.
But it must be all touch, touch, touch; skill, opinion, power, and
money, passing in and out with one another in any order we like, but
still link to link and touch to touch.  If there is failure anywhere
in respect of opinion, skill, power, or money, either as regards
quantity or quality, the chain can be no stronger than its weakest
link, and the turtle and the clinching argument will fly asunder.
Of course, if there is an initial failure in connection, through
defect in any member of the chain, or of connection between the
links, it will no more be attempted to bring the turtle and the
clinching argument together, than it will to chain up a dog with two
pieces of broken chain that are disconnected.  The contact
throughout must be conceived as absolute; and yet perfect contact is
inconceivable by us, for on becoming perfect it ceases to be
contact, and becomes essential, once for all inseverable, identity.
The most absolute contact short of this is still contact by courtesy
only.  So here, as everywhere else, Eurydice glides off as we are
about to grasp her.  We can see nothing face to face; our utmost
seeing is but a fumbling of blind finger-ends in an overcrowded
pocket.
Presently my own blind finger-ends fished up the conclusion, that as
I had neither time nor money to spend on perfecting the chain that
would put me in full spiritual contact with Mr. Sweeting’s turtles,
I had better leave them to complete their education at some one
else’s expense rather than mine, so I walked on towards the Bank.
As I did so it struck me how continually we are met by this melting
of one existence into another.  The limits of the body seem well
defined enough as definitions go, but definitions seldom go far.
What, for example, can seem more distinct from a man than his banker
or his solicitor?  Yet these are commonly so much parts of him that
he can no more cut them off and grow new ones, than he can grow new
legs or arms; neither must he wound his solicitor; a wound in the
solicitor is a very serious thing.  As for his bank—failure of his
bank’s action may be as fatal to a man as failure of his heart.  I
have said nothing about the medical or spiritual adviser, but most
men grow into the society that surrounds them by the help of these
four main tap-roots, and not only into the world of humanity, but
into the universe at large.  We can, indeed, grow butchers, bakers,
and greengrocers, almost ad libitum, but these are low developments,
and correspond to skin, hair, or finger-nails.  Those of us again
who are not highly enough organised to have grown a solicitor or
banker can generally repair the loss of whatever social organisation
they may possess as freely as lizards are said to grow new tails;
but this with the higher social, as well as organic, developments is
only possible to a very limited extent.
The doctrine of metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls—a
doctrine to which the foregoing considerations are for the most part
easy corollaries—crops up no matter in what direction we allow our
thoughts to wander.  And we meet instances of transmigration of body
as well as of soul.  I do not mean that both body and soul have
transmigrated together, far from it; but that, as we can often
recognise a transmigrated mind in an alien body, so we not less
often see a body that is clearly only a transmigration, linked on to
some one else’s new and alien soul.  We meet people every day whose
bodies are evidently those of men and women long dead, but whose
appearance we know through their portraits.  We see them going about
in omnibuses, railway carriages, and in all public places.  The
cards have been shuffled, and they have drawn fresh lots in life and
nationalities, but any one fairly well up in mediaeval and last
century portraiture knows them at a glance.
Going down once towards Italy I saw a young man in the train whom I
recognised, only he seemed to have got younger.  He was with a
friend, and his face was in continual play, but for some little time
I puzzled in vain to recollect where it was that I had seen him
before.  All of a sudden I remembered he was King Francis I. of
France.  I had hitherto thought the face of this king impossible,
but when I saw it in play I understood it.  His great contemporary
Henry VIII. keeps a restaurant in Oxford Street.  Falstaff drove one
of the St. Gothard diligences for many years, and only retired when
the railway was opened.  Titian once made me a pair of boots at
Vicenza, and not very good ones.  At Modena I had my hair cut by a
young man whom I perceived to be Raffaelle.  The model who sat to
him for his celebrated Madonnas is first lady in a confectionery
establishment at Montreal.  She has a little motherly pimple on the
left side of her nose that is misleading at first, but on
examination she is readily recognised; probably Raffaelle’s model
had the pimple too, but Raffaelle left it out—as he would.
Handel, of course, is Madame Patey.  Give Madame Patey Handel’s wig
and clothes, and there would be no telling her from Handel.  It is
not only that the features and the shape of the head are the same,
but there is a certain imperiousness of expression and attitude
about Handel which he hardly attempts to conceal in Madame Patey.
It is a curious coincidence that he should continue to be such an
incomparable renderer of his own music.  Pope Julius II. was the
late Mr. Darwin.  Rameses II. is a blind woman now, and stands in
Holborn, holding a tin mug.  I never could understand why I always
found myself humming “They oppressed them with burthens” when I
passed her, till one day I was looking in Mr. Spooner’s window in
the Strand, and saw a photograph of Rameses II.  Mary Queen of Scots
wears surgical boots and is subject to fits, near the Horse Shoe in
Tottenham Court Road.
Michael Angelo is a commissionaire; I saw him on board the Glen
Rosa, which used to run every day from London to Clacton-on-Sea and
back.  It gave me quite a turn when I saw him coming down the stairs
from the upper deck, with his bronzed face, flattened nose, and with
the familiar bar upon his forehead.  I never liked Michael Angelo,
and never shall, but I am afraid of him, and was near trying to hide
when I saw him coming towards me.  He had not got his
commissionaire’s uniform on, and I did not know he was one till I
met him a month or so later in the Strand.  When we got to Blackwall
the music struck up and people began to dance.  I never saw a man
dance so much in my life.  He did not miss a dance all the way to
Clacton, nor all the way back again, and when not dancing he was
flirting and cracking jokes.  I could hardly believe my eyes when I
reflected that this man had painted the famous “Last Judgment,” and
had made all those statues.
Dante is, or was a year or two ago, a waiter at Brissago on the Lago
Maggiore, only he is better-tempered-looking, and has a more
intellectual expression.  He gave me his ideas upon beauty:  “Tutto
ch’ e vero e bello,” he exclaimed, with all his old self-confidence.
I am not afraid of Dante.  I know people by their friends, and he
went about with Virgil, so I said with some severity, “No, Dante, il
naso della Signora Robinson e vero, ma non e bello"; and he admitted
I was right.  Beatrice’s name is Towler; she is waitress at a small
inn in German Switzerland.  I used to sit at my window and hear
people call “Towler, Towler, Towler,” fifty times in a forenoon.
She was the exact antithesis to Abra; Abra, if I remember, used to
come before they called her name, but no matter how often they
called Towler, every one came before she did.  I suppose they spelt
her name Taula, but to me it sounded Towler; I never, however, met
any one else with this name.  She was a sweet, artless little hussy,
who made me play the piano to her, and she said it was lovely.  Of
course I only played my own compositions; so I believed her, and it
all went off very nicely.  I thought it might save trouble if I did
not tell her who she really was, so I said nothing about it.
I met Socrates once.  He was my muleteer on an excursion which I
will not name, for fear it should identify the man.  The moment I
saw my guide I knew he was somebody, but for the life of me I could
not remember who.  All of a sudden it flashed across me that he was
Socrates.  He talked enough for six, but it was all in dialetto, so
I could not understand him, nor, when I had discovered who he was,
did I much try to do so.  He was a good creature, a trifle given to
stealing fruit and vegetables, but an amiable man enough.  He had
had a long day with his mule and me, and he only asked me five
francs.  I gave him ten, for I pitied his poor old patched boots,
and there was a meekness about him that touched me.  “And now,
Socrates,” said I at parting, “we go on our several ways, you to
steal tomatoes, I to filch ideas from other people; for the rest—
which of these two roads will be the better going, our father which
is in heaven knows, but we know not.”
I have never seen Mendelssohn, but there is a fresco of him on the
terrace, or open-air dining-room, of an inn at Chiavenna.  He is not
called Mendelssohn, but I knew him by his legs.  He is in the
costume of a dandy of some five-and-forty years ago, is smoking a
cigar, and appears to be making an offer of marriage to his cook.
Beethoven both my friend Mr. H. Festing Jones and I have had the
good fortune to meet; he is an engineer now, and does not know one
note from another; he has quite lost his deafness, is married, and
is, of course, a little squat man with the same refractory hair that
he always had.  It was very interesting to watch him, and Jones
remarked that before the end of dinner he had become positively
posthumous.  One morning I was told the Beethovens were going away,
and before long I met their two heavy boxes being carried down the
stairs.  The boxes were so squab and like their owners, that I half
thought for a moment that they were inside, and should hardly have
been surprised to see them spring up like a couple of Jacks-in-the-
box.  “Sono indentro?” said I, with a frown of wonder, pointing to
the boxes.  The porters knew what I meant, and laughed.  But there
is no end to the list of people whom I have been able to recognise,
and before I had got through it myself, I found I had walked some
distance, and had involuntarily paused in front of a second-hand
bookstall.
I do not like books.  I believe I have the smallest library of any
literary man in London, and I have no wish to increase it.  I keep
my books at the British Museum and at Mudie’s, and it makes me very
angry if any one gives me one for my private library.  I once heard
two ladies disputing in a railway carriage as to whether one of them
had or had not been wasting money.  “I spent it in books,” said the
accused, “and it’s not wasting money to buy books.”  “Indeed, my
dear, I think it is,” was the rejoinder, and in practice I agree
with it.  Webster’s Dictionary, Whitaker’s Almanack, and Bradshaw’s
Railway Guide should be sufficient for any ordinary library; it will
be time enough to go beyond these when the mass of useful and
entertaining matter which they provide has been mastered.
Nevertheless, I admit that sometimes, if not particularly busy, I
stop at a second-hand bookstall and turn over a book or two from
mere force of habit.
I know not what made me pick up a copy of AEschylus—of course in an
English version—or rather I know not what made AEschylus take up
with me, for he took me rather than I him; but no sooner had he got
me than he began puzzling me, as he has done any time this forty
years, to know wherein his transcendent merit can be supposed to
lie.  To me he is, like the greater number of classics in all ages
and countries, a literary Struldbrug, rather than a true ambrosia-
fed immortal.  There are true immortals, but they are few and far
between; most classics are as great impostors dead as they were when
living, and while posing as gods are, five-sevenths of them, only
Struldbrugs.  It comforts me to remember that Aristophanes liked
AEschylus no better than I do.  True, he praises him by comparison
with Sophocles and Euripides, but he only does so that he may run
down these last more effectively.  Aristophanes is a safe man to
follow, nor do I see why it should not be as correct to laugh with
him as to pull a long face with the Greek Professors; but this is
neither here nor there, for no one really cares about AEschylus; the
more interesting question is how he contrived to make so many people
for so many years pretend to care about him.
Perhaps he married somebody’s daughter.  If a man would get hold of
the public ear, he must pay, marry, or fight.  I have never
understood that AEschylus was a man of means, and the fighters do
not write poetry, so I suppose he must have married a theatrical
manager’s daughter, and got his plays brought out that way.  The ear
of any age or country is like its land, air, and water; it seems
limitless but is really limited, and is already in the keeping of
those who naturally enough will have no squatting on such valuable
property.  It is written and talked up to as closely as the means of
subsistence are bred up to by a teeming population.  There is not a
square inch of it but is in private hands, and he who would freehold
any part of it must do so by purchase, marriage, or fighting, in the
usual way—and fighting gives the longest, safest tenure.  The
public itself has hardly more voice in the question who shall have
its ear, than the land has in choosing its owners.  It is farmed as
those who own it think most profitable to themselves, and small
blame to them; nevertheless, it has a residuum of mulishness which
the land has not, and does sometimes dispossess its tenants.  It is
in this residuum that those who fight place their hope and trust.
Or perhaps AEschylus squared the leading critics of his time.  When
one comes to think of it, he must have done so, for how is it
conceivable that such plays should have had such runs if he had not?
I met a lady one year in Switzerland who had some parrots that
always travelled with her and were the idols of her life.  These
parrots would not let any one read aloud in their presence, unless
they heard their own names introduced from time to time.  If these
were freely interpolated into the text they would remain as still as
stones, for they thought the reading was about themselves.  If it
was not about them it could not be allowed.  The leaders of
literature are like these parrots; they do not look at what a man
writes, nor if they did would they understand it much better than
the parrots do; but they like the sound of their own names, and if
these are freely interpolated in a tone they take as friendly, they
may even give ear to an outsider.  Otherwise they will scream him
off if they can.
I should not advise any one with ordinary independence of mind to
attempt the public ear unless he is confident that he can out-lung
and out-last his own generation; for if he has any force, people
will and ought to be on their guard against him, inasmuch as there
is no knowing where he may not take them.  Besides, they have staked
their money on the wrong men so often without suspecting it, that
when there comes one whom they do suspect it would be madness not to
bet against him.  True, he may die before he has out-screamed his
opponents, but that has nothing to do with it.  If his scream was
well pitched it will sound clearer when he is dead.  We do not know
what death is.  If we know so little about life which we have
experienced, how shall we know about death which we have not—and in
the nature of things never can?  Every one, as I said years ago in
“Alps and Sanctuaries,” is an immortal to himself, for he cannot
know that he is dead until he is dead, and when dead how can he know
anything about anything?  All we know is, that even the humblest
dead may live long after all trace of the body has disappeared; we
see them doing it in the bodies and memories of those that come
after them; and not a few live so much longer and more effectually
than is desirable, that it has been necessary to get rid of them by
Act of Parliament.  It is love that alone gives life, and the truest
life is that which we live not in ourselves but vicariously in
others, and with which we have no concern.  Our concern is so to
order ourselves that we may be of the number of them that enter into
life—although we know it not.
AEschylus did so order himself; but his life is not of that
inspiriting kind that can be won through fighting the good fight
only—or being believed to have fought it.  His voice is the echo of
a drone, drone-begotten and drone-sustained.  It is not a tone that
a man must utter or die—nay, even though he die; and likely enough
half the allusions and hard passages in AEschylus of which we can
make neither head nor tail are in reality only puffs of some of the
literary leaders of his time.
The lady above referred to told me more about her parrots.  She was
like a Nasmyth’s hammer going slow—very gentle, but irresistible.
She always read the newspaper to them.  What was the use of having a
newspaper if one did not read it to one’s parrots?
“And have you divined,” I asked, “to which side they incline in
politics?”
“They do not like Mr. Gladstone,” was the somewhat freezing answer;
“this is the only point on which we disagree, for I adore him.
Don’t ask more about this, it is a great grief to me.  I tell them
everything,” she continued, “and hide no secret from them.”
“But can any parrot be trusted to keep a secret?”
“Mine can.”
“And on Sundays do you give them the same course of reading as on a
week-day, or do you make a difference?”
“On Sundays I always read them a genealogical chapter from the Old
or New Testament, for I can thus introduce their names without
profanity.  I always keep tea by me in case they should ask for it
in the night, and I have an Etna to warm it for them; they take milk
and sugar.  The old white-headed clergyman came to see them last
night; it was very painful, for Jocko reminded him so strongly of
his late . . . “
I thought she was going to say “wife,” but it proved to have been
only of a parrot that he had once known and loved.
One evening she was in difficulties about the quarantine, which was
enforced that year on the Italian frontier.  The local doctor had
gone down that morning to see the Italian doctor and arrange some
details.  “Then, perhaps, my dear,” she said to her husband, “he is
the quarantine.”  “No, my love,” replied her husband.  “The
quarantine is not a person, it is a place where they put people";
but she would not be comforted, and suspected the quarantine as an
enemy that might at any moment pounce out upon her and her parrots.
So a lady told me once that she had been in like trouble about the
anthem.  She read in her prayer-book that in choirs and places where
they sing “here followeth the anthem,” yet the person with this most
mysteriously sounding name never did follow.  They had a choir, and
no one could say the church was not a place where they sang, for
they did sing—both chants and hymns.  Why, then, this persistent
slackness on the part of the anthem, who at this juncture should
follow her papa, the rector, into the reading-desk?  No doubt he
would come some day, and then what would he be like?  Fair or dark?
Tall or short?  Would he be bald and wear spectacles like papa, or
would he be young and good-looking?  Anyhow, there was something
wrong, for it was announced that he would follow, and he never did
follow; therefore there was no knowing what he might not do next.
I heard of the parrots a year or two later as giving lessons in
Italian to an English maid.  I do not know what their terms were.
Alas! since then both they and their mistress have joined the
majority.  When the poor lady felt her end was near she desired (and
the responsibility for this must rest with her, not me) that the
birds might be destroyed, as fearing that they might come to be
neglected, and knowing that they could never be loved again as she
had loved them.  On being told that all was over, she said, “Thank
you,” and immediately expired.
Reflecting in such random fashion, and strolling with no greater
method, I worked my way back through Cheapside and found myself once
more in front of Sweeting’s window.  Again the turtles attracted me.
They were alive, and so far at any rate they agreed with me.  Nay,
they had eyes, mouths, legs, if not arms, and feet, so there was
much in which we were both of a mind, but surely they must be
mistaken in arming themselves so very heavily.  Any creature on
getting what the turtle aimed at would overreach itself and be
landed not in safety but annihilation.  It should have no communion
with the outside world at all, for death could creep in wherever the
creature could creep out; and it must creep out somewhere if it was
to hook on to outside things.  What death can be more absolute than
such absolute isolation?  Perfect death, indeed, if it were
attainable (which it is not), is as near perfect security as we can
reach, but it is not the kind of security aimed at by any animal
that is at the pains of defending itself.  For such want to have
things both ways, desiring the livingness of life without its
perils, and the safety of death without its deadness, and some of us
do actually get this for a considerable time, but we do not get it
by plating ourselves with armour as the turtle does.  We tried this
in the Middle Ages, and no longer mock ourselves with the weight of
armour that our forefathers carried in battle.  Indeed the more
deadly the weapons of attack become the more we go into the fight
slug-wise.
Slugs have ridden their contempt for defensive armour as much to
death as the turtles their pursuit of it.  They have hardly more
than skin enough to hold themselves together; they court death every
time they cross the road.  Yet death comes not to them more than to
the turtle, whose defences are so great that there is little left
inside to be defended.  Moreover, the slugs fare best in the long
run, for turtles are dying out, while slugs are not, and there must
be millions of slugs all the world over for every single turtle.  Of
the two vanities, therefore, that of the slug seems most
substantial.
In either case the creature thinks itself safe, but is sure to be
found out sooner or later; nor is it easy to explain this mockery
save by reflecting that everything must have its meat in due season,
and that meat can only be found for such a multitude of mouths by
giving everything as meat in due season to something else.  This is
like the Kilkenny cats, or robbing Peter to pay Paul; but it is the
way of the world, and as every animal must contribute in kind to the
picnic of the universe, one does not see what better arrangement
could be made than the providing each race with a hereditary
fallacy, which shall in the end get it into a scrape, but which
shall generally stand the wear and tear of life for some time.  “Do
ut des” is the writing on all flesh to him that eats it; and no
creature is dearer to itself than it is to some other that would
devour it.
Nor is there any statement or proposition more invulnerable than
living forms are.  Propositions prey upon and are grounded upon one
another just like living forms.  They support one another as plants
and animals do; they are based ultimately on credit, or faith,
rather than the cash of irrefragable conviction.  The whole universe
is carried on on the credit system, and if the mutual confidence on
which it is based were to collapse, it must itself collapse
immediately.  Just or unjust, it lives by faith; it is based on
vague and impalpable opinion that by some inscrutable process passes
into will and action, and is made manifest in matter and in flesh:
it is meteoric—suspended in midair; it is the baseless fabric of a
vision so vast, so vivid, and so gorgeous that no base can seem more
broad than such stupendous baselessness, and yet any man can bring
it about his ears by being over-curious; when faith fails a system
based on faith fails also.
Whether the universe is really a paying concern, or whether it is an
inflated bubble that must burst sooner or later, this is another
matter.  If people were to demand cash payment in irrefragable
certainty for everything that they have taken hitherto as paper
money on the credit of the bank of public opinion, is there money
enough behind it all to stand so great a drain even on so great a
reserve?  Probably there is not, but happily there can be no such
panic, for even though the cultured classes may do so, the
uncultured are too dull to have brains enough to commit such
stupendous folly.  It takes a long course of academic training to
educate a man up to the standard which he must reach before he can
entertain such questions seriously, and by a merciful dispensation
of Providence, university training is almost as costly as it is
unprofitable.  The majority will thus be always unable to afford it,
and will base their opinions on mother wit and current opinion
rather than on demonstration.
So I turned my steps homewards; I saw a good many more things on my
way home, but I was told that I was not to see more this time than I
could get into twelve pages of the Universal Review; I must
therefore reserve any remark which I think might perhaps entertain
the reader for another occasion.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays on Life, Art and Science by Samuel Butler is in the public domain.


Also see Essays on Life, Art and Science at Amazon.com


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Essays on Life, Art and Science (Large Print)By Samuel ButlerAt Amazon
