
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




AND EDUCATION
MEN’S thoughts, are much according to their
inclination; their discourse and speeches,
according to their learning and infused opinions;
but their deeds, are after as they have been accustomed.  And therefore, as Machiavel well noteth
(though in an evil-favored instance), there is no
trusting to the force of nature, nor to the bravery
of words, except it be corroborate by custom.  His
instance is, that for the achieving of a desperate
conspiracy, a man should not rest upon the fierceness of any man’s nature, or his resolute undertakings; but take such an one, as hath had his
hands formerly in blood.  But Machiavel knew not
of a Friar Clement, nor a Ravillac, nor a Jaureguy,
nor a Baltazar Gerard; yet his rule holdeth still,
that nature, nor the engagement of words, are not
so forcible, as custom.  Only superstition is now so
well advanced, that men of the first blood, are as
firm as butchers by occupation; and votary resolution, is made equipollent to custom, even in matter of blood.  In other things, the predominancy of
custom is everywhere visible; insomuch as a man
would wonder, to hear men profess, protest, engage, give great words, and then do, just as they
have done before; as if they were dead images,
and engines moved only by the wheels of custom.
We see also the reign or tyranny of custom, what
it is.  The Indians (I mean the sect of their wise men)
lay themselves quietly upon a stock of wood, and
so sacrifice themselves by fire.  Nay, the wives
strive to be burned, with the corpses of their husbands.  The lads of Sparta, of ancient time, were
wont to be scourged upon the altar of Diana, without so much as queching.  I remember, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth’s time of England, an
Irish rebel condemned, put up a petition to the
deputy, that he might be hanged in a withe, and
not in an halter; because it had been so used, with
former rebels.  There be monks in Russia, for penance, that will sit a whole night in a vessel of water,
till they be engaged with hard ice.  Many examples
may be put of the force of custom, both upon mind
and body.  Therefore, since custom is the principal
magistrate of man’s life, let men by all means endeavor, to obtain good customs.  Certainly custom
is most perfect, when it beginneth in young years:
this we call education; which is, in effect, but an
early custom.  So we see, in languages, the tongue
is more pliant to all expressions and sounds, the
joints are more supple, to all feats of activity and
motions,  in youth than afterwards.  For it is true,
that late learners cannot so well take the ply; except it be in some minds, that have not suffered
themselves to fix, but have kept themselves open,
and prepared to receive continual amendment,
which is exceeding rare.  But if the force of custom simple and separate, be great, the force of
custom copulate and conjoined and collegiate, is
far greater.  For there example teacheth, company
comforteth, emulation quickeneth, glory raiseth:
so as in such places the force of custom is in his
exaltation.  Certainly the great multiplication of
virtues upon human nature, resteth upon societies well ordained and disciplined.  For commonwealths, and good governments, do nourish virtue
grown but do not much mend the deeds.  But the
misery is, that the most effectual means, are now
applied to the ends, least to be desired.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
