
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




COSTLY followers are not to be liked; lest
while a man maketh his train longer, he
make his wings shorter.  I reckon to be costly, not
them alone which charge the purse, but which are
wearisome, and importune in suits.  Ordinary followers ought to challenge no higher conditions,
than countenance, recommendation, and protection from wrongs.  Factious followers are worse to
be liked, which follow not upon affection to him,
with whom they range themselves, but upon
discontentment conceived against some other;
whereupon commonly ensueth that ill intelligence, that we many times see between great personages.  Likewise glorious followers, who make
themselves as trumpets of the commendation of
those they follow, are full of inconvenience; for
they taint business through want of secrecy; and
they export honor from a man, and make him a
return in envy.  There is a kind of followers likewise, which are dangerous, being indeed espials;
which inquire the secrets of the house, and bear
tales of them, to others.  Yet such men, many times,
are in great favor; for they are officious, and commonly exchange tales.  The following by certain
estates of men, answerable to that, which a great
person himself professeth (as of soldiers, to him
that hath been employed in the wars, and the like),
hath ever been a thing civil, and well taken, even
in monarchies; so it be without too much pomp
or popularity.  But the most honorable kind of following, is to be followed as one, that apprehendeth
to advance virtue, and desert, in all sorts of persons.  And yet, where there is no eminent odds in
sufficiency, it is better to take with the more passable, than with the more able.  And besides, to
speak truth, in base times, active men are of more
use than virtuous.  It is true that in government, it
is good to use men of one rank equally: for to countenance some extraordinarily, is to make them
insolent, and the rest discontent; because they
may claim a due.  But contrariwise, in favor, to
use men with much difference and election is
good; for it maketh the persons preferred more
thankful, and the rest more officious: because all is
of favor.  It is good discretion, not to make too much
of any man at the first; because one cannot hold
out that proportion.  To be governed (as we call it)
by one is not safe; for it shows softness, and gives
a freedom, to scandal and disreputation; for those,
that would not censure or speak ill of a man immediately, will talk more boldly of those that are so
great with them, and thereby wound their honor.
Yet to be distracted with many is worse; for it
makes men to be of the last impression, and full of
change.  To take advice of some few friends, is ever
honorable; for lookers-on many times see more
than gamesters; and the vale best discovereth the
hill.  There is little friendship in the world, and least
of all between equals, which was wont to be magnified.  That that is, is between superior and inferior, whose fortunes may comprehend the one
the other.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
