
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




THE greatest trust, between man and man, is
the trust of giving counsel.  For in other confidences, men commit the parts of life; their lands,
their goods, their children, their credit, some particular affair; but to such as they make their counsellors, they commit the whole: by how much the
more, they are obliged to all faith and integrity.
The wisest princes need not think it any diminution to their greatness, or derogation to their sufficiency, to rely upon counsel.  God himself is not
without, but hath made it one of the great names
of his blessed Son: The Counsellor.  Solomon hath
pronounced, that in counsel is stability.  Things
will have their first, or second agitation: if they be
not tossed upon the arguments of counsel, they
will be tossed upon the waves of fortune; and be
full of inconstancy, doing and undoing, like the
reeling of a drunken man.  Solomon’s son found
the force of counsel, as his father saw the necessity
of it.  For the beloved kingdom of God, was first
rent, and broken, by ill counsel; upon which counsel, there are set for our instruction, the two marks
whereby bad counsel is for ever best discerned;
that it was young counsel, for the person; and
violent counsel, for the matter.
The ancient times, do set forth in figure, both
the incorporation, and inseparable conjunction, of
counsel with kings, and the wise and politic use of
counsel by kings: the one, in that they say Jupiter did marry Metis, which signifieth counsel;
whereby they intend that Sovereignty, is married
to Counsel: the other in that which followeth,
which was thus: They say, after Jupiter was married to Metis, she conceived by him, and was with
child, but Jupiter suffered her not to stay, till she
brought forth, but eat her up; whereby he became
himself with child, and was delivered of Pallas
armed, out of his head.  Which monstrous fable
containeth a secret of empire; how kings are to
make use of their counsel of state.  That first, they
ought to refer matters unto them, which is the first
begetting, or impregnation; but when they are
elaborate, moulded, and shaped in the womb of
their counsel, and grow ripe, and ready to be
brought forth, that then they suffer not their counsel to go through with the resolution and direction, as if it depended on them; but take the matter
back into their own hands, and make it appear to
the world, that the decrees and final directions
(which, because they come forth, with prudence
and power, are resembled to Pallas armed) proceeded from themselves; and not only from their
authority, but (the more to add reputation to themselves) from their head and device.
Let us now speak of the inconveniences of counsel, and of the remedies.  The inconveniences that
have been noted, in calling and using counsel, are
three.  First, the revealing of affairs, whereby they
become less secret.  Secondly, the weakening of the
authority of princes, as if they were less of themselves.  Thirdly, the danger of being unfaithfully
counselled, and more for the good of them that
counsel, than of him that is counselled.  For which
inconveniences, the doctrine of Italy, and practice
of France, in some kings’ times, hath introduced
cabinet counsels; a remedy worse than the disease.
As to secrecy; princes are not bound to communicate all matters, with all counsellors; but may
extract and select.  Neither is it necessary, that he
that consulteth what he should do, should declare
what he will do.  But let princes beware, that the
unsecreting of their affairs, comes not from themselves.  And as for cabinet counsels, it may be their
motto, plenus rimarum sum: one futile person,
that maketh it his glory to tell, will do more hurt
than many, that know it their duty to conceal.  It is
true there be some affairs, which require extreme
secrecy, which will hardly go beyond one or two
persons, besides the king: neither are those counsels unprosperous; for, besides the secrecy, they
conunonly go on constantly, in one spirit of direction, without distraction.  But then it must be a
prudent king, such as is able to grind with a handmill; and those inward counsellors had need also
be wise men, and especially true and trusty to the
king’s ends; as it was with King Henry the Seventh
of England, who, in his great business, imparted
himself to none, except it were to Morton and Fox.
For weakening of authority; the fable showeth
the remedy.  Nay, the majesty of kings, is rather
exalted than diminished, when they are in the
chair of counsel; neither was there ever prince, bereaved of his dependences, by his counsel, except
where there hath been, either an over-greatness
in one counsellor, or an over-strict combination in
divers; which are things soon found, and holpen.
For the last inconvenience, that men will counsel, with an eye to themselves; certainly, non
inveniet fidem super terram is meant, of the nature of times, and not of all particular persons.
There be, that are in nature faithful, and sincere,
and plain, and direct; not crafty and involved; let
princes, above all, draw to themselves such natures.  Besides, counsellors are not commonly so
united, but that one counsellor, keepeth sentinel
over another; so that if any do counsel out of faction or private ends, it commonly comes to the
king’s ear.  But the best remedy is, if princes know
their counsellors, as well as their counsellors
know them:
Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos.
And on the other side, counsellors should not be
too speculative into their sovereign’s person.  The
true composition of a counsellor, is rather to be
skilful in their master’s business, than in his nature; for then he is like to advise him, and not feed
his humor.  It is of singular use to princes, if they
take the opinions of their counsel, both separately
and together.  For private opinion is more free;
but opinion before others, is more reverent.  In
private, men are more bold in their own humors;
and in consort, men are more obnoxious to others’
humors; therefore it is good to take both; and of
the inferior sort, rather in private, to preserve freedom; of the greater, rather in consort, to preserve
respect.  It is in vain for princes, to take counsel
concerning matters, if they take no counsel likewise concerning persons; for all matters are as
dead images; and the life of the execution of affairs, resteth in the good choice of persons.  Neither
is it enough, to consult concerning persons secundum genera, as in an idea, or mathematical description, what the kind and character of the
person should be; for the greatest errors are committed, and the most judgment is shown, in the
choice of individuals.  It was truly said, optimi consiliarii mortui: books will speak plain, when counsellors blanch.Therefore it is good to be conversant
in them, specially the books of such as themselves
have been actors upon the stage.
The counsels at this day, in most places, are but
familiar meetings, where matters are rather talked
on, than debated.  And they run too swift, to the
order, or act, of counsel.  It were better that in
causes of weight, the matter were propounded one
day, and not spoken to till the next day; in nocte
consilium.  So was it done in the Commission of
Union, between England and Scotland; which
was a grave and orderly assembly.  I commend set
days for petitions; for both it gives the sudtors more
certainty for their attendance, and it frees the
meetings for matters of estate, that they may hoc
agere.  In choice of committees; for ripening business for the counsel, it is better to choose indifferent
persons, than to make an indifferency, by putting
in those, that are strong on both sides.  I commend
also standing commissions; as for trade, for treasure, for war, for suits, for some provinces; for
where there be divers particular counsels, and but
one counsel of estate (as it is in Spain), they are, in
effect, no more than standing commissions: save
that they have greater authority.  Let such as are
to inform counsels, out of their particular professions (as lawyers, seamen, mintmen, and the like)
be first heard before committees; and then, as occasion serves, before the counsel.  And let them not
come in multitudes, or in a tribunitious manner;
for that is to clamor counsels, not to inform them.
A long table and a square table, or seats about the
walls, seem things of form, but are things of substance; for at a long table a few at the upper end, in
effect, sway all the business; but in the other form,
there is more use of the counsellors’ opinions, that
sit lower.  A king, when he presides in counsel, let
him beware how he opens his own inclination too
much, in that which he propoundeth; for else
counsellors will but take the wind of him, and instead of giving free counsel, sing him a song of
placebo.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
