
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




FORTUNE is like the market; where many
times if you can stay a little, the price will fall.
Again, it is sometimes like Sibylla’s offer; which at
first, offereth the commodity at full, then consumeth part and part, and still holdeth up the
price.  For occasion (as it is in the common verse)
turneth a bald noddle, after she hath presented her
locks in front, and no hold taken; or at least turneth
the handle of the bottle, first to be received, and
after the belly, which is hard to clasp.  There is
surely no greater wisdom, than well to time the
beginnings, and onsets, of things.  Dangers are no
more light, if they once seem light; and more dangers have deceived men, than forced them.  Nay,
it were better, to meet some dangers half way,
though they come nothing near, than to keep too
long a watch upon their approaches; for if a man
watch too long, it is odds he will fall asleep.  On the
other side, to be deceived with too long shadows
(as some have been, when the moon was low, and
shone on their enemies’ back), and so to shoot off
before the time; or to teach dangers to come on, by
over early buckling towards them; is another extreme.  The ripeness, or unripeness, of the occasion
(as we said) must ever be well weighed; and generally it is good, to commit the beginnings of all
great actions to Argus, with his hundred eyes, and
the ends to Briareus, with his hundred hands; first
to watch, and then to speed.  For the helmet of
Pluto, which maketh the politic man go invisible,
is secrecy in the counsel, and celerity in the execution.  For when things are once come to the execution, there is no secrecy, comparable to celerity;
like the motion of a bullet in the air, which flieth
so swift, as it outruns the eye.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
