
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




AND TRIUMPHS
THESE things are but toys, to come amongst
such serious observations.  But yet, since
princes will have such things, it is better they
should be graced with elegancy, than daubed with
cost.  Dancing to song, is a thing of great state and
pleasure.  I understand it, that the song be in quire,
placed aloft, and accompanied with some broken
music; and the ditty fitted to the device.  Acting in
song, especially in dialogues, hath an extreme
good grace; I say acting, not dancing (for that is a
mean and vulgar thing); and the voices of the dialogue would be strong and manly (a base and a
tenor; no treble); and the ditty high and tragical;
not nice or dainty.  Several quires, placed one over
against another, and taking the voice by catches,
anthem-wise, give great pleasure.  Turning dances
into figure, is a childish curiosity.  And generally
let it be noted, that those things which I here set
down, are such as do naturally take the sense, and
not respect petty wonderments.  It is true, the alterations of scenes, so it be quietly and without
noise, are things of great beauty and pleasure; for
they feed and relieve the eye, before it be full of
the same object.  Let the scenes abound with light,
specially colored and varied; and let the masquers,
or any other, that are to come down from the
scene, have some motions upon the scene itself,
before their coming down; for it draws the eye
strangely, and makes it, with great pleasure, to
desire to see, that it cannot perfectly discern.  Let
the songs be loud and cheerful, and not chirpings
or pulings.  Let the music likewise be sharp and
loud, and well placed.  The colors that show best by
candle-light are white, carnation, and a kind of
sea-water-green; and oes, or spangs, as they are of
no great cost, so they are of most glory.  As for rich
embroidery, it is lost and not discerned.  Let the
suits of the masquers be graceful, and such as become the person, when the vizors are off; not after
examples of known attires; Turke, soldiers, mariners’, and the like.  Let anti-masques not be long;
they have been commonly of fools, satyrs, baboons,
wild-men, antics, beasts, sprites, witches, Ethiops,
pigmies, turquets, nymphs, rustics, Cupids, statuas
moving, and the like.  As for angels, it is not comical enough, to put them in anti-masques; and
anything that is hideous, as devils, giants, is on
the other side as unfit.  But chiefly, let the music
of them be recreative, and with some strange
changes.  Some sweet odors suddenly coming forth,
without any drops falling, are, in such a company
as there is steam and heat, things of great pleasure
and refreshment.  Double masques, one of men,
another of ladies, addeth state and variety.  But all
is nothing except the room be kept clear and neat.
For justs, and tourneys, and barriers; the glories
of them are chiefly in the chariots, wherein the
challengers make their entry; especially if they
be drawn with strange beasts: as lions, bears,
camels, and the like; or in the devices of their entrance; or in the bravery of their liveries; or in the
goodly furniture of their horses and armor.  But
enough of these toys.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
