
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




AS THE births of living creatures, at first are illshapen, so are all innovations, which are the
births of time.  Yet notwithstanding, as those that
first bring honor into their family, are commonly
more worthy than most that succeed, so the first
precedent (if it be good) is seldom attained by
imitation.  For ill, to man’s nature, as it stands
perverted, hath a natural motion, strongest in continuance; but good, as a forced motion, strongest
at first.  Surely every medicine is an innovation;
and he that will not apply new remedies, must
expect new evils; for time is the greatest innovator;
and if time of course alter things to the worse, and
wisdom and counsel shall not alter them to the
better, what shall be the end? It is true, that what
is settled by custom, though it be not good, yet at
least it is fit; and those things which have long
gone together, are, as it were, confederate within
themselves; whereas new things piece not so well;
but though they help by their utility, yet they
trouble by their inconformity.  Besides, they are
like strangers; more admired, and less favored.  All
this is true, if time stood still; which contrariwise
moveth so round, that a froward retention of custom, is as turbulent a thing as an innovation; and
they that reverence too much old times, are but a
scorn to the new.  It were good, therefore, that men
in their innovations would follow the example of
time itself; which indeed innovateth greatly, but
quietly, by degrees scarce to be perceived.  For
otherwise, whatsoever is new is unlooked for; and
ever it mends some, and pairs others; and he that
is holpen, takes it for a fortune, and thanks the
time; and he that is hurt, for a wrong, and imputeth it to the author.  It is good also, not to try experiments in states, except the necessity be urgent, or
the utility evident; and well to beware, that it be
the reformation, that draweth on the change, and
not the desire of change, that pretendeth the reformation.  And lastly, that the novelty, though it be
not rejected, yet be held for a suspect; and, as the
Scripture saith, that we make a stand upon the
ancient way, and then look about us, and discover
what is the straight and right way, and so to walk
in it.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
