
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




AFFECTED dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to business that can be.  It is like
that, which the physicians call predigestion, or
hasty digestion; which is sure to fill the body full of
crudities, and secret seeds of diseases.  Therefore
measure not dispatch, by the times of sitting, but
by the advancement of the business.  And as in
races it is not the large stride or high lift that makes
the speed; so in business, the keeping close to the
matter, and not taking of it too much at once, procureth dispatch.  It is the care of some, only to come
off speedily for the time; or to contrive some false
periods of business, because they may seem men
of dispatch.  But it is one thing, to abbreviate by
contracting, another by cutting off . And business
so handled, at several sittings or meetings, goeth
commonly backward and forward in an unsteady
manner.  I knew a wise man that had it for a byword, when he saw men hasten to a conclusion,
Stay a little, that we may  make  an  end  the  sooner.
On the other side, true dispatch is a rich thing.
For time is the measure of business, as money is
of wares; and business is bought at a dear hand,
where there is small dispatch.  The Spartans and
Spaniards have been noted to be of small dispatch;
Mi venga la muerte de Spagna; Let my death come
from Spain; for then it will be sure to be long in
coming.
Give good hearing to those, that give the first
information in business; and rather direct them
in the beginning, than interrupt them in the continuance of their speeches; for he that is put out of
his own order, will go forward and backward, and
be more tedious, while he waits upon his memory,
than he could have been, if he had gone on in his
own course.  But sometimes it is seen, that the
moderator is more troublesome, than the actor.
Iterations are commonly loss of time.  But there
is no such gain of time, as to iterate often the state
of the question; for it chaseth away many a frivolous speech, as it is coming forth.  Long and curious
speeches, are as fit for dispatch, as a robe or mantle,
with a long train, is for race.  Prefaces and passages, and excusations, and other speeches of reference to the person, are great wastes of time; and
though they seem to proceed of modesty, they are
bravery.  Yet beware of being too material, when
there is any impediment or obstruction in men’s
wills; for pre-occupation of mind ever requireth
preface of speech; like a fomentation to make the
unguent enter.
Above all things, order, and distribution, and
singling out of parts, is the life of dispatch; so as the
distribution be not too subtle: for he that doth not
divide, will never enter well into business; and he
that divideth too much, will never come out of it
clearly.  To choose time, is to save time; and an unseasonable motion, is but beating the air.  There be
three parts of business; the preparation, the debate
or examination, and the perfection.  Whereof, if
you look for dispatch, let the middle only be the
work of many, and the first and last the work of
few.  The proceeding upon somewhat conceived in
writing, doth for the most part facilitate dispatch:
for though it should be wholly rejected, yet that
negative is more pregnant of direction, than an
indefinite; as ashes are more generative than dust.

Of Seeming Wise
IT HATH been an opinion, that the French are
wiser than they seem, and the Spaniards seem
wiser than they are.  But howsoever it be between
nations, certainly it is so between man and man.
For as the Apostle saith of godliness, Having a
show of godliness, but denying the power thereof;
so certainly there are, in point of wisdom and sufficiently, that do nothing or little very solemnly:
magno conatu nugas.  It is a ridiculous thing, and
fit for a satire to persons of judgment, to see what
shifts these formalists have, and what prospectives
to make superficies to seem body, that hath depth
and bulk.  Some are so close and reserved, as they
will not show their wares, but by a dark light; and
seem always to keep back somewhat; and when
they know within themselves, they speak of that
they do not well know, would nevertheless seem
to others, to know of that which they may not well
speak.  Some help themselves with countenance
and gesture, and are wise by signs; as Cicero saith
of Piso, that when he answered him, he fetched
one of his brows up to his forehead, and bent the
other down to his chin; Respondes, altero ad frontem sublato,    altero ad mentum depresso supercilio, crudelitatem tibi non placere.  Some think
to bear it by speaking a great word, and being peremptory; and go on, and take by admittance, that
which they cannot make good.  Some, whatsoever
is beyond their reach, will seem to despise, or make
light of it, as impertinent or curious; and so would
have their ignorance seem judgment.  Some are
never without a difference, and commonly by
amusing men with a subtilty, blanch the matter;
of whom A. Gellius saith, Hominem delirum, qui
verborum minutiis rerum  frangit pondera.  Of
which kind also, Plato, in his Protagoras, bringeth
in Prodius in scorn, and maketh him make a
speech, that consisteth of distinction from the beginning to the end.  Generally, such men in all
deliberations find ease to be of the negative side,
and affect a credit to object and foretell difficulties; for when propositions are denied, there is an
end of them; but if they be allowed, it requireth a
new work; which false point of wisdom is the bane
of business.  To conclude, there is no decaying merchant, or inward beggar, hath so many tricks to
uphold the credit of their wealth, as these empty
persons have, to maintain the credit of their sufficiency.  Seeming wise men may make shift to get
opinion; but let no man choose them for employment; for certainly you were better take for business, a man somewhat absurd, than over-formal.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
