
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




THE winning of honor, is but the revealing of
a man,s virtue and worth, without disadvantage.  For some in their actions, do woo and effect
honor and reputation, which sort of men, are
commonly much talked of, but inwardly little
admired.  And some, contrariwise, darken their
virtue in the show of it; so as they be undervalued
in opinion.  If a man perform that, which hath not
been attempted before; or attempted and given
over; or hath been achieved, but not with so good
circumstance; he shall purchase more honor, than
by effecting a matter of greater difficulty or virtue,
wherein he is but a follower.  If a man so temper
his actions, as in some one of them he doth content
every faction, or combination of people, the music
will be the fuller.  A man is an ill husband of bis
honor, that entereth into any action, the failing
wherein may disgrace him, more than the carrying of it through, can honor him.  Honor that is
gained and broken upon another, hath the quickest reflection, like diamonds cut with facets.  And
therefore, let a man contend to excel any competitors of his in honor, in outshooting them, if he can,
in their own bow.  Discreet followers and servants,
help much to reputation.  Omnis fama a domesticis
emanat.  Envy, which is the canker of honor, is
best extinguished by declaring a man’s self in
his ends, rather to seek merit than fame; and by
attributing a man’s successes, rather to divine
Providence and felicity, than to his own virtue or
policy.
The true marshalling of the degrees of sovereign
honor, are these: In the first place are conditores
imperiorum, founders of states and commonwealths; such as were Romulus, Cyrus, Caesar,
Ottoman, Ismael.  In the second place are legislatores, lawgivers; which are also called second
founders, or perpetui principes, because they govern by their ordinances after they are gone; such
were Lycurgus, Solon, Justinian, Eadgar, Alphonsus of Castile, the Wise, that made the Siete Partidas.  In the third place are liberatores, or salvatores,
such as compound the long miseries of civil
wars, or deliver their countries from servitude of
strangers or tyrants; as Augustus Caesar, Vespasianus, Aurelianus, Theodoricus, King Henry the
Seventh of England, King Henry the Fourth of
France.  In the fourth place are propagatores or
propugnatores imperii; such as in honorable wars
enlarge their territories, or make noble defence
against invaders.  And in the last place are patres
patriae; which reign justly, and make the times
good wherein they live.  Both which last kinds need
no examples, they are in such number.  Degrees of
honor, in subjects, are, first participes curarum,
those upon whom, princes do discharge the greatest weight of their affairs; their right hands, as
we call them.  The next are duces belli, great leaders
in war; such as are princes’ lieutenants, and do
them notable services in the wars.  The third are
gratiosi, favorites; such as exceed not this scantling, to be solace to the sovereign, and harmless to
the people.  And the fourth, negotiis pares; such as
have great places under princes, and execute their
places, with sufficiency.  There is an honor, likewise, which may be ranked amongst the greatest,
which happeneth rarely; that is, of such as sacrifice themselves to death or danger for the good of
their country; as was M. Regulus, and the two
Decii.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
