
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




TO SEEK to extinguish anger utterly, is but a
bravery of the Stoics.  We have better oracles:
Be angry, but sin not.  Let not the sun go down
upon your anger.  Anger must be limited and confined, both in race and in time.  We will first speak
how the natural inclination and habit to be angry,
may be attempted and calmed.  Secondly, how the
particular motions of anger may be repressed, or
at least refrained from doing mischief.  Thirdly,
how to raise anger, or appease anger in another.
For the first; there is no other way but to meditate, and ruminate well upon the effects of anger,
how it troubles man’s life.  And the best time to do
this, is to look back upon anger, when the fit is
thoroughly over.  Seneca saith well, That anger is
like ruin, which breaks itself upon that it falls.
The Scripture exhorteth us to possess our souls in
patience.  Whosoever is out of patience, is out of
possession of his soul.  Men must not turn bees;
...  animasque in vulnere ponunt.
Anger is certainly a kind of baseness; as it appears well in the weakness of those subjects in
whom it reigns; children, women, old folks, sick
folks.  Only men must beware, that they carry
their anger rather with scorn, than with fear; so
that they may seem rather to be above the injury,
than below it; which is a thing easily done, if a
man will give law to himself in it.
For the second point; the causes and motives of
anger, are chiefly three.  First, to be too sensible of
hurt; for no man is angry, that feels not himself
hurt; and therefore tender and delicate persons
must needs be oft angry; they have so many things
to trouble them, which more robust natures have
little sense of.  The next is, the apprehension and
construction of the injury offered, to be, in the circumstances thereof, full of contempt: for contempt
is that, which putteth an edge upon anger, as much
or more than the hurt itself.  And therefore, when
men are ingenious in picking out circumstances of
contempt, they do kindle their anger much.  Lastly,
opinion of the touch of a man’s reputation, doth
multiply and sharpen anger.  Wherein the remedy
is, that a man should have, as Consalvo was wont
to say, telam honoris crassiorem.  But in all refrainings of anger, it is the best remedy to win time;
and to make a man’s self believe, that the opportunity of his revenge is not yet come, but that he
foresees a time for it; and so to still himself in the
meantime, and reserve it.
To contain anger from mischief, though it take
hold of a man, there be two things, whereof you
must have special caution.  The one, of extreme bitterness of words, especially if they be aculeate and
proper; for cummunia maledicta are nothing so
much; and again, that in anger a man reveal no
secrets; for that, makes him not fit for society.  The
other, that you do not peremptorily break off, in
any business, in a fit of anger; but howsoever you
show bitterness, do not act anything, that is not
revocable.
For raising and appeasing anger in another; it
is done chiefly by choosing of times, when men
are frowardest and worst disposed, to incense
them.  Again, by gathering (as was touched before)
all that you can find out, to aggravate the contempt.  And the two remedies are by the contraries.
The former to take good times, when first to relate
to a man an angry business; for the first impression is much; and the other is, to sever, as much as
may be, the construction of the injury from the
point of contempt; imputing it to misunderstanding, fear, passion, or what you will.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
