
Francis Bacon (1561-1626)




MANY have an opinion not wise, that for a
prince to govern his estate, or for a great
person to govern his proceedings, according to the
respect of factions, is a principal part of policy;
whereas contrariwise, the chiefest wisdom, is
either in ordering those things which are general,
and wherein men of several factions do nevertheless agree; or in dealing with correspondence to
particular persons, one by one.  But I say not that
the considerations of factions, is to be neglected.
Mean men, in their rising, must adhere; but
great men, that have strength in themselves, were
better to maintain themselves indifferent, and
neutral.  Yet even in beginners, to adhere so moderately, as he be a man of the one faction, which is
most passable with the other, commonly giveth
best way.  The lower and weaker faction, is the
firmer in conjunction; and it is often seen, that a
few that are stiff, do tire out a greater number, that
are more moderate.  When one of the factions is extinguished, the remaining subdivideth; as the
faction between Lucullus, and the rest of the
nobles of the senate (which they called Optimates)
held out awhile, against the faction of Pompey
and Caesar; but when the senate’s authority was
pulled down, Caesar and Pompey soon after brake.
The faction or party of Antonius and Octavianus
Caesar, against Brutus and Cassius, held out likewise for a time; but when Brutus and Cassius were
overthrown, then soon after, Antonius and Octavianus brake and subdivided.  These examples are
of wars, but the same holdeth in private factions.
And therefore, those that are seconds in factions,
do many times, when the faction subdivideth,
prove principals; but many times also, they prove
ciphers and cashiered; for many a man’s strength
is in opposition; and when that faileth, he groweth
out of use.  It is commonly seen, that men, once
placed, take in with the  contrary faction, to that
by which they enter: thinking belike, that they
have the first sure, and now are ready for a new
purchase.  The traitor in faction, lightly goeth
away with it; for when matters have stuck long in
balancing, the winning of some one man casteth
them, and he getteth all the thanks.  The even carriage between two factions, proceedeth not always
of moderation, but of a trueness to a man’s self,
with end to make use of both.  Certainly in Italy,
they hold it a little suspect in popes, when they
have often in their mouth Padre commune: and
take it to be a sign of one, that meaneth to refer all
to the greatness of his own house.  Kings had need
beware, how they side themselves, and make
themselves as of a faction or party; for leagues
within the state, are ever pernicious to monarchies:
for they raise an obligation, paramount to obligation of sovereignty, and make the king tanquam
unus ex nobis; as was to be seen in the League of
France.  When factions are carried too high and too
violently, it is a sign of weakness in princes; and
much to the prejudice, both of their authority and
business.  The motions of factions under kings
ought to be, like the motions (as the astronomers
speak) of the inferior orbs, which may have their
proper motions, but yet still are quietly carried, by
the higher motion of primum mobile.
Continue...

This complete text of Essays of Francis Bacon is in the public domain.


Amazon books: 
The Essays, Francis Bacon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
