




Arsene Lupin had just finished his repast and taken from his
pocket and excellent cigar, with a gold band, which he was
examining with unusual care, when the door of his cell was opened.
He had barely time to throw the cigar into the drawer and move
away from the table. The guard entered. It was the hour for
exercise.
“I was waiting for you, my dear boy,” exclaimed Lupin, in his
accustomed good humor.
They went out together. As soon as they had disappeared at a turn
in the corridor, two men entered the cell and commenced a minute
examination of it. One was Inspector Dieuzy; the other was
Inspector Folenfant. They wished to verify their suspicion that
Arsene Lupin was in communication with his accomplices outside of
the prison. On the preceding evening, the `Grand Journal’ had
published these lines addressed to its court reporter:
“Monsieur:
“In a recent article you referred to me in most unjustifiable
terms. Some days before the opening of my trial I will call you
to account.       Arsene Lupin.”
The handwriting was certainly that of Arsene Lupin. Consequently,
he sent letters; and, no doubt, received letters. It was certain
that he was preparing for that escape thus arrogantly announced by
him.
The situation had become intolerable. Acting in conjunction with
the examining judge, the chief of the Surete, Mon. Dudouis, had
visited the prison and instructed the gaoler in regard to the
precautions necessary to insure Lupin’s safety. At the same time,
he sent the two men to examine the prisoner’s cell. They raised
every stone, ransacked the bed, did everything customary in such a
case, but they discovered nothing, and were about to abandon their
investigation when the guard entered hastily and said:
“The drawer....look in the table-drawer. When I entered just now
he was closing it.”
They opened the drawer, and Dieuzy exclaimed:
“Ah! we have him this time.”
Folenfant stopped him.
“Wait a moment. The chief will want to make an inventory.”
“This is a very choice cigar.”
“Leave it there, and notify the chief.”
Two minutes later Mon. Dudouis examined the contents of the
drawer. First he discovered a bundle of newspaper clippings
relating to Arsene Lupin taken from the `Argus de la Presse,’ then
a tobacco-box, a pipe, some paper called “onion-peel,” and two
books. He read the titles of the books. One was an English
edition of Carlyle’s “Hero-worship"; the other was a charming
elzevir, in modern binding, the “Manual of Epictetus,” a German
translation published at Leyden in 1634. On examining the books,
he found that all the pages were underlined and annotated. Were
they prepared as a code for correspondence, or did they simply
express the studious character of the reader? Then he examined
the tobacco-box and the pipe. Finally, he took up the famous
cigar with its gold band.
“Fichtre!” he exclaimed. “Our friend smokes a good cigar. It’s a
Henry Clay.”
With the mechanical action of an habitual smoker, he placed the
cigar close to his ear and squeezed it to make it crack.
Immediately he uttered a cry of surprise. The cigar had yielded
under the pressure of his fingers. He examined it more closely,
and quickly discovered something white between the leaves of
tobacco. Delicately, with the aid of a pin, he withdrew a roll of
very thin paper, scarcely larger than a toothpick. It was a
letter. He unrolled it, and found these words, written in a
feminine handwriting:
“The basket has taken the place of the others. Eight out of ten
are ready. On pressing the outer foot the plate goes downward.
From twelve to sixteen every day, H-P will wait. But where?
Reply at once. Rest easy; your friend is watching over you.”
Mon. Dudouis reflected a moment, then said:
“It is quite clear....the basket....the eight compartments....
From twelve to sixteen mean from twelve to four o’clock.”
“But this H-P, that will wait?”
“H-P must mean automobile. H-P, horsepower, is the way they
indicate strength of the motor. A twenty-four H-P is an
automobile of twenty-four horsepower.”
Then he rose, and asked:
“Had the prisoner finished his breakfast?”
“Yes.”
“And as he has not yet read the message, which is proved by the
condition of the cigar, it is probable that he had just received
it.”
“How?”
“In his food. Concealed in his bread of in a potato, perhaps.”
“Impossible. His food was allowed to be brought in simply to trap
him, but we have never found anything in it.”
“We will look for Lupin’s reply this evening. Detain him outside
for a few minutes. I shall take this to the examining judge, and,
if he agrees with me, we will have the letter photographed at
once, and in an hour you can replace the letter in the drawer in a
cigar similar to this. The prisoner must have no cause for
suspicion.”
It was not without a certain curiosity that Mon. Dudouis returned
to the prison in the evening, accompanied by Inspector Dieuzy.
Three empty plates were sitting on the stove in the corner.
“He has eaten?”
“Yes,” replied the guard.
“Dieuzy, please cut that macaroni into very small pieces, and open
that bread-roll....Nothing?”
“No, chief.”
Mon. Dudouis examined the plates, the fork, the spoon, and the
knife--an ordinary knife with a rounded blade. He turned the
handle to the left; then to the right. It yielded and unscrewed.
The knife was hollow, and served as a hiding-place for a sheet of
paper.
“Peuh!” he said, “that is not very clever for a man like Arsene.
But we mustn’t lose any time. You, Dieuzy, go and search the
restaurant.”
Then he read the note:
“I trust to you, H-P will follow at a distance every day. I will
go ahead. Au revoir, dear friend.”
“At last,” cried Mon. Dudouis, rubbing his hands gleefully, “I
think we have the affair in our own hands. A little strategy on
our part, and the escape will be a success in so far as the arrest
of his confederates are concerned.”
“But if Arsene Lupin slips through your fingers?” suggested the
guard.
“We will have a sufficient number of men to prevent that. If,
however, he displays too much cleverness, ma foi, so much the
worse for him! As to his band of robbers, since the chief refuses
to speak, the others must.”
And, as a matter of fact, Arsene Lupin had very little to say.
For several months, Mon. Jules Bouvier, the examining judge, had
exerted himself in vain. The investigation had been reduced to a
few uninteresting arguments between the judge and the advocate,
Maitre Danval, one of the leaders of the bar. From time to time,
through courtesy, Arsene Lupin would speak. One day he said:
“Yes, monsieur, le judge, I quite agree with you: the robbery of
the Credit Lyonnais, the theft in the rue de Babylone, the issue
of the counterfeit bank-notes, the burglaries at the various
chateaux, Armesnil, Gouret, Imblevain, Groseillers, Malaquis, all
my work, monsieur, I did it all.”
“Then will you explain to me---”
“It is useless. I confess everything in a lump, everything and
even ten times more than you know nothing about.”
Wearied by his fruitless task, the judge had suspended his
examinations, but he resumed them after the two intercepted
messages were brought to his attention; and regularly, at mid-day,
Arsene Lupin was taken from the prison to the Depot in the
prison-van with a certain number of other prisoners. They
returned about three or four o’clock.
Now, one afternoon, this return trip was made under unusual
conditions. The other prisoners not having been examined, it was
decided to take back Arsene Lupin first, thus he found himself
alone in the vehicle.
These prison-vans, vulgarly called “panniers a salade"--or salad-
baskets--are divided lengthwise by a central corridor from which
open ten compartments, five on either side. Each compartment is
so arranged that the occupant must assume and retain a sitting
posture, and, consequently, the five prisoners are seated one upon
the other, and yet separated one from the other by partitions. A
municipal guard, standing at one end, watches over the corridor.
Arsene was placed in the third cell on the right, and the heavy
vehicle started. He carefully calculated when they left the quai
de l’Horloge, and when they passed the Palais de Justice. Then,
about the centre of the bridge Saint Michel, with his outer foot,
that is to say, his right foot, he pressed upon the metal place
that closed his cell. Immediately something clicked, and the
metal plate moved. He was able to ascertain that he was located
between the two wheels.
He waited, keeping a sharp look-out. The vehicle was proceeding
slowly along the boulevard Saint Michel. At the corner of Saint
Germain it stopped. A truck horse had fallen. The traffic having
been interrupted, a cast throng of fiacres and omnibuses had
gathered there. Arsene Lupin looked out. Another prison-van had
stopped close to the one he occupied. He moved the plate still
farther, put his foot on one of the spokes of the wheel and leaped
to the ground. A coachman saw him, roared with laughter, then
tried to raise an outcry, but his voice was lost in the noise of
the traffic that had commenced to move again. Moreover, Arsene
Lupin was already far away.
He had run for a few steps; but, once upon the sidewalk, he turned
and looked around; he seemed to scent the wind like a person who
is uncertain which direction to take. Then, having decided, he
put his hands in his pockets, and, with the careless air of an
idle stroller, he proceeded up the boulevard. It was a warm,
bright autumn day, and the cafes were full. He took a seat on the
terrace of one of them. He ordered a bock and a package of
cigarettes. He emptied his glass slowly, smoked one cigarette and
lighted a second. Then he asked the waiter to send the proprietor
to him. When the proprietor came, Arsene spoke to him in a voice
loud enough to be heard by everyone:
“I regret to say, monsieur, I have forgotten my pocketbook.
Perhaps, on the strength of my name, you will be pleased to give
me credit for a few days. I am Arsene Lupin.”
The proprietor looked at him, thinking he was joking. But Arsene
repeated:
“Lupin, prisoner at the Sante, but now a fugitive. I venture to
assume that the name inspires you with perfect confidence in me.”
And he walked away, amidst shouts of laughter, whilst the
proprietor stood amazed.
Lupin strolled along the rue Soufflot, and turned into the rue
Saint Jacques. He pursued his way slowly, smoking his cigarettes
and looking into the shop-windows. At the Boulevard de Port Royal
he took his bearings, discovered where he was, and then walked in
the direction of the rue de la Sante. The high forbidding walls
of the prison were now before him. He pulled his hat forward to
shape his face; then, approaching the sentinel, he asked:
“It this the prison de la Sante?”
“Yes.”
“I wish to regain my cell. The van left me on the way, and I
would not abuse--”
“Now, young man, move along--quick!” growled the sentinel.
“Pardon me, but I must pass through that gate. And if you prevent
Arsene Lupin from entering the prison it will cost you dear, my
friend.”
“Arsene Lupin! What are you talking about!”
“I am sorry I haven’t a card with me,” said Arsene, fumbling in
his pockets.
The sentinel eyed him from head to foot, in astonishment. Then,
without a word, he rang a bell. The iron gate was partly opened,
and Arsene stepped inside. Almost immediately he encountered the
keeper of the prison, gesticulating and feigning a violent anger.
Arsene smiled and said:
“Come, monsieur, don’t play that game with me. What! they take
the precaution to carry me alone in the van, prepare a nice little
obstruction, and imagine I am going to take to my heels and rejoin
my friends. Well, and what about the twenty agents of the Surete
who accompanied us on foot, in fiacres and on bicycles? No, the
arrangement did not please me. I should not have got away alive.
Tell me, monsieur, did they count on that?”
He shrugged his shoulders, and added:
“I beg of you, monsieur, not to worry about me. When I wish to
escape I shall not require any assistance.”
On the second day thereafter, the `Echo de France,’ which had
apparently become the official reporter of the exploits of Arsene
Lupin, it was said that he was one of its principal shareholders--
published a most complete account of this attempted escape. The
exact wording of the messages exchanged between the prisoner and
his mysterious friend, the means by which correspondence was
constructed, the complicity of the police, the promenade on the
Boulevard Saint Michel, the incident at the cafe Soufflot,
everything was disclosed. It was known that the search of the
restaurant and its waiters by Inspector Dieuzy had been fruitless.
And the public also learned an extraordinary thing which
demonstrated the infinite variety of resources that Lupin
possessed: the prison-van, in which he was being carried, was
prepared for the occasion and substituted by his accomplices for
one of the six vans which did service at the prison.
The next escape of Arsene Lupin was not doubted by anyone. He
announced it himself, in categorical terms, in a reply to Mon.
Bouvier on the day following his attempted escape. The judge
having made a jest about the affair, Arsene was annoyed, and,
firmly eyeing the judge, he said, emphatically:
“Listen to me, monsieur! I give you my word of honor that this
attempted flight was simply preliminary to my general plan of
escape.”
“I do not understand,” said the judge.
“It is not necessary that you should understand.”
And when the judge, in the course of that examination which was
reported at length in the columns of the `Echo de France,’ when
the judge sought to resume his investigation, Arsene Lupin
exclaimed, with an assumed air of lassitude:
“Mon Dieu, Mon Dieu, what’s the use! All these questions are of
no importance!”
“What! No importance?” cried the judge.
“No; because I shall not be present at the trial.”
“You will not be present?”
“No; I have fully decided on that, and nothing will change my
mind.”
Such assurance combined with the inexplicable indiscretions that
Arsene committed every day served to annoy and mystify the
officers of the law. There were secrets known only to Arsene
Lupin; secrets that he alone could divulge. But for what purpose
did he reveal them? And how?
Arsene Lupin was changed to another cell. The judge closed his
preliminary investigation. No further proceedings were taken in
his case for a period of two months, during which time Arsene was
seen almost constantly lying on his bed with his face turned
toward the wall. The changing of his cell seemed to discourage
him. He refused to see his advocate. He exchanged only a few
necessary words with his keepers.
During the fortnight preceding his trial, he resumed his vigorous
life. He complained of want of air. Consequently, early every
morning he was allowed to exercise in the courtyard, guarded by
two men.
Public curiosity had not died out; every day it expected to be
regaled with news of his escape; and, it is true, he had gained a
considerable amount of public sympathy by reason of his verve, his
gayety, his diversity, his inventive genius and the mystery of his
life. Arsene Lupin must escape. It was his inevitable fate. The
public expected it, and was surprised that the event had been
delayed so long. Every morning the Prefect of Police asked his
secretary:
“Well, has he escaped yet?”
“No, Monsieur le Prefect.”
“To-morrow, probably.”
And, on the day before the trial, a gentleman called at the office
of the `Grand Journal,’ asked to see the court reporter, threw his
card in the reporter’s face, and walked rapidly away. These words
were written on the card: “Arsene Lupin always keeps his
promises.”
It was under these conditions that the trial commenced. An
enormous crowd gathered at the court. Everybody wished to see the
famous Arsene Lupin. They had a gleeful anticipation that the
prisoner would play some audacious pranks upon the judge.
Advocates and magistrates, reporters and men of the world,
actresses and society women were crowded together on the benches
provided for the public.
It was a dark, sombre day, with a steady downpour of rain. Only a
dim light pervaded the courtroom, and the spectators caught a very
indistinct view of the prisoner when the guards brought him in.
But his heavy, shambling walk, the manner in which he dropped into
his seat, and his passive, stupid appearance were not at all
prepossessing. Several times his advocate--one of Mon. Danval’s
assistants--spoke to him, but he simply shook his head and said
nothing.
The clerk read the indictment, then the judge spoke:
“Prisoner at the bar, stand up. Your name, age, and occupation?”
Not receiving any reply, the judge repeated:
“Your name? I ask you your name?”
A thick, slow voice muttered:
“Baudru, Desire.”
A murmur of surprise pervaded the courtroom. But the judge
proceeded:
“Baudru, Desire? Ah! a new alias! Well, as you have already
assumed a dozen different names and this one is, no doubt, as
imaginary as the others, we will adhere to the name of Arsene
Lupin, by which you are more generally known.”
The judge referred to his notes, and continued:
“For, despite the most diligent search, your past history remains
unknown. Your case is unique in the annals of crime. We know not
whom you are, whence you came, your birth and breeding--all is a
mystery to us. Three years ago you appeared in our midst as
Arsene Lupin, presenting to us a strange combination of
intelligence and perversion, immorality and generosity.
Our knowledge of your life prior to that date is vague and
problematical. It may be that the man called Rostat who, eight
years ago, worked with Dickson, the prestidigitator, was none
other than Arsene Lupin. It is probably that the Russian student
who, six years ago, attended the laboratory of Doctor Altier at
the Saint Louis Hospital, and who often astonished the doctor by
his ingenuity of his hypotheses on subjects of bacteriology and
the boldness of his experiments in diseases of the skin, was none
other than Arsene Lupin. It is probable, also, that Arsene Lupin
was the professor who introduced the Japanese art of jiu-jitsu to
the Parisian public. We have some reason to believe that Arsene
Lupin was the bicyclist who won the Grand Prix de l’Exposition,
received his ten thousand francs, and was never heard of again.
Arsene Lupin may have been, also, the person who saved so many
lives through the little dormer-window at the Charity Bazaar;
and, at the same time, picked their pockets.”
The judge paused for a moment, then continued:
“Such is that epoch which seems to have been utilized by you in a
thorough preparation for the warfare you have since waged against
society; a methodical apprenticeship in which you developed your
strength, energy and skill to the highest point possible. Do you
acknowledge the accuracy of these facts?”
During this discourse the prisoner had stood balancing himself,
first on one foot, then on the other, with shoulders stooped and
arms inert. Under the strongest light one could observe his
extreme thinness, his hollow cheeks, his projecting cheek-bones,
his earthen-colored face dotted with small red spots and framed in
a rough, straggling beard. Prison life had caused him to age and
wither. He had lost the youthful face and elegant figure we had
seen portrayed so often in the newspapers.
It appeared as if he had not heard the question propounded by the
judge. Twice it was repeated to him. Then he raised his eyes,
seemed to reflect, then, making a desperate effort, he murmured:
“Baudru, Desire.”
The judge smiled, as he said:
“I do not understand the theory of your defense, Arsene Lupin. If
you are seeking to avoid responsibility for your crimes on the
ground of imbecility, such a line of defense is open to you. But
I shall proceed with the trial and pay no heed to your vagaries.”
He then narrated at length the various thefts, swindles and
forgeries charged against Lupin. Sometimes he questioned the
prisoner, but the latter simply grunted or remained silent. The
examination of witnesses commenced. Some of the evidence given
was immaterial; other portions of it seemed more important, but
through all of it there ran a vein of contradictions and
inconsistencies. A wearisome obscurity enveloped the proceedings,
until Detective Ganimard was called as a witness; then interest
was revived.
From the beginning the actions of the veteran detective appeared
strange and unaccountable. He was nervous and ill at ease.
Several times he looked at the prisoner, with obvious doubt and
anxiety. Then, with his hands resting on the rail in front of
him, he recounted the events in which he had participated,
including his pursuit of the prisoner across Europe and his
arrival in America. He was listened to with great avidity, as his
capture of Arsene Lupin was well known to everyone through the
medium of the press. Toward the close of his testimony, after
referring to his conversations with Arsene Lupin, he stopped,
twice, embarrassed and undecided. It was apparent that he was
possessed of some thought which he feared to utter. The judge
said to him, sympathetically:
“If you are ill, you may retire for the present.”
“No, no, but---”
He stopped, looked sharply at the prisoner, and said:
“I ask permission to scrutinize the prisoner at closer range.
There is some mystery about him that I must solve.”
He approached the accused man, examined him attentively for
several minutes, then returned to the witness-stand, and, in an
almost solemn voice, he said:
“I declare, on oath, that the prisoner now before me is not Arsene
Lupin.”
A profound silence followed the statement. The judge, nonplused
for a moment, exclaimed:
“Ah! What do you mean? That is absurd!”
The detective continued:
“At first sight there is a certain resemblance, but if you
carefully consider the nose, the mouth, the hair, the color of
skin, you will see that it is not Arsene Lupin. And the eyes!
Did he ever have those alcoholic eyes!”
“Come, come, witness! What do you mean? Do you pretend to say
that we are trying the wrong man?”
“In my opinion, yes. Arsene Lupin has, in some manner, contrived
to put this poor devil in his place, unless this man is a willing
accomplice.”
This dramatic denouement caused much laughter and excitement
amongst the spectators. The judge adjourned the trial, and sent
for Mon. Bouvier, the gaoler, and guards employed in the prison.
When the trial was resumed, Mon. Bouvier and the gaoler examined
the accused and declared that there was only a very slight
resemblance between the prisoner and Arsene Lupin.
“Well, then!” exclaimed the judge, “who is this man? Where does
he come from? What is he in prison for?”
Two of the prison-guards were called and both of them declared
that the prisoner was Arsene Lupin. The judged breathed once
more.
But one of the guards then said:
“Yes, yes, I think it is he.”
“What!” cried the judge, impatiently, “you think it is he! What
do you mean by that?”
“Well, I saw very little of the prisoner. He was placed in my
charge in the evening and, for two months, he seldom stirred, but
laid on his bed with his face to the wall.”
“What about the time prior to those two months?”
“Before that he occupied a cell in another part of the prison. He
was not in cell 24.”
Here the head gaoler interrupted, and said:
“We changed him to another cell after his attempted escape.”
“But you, monsieur, you have seen him during those two months?”
“I had no occasion to see him. He was always quiet and orderly.”
“And this prisoner is not Arsene Lupin?”
“No.”
“Then who is he?” demanded the judge.
“I do not know.”
“Then we have before us a man who was substituted for Arsene
Lupin, two months ago. How do you explain that?”
“I cannot.”
In absolute despair, the judge turned to the accused and addressed
him in a conciliatory tone:
“Prisoner, can you tell me how, and since when, you became an
inmate of the Prison de la Sante?”
The engaging manner of the judge was calculated to disarm the
mistrust and awaken the understanding of the accused man. He
tried to reply. Finally, under clever and gentle questioning, he
succeeded in framing a few phrases from which the following story
was gleaned: Two months ago he had been taken to the Depot,
examined and released. As he was leaving the building, a free
man, he was seized by two guards and placed in the prison-van.
Since then he had occupied cell 24. He was contented there,
plenty to eat, and he slept well--so he did not complain.
All that seemed probable; and, amidst the mirth and excitement of
the spectators, the judge adjourned the trial until the story
could be investigated and verified.
The following facts were at once established by an examination of
the prison records: Eight weeks before a man named Baudru Desire
had slept at the Depot. He was released the next day, and left
the Depot at two o’clock in the afternoon. On the same day at two
o’clock, having been examined for the last time, Arsene Lupin left
the Depot in a prison-van.
Had the guards made a mistake? Had then been deceived by the
resemblance and carelessly substituted this man for their
prisoner?
Another question suggested itself: Had the substitution been
arranged in advance? In that event Baudru must have been an
accomplice and must have caused his own arrest for the express
purpose of taking Lupin’s place. But then, by what miracle had
such a plan, based on a series of improbable chances, been carried
to success?
Baudru Desire was turned over to the anthropological service; they
had never seen anything like him. However, they easily traced his
past history. He was known at Courbevois, at Asnieres and at
Levallois. He lived on alms and slept in one of those rag-picker’s
huts near the barrier de Ternes. He had disappeared from there a
year ago.
Had he been enticed away by Arsene Lupin? There was no evidence to
that effect. And even if that was so, it did not explain the
flight of the prisoner. That still remained a mystery. Amongst
twenty theories which sought to explain it, not one was
satisfactory. Of the escape itself, there was no doubt; an escape
that was incomprehensible, sensational, in which the public, as
well as the officers of the law, could detect a carefully prepared
plan, a combination of circumstances marvelously dove-tailed,
whereof the denouement fully justified the confident prediction of
Arsene Lupin: “I shall not be present at my trial.”
After a month of patient investigation, the problem remained
unsolved. The poor devil of a Baudru could not be kept in prison
indefinitely, and to place him on trial would be ridiculous. There
was no charge against him. Consequently, he was released; but the
chief of the Surete resolved to keep him under surveillance. This
idea originated with Ganimard. From his point of view there was
neither complicity nor chance. Baudru was an instrument upon which
Arsene Lupin had played with his extraordinary skill. Baudru, when
set at liberty, would lead them to Arsene Lupin or, at least, to
some of his accomplices. The two inspectors, Folenfant and Dieuzy,
were assigned to assist Ganimard.
One foggy morning in January the prison gates opened and Baudru
Desire stepped forth--a free man. At first he appeared to be quite
embarrassed, and walked like a person who has no precise idea
whither he is going. He followed the rue de la Sante and the rue
Saint Jacques. He stopped in front of an old-clothes shop, removed
his jacket and his vest, sold his vest on which he realized a few
sous; then, replacing his jacket, he proceeded on his way. He
crossed the Seine. At the Chatelet an omnibus passed him. He
wished to enter it, but there was no place. The controller advised
him to secure a number, so he entered the waiting-room.
Ganimard called to his two assistants, and, without removing his
eyes from the waiting room, he said to them:
“Stop a carriage....no, two. That will be better. I will go with
one of you, and we will follow him.”
The men obeyed. Yet Baudru did not appear. Ganimard entered the
waiting-room. It was empty.
“Idiot that I am!” he muttered, “I forgot there was another exit.”
There was an interior corridor extending from the waiting-room to
the rue Saint Martin. Ganimard rushed through it and arrived just
in time to observe Baudru upon the top of the Batignolles-Jardin de
Plates omnibus as it was turning the corner of the rue de Rivoli.
He ran and caught the omnibus. But he had lost his two assistants.
He must continue the pursuit alone. In his anger he was inclined
to seize the man by the collar without ceremony. Was it not with
premeditation and by means of an ingenious ruse that his pretended
imbecile had separated him from his assistants?
He looked at Baudru. The latter was asleep on the bench, his head
rolling from side to side, his mouth half-opened, and an incredible
expression of stupidity on his blotched face. No, such an
adversary was incapable of deceiving old Ganimard. It was a stroke
of luck--nothing more.
At the Galleries-Lafayette, the man leaped from the omnibus and
took the La Muette tramway, following the boulevard Haussmann and
the avenue Victor Hugo. Baudru alighted at La Muette station; and,
with a nonchalant air, strolled into the Bois de Boulogne.
He wandered through one path after another, and sometimes retraced
his steps. What was he seeking? Had he any definite object? At
the end of an hour, he appeared to be faint from fatigue, and,
noticing a bench, he sat down. The spot, not far from Auteuil, on
the edge of a pond hidden amongst the trees, was absolutely
deserted. After the lapse of another half-hour, Ganimard became
impatient and resolved to speak to the man. He approached and took
a seat beside Baudru, lighted a cigarette, traced some figures in
the sand with the end of his cane, and said:
“It’s a pleasant day.”
No response. But, suddenly the man burst into laughter, a happy,
mirthful laugh, spontaneous and irresistible. Ganimard felt his
hair stand on end in horror and surprise. It was that laugh, that
infernal laugh he knew so well!
With a sudden movement, he seized the man by the collar and looked
at him with a keen, penetrating gaze; and found that he no longer
saw the man Baudru. To be sure, he saw Baudru; but, at the same
time, he saw the other, the real man, Lupin. He discovered the
intense life in the eyes, he filled up the shrunken features, he
perceived the real flesh beneath the flabby skin, the real mouth
through the grimaces that deformed it. Those were the eyes and
mouth of the other, and especially his keen, alert, mocking
expression, so clear and youthful!
“Arsene Lupin, Arsene Lupin,” he stammered.
Then, in a sudden fit of rage, he seized Lupin by the throat and
tried to hold him down. In spite of his fifty years, he still
possessed unusual strength, whilst his adversary was apparently in
a weak condition. But the struggle was a brief one. Arsene Lupin
made only a slight movement, and, as suddenly as he had made the
attack, Ganimard released his hold. His right arm fell inert,
useless.
“If you had taken lessons in jiu-jitsu at the quai des Orfevres,"
said Lupin, “you would know that that blow is called udi-shi-ghi in
Japanese. A second more, and I would have broken your arm and that
would have been just what you deserve. I am surprised that you, an
old friend whom I respect and before whom I voluntarily expose my
incognito, should abuse my confidence in that violent manner. It
is unworthy--Ah! What’s the matter?”
Ganimard did not reply. That escape for which he deemed himself
responsible--was it not he, Ganimard, who, by his sensational
evidence, had led the court into serious error? That escape
appeared to him like a dark cloud on his professional career. A
tear rolled down his cheek to his gray moustache.
“Oh! mon Dieu, Ganimard, don’t take it to heart. If you had not
spoken, I would have arranged for some one else to do it. I
couldn’t allow poor Baudru Desire to be convicted.”
“Then,” murmured Ganimard, “it was you that was there? And now you
are here?”
“It is I, always I, only I.”
“Can it be possible?”
“Oh, it is not the work of a sorcerer. Simply, as the judge
remarked at the trial, the apprenticeship of a dozen years that
equips a man to cope successfully with all the obstacles in life.”
“But your face? Your eyes?”
“You can understand that if I worked eighteen months with Doctor
Altier at the Saint-Louis hospital, it was not out of love for the
work. I considered that he, who would one day have the honor of
calling himself Arsene Lupin, ought to be exempt from the ordinary
laws governing appearance and identity. Appearance? That can be
modified at will. For instance, a hypodermic injection of
paraffine will puff up the skin at the desired spot. Pyrogallic
acid will change your skin to that of an Indian. The juice of the
greater celandine will adorn you with the most beautiful eruptions
and tumors. Another chemical affects the growth of your beard and
hair; another changes the tone of your voice. Add to that two
months of dieting in cell 24; exercises repeated a thousand times
to enable me to hold my features in a certain grimace, to carry my
head at a certain inclination, and adapt my back and shoulders to a
stopping posture. Then five drops of atropine in the eyes to make
them haggard and wild, and the trick is done.”
“I do not understand how you deceived the guards.”
“The change was progressive. The evolution was so gradual that
they failed to notice it.”
“But Baudru Desire?"
“Baudru exists. He is a poor, harmless fellow whom I met last
year; and, really, he bears a certain resemblance to me.
Considering my arrest as a possible event, I took charge of Baudru
and studied the points wherein we differed in appearance with a
view to correct them in my own person. My friends caused him to
remain at the Depot overnight, and to leave there next day about
the same hour as I did--a coincidence easily arranged. Of course,
it was necessary to have a record of his detention at the Depot in
order to establish the fact that such a person was a reality;
otherwise, the police would have sought elsewhere to find out my
identity. But, in offering to them this excellent Baudru, it was
inevitable, you understand, inevitable that they would seize
upon him, and, despite the insurmountable difficulties of a
substitution, they would prefer to believe in a substitution than
confess their ignorance.”
“Yes, yes, of course,” said Ganimard.
“And then,” exclaimed Arsene Lupin, “I held in my hands a trump-
card: an anxious public watching and waiting for my escape. And
that is the fatal error into which you fell, you and the others, in
the course of that fascinating game pending between me and the
officers of the law wherein the stake was my liberty. And you
supposed that I was playing to the gallery; that I was intoxicated
with my success. I, Arsene Lupin, guilty of such weakness! Oh,
no! And, no longer ago than the Cahorn affair, you said: “When
Arsene Lupin cries from the housetops that he will escape, he has
some object in view.” But, sapristi, you must understand that in
order to escape I must create, in advance, a public belief that
escape, a belief amounting to an article of faith, an absolute
conviction, a reality as glittering as the sun. And I did create
that belief that Arsene Lupin would escape, that Arsene Lupin would
not be present at his trial. And when you gave your evidence and
said: “That man is not Arsene Lupin,” everybody was prepared to
believe you. Had one person doubted it, had any one uttered this
simple restriction: Suppose it is Arsene Lupin?--from that moment, I
was lost. If anyone had scrutinized my face, not imbued with the
idea that I was not Arsene Lupin, as you and the others did at my
trial, but with the idea that I might be Arsene Lupin; then,
despite all my precautions, I should have been recognized. But I
had no fear. Logically, psychologically, no once could entertain
the idea that I was Arsene Lupin.”
He grasped Ganimard’s hand.
“Come, Ganimard, confess that on the Wednesday after our
conversation in the prison de la Sante, you expected me at your
house at four o’clock, exactly as I said I would go.”
“And your prison-van?” said Ganimard, evading the question.
“A bluff! Some of my friends secured that old unused van and wished
to make the attempt. But I considered it impractical without the
concurrence of a number of unusual circumstances. However, I found
it useful to carry out that attempted escape and give it the widest
publicity. An audaciously planned escape, though not completed,
gave to the succeeding one the character of reality simply by
anticipation.”
“So that the cigar....”
“Hollowed by myself, as well as the knife.”
“And the letters?”
“Written by me.”
“And the mysterious correspondent?”
“Did not exist.”
Ganimard reflected a moment, then said:
“When the anthropological service had Baudru’s case under
consideration, why did they not perceive that his measurements
coincided with those of Arsene Lupin?”
“My measurements are not in existence.”
“Indeed!”
“At least, they are false. I have given considerable attention to
that question. In the first place, the Bertillon system of records
the visible marks of identification--and you have seen that they are
not infallible--and, after that, the measurements of the head, the
fingers, the ears, etc. Of course, such measurements are more or
less infallible.”
“Absolutely.”
“No; but it costs money to get around them. Before we left
America, one of the employees of the service there accepted so much
money to insert false figures in my measurements. Consequently,
Baudru’s measurements should not agree with those of Arsene Lupin.”
After a short silence, Ganimard asked:
“What are you going to do now?”
“Now,” replied Lupin, “I am going to take a rest, enjoy the best of
food and drink and gradually recover my former healthy condition.
It is all very well to become Baudru or some other person, on
occasion, and to change your personality as you do your shirt, but
you soon grow weary of the change. I feel exactly as I imagine the
man who lost his shadow must have felt, and I shall be glad to be
Arsene Lupin once more.”
He walked to and fro for a few minutes, then, stopping in front of
Ganimard, he said:
“You have nothing more to say, I suppose?”
“Yes. I should like to know if you intend to reveal the true state
of facts connected with your escape. The mistake that I made---”
“Oh! no one will ever know that it was Arsene Lupin who was
discharged. It is to my own interest to surround myself with
mystery, and therefore I shall permit my escape to retain its
almost miraculous character. So, have no fear on that score, my
dear friend. I shall say nothing. And now, good-bye. I am going
out to dinner this evening, and have only sufficient time to
dress.”
“I though you wanted a rest.”
“Ah! there are duties to society that one cannot avoid. To-morrow,
I shall rest.”
“Where do you dine to-night?”
“With the British Ambassador!”
Continue...

This complete text of The Extraordinary Adventures of Arsene Lupin, Gentleman-Burglar by Maurice Leblanc is in the public domain.


Also see Arsene Lupin - by Maurice Leblanc at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on June 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Extraordinary Adventures of Arsene Lupin, Gentleman-BurglarBy Maurice LeblancAt Amazon
