




Two or three times each year, on occasions of unusual importance,
such as the balls at the Austrian Embassy or the soirees of Lady
Billingstone, the Countess de Dreux-Soubise wore upon her white
shoulders “The Queen’s Necklace.”
It was, indeed, the famous necklace, the legendary necklace that
Bohmer and Bassenge, court jewelers, had made for Madame Du Barry;
the veritable necklace that the Cardinal de Rohan-Soubise intended
to give to Marie-Antoinette, Queen of France; and the same that the
adventuress Jeanne de Valois, Countess de la Motte, had pulled to
pieces one evening in February, 1785, with the aid of her husband
and their accomplice, Retaux de Villette.
To tell the truth, the mounting alone was genuine. Retaux de
Villette had kept it, whilst the Count de la Motte and his wife
scattered to the four winds of heaven the beautiful stones so
carefully chosen by Bohmer. Later, he sold the mounting to Gaston
de Dreux-Soubise, nephew and heir of the Cardinal, who re-purchased
the few diamonds that remained in the possession of the English
jeweler, Jeffreys; supplemented them with other stones of the same
size but of much inferior quality, and thus restored the marvelous
necklace to the form in which it had come from the hands of Bohmer
and Bassenge.
For nearly a century, the house of Dreux-Soubise had prided itself
upon the possession of this historic jewel. Although adverse
circumstances had greatly reduced their fortune, they preferred to
curtail their household expenses rather than part with this relic
of royalty. More particularly, the present count clung to it as a
man clings to the home of his ancestors. As a matter of prudence,
he had rented a safety-deposit box at the Credit Lyonnais in which
to keep it. He went for it himself on the afternoon of the day on
which his wife wished to wear it, and he, himself, carried it back
next morning.
On this particular evening, at the reception given at the Palais de
Castille, the Countess achieved a remarkable success; and King
Christian, in whose honor the fete was given, commented on her
grace and beauty. The thousand facets of the diamond sparkled and
shone like flames of fire about her shapely neck and shoulders, and
it is safe to say that none but she could have borne the weight of
such an ornament with so much ease and grace.
This was a double triumph, and the Count de Dreux was highly elated
when they returned to their chamber in the old house of the
faubourg Saint-Germain. He was proud of his wife, and quite as
proud, perhaps, of the necklace that had conferred added luster to
his noble house for generations. His wife, also, regarded the
necklace with an almost childish vanity, and it was not without
regret that she removed it from her shoulders and handed it to her
husband who admired it as passionately as if he had never seen it
before. Then, having placed it in its case of red leather, stamped
with the Cardinal’s arms, he passed into an adjoining room which
was simply an alcove or cabinet that had been cut off from their
chamber, and which could be entered only by means of a door at the
foot of their bed. As he had done on previous occasions, he hid it
on a high shelf amongst hat-boxes and piles of linen. He closed
the door, and retired.
Next morning, he arose about nine o’clock, intending to go to the
Credit Lyonnais before breakfast. He dressed, drank a cup of
coffee, and went to the stables to give his orders. The condition
of one of the horses worried him. He caused it to be exercised in
his presence. Then he returned to his wife, who had not yet left
the chamber. Her maid was dressing her hair. When her husband
entered, she asked:
“Are you going out?”
“Yes, as far as the bank.”
“Of course. That is wise.”
He entered the cabinet; but, after a few seconds, and without any
sign of astonishment, he asked:
“Did you take it, my dear?”
“What?....No, I have not taken anything.”
“You must have moved it.”
“Not at all. I have not even opened that door.”
He appeared at the door, disconcerted, and stammered, in a scarcely
intelligible voice:
“You haven’t....It wasn’t you?....Then....”
She hastened to his assistance, and, together, they made a thorough
search, throwing the boxes to the floor and overturning the piles
of linen. Then the count said, quite discouraged:
“It is useless to look any more. I put it here, on this shelf.”
“You must be mistaken.”
“No, no, it was on this shelf--nowhere else.”
They lighted a candle, as the room was quite dark, and then carried
out all the linen and other articles that the room contained. And,
when the room was emptied, they confessed, in despair, that the
famous necklace had disappeared. Without losing time in vain
lamentations, the countess notified the commissary of police, Mon.
Valorbe, who came at once, and, after hearing their story, inquired
of the count:
“Are you sure that no one passed through your chamber during the
night?”
“Absolutely sure, as I am a very light sleeper. Besides, the
chamber door was bolted, and I remember unbolting it this morning
when my wife rang for her maid.”
“And there is no other entrance to the cabinet?”
“None.”
“No windows?”
“Yes, but it is closed up.”
“I will look at it.”
Candles were lighted, and Mon. Valorbe observed at once that the
lower half of the window was covered by a large press which was,
however, so narrow that it did not touch the casement on either
side.
“On what does this window open?”
“A small inner court.”
“And you have a floor above this?”
“Two; but, on a level with the servant’s floor, there is a close
grating over the court. That is why this room is so dark.”
When the press was moved, they found that the window was fastened,
which would not have been the case if anyone had entered that way.
“Unless,” said the count, “they went out through our chamber.”
“In that case, you would have found the door unbolted.”
The commissary considered the situation for a moment, then asked
the countess:
“Did any of your servants know that you wore the necklace last
evening?”
“Certainly; I didn’t conceal the fact. But nobody knew that it was
hidden in that cabinet.”
“No one?”
“No one....unless....”
“Be quite sure, madam, as it is a very important point.”
She turned to her husband, and said:
“I was thinking of Henriette.”
“Henriette? She didn’t know where we kept it.”
“Are you sure?”
“Who is this woman Henriette?” asked Mon. Valorbe.
“A school-mate, who was disowned by her family for marrying beneath
her. After her husband’s death, I furnished an apartment in this
house for her and her son. She is clever with her needle and has
done some work for me.”
“What floor is she on?”
“Same as ours....at the end of the corridor....and I think....
the window of her kitchen....”
“Opens on this little court, does it not?”
“Yes, just opposite ours.”
Mon. Valorbe then asked to see Henriette. They went to her
apartment; she was sewing, whilst her son Raoul, about six years
old, was sitting beside her, reading. The commissary was surprised
to see the wretched apartment that had been provided for the woman.
It consisted of one room without a fireplace, and a very small room
that served as a kitchen. The commissary proceeded to question
her. She appeared to be overwhelmed on learning of the theft.
Last evening she had herself dressed the countess and placed the
necklace upon her shoulders.
“Good God!” she exclaimed, “it can’t be possible!”
“And you have no idea? Not the least suspicion? Is it possible
that the thief may have passed through your room?”
She laughed heartily, never supposing that she could be an object
of suspicion.
“But I have not left my room. I never go out. And, perhaps, you
have not seen?”
She opened the kitchen window, and said:
“See, it is at least three metres to the ledge of the opposite
window.”
“Who told you that we supposed the theft might have been committed
in that way?”
“But....the necklace was in the cabinet, wasn’t it?”
“How do you know that?”
“Why, I have always known that it was kept there at night. It had
been mentioned in my presence.”
Her face, though still young, bore unmistakable traces of sorrow
and resignation. And it now assumed an expression of anxiety as if
some danger threatened her. She drew her son toward her. The
child took her hand, and kissed it affectionately.
When they were alone again, the count said to the commissary:
“I do not suppose you suspect Henriette. I can answer for her.
She is honesty itself.”
“I quite agree with you,” replied Mon. Valorbe. “At most, I
thought there might have been an unconscious complicity. But I
confess that even that theory must be abandoned, as it does not
help solve the problem now before us.”
The commissary of police abandoned the investigation, which was now
taken up and completed by the examining judge. He questioned the
servants, examined the condition of the bolt, experimented with the
opening and closing of the cabinet window, and explored the little
court from top to bottom. All was in vain. The bolt was intact.
The window could not be opened or closed from the outside.
The inquiries especially concerned Henriette, for, in spite of
everything, they always turned in her direction. They made a
thorough investigation of her past life, and ascertained that,
during the last three years, she had left the house only four
times, and her business, on those occasions, was satisfactorily
explained. As a matter of fact, she acted as chambermaid and
seamstress to the countess, who treated her with great strictness
and even severity.
At the end of a week, the examining judge had secured no more
definite information than the commissary of police. The judge
said:
“Admitting that we know the guilty party, which we do not, we are
confronted by the fact that we do not know hoe the theft was
committed. We are brought face to face with two obstacles: a door
and a window--both closed and fastened. It is thus a double
mystery. How could anyone enter, and, moreover, how could any one
escape, leaving behind him a bolted door and a fastened window?”
At the end of four months, the secret opinion of the judge was that
the count and countess, being hard pressed for money, which was
their normal condition, had sold the Queen’s Necklace. He closed
the investigation.
The loss of the famous jewel was a severe blow to the Dreux-
Soubise. Their credit being no longer propped up by the reserve
fund that such a treasure constituted, they found themselves
confronted by more exacting creditors and money-lenders. They were
obliged to cut down to the quick, to sell or mortgage every article
that possessed any commercial value. In brief, it would have been
their ruin, if two large legacies from some distant relatives had
not saved them.
Their pride also suffered a downfall, as if they had lost a
quartering from their escutcheon. And, strange to relate, it was
upon her former schoolmate, Henriette, that the countess vented her
spleen. Toward her, the countess displayed the most spiteful
feelings, and even openly accused her. First, Henriette was
relegated to the servants’ quarters, and, next day, discharged.
For some time, the count and countess passed an uneventful life.
They traveled a great deal. Only one incident of record occurred
during that period. Some months after the departure of Henriette,
the countess was surprised when she received and read the following
letter, signed by Henriette:
“Madame,"
“I do not know how to thank you; for it was you, was it not, who
sent me that? It could not have been anyone else. No one but you
knows where I live. If I am wrong, excuse me, and accept my
sincere thanks for your past favors....”
What did the letter mean? The present or past favors of the
countess consisted principally of injustice and neglect. Why,
then, this letter of thanks?
When asked for an explanation, Henriette replied that she had
received a letter, through the mails, enclosing two bank-notes of
one thousand francs each. The envelope, which she enclosed with
her reply, bore the Paris post-mark, and was addressed in a
handwriting that was obviously disguised. Now, whence came those
two thousand francs? Who had sent them? And why had they sent
them?
Henriette received a similar letter and a like sum of money twelve
months later. And a third time; and a fourth; and each year for a
period of six years, with this difference, that in the fifth and
sixth years the sum was doubled. There was another difference:
the post-office authorities having seized one of the letters under
the pretext that it was not registered, the last two letters were
duly sent according to the postal regulations, the first dated from
Saint-Germain, the other from Suresnes. The writer signed the
first one, “Anquety"; and the other, “Pechard.” The addresses that
he gave were false.
At the end of six years, Henriette dies, and the mystery remained
unsolved.
All these events are known to the public. The case was one of
those which excite public interest, and it was a strange
coincidence that this necklace, which had caused such a great
commotion in France at the close of the eighteenth century, should
create a similar commotion a century later. But what I am about to
relate is known only to the parties directly interested and a few
others from whom the count exacted a promise of secrecy. As it is
probable that some day or other that promise will be broken, I have
no hesitation in rending the veil and thus disclosing the key to
the mystery, the explanation of the letter published in the morning
papers two days ago; an extraordinary letter which increased, if
possible, the mists and shadows that envelope this inscrutable
drama.
Five days ago, a number of guests were dining with the Count de
Dreux-Soubise. There were several ladies present, including his
two nieces and his cousin, and the following gentlemen: the
president of Essaville, the deputy Bochas, the chevalier Floriani,
whom the count had known in Sicily, and General Marquis de
Rouzieres, and old club friend.
After the repast, coffee was served by the ladies, who gave the
gentlemen permission to smoke their cigarettes, provided they would
not desert the salon. The conversation was general, and finally
one of the guests chanced to speak of celebrated crimes. And that
gave the Marquis de Rouzieres, who delighted to tease the count, an
opportunity to mention the affair of the Queen’s Necklace, a
subject that the count detested.
Each one expressed hi own opinion of the affair; and, of course,
their various theories were not only contradictory but impossible.
“And you, monsieur,” said the countess to the chevalier Floriani,
“what is your opinion?”
“Oh! I--I have no opinion, madame.”
All the guests protested; for the chevalier had just related in an
entertaining manner various adventures in which he had participated
with his father, a magistrate at Palermo, and which established his
judgment and taste in such manners.
“I confess,” said he, “I have sometimes succeeded in unraveling
mysteries that the cleverest detectives have renounced; yet I do
not claim to be Sherlock Holmes. Moreover, I know very little
about the affair of the Queen’s Necklace.”
Everybody now turned to the count, who was thus obliged, quite
unwillingly, to narrate all the circumstances connected with the
theft. The chevalier listened, reflected, asked a few questions,
and said:
“It is very strange....at first sight, the problem appears to be a
very simple one.”
The count shrugged his shoulders. The others drew closer to the
chevalier, who continued, in a dogmatic tone:
“As a general rule, in order to find the author of a crime or a
theft, it is necessary to determine how that crime or theft was
committed, or, at least, how it could have been committed. In the
present case, nothing is more simple, because we are face to face,
not with several theories, but with one positive fact, that is to
say: the thief could only enter by the chamber door or the window
of the cabinet. Now, a person cannot open a bolted door from the
outside. Therefore, he must have entered through the window.”
“But it was closed and fastened, and we fount it fastened
afterward,” declared the count.
“In order to do that,” continued Floriani, without heeding the
interruption, “he had simply to construct a bridge, a plank or a
ladder, between the balcony of the kitchen and the ledge of the
window, and as the jewel-case---”
“But I repeat that the window was fastened,” exclaimed the count,
impatiently.
This time, Floriani was obliged to reply. He did so with
the greatest tranquility, as if the objection was the most
insignificant affair in the world.
“I will admit that it was; but is there not a transom in the upper
part of the window?”
“How do you know that?”
“In the first place, that was customary in houses of that date;
and, in the second place, without such a transom, the theft cannot
be explained.”
“Yes, there is one, but it was closed, the same as the window.
Consequently, we did not pay attention to it.”
“That was a mistake; for, if you had examined it, you would have
found that it had been opened.”
“But how?”
“I presume that, like all others, it opens by means of a wire with
a ring on the lower end.”
“Yes, but I do not see---”
“Now, through a hole in the window, a person could, by the aid of
some instrument, let us say a poker with a hook at the end, grip
the ring, pull down, and open the transom.”
The count laughed and said:
“Excellent! excellent! Your scheme is very cleverly constructed,
but you overlook one thing, monsieur, there is no hole in the
window.”
“There was a hole.”
“Nonsense, we would have seen it.”
“In order to see it, you must look for it, and no one has looked.
The hole is there; it must be there, at the side of the window, in
the putty. In a vertical direction, of course.”
The count arose. He was greatly excited. He paced up and down the
room, two or three times, in a nervous manner; then, approaching
Floriani, said:
“Nobody has been in that room since; nothing has been changed.”
“Very well, monsieur, you can easily satisfy yourself that my
explanation is correct.”
“It does not agree with the facts established by the examining
judge. You have seen nothing, and yet you contradict all that we
have seen and all that we know.”
Floriani paid no attention to the count’s petulance. He simply
smiled and said:
“Mon Dieu, monsieur, I submit my theory; that is all. If I am
mistaken, you can easily prove it.”
“I will do so at once....I confess that you assurance---”
The count muttered a few more words; then suddenly rushed to the
door and passed out. Not a word was uttered in his absence; and
this profound silence gave the situation an air of almost tragic
importance. Finally, the count returned. He was pale and nervous.
He said to his friends, in a trembling voice:
“I beg your pardon....the revelations of the chevalier were so
unexpected....I should never have thought....”
His wife questioned him, eagerly:
“Speak....what is it?”
He stammered: “The hole is there, at the very spot, at the side of
the window---”
He seized the chevalier’s arm, and said to him in an imperious
tone:
“Now, monsieur, proceed. I admit that you are right so far, but
now....that is not all....go on....tell us the rest of it.”
Floriani disengaged his arm gently, and, after a moment, continued:
“Well, in my opinion, this is what happened. The thief, knowing
that the countess was going to wear the necklace that evening, had
prepared his gangway or bridge during you absence. He watched you
through the window and saw you hide the necklace. Afterward, he
cut the glass and pulled the ring.”
“Ah! but the distance was so great that it would be impossible for
him to reach the window-fastening through the transom.”
“Well, then, if he could not open the window by reaching through
the transom, he must have crawled through the transom.”
“Impossible; it is too small. No man could crawl through it.”
“Then it was not a man,” declared Floriani.
“What!”
“If the transom is too small to admit a man, it must have been a
child.”
“A child!”
“Did you not say that your friend Henriette had a son?”
“Yes; a son named Raoul.”
“Then, in all probability, it was Raoul who committed the theft.”
“What proof have you of that?”
“What proof! Plenty of it....For instance---”
He stopped, and reflected for a moment, then continued:
“For instance, that gangway or bridge. It is improbable that the
child could have brought it in from outside the house and carried
it away again without being observed. He must have used something
close at hand. In the little room used by Henriette as a kitchen,
were there not some shelves against the wall on which she placed
her pans and dishes?”
“Two shelves, to the best of my memory.”
“Are you sure that those shelves are really fastened to the wooden
brackets that support them? For, if they are nor, we could be
justified in presuming that the child removed them, fastened them
together, and thus formed his bridge. Perhaps, also, since there
was a stove, we might find the bent poker that he used to open the
transom.”
Without saying a word, the count left the room; and, this time,
those present did not feel the nervous anxiety they had experienced
the first time. They were confident that Floriani was right, and
no one was surprised when the count returned and declared:
“It was the child. Everything proves it.”
“You have seen the shelves and the poker?”
“Yes. The shelves have been unnailed, and the poker is there yet.”
But the countess exclaimed:
“You had better say it was his mother. Henriette is the guilty
party. She must have compelled her son---”
“No,” declared the chevalier, “the mother had nothing to do with
it.”
“Nonsense! they occupied the same room. The child could not have
done it without the mother’s knowledge.”
“True, they lived in the same room, but all this happened in the
adjoining room, during the night, while the mother was asleep.”
“And the necklace?” said the count. “It would have been found
amongst the child’s things.”
“Pardon me! He had been out. That morning, on which you found him
reading, he had just come from school, and perhaps the commissary
of police, instead of wasting his time on the innocent mother,
would have been better employed in searching the child’s desk
amongst his school-books.”
“But how do you explain those two thousand francs that Henriette
received each year? Are they not evidence of her complicity?”
“If she had been an accomplice, would she have thanked you for that
money? And then, was she not closely watched? But the child,
being free, could easily go to a neighboring city, negotiate with
some dealer and sell him one diamond or two diamonds, as he might
wish, upon condition that the money should be sent from Paris, and
that proceeding could be repeated from year to year.”
An indescribable anxiety oppressed the Dreux-Soubise and their
guests. There was something in the tone and attitude of Floriani--
something more that the chevalier’s assurance which, from the
beginning, had so annoyed the count. There was a touch of irony,
that seemed rather hostile than sympathetic. But the count
affected to laugh, as he said:
“All that is very ingenious and interesting, and I congratulate you
upon your vivid imagination.”
“No, not at all,” replied Floriani, with the utmost gravity, “I
imagine nothing. I simply describe the events as they must have
occurred.”
“But what do you know about them?”
“What you yourself have told me. I picture to myself the life of
the mother and child down there in the country; the illness of the
mother, the schemes of and inventions of the child sell the
precious stones in order to save his mother’s life, or, at least,
soothe her dying moments. Her illness overcomes her. She dies.
Years roll on. The child becomes a man; and then--and now I will
give my imagination a free rein--let us suppose that the man feels a
desire to return to the home of his childhood, that he does so, and
that he meets there certain people who suspect and accuse his
mother....do you realize the sorrow and anguish of such an
interview in the very house wherein the original drama was played?”
His words seemed to echo for a few seconds in the ensuing silence,
and one could read upon the faces of the Count and Countess de
Dreux a bewildered effort to comprehend his meaning and, at the
same time, the fear and anguish of such a comprehension. The count
spoke at last, and said:
“Who are you, monsieur?”
“I? The chevalier Floriani, whom you met at Palermo, and whom you
have been gracious enough to invite to your house on several
occasions.”
“Then what does this story mean?”
“Oh! nothing at all! It is simply a pastime, so far as I am
concerned. I endeavor to depict the pleasure that Henriette’s son,
if he still lives, would have in telling you that he was the guilty
party, and that he did it because his mother was unhappy, as she
was on the point of losing the place of a....servant, by which she
lived, and because the child suffered at sight of his mother’s
sorrow.”
He spoke with suppressed emotion, rose partially and inclined
toward the countess. There could be no doubt that the chevalier
Floriani was Henriette’s son. His attitude and words proclaimed
it. Besides, was it not his obvious intention and desire to be
recognized as such?
The count hesitated. What action would he take against the
audacious guest? Ring? Provoke a scandal? Unmask the man who had
once robbed him? But that was a long time ago! And who would
believe that absurd story about the guilty child? No; better far
to accept the situation, and pretend not to comprehend the true
meaning of it. So the count, turning to Floriani, exclaimed:
“Your story is very curious, very entertaining; I enjoyed it much.
But what do you think has become of this young man, this model son?
I hope he has not abandoned the career in which he made such a
brilliant debut.”
“Oh! certainly not.”
“After such a debut! To steal the Queen’s Necklace at six years of
age; the celebrated necklace that was coveted by Marie-Antoinette!”
“And to steal it,” remarked Floriani, falling in with the count’s
mood, “without costing him the slightest trouble, without anyone
thinking to examine the condition of the window, or to observe that
the window-sill was too clean--that window-sill which he had wiped
in order to efface the marks he had made in the thick dust. We
must admit that it was sufficient to turn the head of a boy at that
age. It was all so easy. He had simply to desire the thing, and
reach out his hand to get it.”
“And he reached out his hand.”
“Both hands,” replied the chevalier, laughing.
His companions received a shock. What mystery surrounded the life
of the so-called Floriani? How wonderful must have been the life
of that adventurer, a thief at six years of age, and who, to-day,
in search of excitement or, at most, to gratify a feeling of
resentment, had come to brave his victim in her own house,
audaciously, foolishly, and yet with all the grace and delicacy of
a courteous guest!
He arose and approached the countess to bid her adieu. She
recoiled, unconsciously. He smiled.
“Oh! Madame, you are afraid of me! Did I pursue my role of parlor-
magician a step too far?”
She controlled herself, and replied, with her accustomed ease:
“Not at all, monsieur. The legend of that dutiful son interested
me very much, and I am pleased to know that my necklace had such a
brilliant destiny. But do you not think that the son of that
woman, that Henriette, was the victim of hereditary influence in
the choice of his vocation?”
He shuddered, feeling the point, and replied:
“I am sure of it; and, moreover, his natural tendency to crime must
have been very strong or he would have been discouraged.”
“Why so?”
“Because, as you must know, the majority of the diamonds were
false. The only genuine stones were the few purchased from the
English jeweler, the others having been sold, one by one, to meet
the cruel necessities of life.”
“It was still the Queen’s Necklace, monsieur,” replied the
countess, haughtily, “and that is something that he, Henriette’s
son, could not appreciate.”
“He was able to appreciate, madame, that, whether true or false,
the necklace was nothing more that an object of parade, an emblem
of senseless pride.”
The count made a threatening gesture, but his wife stopped him.
“Monsieur,” she said, “if the man to whom you allude has the
slightest sense of honor---”
She stopped, intimidated by Floriani’s cool manner.
“If that man has the slightest sense of honor,” he repeated.
She felt that she would not gain anything by speaking to him in
that manner, and in spite of her anger and indignation, trembling
as she was from humiliated pride, she said to him, almost politely:
“Monsieur, the legend says that Retaux de Villette, when in
possession of the Queen’s Necklace, did not disfigure the mounting.
He understood that the diamonds were simply the ornament, the
accessory, and that the mounting was the essential work, the
creation of the artist, and he respected it accordingly. Do you
think that this man had the same feeling?”
“I have no doubt that the mounting still exists. The child
respected it.”
“Well, monsieur, if you should happen to meet him, will you tell
him that he unjustly keeps possession of a relic that is the
property and pride of a certain family, and that, although the
stones have been removed, the Queen’s necklace still belongs to the
house of Dreux-Soubise. It belongs to us as much as our name or
our honor.”
The chevalier replied, simply:
“I shall tell him, madame.”
He bowed to her, saluted the count and the other guests, and
departed.
Four days later, the countess de Dreux found upon the table in her
chamber a red leather case bearing the cardinal’s arms. She opened
it, and found the Queen’s Necklace.
But as all things must, in the life of a man who strives for unity
and logic, converge toward the same goal--and as a little
advertising never does any harm--on the following day, the `Echo de
France’ published these sensational lines:
“The Queen’s Necklace, the famous historical jewelry stolen from
the family of Dreux-Soubise, has been recovered by Arsene Lupin,
who hastened to restore it to its rightful owner. We cannot too
highly commend such a delicate and chivalrous act.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Extraordinary Adventures of Arsene Lupin, Gentleman-Burglar by Maurice Leblanc is in the public domain.


Also see Arsene Lupin - by Maurice Leblanc at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on June 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Extraordinary Adventures of Arsene Lupin, Gentleman-BurglarBy Maurice LeblancAt Amazon
