




THE King of Duntrine had a daughter when he was old, and she was 
the fairest King’s daughter between two seas; her hair was like 
spun gold, and her eyes like pools in a river; and the King gave 
her a castle upon the sea beach, with a terrace, and a court of the 
hewn stone, and four towers at the four corners.  Here she dwelt 
and grew up, and had no care for the morrow, and no power upon the 
hour, after the manner of simple men.
It befell that she walked one day by the beach of the sea, when it 
was autumn, and the wind blew from the place of rains; and upon the 
one hand of her the sea beat, and upon the other the dead leaves 
ran.  This was the loneliest beach between two seas, and strange 
things had been done there in the ancient ages.  Now the King’s 
daughter was aware of a crone that sat upon the beach.  The sea 
foam ran to her feet, and the dead leaves swarmed about her back, 
and the rags blew about her face in the blowing of the wind.
“Now,” said the King’s daughter, and she named a holy name, “this 
is the most unhappy old crone between two seas.”
“Daughter of a King,” said the crone, “you dwell in a stone house, 
and your hair is like the gold: but what is your profit?  Life is 
not long, nor lives strong; and you live after the way of simple 
men, and have no thought for the morrow and no power upon the 
hour.”
“Thought for the morrow, that I have,” said the King’s daughter; 
“but power upon the hour, that have I not.”  And she mused with 
herself.
Then the crone smote her lean hands one within the other, and 
laughed like a sea-gull.  “Home!” cried she.  “O daughter of a 
King, home to your stone house; for the longing is come upon you 
now, nor can you live any more after the manner of simple men.  
Home, and toil and suffer, till the gift come that will make you 
bare, and till the man come that will bring you care.”
The King’s daughter made no more ado, but she turned about and went 
home to her house in silence.  And when she was come into her 
chamber she called for her nurse.
“Nurse,” said the King’s daughter, “thought is come upon me for the 
morrow, so that I can live no more after the manner of simple men.  
Tell me what I must do that I may have power upon the hour.”
Then the nurse moaned like a snow wind.  “Alas!” said she, “that 
this thing should be; but the thought is gone into your marrow, nor 
is there any cure against the thought.  Be it so, then, even as you 
will; though power is less than weakness, power shall you have; and 
though the thought is colder than winter, yet shall you think it to 
an end.”
So the King’s daughter sat in her vaulted chamber in the masoned 
house, and she thought upon the thought.  Nine years she sat; and 
the sea beat upon the terrace, and the gulls cried about the 
turrets, and wind crooned in the chimneys of the house.  Nine years 
she came not abroad, nor tasted the clean air, neither saw God’s 
sky.  Nine years she sat and looked neither to the right nor to the 
left, nor heard speech of any one, but thought upon the thought of 
the morrow.  And her nurse fed her in silence, and she took of the 
food with her left hand, and ate it without grace.
Now when the nine years were out, it fell dusk in the autumn, and 
there came a sound in the wind like a sound of piping.  At that the 
nurse lifted up her finger in the vaulted house.
“I hear a sound in the wind,” said she, “that is like the sound of 
piping.”
“It is but a little sound,” said the King’s daughter, “but yet is 
it sound enough for me.”
So they went down in the dusk to the doors of the house, and along 
the beach of the sea.  And the waves beat upon the one hand, and 
upon the other the dead leaves ran; and the clouds raced in the 
sky, and the gulls flew widdershins.  And when they came to that 
part of the beach where strange things had been done in the ancient 
ages, lo, there was the crone, and she was dancing widdershins.
“What makes you dance widdershins, old crone?” said the King’s 
daughter; “here upon the bleak beach, between the waves and the 
dead leaves?”
“I hear a sound in the wind that is like a sound of piping,” quoth 
she.  “And it is for that that I dance widdershins.  For the gift 
comes that will make you bare, and the man comes that must bring 
you care.  But for me the morrow is come that I have thought upon, 
and the hour of my power.”
“How comes it, crone,” said the King’s daughter, “that you waver 
like a rag, and pale like a dead leaf before my eyes?”
“Because the morrow has come that I have thought upon, and the hour 
of my power,” said the crone; and she fell on the beach, and, lo! 
she was but stalks of the sea tangle, and dust of the sea sand, and 
the sand lice hopped upon the place of her.
“This is the strangest thing that befell between two seas,” said 
the King’s daughter of Duntrine.
But the nurse broke out and moaned like an autumn gale.  “I am 
weary of the wind,” quoth she; and she bewailed her day.
The King’s daughter was aware of a man upon the beach; he went 
hooded so that none might perceive his face, and a pipe was 
underneath his arm.  The sound of his pipe was like singing wasps, 
and like the wind that sings in windlestraw; and it took hold upon 
men’s ears like the crying of gulls.
“Are you the comer?” quoth the King’s daughter of Duntrine.
“I am the corner,” said he, “and these are the pipes that a man may 
hear, and I have power upon the hour, and this is the song of the 
morrow.”  And he piped the song of the morrow, and it was as long 
as years; and the nurse wept out aloud at the hearing of it.
“This is true,” said the King’s daughter, “that you pipe the song 
of the morrow; but that ye have power upon the hour, how may I know 
that?  Show me a marvel here upon the beach, between the waves and 
the dead leaves.”
And the man said, “Upon whom?”
“Here is my nurse,” quoth the King’s daughter.  “She is weary of 
the wind.  Show me a good marvel upon her.”
And, lo! the nurse fell upon the beach as it were two handfuls of 
dead leaves, and the wind whirled them widdershins, and the sand 
lice hopped between.
“It is true,” said the King’s daughter of Duntrine, “you are the 
comer, and you have power upon the hour.  Come with me to my stone 
house.”
So they went by the sea margin, and the man piped the song of the 
morrow, and the leaves followed behind them as they went.
Then they sat down together; and the sea beat on the terrace, and 
the gulls cried about the towers, and the wind crooned in the 
chimneys of the house.  Nine years they sat, and every year when it 
fell autumn, the man said, “This is the hour, and I have power in 
it"; and the daughter of the King said, “Nay, but pipe me the song 
of the morrow”.  And he piped it, and it was long like years.
Now when the nine years were gone, the King’s daughter of Duntrine 
got her to her feet, like one that remembers; and she looked about 
her in the masoned house; and all her servants were gone; only the 
man that piped sat upon the terrace with the hand upon his face; 
and as he piped the leaves ran about the terrace and the sea beat 
along the wall.  Then she cried to him with a great voice, “This is 
the hour, and let me see the power in it”.  And with that the wind 
blew off the hood from the man’s face, and, lo! there was no man 
there, only the clothes and the hood and the pipes tumbled one upon 
another in a corner of the terrace, and the dead leaves ran over 
them.
And the King’s daughter of Duntrine got her to that part of the 
beach where strange things had been done in the ancient ages; and 
there she sat her down.  The sea foam ran to her feet, and the dead 
leaves swarmed about her back, and the veil blew about her face in 
the blowing of the wind.  And when she lifted up her eyes, there 
was the daughter of a King come walking on the beach.  Her hair was 
like the spun gold, and her eyes like pools in a river, and she had 
no thought for the morrow and no power upon the hour, after the 
manner of simple men.
 

This e-text of “Fables” (by Robert L. Stevenson) is copyright-free.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Child's Garden of VersesBy Robert Louis StevensonAt Amazon
