
Henry the Second




One of the most famous warriors of the Middle Ages was Edward the
Black Prince.  He was so called because he wore black armor in
battle.
The Black Prince was the son of Edward III who reigned over England
from 1327 to 1377.  He won his fame as a soldier in the wars which
his father carried on against France.
You remember that the early kings of England, from the time
of William the Conqueror, had possessions in France.  Henry II,
William’s grandson, was the duke of Normandy and lord of Brittany
and other provinces, and when he married Eleanor of Aquitaine she
brought him that province also.
Henry’s son John lost all the French possessions of the English
crown except a part of Aquitaine, and Edward III inherited this.
So when Philip of Valois (val-wah’) became king of France, about
a year after Edward had become king of England, Edward had to do
homage to Philip.
To be king of England and yet to do homage to the king of France—to
bend the knee before Philip and kiss his foot—was something Edward
did not like.  He thought it was quite beneath his dignity, as his
ancestor Rollo had thought when told that he must kiss the foot of
King Charles.
So Edward tried to persuade the nobles of France that he himself
ought by right to be the king of France instead of being only
a vassal.  Philip of Valois was only a cousin of the late French
King Charles IV.  Edward was the son of his sister.  But there was
a curious old law in France, called the Salic Law, which forbade
that daughters should inherit lands.  This law barred the claim
of Edward, because his claim came through his mother.  Still he
determined to win the French throne by force of arms.
A chance came to quarrel with Philip.  Another of Philip’s vassals
rebelled against him, and Edward helped the rebel.  He hoped by
doing so to weaken Philip and more easily overpower him.
Philip at once declared that Edward’s possessions in France were
forfeited.
Then Edward raised an army of thirty thousand men, and with it
invaded France.
The Black Prince was now only about sixteen years of age, but he
had already shown himself brave in battle, and his father put him
in command of one of the divisions of the army.
Thousands of French troops led by King Philip were hurried from
Paris to meet the advance of the English; and on the 26th of August,
1346, the two armies fought a hard battle at the village of Crécy.
During the battle the division of the English army commanded by
the Black Prince had to bear the attack of the whole French force.
The prince fought so bravely and managed his men so well that King
Edward, who was overlooking the field of battle from a windmill on
the top of a hill, sent him words of praise for his gallant work.
Again and again the prince’s men drove back the French in splendid
style.  But at last they seemed about to give way before a very
fierce charge, and the earl of Warwick hastened to Edward to advise
him to send the prince aid.
“Is my son dead or unhorsed or so wounded that he cannot help
himself?” asked the king.
“No, Sire,” was the reply; “but he is hard pressed.”
“Return to your post, and come not to me again for aid so long as
my son lives,” said the king.  “Let the boy prove himself a true
knight and win his spurs.”
The earl went to the prince and told him what his father had said.
“I will prove myself a true knight,” exclaimed the prince.  “My
father is right.  I need no aid.  My men will hold their post as
long as they have strength to stand.”
Then he rode where the battle was still furiously raging, and
encouraged his men.  The king of France led his force a number of
times against the prince’s line, but could not break it and was at
last compelled to retire.
The battle now went steadily against the French, although they
far outnumbered the English.  Finally, forty thousand of Philip’s
soldiers lay dead upon the field and nearly all the remainder of
his army was captured.  Philip gave up the struggle and fled.  Among
those who fought on the side of the French at Crécy was the blind
king of Bohemia, who always wore three white feathers in his helmet.
When the battle was at its height the blind king had his followers
lead him into the thick of the fight, and he dealt heavy blows upon
his unseen foes until he fell mortally wounded.  The three white
feathers were taken from his helmet by the Black Prince, who ever
after wore them himself.
As soon as he could King Edward rode over the field to meet his
son.  “Prince,” he said, as he greeted him, “you are the conqueror
of the French.”  Turning to the soldiers, who had gathered around
him, the king shouted, “Cheer, cheer for the Black Prince!  Cheer
for the hero of Crécy!”
What cheering then rose on the battle-field!  The air rang with
the name of the Black Prince.
Soon after the battle of Crécy King Edward laid siege to Calais;
but the city resisted his attack for twelve months.  During the
siege the Black Prince aided his father greatly.
After the capture of Calais, it was agreed to stop fighting for
seven years, and Edward’s army embarked for England.
In 1355 Edward again declared war against the French.  The Black
Prince invaded France with an army of sixty thousand men.  He
captured rich towns and gathered a great deal of booty.  While he
was preparing to move on Paris, the king of France raised a great
army and marched against him.
The Black Prince had lost so many men by sickness that he had only
about ten thousand when he reached the city of Poitiers.  Suddenly,
near the city, he was met by the French force of about fifty-five
thousand, splendidly armed and commanded by the king himself.
“God help us!” exclaimed the prince, when he looked at the long
lines of the French as they marched on a plain before him.
Early on the morning of September 14, 1356, the battle began.  The
English were few in number, but they were determined to contest
every inch of the ground and not surrender while a hundred of
them remained to fight.  For hours they withstood the onset of the
French.  At last a body of English horsemen charged furiously on
one part of the French line, while the Black Prince attacked another
part.
This sudden movement caused confusion among the French.  Many of
them fled from the field.  When the Black Prince saw this he shouted
to his men, “Advance, English banners, in the name of God and St.
George!”  His army rushed forward and the French were defeated.
Thousands of prisoners were taken, including the king of France
and many of his nobles.
The king was sent to England, where he was treated with the greatest
kindness.  When, some time afterwards there was a splendid procession
in London to celebrate the victory of Poitiers, he was allowed to
ride in the procession on a beautiful white horse, while the Black
Prince rode on a pony at his side.
The Black Prince died in 1376.  He was sincerely mourned by the
English people.  They felt that they had lost a prince who would
have made a great and good king.
William Tell and Arnold von Winkelried
Far up among the Alps, in the very heart of Switzerland, are three
districts, or cantons, as they are called, which are known as the
Forest Cantons and are famous in the world’s history.  About two
thousand years ago the Romans found in these cantons a hardy race
of mountaineers, who, although poor, were free men and proud of
their independence.  They became the friends and allies of Rome,
and the cantons were for many years a part of the Roman Empire, but
the people always had the right to elect their own officers and to
govern themselves.
When Goths and the Vandals and the Huns from beyond the Rhine and
the Danube overran the Roman Empire, these three cantons were not
disturbed.  The land was too poor and rocky to attract men who were
fighting for possession of the rich plains and valleys of Europe,
and so it happened that for century after century, the mountaineers
of these cantons lived on in their old, simple way, undisturbed by
the rest of the world.
In a canton in the valley of the Rhine lived the Hapsburg family,
whose leaders in time grew to be very rich and powerful.  They
became dukes of Austria and some of them were elected emperors.
One of the Hapsburgs, Albert I, claimed that the land of the Forest
Cantons belonged to him.  He sent a governor and a band of soldiers
to those cantons and made the people submit to his authority.
In one of the Forest Cantons at this time lived a famous mountaineer
named William Tell.  He was tall and strong.  In all Switzerland no
man had a foot so sure as his on the mountains or a hand so skilled
in the use of a bow.  He was determined to resist the Austrians.
Secret meetings of the mountaineers were held and all took a solemn
oath to stand by each other and fight for their freedom; but they
had no arms and were simple shepherds who had never been trained
as soldiers.  The first thing to be done was to get arms without
attracting the attention of the Austrians.  It took nearly a year
to secure spears, swords, and battle-axes and distribute them among
the mountains.  Finally this was done, and everything was ready.
All were waiting for a signal to rise.
The story tells us that just at this time Gessler, the Austrian
governor, who was a cruel tyrant, hung a cap on a high pole in the
market-place in the village of Altorf, and forced everyone who passed
to bow before it.  Tell accompanied by his little son, happened to
pass through the marketplace.  He refused to bow before the cap and
was arrested.  Gessler offered to release him if he would shoot an
apple from the head of his son.  The governor hated Tell and made
this offer hoping that the mountaineer’s hand would tremble and
that he would kill his own son.  It is said that Tell shot the apple
from his son’s head but that Gessler still refused to release him.
That night as Tell was being carried across the lake to prison a
storm came up.  In the midst of the storm he sprang from the boat
to an over-hanging rock and made his escape.  It is said that he
killed the tyrant.  Some people do not believe this story, but the
Swiss do, and if you go to Lake Lucerne some day they will show
you the very rock upon which Tell stepped when he sprang from the
boat.
That night the signal fires were lighted on every mountain and
by the dawn of day the village of Altorf was filled with hardy
mountaineers, armed and ready to fight for their liberty.  A battle
followed and the Austrians were defeated and driven from Altorf.
This victory was followed by others.
A few years later, the duke himself came with a large army,
determined to conquer the mountaineers.  He had to march through
a narrow pass, with mountains rising abruptly on either side.  The
Swiss were expecting him and hid along the heights above the pass,
as soon as the Austrians appeared in the pass, rocks and trunks of
trees were hurled down upon them.  Many were killed and wounded.
Their army was defeated, and the duke was forced to recognize the
independence of the Forest Cantons.
This was the beginning of the Republic of Switzerland.  In time
five other cantons joined them in a compact for liberty.
About seventy years later the Austrians made another attempt to
conquer the patriots.  They collected a splendid army and marched
into the mountains.  The Swiss at once armed themselves and met
the Austrians at a place called Sempach.  In those times powder
had not been invented, and men fought with spears, swords, and
battle-axes.  The Austrian soldiers stood shoulder to shoulder,
each grasping a long spear whose point projected far in front of
him.  The Swiss were armed with short swords and spears and it was
impossible for them to get to the Austrians.  For a while their cause
looked hopeless, but among the ranks of the Swiss was a brave man
from one of the Forest Cantons.  His name was Arnold von Winkelried
(Win’-kel-ried).  As he looked upon the bristling points of the
Austrian spears, he saw that his comrades had no chance to win
unless an opening could be made in that line.  He determined to
make such an opening even at the cost of his life.  Extending his
arms as far as he could, he rushed toward the Austrian line and
gathered within his arms as many spears as he could grasp.
“Make way for liberty!” he cried— Then ran, with arms extended
wide,  As if his dearest friend to clasp;  Ten spears he swept
within his grasp.  “Make way for liberty!” he cried— Their keen
points met from side to side.   He bowed among them like a tree,
And thus made way for liberty.
Pierced through and through Winkelried fell dead, but he had made
a gap in the Austrian line, and into this gap rushed the Swiss
patriots.  Victory was theirs and the Cantons were free.
Continue...

This complete text of Famous Men of the Middle Ages by John Henry Haaren, LL.D., District Superintendent of Schools The
City of New York, and A. B. Poland, Ph.D. Superintendent of Schools Newark N.J., is in the public domain.


Buy Henry Second by W. L. Warren at Amazon.com

You can also buy this book.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on August 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows (Book 7)By J. K. RowlingAt Amazon
