




That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own
mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and
deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that
extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the
consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could
extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour
ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle.
Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel’s voice,
that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and
wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was
loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman
would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac’s face and
listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under
the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his
conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately;
he had said to himself that a woman’s happiness should atone for this
venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face;
the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily
for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and
at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had
brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his
deep voice broke in upon their bliss.
     “A charming girl is my Fanchette
      In her simplicity,”
he sang mockingly.
Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it
was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the
hand, the light touch of Rastignac’s hair against her cheek, a word
whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student’s warm
breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss
upon her throat–such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of
the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment,
only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more
entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love’s sake in the most
famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty
expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout
young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour
she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could
give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self
followed the gift.
“The thing is arranged,” Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. “Our
two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is
a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet
to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half-past eight in the
morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her
coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father’s fortune and
affections. A funny way of putting it, isn’t it? Taillefer’s youngster
is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be
bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising
your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that
thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know.”
Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in
reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the
boarders likewise appeared.
“That is just as I intended.” Vautrin said. “You know quite well what
you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you
are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you.”
He made as though he would take Eugene’s hand, but Rastignac hastily
withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to
him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.
“Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes
of virtue about us!” murmured Vautrin. “But Papa Doliban has three
millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in
your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride’s white
dress, even in your own eyes.”
Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go
that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as
Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, “You look
melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me.”
The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he
spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.
“Let us go up to your room,” the worthy soul remarked, when he had
asked Sylvie for the law student’s key. “This morning,” he resumed,
“you thought that she did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She
would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and
out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was
expecting me! Now do you understand? We were to complete the
arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you
are to move into it in three days’ time. Don’t split upon me. She
wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn’t bear to keep the secret from
you. You will be in the Rue d’Artois, only a step or two from the Rue
Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might
have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have
done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it.
My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have
thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I
shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound
securities, landed property that won’t run away.”
Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his
cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student’s back
was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney-piece and
set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac’s arms stamped in
gold on the leather.
“My dear boy,” said the kind soul, “I have been up to the eyes in this
business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have
an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not
refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?”
“What is it?”
“There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to
let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn’t that so?
I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the
way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me
about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall
have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and
I shall say to myself, ’He has just seen my little Delphine. He has
been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.’ If I were
ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know
when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to
the Champs-Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of
seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then–perhaps
she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft
quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one
month she has become my little girl again, so light-hearted and gay.
Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would
do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, ’I am very
happy, papa!’ When they say ’father’ stiffly, it sends a chill through
me; but when they call me ’papa,’ it brings all the old memories back.
I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me,
and to no one else.”
The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.
“It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long,
long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it
must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my
girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of
her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this
morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh!
you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a
service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh!
if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would
have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would
be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes
of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses
everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on
earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!” he said,
raising his head after a pause. “All the time we were going about
together she chatted away about you. ’He is so nice-looking, papa;
isn’t he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?’ Pshaw!
she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue
d’Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into
mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt
as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to
me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your
chimney-piece?” said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no
sign, and he was dying of impatience.
Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He
thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and
of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast
between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of
nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case,
opened it, and found a watch of Breguet’s make wrapped in paper, on
which these words were written:
  “I want you to think of me every hour, because . . .
“Delphine.”
That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that
had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold
watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key,
the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had
imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was
radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little
detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her
present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people,
and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac
already for his own as well as for his daughter’s sake.
“You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That
great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his
opera-dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know
where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better
let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"
–he heaved a sigh–"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would
not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf’s
brains.–You will take me with you, will you not?”
“Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you––”
“Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not
you! Let me embrace you,” and he flung his arms around the student’s
neck.
“You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go
to her this evening, will you not?”
“Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand.”
“Can I be of any use?”
“My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer’s while I go to Mme. de
Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this
evening; it is a matter of life and death.”
“Really, young man!” cried Father Goriot, with a change of
countenance; “are you really paying court to his daughter, as those
simpletons were saying down below? . . . Tonnerre de dieu! you have
no notion what a tap a la Goriot is like, and if you are playing a
double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh!
the thing is impossible!”
“I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world,” said the
student. “I only knew it a moment ago.”
“Oh! what happiness!” cried Goriot.
“But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off
to-morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life
in it.”
“But what business is it of yours?” said Goriot.
“Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting
in an appearance––”
Just at that moment Vautrin’s voice broke in upon them; he was
standing at the threshold of his door and singing:
     “Oh! Richard, oh my king!
      All the world abandons thee!
      Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!
      The same old story everywhere,
      A roving heart and a . . . tra la la.”
“Gentlemen!” shouted Christophe, “the soup is ready, and every one is
waiting for you.”
“Here,” Vautrin called down to him, “come and take a bottle of my
Bordeaux.”
“Do you think your watch is pretty?” asked Goriot. “She has good
taste, hasn’t she? Eh?”
Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and,
all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.
Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during
dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer’s opinion, had
never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the
whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene
with consternation.
“Why, what has come to you to-day?” inquired Mme. Vauquer. “You are as
merry as a skylark.”
“I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain.”
“Bargain?” said Eugene.
“Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall
be paid a handsome commission on them–Mlle. Michonneau,” he went on,
seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, “have
you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making
those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to
oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?"
he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.
“Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules,"
said the young painter.
“I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the
Venus of Pere-Lachaise,” replied Vautrin.
“There’s Poiret,” suggested Bianchon.
“Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!” cried
Vautrin; “his name means a pear––”
“A sleepy pear!” Bianchon put in. “You will come in between the pear
and the cheese.”
“What stuff are you all talking!” said Mme. Vauquer; “you would do
better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle
there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the
stomach besides.”
“Gentlemen,” said Vautrin, “the Lady President calls us to order. Mme.
Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but
respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of
Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no
political allusions intended.–Come, you Turk!” he added, looking at
Christophe, who did not offer to stir. “Christophe! Here! What, you
don’t answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!”
“Here it is, sir,” said Christophe, holding out the bottle.
Vautrin filled Eugene’s glass and Goriot’s likewise, then he
deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it
while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a
grimace.
“Corked!” he cried. “The devil! You can drink the rest of this,
Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right-hand
side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles.”
“If you are going to stand treat,” said the painter, “I will pay for a
hundred chestnuts.”
“Oh! oh!”
“Booououh!”
“Prrr!”
These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a
set firework.
“Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne,” called
Vautrin.
“Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A
couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall
never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to
pay for it, I have some currant cordial.”
“That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught,” muttered
the medical student.
“Shut up, Bianchon,” exclaimed Rastignac; “the very mention of black
draught makes me feel––. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay
for it,” he added.
“Sylvie,” called Mme. Vauquer, “bring in some biscuits, and the little
cakes.”
“Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards,” said Vautrin. “But trot
out the biscuits.”
The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene
than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries
of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official
having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the
caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously
struck up with the following variations:
“Scissors to grind!”
“Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!”
“Brandy-snaps, ladies!”
“China to mend!”
“Boat ahoy!”
“Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!”
“Old clo’!”
“Cherries all ripe!”
But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which
he rendered the cry of “Umbrellas to me-end!”
A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the
room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats’ concert, with Vautrin as
conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on
Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads
already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general
confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them
were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that
evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin
gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change
that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes
drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say
in his ear:–
“My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin
yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs.
When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence
can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer,
telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded,
the bread is ready for the oven; to-morrow we will eat it up and
whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking?
. . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few
conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the
bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini
will clear the way to Michel Taillefer’s inheritance with the point of
his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother’s money, a snug
fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I
know that her late mother’s property amounts to more than three
hundred thousand––”
Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed
to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was
creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but
it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by
one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled
that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle.
Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in
a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and
drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.
“Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!” said
the widow.
These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.
“There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this,” said
Sylvie. “There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top.”
“Good-bye, mamma,” said Vautrin; “I am going to a theatre on the
boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from
Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two
ladies––”
“Thank you; I must decline,” said Mme. Couture.
“What! my good lady!” cried Mme. Vauquer, “decline to see a play
founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were
so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the
line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might
edify your young lady.”
“We are forbidden to go to the play,” answered Victorine.
“Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit,” said
Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.
He altered the sleeping student’s position, settled his head more
comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the
forehead, and began to sing:
     “Sleep, little darlings;
      I watch while you slumber.”
“I am afraid he may be ill,” said Victorine.
“Then stop and take care of him,” returned Vautrin. “’Tis your duty
as a meek and obedient wife,” he whispered in her ear. “The young
fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife–there’s your
fortune for you. In short,” he added aloud, “they lived happily ever
afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a
numerous family. That is how all the romances end.–Now, mamma,” he
went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her
waist, “put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess’
scarf, while I go out and call a cab–all my own self.”
And he started out, singing as he went:
     “Oh! sun! divine sun!
      Ripening the pumpkins every one.”
“My goodness! Well, I’m sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a
garret with a man like that.–There, now!” she added, looking round
for the old vermicelli maker, “there is that Father Goriot half seas
over. He never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But
he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to
lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he
couldn’t lose what he hadn’t got–Sylvie, just take him up to his
room!”
Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just
as he was, like a package, across the bed.
“Poor young fellow!” said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene’s hair
that had fallen over his eyes; “he is like a young girl, he does not
know what dissipation is.”
“Well, I can tell you this, I know,” said Mme. Vauquer, “I have taken
lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my
hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more
aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks
sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture.
Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There’s a special
providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken
his head against the knob of the chair. They’d make a pretty pair
those two would!”
“Hush, my good neighbor,” cried Mme. Couture, “you are saying such
things––”
“Pooh!” put in Mme. Vauquer, “he does not hear.–Here, Sylvie! come
and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays.”
“What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?” said Sylvie. “No,
you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your
murderer. It’s a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life.”
“I don’t care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin.”
“Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?”
“Come, Sylvie, don’t argue,” said the widow, as she left the room.
“At her age, too!” said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her
mistress as she spoke.
Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene
slept on Victorine’s shoulder. The sound of Christophe’s snoring
echoed through the silent house; Eugene’s quiet breathing seemed all
the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a
child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those
acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing
sentiments of a woman’s nature; he was so close to her that she could
feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal
protection and conscious pride in Victorine’s face. Among the
countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there
was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.
“Poor, dear child!” said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.
The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine’s innocent, pathetic face,
so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to
mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the
accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet,
austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have
caught something of the golden glory of heaven.
“After all, he only took two glasses, mamma,” said Victorine, passing
her fingers through Eugene’s hair.
“Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have
carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him
credit.”
There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.
“There is M. Vautrin, mamma,” said the girl. “Just take M. Eugene. I
would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways
of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as
though you had nothing on.”
“Oh, no, you are wrong!” said Mme. Couture. “M. Vautrin is a worthy
man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture,
rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite.”
Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but
looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces–the
lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.
“Well,” he remarked, folding his arms, “here is a picture! It would
have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint-Pierre (good
soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme.
Couture!–Sleep on, poor boy,” he added, looking at Eugene, “luck
sometimes comes while you are sleeping.–There is something touching
and attractive to me about this young man, madame,” he continued; “I
know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head
of a cherub on an angel’s shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were
a woman, I would die (no–not such a fool), I would live for him.” He
bent lower and spoke in the widow’s ear. “When I see those two
together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them
for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the
heart,” he said in a loud voice. “And when I see you, my children,
thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to
myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate
you. God is just."–He turned to Victorine. “It seems to me,” he said,
“that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it,
Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes
many a time. Come, now, don’t be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon
my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very
long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will
want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome
man with a title, and he will idolize you.”
The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the
stairs, interrupted Vautrin’s fortune-telling. “Here is Mamma
Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.
–Aren’t we a trifle pinched for room?” he inquired, with his arm
round the lady; “we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma!
If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up
the fragments with all the care of an antiquary.”
“There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!” said
the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture’s ear.
“Good-bye, little ones!” said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and
Victorine. “Bless you both!” and he laid a hand on either head. “Take
my word for it, young lady, an honest man’s prayers are worth
something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them.”
“Good-bye, dear,” said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. “Do you think that
M. Vautrin means to run away with me?” she added, lowering her voice.
“Lack-a-day!” said the widow.
“Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M.
Vautrin said!” said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands.
The two women were alone together.
“Why, it wouldn’t take much to bring it to pass,” said the elderly
lady; “just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother––”
“Oh! mamma.”
“Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy,"
the widow remarked. “I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew
flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the
truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn’t speak up for his
own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery.
My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you,
nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she
might come in for.”
“It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his
life,” said Victorine. “If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to
be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life.”
“Mon Dieu! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full
of piety, you see,” Mme. Couture remarked. “I am very glad to find
that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the
Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was
saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to
lead us?”
With Sylvie’s help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene
up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his
clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room,
Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian’s back was turned,
and pressed a kiss on Eugene’s forehead, feeling all the joy that this
stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and
gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss
of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it
until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.
That evening’s merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given
the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin.
Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of
Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name
would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his
real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.
But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally
decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to
warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea
of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that
night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the
famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still
thinking that it was the district superintendent–one Gondureau–with
whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors
courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely
arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to
administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great
man’s evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she
began to see that this business involved something more than the mere
capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in
a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that
in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the
police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money.
But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue
Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the
scent.
“A delusion,” he said. “Collin’s sorbonne is the most dangerous that
has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the
rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the
backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very
popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the
Place de Greve.”
As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two
slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible
expressions borrowed from thieves’ Latin, thieves, of all people,
being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A
sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking–his
council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a
human head is worth after the axe has done its work.
“Collin is playing us off,” he continued. “When we come across a man
like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always
one resource left–we can kill him if he takes it into his head to
make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of
killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid
of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with
getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and
carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper
formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings,
over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have.
There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into
Trompe-la-Mort’s paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty
scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to
keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of
the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it
is better to prevent crime than to punish it.”
“And you do a service to our country,” said Poiret.
“Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you
are,” said the head of the department. “Yes, of course, we are serving
our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great
services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise
above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the
mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an
out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation
of my life.–I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle.
I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send
Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in
the house where you saw me before.–Your servant, sir. If you should
ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best
to get it back for you.”
“Well, now,” Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, “there are idiots
who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very
pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as
saying ’Good-day.’”
The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the
annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence
in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like
apparition of the sham Comtesse de l’Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes
of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and
supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her
boarders so long as she lived.
In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till
close upon eleven o’clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight
from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a
prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin’s first bottle of wine),
was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered
no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme.
Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o’clock,
and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested,
therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past
eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was
waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who
came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup
belonging to Vautrin–it was standing with the others in the
bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster
had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business.
The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some
difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and
yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen.
It ran thus:–
“I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my
friend. Till two o’clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that
waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that
torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never
loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I
would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not
feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive
out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full
how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and
explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told
you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity’s
sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line
will be enough. Say, ’I will hasten to you,’ or else, ’I am ill.’ But
if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have
happened? . . .”
“Yes, indeed, what has happened?” exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down
to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any
more. “What time is it?”
“Half-past eleven,” said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his
coffee.
The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating
glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics
in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every
limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another
moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M.
Taillefer’s servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.
“Mademoiselle,” he cried, “your father is asking for you–something
terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the
forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will
scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious.”
“Poor young fellow!” exclaimed Vautrin. “How can people brawl when
they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people
have bad manners, and that is a fact.”
“Sir!” cried Eugene.
“Well, what then, you big baby!” said Vautrin, swallowing down his
coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with
such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing
news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. “Are there not
duels every morning in Paris?” added Vautrin.
“I will go with you, Victorine,” said Mme. Couture, and the two women
hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she
went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance
that said–"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me
tears!”
“Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin,” said Mme. Vauquer.
“I am all sorts of things,” said Vautrin.
“Queer, isn’t it?” said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession
of commonplaces suited to the occasion. “Death takes us off without
asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky
thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have
other complaints that men don’t suffer from. We bear children, and it
takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her
father will have to acknowledge her now!”
“There!” said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, “yesterday she had not a
penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune.”
“I say, M. Eugene!” cried Mme. Vauquer, “you have landed on your
feet!”
At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the
crumpled letter still in his hand.
“You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to
be like the rest of them?” he asked.
“Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine,” said Eugene, turning to
Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised
the onlookers at this scene.
Father Goriot caught the student’s hand and grasped it warmly. He
could have kissed it.
“Oh, ho!” said Vautrin, “the Italians have a good proverb–Col
tempo.”
“Is there any answer?” said Mme. de Nucingen’s messenger, addressing
Eugene.
“Say that I will come directly.”
The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he
could not be prudent.
“What is to be done?” he exclaimed aloud. “There are no proofs!”
Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its
work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave
Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, “Luck comes to us while we
sleep, young man,” and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck
dead.
“So there is a Divine Justice!” said Eugene.
“Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?”
“A stroke!” cried Mlle. Michonneau.
“Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor,” called the widow. “Oh, M.
Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie
might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel.”
Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his
hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.
“Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist’s and ask for something
that’s good for the apoplexy.”
Christophe likewise went.
“Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs.”
Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow
staircase, and laid upon his bed.
“I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter,” said M.
Goriot.
“Selfish old thing!” cried Mme. Vauquer. “Yes, go; I wish you may die
like a dog.”
“Just go and see if you can find some ether,” said Mlle. Michonneau to
Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened
the sick man’s clothes.
Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress
of the situation.
“Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be
of some use in sparing my modesty,” she said to Poiret, “instead of
standing there like a stock.”
Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp
slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.
“There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily,"
exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on
the shirt again.–"Ouf! How heavy he is,” he added, as he laid the
convict down.
“Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!” said the old maid briskly;
her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article
of the furniture with greedy eyes. “Could we find some excuse for
opening that desk?”
“It mightn’t be quite right,” responded Poiret to this.
“Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it
doesn’t belong to any one now. But we haven’t time, there is the
Vauquer.”
“Here is the ether,” said that lady. “I must say that this is an
eventful day. Lord! that man can’t have had a stroke; he is as white
as curds.”
“White as curds?” echoed Poiret.
“And his pulse is steady,” said the widow, laying her hand on his
breast.
“Steady?” said the astonished Poiret.
“He is all right.”
“Do you think so?” asked Poiret.
“Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a
doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is
only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look,
mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort
of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly,
however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why
he wears a wig. They say that red-haired people are either the worst
or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?”
“Good to hang,” said Poiret.
“Round a pretty woman’s neck, you mean,” said Mlle Michonneau,
hastily. “Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman’s duty to nurse you
men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may
as well take yourself off,” she added. “Mme. Vauquer and I will take
great care of dear M. Vautrin.
Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of
the room by his master.
Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to
breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to
prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had
happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he
himself might be implicated. Vautrin’s coolness still further dismayed
him.
“Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?” Rastignac
asked himself.
He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds
of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the
pack.
“Well?” shouted Bianchon, “you have seen the Pilote?”
The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out
several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the
benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into
provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local
journals.
“There is a wonderful history in it,” said the house student of the
Hopital Cochin. “Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the
Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his
forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in
Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They
say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?”
“Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a
charming woman, and she is in love with me, so––”
“You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to
her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master
Taillefer’s money!”
“Are all the devils of hell at my heels?” cried Rastignac.
“What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand,” said
Bianchon, “and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish.”
“Just go to Mother Vauquer’s,” said Rastignac; “that scoundrel Vautrin
has dropped down like one dead.”
“Aha!” said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, “you
confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself.”
The law student’s long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in
some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after
hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out
scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron
tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot’s
confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for
him in the Rue d’Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then
he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.
“Such a love is my anchor of safety,” he said to himself. “How the old
man’s heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he
has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like
a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she
will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de
Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall
porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to
be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!”
He took out his watch and admired it.
“I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other
for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I
shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing
criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere
moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar
unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position
humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her
husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called
upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?”
Rastignac’s battle with himself went on for a long while; and though
the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible
curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison
Vauquer through the gathering dusk.
Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the
stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau’s
officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of
her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was
impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics
at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in
the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled
sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer’s duel. They were
anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the
probable change in Victorine’s prospects. Father Goriot alone was
absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the
room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the
same look that had read his thoughts before–the look that had such
power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.
“Well, dear boy,” said the escaped convict, “I am likely to cheat
death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a
stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors.”
“A bull you might say,” cried the widow.
“You really might be sorry to see me still alive,” said Vautrin in
Rastignac’s ear, thinking that he guessed the student’s thoughts. “You
must be mighty sure of yourself.”
“Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a
gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort,” said Bianchon; “and, upon my word,
that name would do very well for you.”
Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He
turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle.
Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of
that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature
had dropped from the convict’s face; from the unmistakable ferocity of
that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and
hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this
scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a
pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there
were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles
on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round
the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the
sitting-room.
“In the name of the King and the Law!” said an officer, but the words
were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.
Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men,
who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two
policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the
sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave
access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden,
and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones
under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for
Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief
walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a
sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin’s face
was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of
strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair,
the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that
moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash
the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they
understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines,
his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with
which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical
strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew
to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He
started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew
exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the
police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor.
Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and
instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was
something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden
transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron
full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force
dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that
cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his
brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.
“You are not in the politest of humors to-day,” he remarked to the
chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his
head.
“Gentlemen,” he said, “put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call
on those present to witness that I make no resistance.”
A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring
like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally
sudden cessation.
“There’s a sell for you, master crusher,” the convict added, looking
at the famous director of police.
“Come, strip!” said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.
“Why?” asked Collin. “There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and
surrender.”
He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to
overwhelm his audience.
“Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle,” he went on, addressing a little,
white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table;
and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to
draw up a document. “I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin,
otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years’ penal
servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my
nickname.–If I had as much as raised my hand,” he went on, addressing
the other lodgers, “those three sneaking wretches yonder would have
drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer’s domestic hearth. The rogues have laid
their heads together to set a trap for me.”
Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.
“Good Lord!” she cried, “this does give one a turn; and me at the
Gaite with him only last night!” she said to Sylvie.
“Summon your philosophy, mamma,” Collin resumed. “Is it a misfortune
to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are
you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful
than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society
rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me."
His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile
that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his
eyes.–"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept
any time you like! Do you understand?” And he sang:
     “A charming girl is my Fanchette
      In her simplicity.”
“Don’t you trouble yourself,” he went on; “I can get in my money. They
are too much afraid of me to swindle me.”
The convicts’ prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp
transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur,
its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the
speaker’s discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and
mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race
of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno,
wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save
repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel
who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and
acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own
evil thoughts.
“Who betrayed me?” said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round
the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.
“It was you, old cat!” he said. “That sham stroke of apoplexy was your
doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be
cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did
not sell me either. But who did?––Aha! you may rummage upstairs,” he
shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking
possession of his effects. “The nest is empty, the birds flew away
yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here,” he
said tapping his forehead. “Now I know who sold me! It could only be
that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?"
he said, turning to the chief. “It was timed so neatly to get the
banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you–spies! As for
Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight,
even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much
did you give the Michonnette?” he asked of the police officers. “A
thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of
the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me
warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no
suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have
had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to
save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money,” he said,
as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. “These folks will amuse
themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep
me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be
back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des
Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help
their general–their good Trompe-la-Mort–to get clear away. Is there
a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten
thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?” he asked proudly.
“There is some good there,” he said tapping his heart; “I have never
betrayed any one!–Look you here, you slut,” he said to the old maid,
“they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns
them sick. Rake in your gains.”
He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers’ faces.
“What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before?
A convict of Collin’s stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less
weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal
fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is
proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against
a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police,
and I am a match for them all.”
“Ye gods!” cried the painter, “what a magnificent sketch one might
make of him!”
“Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet,
master of ceremonies to the widow” (a nickname full of sombre poetry,
given by prisoners to the guillotine), “be a good fellow, and tell me
if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don’t want him to suffer
for some one else, that would not be fair.”
But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party
returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had
been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the
chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.
“Gentlemen,” said Collin, addressing the lodgers, “they will take me
away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and
I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and
permit me to send you figs from Provence.”
He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at
Rastignac.
“Good-bye, Eugene,” he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange
transition from his previous rough and stern manner. “If you should be
hard up, I have left you a devoted friend,” and, in spite of his
shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, “One,
two!” like a fencing-master, and lunged. “If anything goes wrong,
apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service.”
The strange speaker’s manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no
one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the
pantomime.
As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house,
Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress’ temples with vinegar, looked
round at the bewildered lodgers.
“Well,” said she, “he was a man, he was, for all that.”
Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too
much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers
began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on
Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead-alive, mummy-like figure,
crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that
the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces
from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long
excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the
room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of
loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard
it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he
bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, “If that creature is
going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out.”
In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room,
save Poiret, was of the medical student’s opinion, so that the latter,
strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.
“You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us,” he
said; “speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at
once.”
“At once!” echoed Poiret in amazement.
Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in
her ear.
“I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be
here as any one else,” she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.
“Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back,"
said Rastignac.
“Monsieur is taking Collin’s part” she said, with a questioning,
malignant glance at the law student; “it is not difficult to guess
why.”
Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her
and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it
revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.
“Let her alone!” cried the boarders.
Continue...

This eBook of “Father Goriot” by Honore de Balzac (translated by Ellen Marriage) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Balzac's Works: Volume V: Scenes From Private Life: Father Goriot, The Unconscious Humorists, Gaudissart the GreatBy Honore De BalzacAt Amazon
