Presented by
Authorama
Public Domain Books
Michelangelo, Leonardo, Raphael: the three great names of the noblest
period of the Renaissance take our minds from the host of fine artists
who worked alongside them. Nevertheless beside these giants a whole
host of exquisite artists have place, and not least among them the
three painters with whom Mr. Leader Scott has dealt in these pages. Fra
Bartolommeo linking up with the religious art of the preceding period,
with that of Masaccio, of Piero de Cosimo, his senior student in the
studio of Cosimo Roselli, and at last with that of the definitely
"modern” painters of the Renaissance, Raphael, Leonardo and
Michelangelo himself, is a transition painter in this supreme period.
Technique and the work of hand and brain are rapidly taking the place
of inspiration and the desire to convey a message. The aesthetic
sensation is becoming an end in itself. The scientific painters,
perfecting their studies of anatomy and of perspective, having a
conscious mastery over their tools and their mediums, are taking the
place of such men as Fra Angelico.
As a painter at this end of a period of transition–a painter whose
spiritual leanings would undoubtedly have been with the earlier men,
but whose period was too strong for him–Fra Bartolommeo is of
particular interest; and Albertinelli, for all the fiery surface
difference of his outlook is too closely bound by the ties of his
friendship for the Frate to have any other viewpoint.
Andrea del Sarto presents yet another phenomenon: that of the artist
endowed with all the powers of craftsmanship yet serving an end neither
basically spiritual nor basically aesthetic, but definitely
professional. We have George Vasari’s word for it; and Vasari’s blame
upon the extravagant and too-well-beloved Lucrezia. To-day we are so
accustomed to the idea of the professional attitude to art that we can
accept it in Andrea without concern. Not that other and earlier artists
were unconcerned with the aspect of payments. The history of Italian
art is full of quarrels and bickerings about prices, the calling in of
referees to decide between patron and painter, demands and refusals of
payment. Even the unworldly Fra Bartolommeo was the centre of such
quarrels, and although his vow of poverty forbade him to receive money
for his work, the order to which he belonged stood out firmly for the
scudi which the Frate’s pictures brought them. In justice to
Andrea it must be added that this was not the only motive for his
activities; it was not without cause that the men of his time called
him “senza errori,” the faultless painter; and the production of
a vast quantity of his work rather than good prices for individual
pictures made his art pay to the extent it did. A pot-boiler in
masterpieces, his works have place in every gallery of importance, and
he himself stands very close to the three greatest; men of the
Renaissance.
Both Fra Bartolommeo and Albertinelli are little known in this country.
Practically nothing has been written about them and very few of their
works are in either public galleries or private collections. It is in
Italy, of course, that one must study their originals, although the
great collections usually include one or two. Most interesting from the
viewpoint of the study of art is the evolution of the work of the
artist-monk as he came under the influence of the more dramatic modern
and frankly sensational work of Raphael, of the Venetians and of
Michelangelo. In this case (many will say in that of the art of the
world) this tendency detracted rather than helped the work. The
draperies, the dramatic poses, the artistic sensation arrests the mind
at the surface of the picture. It is indeed strange that this devout
churchman should have succumbed to the temptation, and there are
moments when one suspects that his somewhat spectacular pietism
disguised the spirit of one whose mind had little to do with the
mysticism of the mediaeval church. Or perhaps it was that the strange
friendship between him and Albertinelli, the man of the cloister and
the man of the world, effected some alchemy in the mind of each. The
story of that lifelong friendship, strong enough to overcome the
difficulties of a definite partnership between the strict life of the
monastery and the busy life of the bottega, is one of the most
fascinating in art history.
Mr. Leader Scott has in all three lives the opportunity for fascinating
studies, and his book presents them to us with much of the flavour of
the period in which they lived. Perhaps to-day we should incline to
modify his acceptance of the Vasari attitude to Lucrezia, especially
since he himself tends to withdraw the charges against her, but leaves
her as the villainess of the piece upon very little evidence. The
inclusion of a chapter upon Ghirlandajo, treated merely as a follower
of Fra Bartolommeo, scarcely does justice in modern eyes to this fine
artist, whose own day and generation did him such honour and paid him
so well. But the author’s general conclusions as to the place in art
and the significance of the lives of the three painters with whom he is
chiefly concerned remains unchallenged, and we have in the volume a
necessary study to place alongside those of Leonardo, of Michelangelo
and of Raphael for an understanding of the culmination of the
Renaissance in Italy.
Horace Shipp.
It seems to be a law of nature that progress, as well as time, should
be marked by periods of alternate light and darkness–day and night.
This law is nowhere more apparent than in the history of Art. Three
times has the world been illuminated by the full brilliance of Art, and
three times has a corresponding period of darkness ensued.
The first day dawned in Egypt and Assyria, and its works lie buried in
the tombs of prehistoric Pharaohs and Ninevite kings. The second day
the sun rose on the shores of many-isled Greece, and shed its rays over
Etruria and Rome, and ere it set, temples and palaces were flooded with
beauty. The gods had taken human form, and were come to dwell with men.
The third day arising in Italy, lit up the whole western world with the
glow of colour and fervour, and its fading rays light us yet.
The first period was that of mythic art; the world like a child
wondering at all around tried to express in myths the truths it could
not comprehend.
The second was pagan art which satisfies itself that in expressing the
perfection of humanity, it unfolds divinity. The third era of Christian
art, conscious that the divine lies beyond the human, fails in aspiring
to express infinitude.
Tracing one of these periods from its rise, how truly this similitude
of the dawn of day is carried out. See at the first streak of light how
dim, stiff, and soulless all things appear! Trees and objects bear
precisely the relation to their own appearance in broad daylight as the
wooden Madonnas of the Byzantine school do to those of Raphael.
Next, when the sun–the true light–first appears, how it bathes the
sea and the hills in an ethereal glory not their own! What fair liquid
tints of blue, and rose, and glorious gold! This period which, in art,
began with Giotto and ended with Botticelli, culminated in Fra
Angelico, who flooded the world of painting with a heavenly
spiritualism not material, and gave his dreams of heaven the colours of
the first pure rays of sunshine.
But as the sun rises, nature takes her real tints gradually. We see
every thing in its own colour; the gold and the rose has faded away
with the truer light, and a stern realism takes its place. The human
form must be expressed, in all its solidity and truth, not only in its
outward semblance, but the hidden soul must be seen through the veil of
flesh. And in this lies the reason of the decline; only to a few great
masters it was given to reveal spirituality in humanity–the others
could only emulate form and colour, and failed.
It is impossible to contemplate art apart from religion; as truly as
the celestial sun is the revealer of form, so surely is the heavenly
light of religion the first inspirer of art.
Where would the Egyptian, Assyrian, and Etruscan paintings and
sculptures have been but for the veneration of the mystic gods of the
dead, which both prompted and preserved them?
What would Greek sculpture have been without the deified
personifications of the mysterious powers of nature which inspired it?
and it is the fact of the pagan religion being both sensuous and
realistic which explains the perfection of Greek art. The highest ideal
being so low as not to soar beyond the greatest perfection of humanity,
was thus within the grasp of the artist to express. Given a manly
figure with the fullest development of strength; a female one showing
the greatest perfection of form; and a noble man whose features express
dignity and mental power;–the ideal of a Hercules, a Venus, and a
Jupiter is fully expressed, and the pagan mind satisfied. The spirit of
admirers was moved more by beauty of form than by its hidden
significance. In the great Venus, one recognises the woman before
feeling the goddess.
As with their sculpture, without doubt it was also with painting. Mr.
Symonds, in his Renaissance of the Fine Arts, speaks of the
Greek revival as entirely an age of sculpture; but the solitary glance
into the more perishable art of painting among the Greeks, to be seen
at Cortona, reveals the exquisite perfection to which this branch was
also brought. It is a painting in encaustic, and has been used as a
door for his oven by the contadino who dug it up–yet it remains a
marvel of genius. The subject is a female head–a muse, or perhaps only
a portrait; the delicacy and mellowness of the flesh tints equal those
of Raphael or Leonardo, and a lock of hair lying across her breast is
so exquisitely painted that it seems to move with her breath. The
features are of the large-eyed regular Greek type, womanly dignity is
in every line, but it is an essentially pagan face–the Christian soul
has never dawned in those eyes! With this before us, we cannot doubt
that Greek art found its expression as much in colour as in form and
that the same religion inspired both.
In an equal degree Renaissance Art has its roots in Christianity; but
the religion is deeper and greater, and has left art behind.
The early Christians must have felt this when they expressed everything
in symbols, for these are merely suggestive, and allow the imagination
full play around and beyond them; they are mere stepping-stones to the
ideal which exists but is as yet inexpressible.
“Myths and symbols always mark the dawn of a religion, incarnation and
realism its full growth.” So after a time when the first vague wonder
and ecstasy are over, symbols no longer content people; they want to
bring religion home to them in a more tangible form, to humanize it, in
fact. From this want it arises that nature next to religion inspires
art, and finally takes its place. For it follows as a matter of course
that as art is a realistic interpreter of the spiritual, so it is more
easy to follow nature than spirituality, nature being the outward or
realistic expression of the mind of God.
It was a saying of Buffalmacco, who was not one of the most
devout painters of the fourteenth century, “Do not let us think of
anything but to cover our walls with saints, and out of disrespect to
the demons to make men more devout.” And Savonarola, though he has been
accused of being one of the causes of the decline, thus upheld the
sacred influences of art; when he exclaimed in one of his fervent
bursts of eloquence, “You see that Saint there in the Church and say,
’I will live a good life and be like him.’” If these were the feelings
of the least devout and the religious fanatic, how hallowed must the
influences of Christian painting have been to the intermediate ranks.
Mr. Symonds beautifully expresses the tendency of that time: “The eyes
of the worshipper should no longer have a mere stock or stone to
contemplate; his imagination should be helped by the dogmatic
presentation of the scenes of sacred history, and his devotion
quickened by lively images of the passion of our Lord.... The body and
soul moreover should be reconciled, and God’s likeness should be once
more acknowledged in the features and limbs of men.” [Footnote:
Symonds’ Renaissance of the Fine Arts, chap. i. p. 11.]
The school of Giotto was the first to feel this need of the soul. He,
taking his ideas from nature, clothed the soul in a thin veil; the
Italians call his school that of poetic art; it reached sentiment and
poetry, but did not pass them. Yet the thirteenth century was sublime
for the expression of the idea; one only has to study the intense
meaning in the works of Giotto, and Orcagna, Duccio, and the Lorenzetti
of Siena to perceive this. The fourteenth century, on the contrary,
rendered itself glorious for manifestation of form. “Artists thought
the veil of ideality a poor thing, and wished to give the solidity of
the body to the soul; they stole every secret from nature; the senses
were content, but not sentiment.” [Footnote: Purismo nell’ Arte,
da Cesare Guasti.]
The artists of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, of whom we have
to speak, blended the two schools, and became perfection as far as they
went. Michelangelo drew more from the vigorous thirteenth-century
masters, and Raphael from the more sensuous followers of Masaccio and
Lippi. The former tried to put the Christian soul into his works, but
its infinite depth was unattainable. As his many unfinished works
prove, he always felt some great overwhelming meaning in his inmost
soul, which all his passionate artistic yearnings were inadequate to
express. Raphael tried to bring realism into religion through painting,
and to give us the scenes of our Lord’s and the Apostles’ lives in such
a humanized aspect, that we should feel ourselves of his nature. But
the incarnation of religion in art defeated its own ends; sensuousness
was introduced in place of the calm, unearthly spirituality of the
earlier masters. Compare the cartoon of S. Paul preaching at Athens, in
which he has all the majesty of a Cæsar in the Forum, with the lowly
spirit of the Apostle’s life! In truth, Raphael failed to approach
nearer to sublimity than Fra Angelico, with all his faulty drawing but
pure spirit.
After him, artists loved form and colour for themselves rather than for
the spiritual meaning. Miss Owen [Footnote: Art Schools of Medieval
Christendom, edited by Ruskin.] accuses Raphael of having rendered
Art pagan, but this seems blaming him for the weakness of his
followers, who took for their type his works rather than his ideal. The
causes of the decline were many, and are not centred in one man. As
long as Religion slumbered in monasticism and dogma, Art seizing on the
human parts, such as the maternity of the Madonna, the personifications
of saints who had lived in the world, was its adequate exponent. The
religion awakened by the aesthetic S. Francis, who loved all kinds of
beauty, was of the kind to be fed by pictures. But when Savonarola had
aroused the fervour of the nation to its highest point, when beauty was
nothing, the world nothing, in comparison to the infinity of God;–then
art, finding itself powerless to express this overwhelming infinity,
fell back on more earthly founts of inspiration, the classics and the
poets.
Lorenzo de’ Medici and Pope Nicholas V. had fully as much to do with
the decline as Savonarola. The Pope in Rome, and Lorenzo in Florence,
led art to the verge of paganism; Savonarola would have kept it on the
confines of purism; it was divided and fell, passing through the
various steps of decadence, the mannerists and the eclectics, to rise
again in this nineteenth century with what is after all its true aim,
the interpretation of nature, and the illustration of the poetry of a
nation.
But with the decadence we have happily nothing to do; the artists of
whom we speak first, Fra Bartolommeo and Albertinelli, belong to the
culmination of art on its rising side, while Andrea del Sarto stands as
near to the greatest artists on the other side, and is the last of the
group before the decline. On Fra Bartolommeo the spirituality of Fra
Angelico still lingered, while the perfection of Raphael illumined him.
Andrea del Sarto, on the other side, had gathered into his hands the
gleams of genius from all the great artists who were his elder
contemporaries, and so blending them as to form seemingly a style of
his own, distinct from any, has left on our walls and in our galleries
hundreds of masterpieces of colour, as gay and varied as the tints the
orientals weave into their wondrous fabrics.
It might be said with truth that Fra Bartolommeo painted for the soul,
and Andrea del Sarto for the eye.
Amongst the thousand arteries in which the life blood of the
Renaissance coursed in all its fulness, none were so busy or so
important as the “botteghe” of the artists. In these the genius of the
great masters, the Pleiades of stars at the culmination of art in
Florence, was either tenderly nursed, or sharply pruned into vigour by
struggling against discouragement and envy. In these the spirit of
awakened devotion found an outlet, in altarpieces and designs for
church frescoes which were to influence thousands. Here the spirit of
poetry, brooding in the mysterious lines of Dante, or echoing from past
ages in the myths of the Greeks, took form and glowed on the walls in
mighty cartoons to be made imperishable in fresco. Here the spirit of
luxury was satisfied by beautiful designs for ornaments, dress stuffs,
tapestries, vases and “cassoni,” &c., which brought beauty into every
life, and made each house a poem. The soul, the mind, and the body,
could alike be supplied at those fountains of the beautiful, the artshops
or schools.
Whilst Michelangelo as a youth was drawing from the cartoons of the
Sassetti chapel in the school of Domenico Ghirlandajo, Cosimo Roselli
was just receiving as a pupil a boy only a little behind him in genius.
A small, delicate-faced, spiritual-eyed boy of nine years, known as
Baccio della Porta, who came with a roll of drawings under his arm and
high hopes in his soul, no doubt trotting along manfully beside
Cosimo’s old friend, Benedetto da Majano, the sculptor, who had
recommended his being placed in the studio.
By the table given in the note [Footnote: Pietro, a Genoese, came in
1400 to the parish of S. Michele, at Montecuccioli in Mugello; he was a
peasant, and had a son Jacopo, who was father of Paolo, the muleteer;
and three other sons, Bartolo, Giusto, and Jacopo, who had a
podere at Soffignano, near Prato. Paolo married first Bartolommea,
daughter of Zanobi di Gallone, by whom he had a son, Bartolommeo, known
as Baccio della Porta, born 1475. The first wife dying, Paolo married
Andrea di Michaele di Cenni, who had four sons, Piero, Domenico,
Michele, and Francesco; only Piero lived to grow up, and he became a
priest. [Favoured by Sig. Milanesi.] it will be seen that Baccio was
the son of Paolo, a muleteer, which no doubt was a profitable trade in
those days when the country roads were mere mule-tracks, and the traffic
between different towns was carried on almost entirely by horses and
mulepacks. There is some doubt as to the place of Baccio’s birth, which
occurred in 1475. Vasari gives it as Savignano near Prato; Crowe and
Cavalcaselle [Footnote: Vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 427.] assert it was
Suffignano, near Florence, where they say Paolo’s brothers, Jacopo and
Giusto, were contadini or peasants.
But on consulting the post-office authorities we find no place called
Suffignano near Florence; it must therefore have been a village near
Prato called Soffignano, which from similarity of sound Vasari confused
with the larger place, Savignano. This is the more probable, for Rosini
asserts that “Benedetto da Majano, who had bought a podere near
Prato, knew him and took him into his affections, and by his means
placed him with Cosimo.” [Footnote: Rosini, Storia della
Pittura, chap. xvii. p. 47.]
It is certainly probable that Paolo’s wife lived with his family during
his wanderings, because it is the true Italian custom, and Baccio was
in that case born in his uncle’s house; for it is not till 1480 that we
find Paolo retired from trade and set up in a house of his own in
Florence at the gate of S. Pier Gattolini, now the Porta Romana.
The friendship begun at Prato must have been continued in Florence, for
in 1480 Paolo not only owned that house at the gate of S. Pier
Gattolini, but was the proud possessor of a podere at Brozzi, which
yielded six barrels of wine. He is a merciful man too, for among his
possessions are two mules disutili e vecchi (old and useless).
At this time Baccio was six years old, and his three stepbrothers quite
babies. [Footnote: Archives of Florence, Portate al Castato, 1480-1.]
Paolo, as well as his mules, had earned his repose, being certainly
old, if not useless, and was anxious for his little sons to be placed
out in the world as early as possible. Thus it came that in 1484 Baccio
was taken away from his brothers, who played under the shadow of the
old gateway, and was put to do the drudgery of the apprenticeship to
art. He had to grind colours for Cosimo–who, as we know, used a great
deal of colour, having dazzled the eyes of the Pope with the brilliancy
of his blue and gold in the Sistine Chapel some years before–he had to
sweep out the studio, no doubt assisted by Mariotto Albertinelli, a boy
of his own age, and to run errands, carrying designs for inspection to
expectant brides who wanted the chests painted to hold their wedding
clothes, or doing the messenger between his master and the nuns of S.
Ambrogio, who paid Cosimo their gold florins by the hand of the boy in
1484 and 1485. [Footnote: Note to Crowe and Cavalcaselle, vol. iii.
chap. xiii. p. 429.]
Whether his age made him a more acceptable means of communication with
the nuns, or whether Pier di Cosimo, the elder pupil, already displayed
his hatred of womankind, I know not; perhaps the boy already showed
that innate devotion and especial fitness for sanctity which marks his
entire art career. Truly everything in his youthful life combined to
lead his thoughts to higher things. The first fresco at which he
assisted was in this solemn cloister of St. Ambrogio, and the subject
the Miracle of the Sacrament; the saintly air of the place, the
calm faces of the white-hooded nuns, must all have had an influence in
inspiring his youthful mind with the spirit of devotion.
Baccio’s fellow-students were not many, but they formed an interesting
group. Pier di Cosimo was the head man, and eldest of all; with such
ties was he bound to his master and godfather, that he was known better
as Cosimo’s Peter than by his own patronymic of Chimenti. He was at
this time twenty-two years of age, his registry in the Florentine Guild
proves his birth in 1462, as the son of Lorenzo, son of Piero, son of
Antonio, Chimenti.
Being the eldest of five brothers, it is difficult to conceive how a
member of a large family grew up developing such eccentricities as are
usually the fruit of isolation.
In the studio Piero was industrious and steady, working earnestly,
whether he was assisting his master’s designs or carrying out his own
fancies of monsters, old myths, and classic fairy stories. No doubt the
two boys, Mariotto and Baccio, found little companionship in this
abstracted young man always dreaming over his own ideas. If they told
him an anecdote, he would look up vacantly at the end not having heard
a word; at other times every little noise or burst of laughter would
annoy him, and he would be immoderately angry with the flies and
mosquitos.
Piero had already been to Rome, and had assisted Cosimo in his fresco
of Christ preaching on Lake Tiberias; indeed most judges thought
his landscape the best part of that work, and the talent he showed
obtained him several commissions. He took the portraits of Virginio
Orsini, Ruberto Sanseverino and Duke Valentino, son of Pope Alessandro
VI. He was much esteemed as a portrait painter also in Florence, and
from his love of classical subjects, and extreme finish of execution,
he ranked as one of the best painters of “cassoni,” or bridal-linen
chests.
This fashion excited the indignation of Savonarola, who in one of his
sermons exclaimed, “Do not let your daughters prepare their ’corredo’
(trousseau) in a chest with pagan paintings; is it right for a
Christian spouse to be familiar with Venus before the Virgin, or Mars
before the saints?”
Thus Piero being a finished painter, was often Cosimo Roselli’s
substitute in the instruction of the two boys, for Cosimo having come
home from Rome with some money, lived at his ease; but still continued
to paint frescoes in company with Piero.
Another pupil was Andrea di Cosimo, whose peculiar branch of art was
that of the grotesque. He no doubt drew designs for friezes and
fountains, for architraves and door mouldings, in which distorted faces
look out from all kinds of writhing scrolls; and lizards, dragons,
snakes, and creeping plants, mingle according to the artist’s fancy.
Andrea was however often employed in more serious work, as the records
of the Servite Convent prove, for they contain the note of payment to
him, in 1510, for the curtains of the altarpiece which Filippino Lippi
had painted. These curtains were till lately attributed to Andrea del
Sarto, or Francia Bigio.
This is the Andrea Feltrini mentioned by Crowe and Cavalcaselle as
working in the cloister of the Servi with Andrea del Sarto and Francia
Bigio between 1509 and 1514.[Footnote: History of Painting, vol.
iii. chap. xvii. p. 546.]
But Baccio’s dearest friend in the studio was a boy nearly his own age,
Mariotto Albertinelli, son of Biagio di Bindo, born October 13, 1474.
He had experienced the common lot of young artists in those days, and
had been apprenticed to a gold-beater, but preferred the profession of
painter. From the first these two lads, being thrown almost entirely
together in the work of the studio, formed one of those pure, lasting
friendships, of which so many exist in the annals of art, and so few in
the material world. They helped each other in the drudgery, and enjoyed
their higher studies together; but they did not draw all their
inspirations from the over-coloured works of Cosimo–although Mariotto
once reproduced his red-winged cherubim in after life [Footnote: In the
’Trinity’ in the Belle Arti, Florence.]–nor from the hard and laboured
myths of Piero.
They went to higher founts, for scarcely a trace of these early
influences are to be found in their paintings. Vasari says they studied
the Cose di Leonardo. The great artist had at this time left the
studio of Verocchio, and was fast rising into fame in Florence, so it
is most probable that two youths with strong artistic tendencies would
study, not only the sketches, but also the precepts, of the great man.
Besides this there were two national art-schools open to students in
Florence: these were the frescoes of Masaccio and Lippi in the Carmine,
and the Medicean garden in the Via Cavour, then called Via Larga.
The two boys left the studio of Cosimo Roselli at an early age. There
had been trouble in the house of Paolo the ex-muleteer, and Baccio’s
already serious mind had been awed by the sight of death. His little
brother, Domenico, died in 1486 at seven years of age. His father,
Paolo, died in 1487; thus Baccio, at the age of twelve or thirteen, was
left the head of the family, and the supporter of his stepmother and
her babes. This may account for his leaving Cosimo so young, and
setting up his studio with Mariotto as his companion, in his own house
at the gate of S. Pier Gattolini; this partnership began presumably
about the year 1490.
Conscious that they were not perfected by Cosimo’s teaching, they both
set themselves to undergo a strict discipline in art, and, friends as
they were, their paths began to diverge from this point. Their natural
tastes led them to opposite schools–Baccio to the sacred shrine of art
in the shadowed church, Mariotto to the greenery and sunshine of the
Medici garden, where beauty of nature and classic treasures were heaped
in profusion; whose loggie [Footnote: Arched colonnades.] glowed with
the finest forms of Greek sculpture, resuscitated from the tombs of
ages to inspire newer artists to perfection, but alas! also to debase
the aim of purely Christian art.
Baccio’s calm devotional mind no doubt disliked the turmoil of this
garden, crowded with spirited youths; the tone of pagan art was not in
accordance with his ideal, and so he learned from Masaccio and Lippi
that love of true form and harmonious composition, which he perfected
afterwards by a close study of Leonardo da Vinci, whose principles of
chiaroscuro he seems to have completely carried out. With this
training he rose to such great celebrity even in his early manhood,
that Rosini [Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap. xvii.
p. 48.] calls him “the star of the Florentine school in Leonardo and
Michelangelo’s absence,” and he attained a grandeur almost equal to the
latter, in the S. Mark and SS. Peter and Paul of his later years.
Meanwhile Mariotto was revelling in the Eden of art, drawing daily
beneath the Loggie–where the orange-trees grew close to the pillars–
from the exquisite statues and “torsi,” peopling the shades with white
forms, or copying cartoons by the older masters, which hung against the
walls.
The custode of all these treasures was Bertoldo, an old
sculptor, who boasted of having been the scholar of Donatello, and also
heir to his art possessions. He could also point to the bronze pulpits
of San Lorenzo, which he finished, as proof of his having inherited a
portion of his master’s spirit. Bertoldo, having doubtless rendered to
Duke Cosimo’s keeping his designs by Donatello, which were preserved in
the garden, obtained the post of instructor there; but his age may have
prevented his keeping perfect order, and the younger spirits
overpowered him. There were Michelangelo, with all the youthful power
of passion and force which he afterwards imparted to his works, and the
audacious Torrigiano, with his fierce voice, huge bulk, and knitted
brows, who was himself a discord like the serpent in Eden. Easily
offended, he was prompt in offering outrage. Did any other young man
show talent or surpass him, revenge deep and mean as that of Bandinelli
to Michelangelo was sure to follow, the envied work being spoiled in
his rage. Then there were the fun-loving Francesco Granacci, and the
witty Rustici, as full of boyish pranks as they were of genius–what
could one old man do among so many?–and now comes the impetuous
Mariotto to add one more unruly member to his class.
How well one can imagine the young men–in loose blouses confined at
the waist, or in buff jerkins and close-fitting hose, with jaunty
cloaks or doublets, and little red or black caps, set on flowing locks
cut square in front–passing beneath the shadows of the arches among
the dim statues, or crossing the garden in the sunshine amid the
orange-trees, under the splendid blue Italian skies.
We can see them painting, modelling, or drawing large cartoons in
charcoal, while old Bertoldo passes from easel to easel, criticising
and fault-finding, detailing for the hundredth time Donatello’s maxims,
and moving on, heedless or deaf to the irreverent jokes of his
ungrateful pupils.
Then, like a vision of power and grandeur, Lorenzo il Magnifico enters
with a group of his classic friends. Politian and the brothers Pulci
admire again the ancient sculptures which are to them as illustrations
of their readings, and Lorenzo notes the works of all the students who
were destined to contribute to the glory of the many Medicean palaces.
How the burly Torrigiano’s heart burns within him when the Duke praises
his compeer’s works!
Sometimes Madonna Alfonsina, the mother of Lorenzo, and widow of Piero,
walked here, and she also took an interest in the studies of the
youths. Mariotto especially attracted her by his talent and zeal. She
commissioned him to paint some pictures for her to send as a present to
her own family, the Orsini of Rome. These works, of which the subjects
are not known, passed afterwards into the possession of Cæsar Borgia.
She also sat to Mariotto for her own portrait. It is easily imagined
how elated the excitable youth became at this notice from the mother of
the magnificent Lorenzo. He had dreams of making a greater name than
even his master, Cosimo, whose handiwork was in the Sistine; of
excelling Michelangelo, of whose genius the world was beginning to
talk; and, as adhering to a party was the only way to success in those
days, he became a strong Pallesco, [Footnote: The Palleschi were the
partizans of the Medici, so called because they took as their standard
the Palle, or Balls, the arms of that family.] trusting wholly in the
favour of Madonna Alfonsina.
He even absented himself almost constantly from the studio, which
Baccio shared with him, and worked at the Medici palace, [Footnote:
This break is signified by Baldinucci, Opere, vol. iv. p. 84,
and by Vasari, who says that after the exile of Piero he returned to
Baccio.] but, alas! in 1494 this brilliant aspect of his fortunes
changed.
Lorenzo being dead, Piero de’ Medici was banished, the great palace
fell into the hands of the republican Signoria, and all the painters
were left without patronage.
Mariotto, very much cast down, bethought himself of a friend who never
failed him, and whose love was not affected by party; and, returning to
the house of Baccio, he set to work, most likely in a renewed spirit of
confidence in the comrade who stood by him when the princes in whom he
trusted failed him. Whatever his frame of mind, he began now to study
earnestly the works of Baccio, who, while he was seeking patronage in
the palace, had been purifying his genius in the Church. Mariotto
imbibed more and more of Baccio’s style, till their works so much
resembled one another that indifferent judges could scarcely
distinguish them apart. It would be interesting if we could see those
early pictures done for Madonna Alfonsina, and compare them with the
style formed after this second adherence to Fra Bartolommeo. What his
manner afterwards became we have a proof in the Salutation
(1503), in which there is grand simplicity of motive combined with the
most extreme richness of execution and fullest harmony of colour.
This second union between the friends could not have been so
satisfactory to either as the first pure boyish love, when they had
been full of youthful hopes, and felt their hearts expand with the
dreams and visions of genius. Now instead of the mere differences
between two styles of art, there were differences which much more
seriously affected their characters; they were daily sundering, one
going slowly towards the cloister, the other to the world. Albertinelli
had gained a greater love of worldly success and luxury.
Baccio’s mind, always attuned to devotion, was now intensified by
family sorrows, which no doubt brought him nearer to heaven. Thus
softened, he had the more readily received the seeds of faith which
Savonarola scattered broadcast.
Yet though every word of the one was a wound to the other, this
strangely assorted pair of friends did not part. Rosini well defined
their union as “a knot which binds more strongly by pulling contrary
ways.” [Footnote: Storia della Pittura, chap. xvii. p. 48]
So when Albertinelli, while colouring with zeal a design of Baccio’s,
would inveigh against all monks, the Dominicans in particular, and
Savonarola especially, his friend would argue that the inspired prophet
was not an enemy, but a purifier and reformer of art. Probably Baccio
was at the Duomo on that Sunday in Lent, 1495, and reported to Mariotto
those wondrous words of Savonarola, that “Beauty ought never to be
taken apart from the true and good,” and how, after quoting the same
sentiments from Socrates and Plato, the preacher went on to say, “True
beauty is neither in form nor colour, but in light. God is light, and
His creatures are the more lovely as they approach the nearer to Him in
beauty. And the body is the more beautiful according to the purity of
the soul within it.” Certain it is that this divine light lived ever
after in the paintings of Fra Bartolommeo.
He frequented the cloisters of San Marco, where even Lorenzo de’ Medici
used to go and hear the prior expound Christianity near the rose tree.
There were Lorenzo di Credi and Sandro Botticelli, both middle-aged
men, of a high standing as artists; there were the Delia Robbias,
father and son, and several others. Sandro, while listening, must have
taken in the inspired words with the scent and beauty of the roses,
whose spirit he gives in so many of his paintings.
Young Baccio, on the contrary, feasted his eyes on the speaker’s face,
till the very soul within it was imprinted on his mind, from whence he
reproduced it in that marvellous likeness, the year after the martyrdom
of Savonarola.
This is the earliest known work of Fra Bartolommeo, and is a faithful
portrait; the deep-sunk eye-socket, and eye like an internal fire,
showing the preacher’s powerful mind; the prominent aquiline nose and
dilating vehement nostril bespeaking his earnestness and decision; the
large full mouth alone shows the timorousness which none but himself
knew of, so overpowered was it by his excitable spirit. The handling is
Baccio’s own able style, but Sig. Cavalcaselle thinks the influences of
Cosimo Roselli are apparent in the low tone and clouded translucent
colour; he signed it “Hieronymi Ferrariensis, a Deo missi prophetæ
effigies,” a legend which expresses the more than reverence which
Baccio cherished for the preacher. This portrait has only lately been
identified by its present possessor, Sig. Ermolao Rubieri, who
discovered the legend under a coat of paint. Its vicissitudes are
traceable from the time when Sig. Averardo (or, as Vasari calls him,
Alamanno) Salviati brought it back from Ferrara, where no doubt it had
been in the possession of Savonarola’s family. Salviati gave it to the
convent of San Vincenzo at Prato, from which place Sig. Rubieri
purchased it in 1810. The likeness of the reformer in the Belle Arti of
Florence has been supposed to be this one, but it is more likely to be
the one done by Fra Bartolommeo at Pian di Mugnone in after years, when
he drew the friar as S. Peter Martyr, with the wound on his head.
Padre Marchese, himself a Dominican, speaks thus of his convent:–"San
Marco has within its walls the Renaissance, a compendium in two
artists. Fra Angelico, the painter of the ideal, Fra Bartolommeo, of
form. The first closes the antique Tuscan school. He who has seen Fra
Angelico, has seen also Giotto, Cimabue, &c. The second represents the
modern school. In him are almost comprised Masaccio, Lorenzo di Credi,
Leonardo, Buonarroti, and Andrea del Sarto.”
The first, Fra Angelico, “sets himself to contemplate in God the fount
and architype of the beautiful, and, as much as is possible to mortal
hands, reproduces and stamps it in those works which a sensual mind
cannot understand, but which to the heavenly soul speak an eloquent
language. Fra Bartolommeo, with more analysis, works thoughtfully ...
he ascends from the effect to the cause, and in created things
contemplates a reflection of spiritual beauty.”
It is true the Dominican order has been as great a patron of arts as
the Franciscan of literature. It united with Niccolo Pisano to give
form to national architecture. It had sculptors, miniaturists, and
glass painters. As a building San Marco has been a shrine of art; since
the time that Michelozzi, with the assistance of the Medici, built the
convent for Sant’ Antonino, and Fra Angelico left the impress of his
soul on the walls, a long line of artist monks has lived within its
cloisters. With San Marco our story has now to deal, for it is
impossible to write Fra Bartolommeo’s life without touching on the
well-known history of Savonarola. The great preacher’s influence in
these years, from 1492 to 1497, entered into almost every individual in
Florence, either to draw them to devotion, or to stir them up to the
greatest opposition.
The artists, whose minds were probably the most impressional, were his
fervent adherents. He has been accused of being the ruin of art, but
"this cry has only arisen in our time; the silence of contemporaries,
although not friendly to him, proves that he was not in that century so
accused.” [Footnote: Gino Capponi, Storia delta Republica di
Firenze, lib. vi. chap. ii.] The only mention of anything of
artistic value is a “tavoliere” [Footnote: A chess or draught board.]
of rich work, spoken of by Burlamacchi and Benivieni, in a “Canzone di
un Piagnone sul bruciamento delle Vanità.” Savonarola himself was an
artist and musician in early life, the love of the beautiful was strong
within him, only he would have it go hand in hand with the good and
true. His dominant spirit was that of reform; as he tried to regenerate
mind, morals, literature, and state government, so he would reform art,
and fling over it the spiritual light which illumed his own soul.
It was natural that such a mind should act on the devotional character
of Baccio. What could he do but join when every church was full of
worshippers, each shrine at the street corners had a crowd of devout
women on their knees before it–when thousands of faces were uplifted
in the vast expanse of the Duomo, and every face burned with fervour as
the divine flame from the preacher lit the lamp of each soul–when in
the streets he met long processions of men, women, and children, the
echoes of whose hymns (Laudi) filled the narrow streets, and went up to
the clear air above them?
Then came that strange carnival when there were no maskers in the city,
but white-robed boys went from house to house to collect the vanities
for the burning–when the flames of the fires, hitherto saturnalian,
were the flames of a holocaust, wherein each one cast the sins and
temptations, even the pretty things which, though dear to himself,
withdrew him from God. And when the white-robed boys came to the studio
of the friends at the gate of S. Pier Gattolini, with what sighs and
self-immolation Baccio looked for the last time at some of his studies
which he judged to come under the head of anathemata, and handed
them over to the acolytes. How Mariotto’s soul, warm to Pagan art,
burned within him at this sacrifice! And how he would talk more than
ever against the monks, and hang up his own cartoons and studies of the
Greek Venus in the studio for Baccio’s behoof!
In these years we have no notice of authentic works done by the
youthful partners, though biographers talk of their having commissions
for madonnas, and other works of art.
In 1497 Francesco Valori, the grand-featured, earnest admirer of
Savonarola, became Gonfaloniere in the time of Piero de’ Medici’s
exile, [Footnote: Gino Capponi, Storia delta Republica di
Firenze, lib. vi. chap. xi. p. 233.] and the friar’s party was in
the ascendent. Rosini [Footnote: Storia delta Pittura, chap.
xvii. p. 48.] says that belonging to a faction was a means of fame, and
that the Savonarola party was powerful, giving this as a reason for
Baccio’s partisanship; but this we can hardly believe, his whole life
proved his earnestness. He was much beloved in Florence for his calm
upright nature and good qualities. He delighted in the society of pious
and learned men, spent much time in the convent, where he had many
friends among the monks; yet with all he kept still faithful to his
early friend Mariotto, whose life was cast so differently. Savonarola’s
faction was powerful, but the Medici had still adherents who stirred up
a strong party against him.
His spirit of reform at length aroused the ire of the Pope, who forbade
him to preach. He disobeyed, and the sermons on Ezekiel were scenes of
tumult; no longer a group of rapt faces dwelling on his words, but
frowns, murmurs, and anathemas from a crowd only kept off him by a
circle of armed adherents round his pulpit.
At length, on June 22nd, the excommunication by Pope Alessandro VI.
(Borgia) fell like a thunderclap, and the Medicean youths marched in
triumphant procession with torches and secular music to burlesque the
Laudi; no doubt Albertinelli was one of these, while Baccio grieved
among the awestruck friars in the convent.
In 1498 Savonarola again lifted up his voice; the church was not large
enough, so he preached beneath the blue sky on the Piazza San Marco;
and Fra Domenico Buonvicini da Pescia, in the eagerness of
partisanship, said that his master’s words would stand the ordeal of
fire. Then came that tumultuous day of April 7th, the “Sunday of the
Olives,” when the Franciscans and Dominicans argued while the fire
burnt out before them, when Savonarola’s great spirit quailed within
him, and the ordeal failed; a merciful rain quenching the flames which
none dared to brave save the undaunted Fra Domenico himself.
There was no painting done in the studio on that day we may be sure.
Baccio was one of the surging, conflicting crowd gathered beneath the
mingling shadows of Orcagna’s arches and Arnolfo’s great palace, and at
eventide he was one of the armed partisans who protected the friar back
to his convent, menaced not only by rains from heaven, but by the
stormy wrath of an angry populace, defrauded of the sight they came to
see.
The next day was the one which determined the painter’s future life.
There was in the city a curious process of crystallisation of all the
particles held in solution round the fire the previous day. The Palazzo
Vecchio attracted about its doors the “Arrabiati.” The “Compagnacci"
assembled, armed, by the Duomo. The streets were full of detached
parties of Piagnoni, treading ways of peril to their centre, San Marco.
Passions raged and seethed all day, till at the hour of vespers a cry
arose, “à San Marco,” and thither the multitude–500 Compagnacci, and
300 Palleschi–rushed, armed with picks and arquebusses, &c. They killed
some stray Piagnoni whom they found praying by a shrine, and placed
guards at the streets which led to the convent; then the assault began.
The church was dimly lighted. Savonarola and Fra Domenico kneeled on
the steps of the altar, with many worshippers around them, singing
tremulous hymns; amongst these were Francesco Valori, Ridolfi, and
Baccio della Porta, but all armed, as Cronaca tells us. They still sang
hymns when the doors were attacked with stones; then leaving the
priests and women to pray for them the men rushed to the defence.
Old Valori, with a few brave friends, guarded the door; others made
loop-holes of the windows and fired out; some went up the campanile,
and some on the roof. Baccio fought bravely among the rest. The
Palleschi were almost repulsed, but at length succeeded in setting fire
to the doors. The church was filled with smoke; a turbulent crowd
rushed wildly in. Savonarola saw his people fall dead beside him on the
altar steps, and, taking up the Sacrament, he fled to the Greek
library, where the messengers of the Signoria came and arrested both
himself and Fra Domenico. It was in the fierce fight that ensued when
the enemies poured in, laying hands sacrilegiously on every thing
sacred, that Baccio made the vow that if he were saved this peril, he
would take the habit–a vow which certainly was not made in a cowardly
spirit, he fighting to the death, and then espousing the losing cause.
[Footnote: Gino Capponi, lib. vi. chaps. i. and ii., and Padre
Marchese, San Marco, p. 147 et seq.]
Then came that sad 23rd of May, the eve of the Ascension, when three
martyrs went calmly to their death beneath the shadow of the old
palace, amidst the insults of an infuriated crowd, and Arno’s yellow
waters received their ashes. [Footnote: Capponi, chap. ii. p. 253.]
[Illustration: SAVONAROLO AS PETER MARTYR. BY FRA BARTOLOMMEO. In
the Accademia delle Belle Arti, Florence.]
After the death of Savonarola the party had many defaulters; but
Baccio, the Delia Robbias, Credi, Cronaca, and many other artists, were
faithful, and even showed their grief by abandoning for a time the arts
they loved. “It almost seemed as if with him they had lost the sacred
flame from which their fervid imagination drew life and aliment."
[Footnote: Marchese, San Marco, lib. iii. p. 261.]
While all these events had been taking place, Baccio had worked as
often as his perturbed spirit would allow, at a great fresco of the
Last Judgment, in a chapel of the cemetery of S. Maria Nuova. A
certain Gerozzi, di Monna Venna Dini, gave him the commission, and as
far as he had gone, the painter had given entire satisfaction. This
fresco, his first as far as is known, shows Baccio’s style as fully as
his later ones. We have here his great harmony of form, and intense
suggestiveness in composition. The infinity of heaven is emblematised
in circles of saints and cherubim around the enthroned Christ. The
cross, a link between heaven and earth, is borne by a trinity of
angels; S. Michael, as the avenging spirit, stands a powerful figure in
the foreground dividing the saved from the lost; the whole composition
forming a heavenward cross on an earthly foundation. There are no caves
and holes of torture with muscular bodies writhing within them; but in
the despairing figures passing away on the right, some with heads bowed
on clasped hands, others lifting up faces and arms in a vain cry for
mercy, what suggestions there are of infinite remorse!–more dignified
far than the distorted sufferers in the torture pits of previous
masters. These are just indicated by two demons, and a subterranean
fire behind the unblest souls. Miss Owen, [Footnote: Art Schools of
Christendom, edited by Prof. Ruskin.] speaking Mr. Ruskin’s
sentiments, calls this a great falling off from Giotto and Orcagna’s
conceptions; but though theirs may be more powerful and terrible, a
greater suggestion of Christian religion is here.
They, and later, Michelangelo, flung Dante’s great struggling soul in
tangible forms upon the walls, and embodied his poem, awful, grand, and
earnest, with all the human passion intensified into human suffering.
Fra Bartolommeo shows the Christian spirit; his faces look beyond the
present judgment, and, instead of wrath, mercy is the predominating
idea. It is like the difference in spirit between the Old Testament and
the New.
The painter’s reverence of Fra Angelico, and estimation of the divinity
of art, is shown by Fra Angelico being placed among the saints of
heaven on the right of the Saviour.
Leonardo’s instructions for shading off a light sky will occur to any
one who studies the finely gradated tints mingling with the clouds
around the celestial group. But grand as the fresco is, and interesting
as it must have been to the artist at this time, when thoughts of
Savonarola mingled with every stroke, he felt he was not fulfilling his
true mission in the world. Drawn more and more to the convent, hallowed
to him by the memory of the martyr-friar, he was also more attuned to
thoughts of retirement by family bereavements–one young brother,
Piero, only being left to him out of the whole circle. The reluctance
to leave this youth alone may have deferred for a time his taking the
monastic vows; but having placed him under the guardianship of Santi
Pagnini, a Dominican, he consigned the Last Judgment to Mariotto
to finish, and leaving his worldly goods to his brother, took the habit
in the convent of S. Domenico, at Prato, on July 26th, 1500, two years
after first making the resolution. His year of probation over, he took
the final vows and became Fra Bartolommeo.
A document in S. Marco proves that he was possessed of worldly goods
when he entered, [Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap
xxvii.] among which were the house of his father in S. Pier Gattolini,
and the podere at Brozzi. Having once given himself up to monasticism,
Fra Bartolommeo would offer no half-service, his brushes were left
behind with all other worldly things, and here closes Baccio della
Porta’s first artistic career.
His sun was set only to rise again to greater brilliance in the future
as Fra Bartolommeo, a name famous for ever in the annals of art.
Four years had passed, and the monk had never touched a pencil, but his
mission in art was not fulfilled, and events were working towards that
end, for the spirit of art once awakened could not die either in that
convent or in that age.
His friend, Mariotto, kept him au courant in all the gossip of
art, and told him of the great cartoons of Leonardo and Michelangelo,
which he too went to see. They might have inspired him afresh, or
perhaps in advising Albertinelli he himself felt impelled to paint, or
possibly the visits of Raphael in 1504 influenced him.
Padre Marchese takes the conventional view, and says that Santi
Pagnini, the oriental scholar and lover of art, came back to S. Marco
in 1504 as prior, and used not only his entreaties, but his authority,
to induce Fra Bartolommeo to recommence painting. However this may be,
it is certain that when Bernardo del Bianco, who had built a beautiful
chapel in the Badia from Rovezzano’s designs, wished for an altar-piece
worthy of its beauty, which he felt no hand could execute so well as
that of the Frate–he yielded to persuasion, and the Vision of S.
Bernard was begun. The contract is dated 18th November, 1504; a
part payment of sixty florins in gold was made 16th of June, 1507.
[Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie, iii. vol. ii. p. 594.]
This picture, now in the Belle Arti of Florence, is so much injured by
re-painting that some parts seem even crude. The saint is on his knees
writing, while the vision of the Virgin and Child stands poised in air
before him; she inspires his pen, and the infant Christ gives His
blessing on the work. There is great spirituality and ecstasy in St.
Bernard’s face, his white robe contrasts well with two saints behind
him, which carry out Fra Bartolommeo’s favourite triangular grouping,
and with a rich harmony of colour balance his white robe.
The Virgin is drawn with great nobility and grace, her drapery
admirably majestic, yet airy, and a sweet, infantile playfulness
renders the Child charming. The angels beneath the Virgin’s feet are
lovely, but the group of seraphs behind are the least pleasing of all.
They are of the earth, earthy, and seem reminiscences of the Florentine
maidens the artist met in the streets. Possibly this is the part most
injured by the restorer’s hand. The colouring of the two saints behind
S. Bernard-one in a green robe with bronze-gold shades, and the other
blue and orange-is very suggestive of Andrea del Sarto, and seems to
render probable Rosini’s assertion that the Frate “taught the first
steps of this difficult career to that artist who alone was called
’senz’ errori.’”
Having once retaken the brush, Fra Bartolommeo recovered his former
skill and fame; a beautiful specimen of this period is the Meeting
of Christ with the Disciples of Emmaus (1506), a fresco in a lunette
over the door of the refectory at S. Marco; in which he combines a
richness of colouring rarely obtained in fresco, with a drawing which
is almost perfect. Fra Niccolò della Magna, who was prior in that year,
and left in 1507 to become Archbishop of Capua, sat for one of the
saints. Contemporory with this may be dated also the figure of the
Virgin, painted for Agnolo Doni, now in the Corsini gallery in Rome.
Giovanni de’ Medici also gave him a commission.
Meanwhile the S. Bernard was not paid for. Fra Bartolommeo
priced it at 200 ducats, and the convent being the gainer by his works,
took his own valuation. Bernardo offered only eighty ducats; the Frati
were indignant, and called in the Abbot of the Badia as umpire; he
being unable to move Bernardo, retired from office; then a council of
friends was resolved on, in which Mariotto was for the painter, and
Lorenzo de Credi for the purchaser; but this also failed.
It was next proposed to submit the question to the Guild of Druggists
(arte degli speziali), which included at that time also doctors
and painters; but the convent, refusing lay judgment, took the offer of
Francesco Magalotti, a relative of Bernardo, who priced it at 100
ducats, and the monks had to be satisfied. The dispute ended July 17th,
1507. [Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap, xxvii. p.
245, and Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., vol. ii. pp. 42 to 45.]
All writers agree as to the fact of Fra Bartolommeo’s friendship with
Raphael, but very few are decided as to its date. Raphael was in
Florence in 1504, but then Fra Bartolommeo had not re-commenced
painting, and would have no works in the convent to excite his
admiration of the colouring. Padre Marchese, following Rosini and Padre
Luigi Pungeleoni, asserts that this intimacy was during Raphael’s
second visit in 1506, when he might have seen the newly-finished fresco
of The Disciples at Emmaus. It is undoubted that their intercourse
was beneficial to both. Raphael studied anew Leonardo’s principles of
colour under Fra Bartolommeo’s interpretation of them, and the Frate
improved his knowledge of perspective and harmony of composition. It is
said they worked together at some pictures, of which one is in France, and
another at Milan; but there is not sufficient evidence to prove this.
It is also thought that Fra Bartolommeo helped in the composition of
Raphael’s famous Madonna del Baldacchino, which is truly very
much in his style.
The year 1508 marks the Frate’s first acquaintance with the Venetian
school, which was not without its influence upon him. Frequent
interchange of visits took place between the Dominicans in the
different parts of Italy; and Fra Bartolommeo took the opportunity then
offered him of going to visit his brethren at Venice.
His namesake, Baccio di Monte Lupo, a sculptor who had fled from
Florence after the death of Savonarola, and who had fought side by side
with Baccio in the siege of S. Mark’s church, was in Venice at that
time, working on the tomb of Benedetto da Pesaro in the church of the
Frati, and he was only too delighted to show the beauties of the Queen
of the Adriatic to an artistic mind. Tintoretto was not yet born;
Titian was only just rising into fame, though his style had not yet
become what it was after Giorgione’s influence; but Fra Bartolommeo
must have found much that was sympathetic in the exquisite works of
Giovanni Bellini and his school, and much to admire in the glorious
colouring of Giorgione.
Father Dalzano, the vicar of the monastery of S. Peter Martyr at
Murano, gave the Florentine monk a commission for a picture of the
value of seventy or 100 ducats. Not having time to paint this during
his stay, he promised to execute it on his return to Florence, and the
vicar paid him in advance twenty-eight ducats in money and colours; the
rest was to be raised by the sale of some MS. letters from S. Catherine
of Siena, which a friend of Father Dalzano near Florence held in
possession.
Fra Bartolommeo, having brought home from the Venetian school a new
impulse for painting, and wishing to diffuse the religious influence of
art more widely, desired to enlarge his atelier and school at San
Marco. His only assistants in the convent were Fra Paolino of Pistoja,
and one or two miniaturists, who were only good at missals. Fra Paolino
(born 1490) took the vows at a very early age, and was removed to
Florence from Prato with Fra Bartolommeo. He was the son of a painter,
Bernardino di Antonio, but though he learned the first principles from
him, his real art was imbibed from the Frate, under whom, together with
Mariotto, he worked for years.
But this youthful scholar was not enough for Fra Bartolommeo’s new
energies. He pined for his old friend, Mariotto, who could follow out
his designs in his own style so closely, that an unpractised eye could
not see the difference of hand; and such was his influence on the
rulers of the order, that they allowed a most unique partnership to be
entered into.
The parties were, Albertinelli on one side, and the convent and Fra
Bartolommeo on the other. The partners to provide the expenses, and the
profits to be divided between the convent and Mariotto; the vow of
poverty not allowing Fra Bartolommeo as an individual any personal
share. This began in 1509 and lasted till 1512. The inventory of the
profits and the division made when the partnership was dissolved, given
entire by Padre Marchese, [Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie,
&c., vol. ii.] are very interesting. The two artists had separate
monograms to distinguish the pictures which were specially their own,
besides which the monk signed his with the touching petition, “orate
pro pictore,” his friend merely Latinising his name; the works
painted together were signed by the combined monograms. Before setting
a hand to anything else, the Frate fulfilled his engagement to the
Venetian prior, for whom he painted the Eternal in Heaven,
surrounded by saints and angels; but of this we will speak later.
During the interval between the second and third partnership of this
incongruous pair of friends, the life of Albertinelli had been very
different from that of the Frate. So distressed was he at losing Baccio
that he was quite wild for a time. His passions being unruled, that of
grief took entire possession of him. In his despair he vowed to give up
painting; he declared that he would also become a monk, if it were not
that he now hated them more than ever; besides, he was a Pallesco, and
could not desert his party.
After a time, however, he calmed down, and, looking on his friend’s
unfinished fresco of the Last Judgment as a legacy from him,
began to work at it as a kind of obligation till the occupation wove
its own charm, and he steadily devoted himself to art again, much to
the satisfaction of good Gerozzi Dini, who was in great perturbation,
and declared there was not another hand but his in Florence which could
finish it; and also to the relief of Fra Bartolommeo himself, who,
having received money on account, was troubled in conscience lest it
should remain unfinished. There remained only some figures to put in
the terrestrial group, all the celestial portions having been finished
by the Frate; but they are very well drawn figures, with a good deal of
expression in them. Several are likenesses, amongst whom are Dini and
his wife, Bugiardini, the painter’s pupil, and himself. Most of these
are now destroyed by the effects of damp.
Mariotto left Fra Bartolommeo’s house in S. Pier Gattolini, and took a
room in Gualfonda–now Via Val Fonda–a street leading towards the
fortress, built by the Grand Duke Cosimo on the north of the city; and
here in time quite a school grew up under his tuition. Giuliano
Bugiardini was his head assistant rather than pupil; Francia Bigio,
then a boy, Visino, who afterwards went to Hungary, and Innocenzio da
Nicola, besides Piero, Baccio’s brother, were all scholars.
Albertinelli’s Bottega in Val Fonda gave some noble paintings to the
world, works independently his own, though Fra Bartolommeo’s influence
is traceable in most of them. The finest of these is the
Salutation, dated 1503–ordered for the Church of S. Martino,
and now the gem of the hall of the Old Masters in the Uffizi Gallery–a
work which alone has been able to mark him for all time as a great
master.
So simple is the subject, and yet so grand the proportions, and in the
figures there is such majesty of maternity and dignity of womanhood! A
decorated portico, with the heavens behind it, forms the background to
the two noble women, in one of whom is expressed the gracious sympathy
of an elder matron with the awful, mysterious joy of the younger.
The colouring, perfectly harmonised, is the most masterly blending of a
subdued tone with soft yet brilliant and shows a deep study of the
method of Leonardo.
The predella has an Annunciation, Nativity, and
Circumcision; all showing the same able style, but more injured
by time than the picture.
Another charming painting of this period is the Nativity at the
Pitti, a round, on panel. The Madonna is not quite so noble as
that of the Salutation, but the limbs of the child are beautifully
rounded. There is a pretty group of three angels singing in the sky; the
landscape is as minute in detail as those his old fellow-pupil Piero used
to paint in Cosimo’s studio.
In 1504-5 Fra Bartolommeo called upon him for a deed of friendship,
which proves that, whatever biographers (building up theories on a word
or two in Vasari) may say of his want of steadiness, the friend who
knew him best had supreme trust in him. Santi Pagnini, having been
removed to Siena as prior, Fra Bartolommeo made Mariotto guardian and
instructor of his young brother Piero, signing a contract that Mariotto
was to have the use and management of all estates and possessions of
Piero, which included several poderi in the country, as well as
the house at the Porta Romana (S. Pier Gattolini). In return
Albertinelli was to keep Piero in his house, teach, clothe, and provide
for him, not, however, being obliged to give him more than “sette
(seven) soldi” a month. Albertinelli was also to have a mass said
yearly in the Church of S. Pier Gattolini for the soul of Paolo the
muleteer, and to use two pounds of wax candles thereat. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, Memorie, vol. ii. pp. 36, 37.] The contract was
signed from 1st January, 1505, and was to last till 1st January, 1511.
It appears that this brother Piero was a great trouble to the Frate,
being of a bizarre disposition, and addicted to squandering money; he
sold some possessions for much less than their worth, [Footnote:
Private communication from Sig. G. Milanesi.] which probably accounts
for the singular contract of guardianship. He did not show enough
talent to become a painter, and took priests’ orders later.
About this time Fra Bartolommeo recommenced work, and while he was
painting the triptych for Donatello’s Madonna (the miniature
Nativity and Circumcision in the Uffizi), Albertinelli was at work
in the convent of the Certosa, at a Crucifixion in fresco. The
painting is extant in the chapterhouse, and is a very fair and
unrestored specimen of his best style. The Virgin and Magdalen are very
purely conceived figures; the idea of the angels gathering the blood
falling from the wounded hands of the crucified Saviour is very tender;
there is a great brightness of colouring, and a greenish landscape almost
Peruginesque in feeling. Some of his pupils worked with him at the
Certosa, and nearly brought their master into trouble.
They were not more content with convent fare than was Davide
Ghirlandajo, when the only delicacy supplied him at Vallombrosa was
cheese; and to revenge themselves, they stole round the cloister after
the circular sliding panels by which the rations were sent into the
monks’ cells were filled, and feasted on the meals made ready for the
good brothers. Great confusion ensued in the convent, the monks
accusing each other of the theft; but when they found out the real
culprits, they made a compromise, promising double rations if the
artists would hasten their work and leave them their daily dole in
peace.
The fresco is dated 1506. The same year produced the fine picture now
in the Louvre, which was painted for the church of S. Trinità on the
commission of Zanobio del Maestro.
The Madonna, stands on a pedestal, with S. Jerome and S. Zenobio
in front, while episodes from their lives are brought in like distant
echoes in the background. [Footnote: S. Zenobio was the first bishop of
Florence, and is the patron saint of that city.]
The nuns of S. Giuliano employed him to paint two pictures, both of
which are now in the Belle Arti. One is an altarpiece; the Madonna
enthroned, with the Divine Child in her arms. Era Bartolommeo’s
idea of an angel-sustained canopy is here, but the angels hold it up
from the outside instead of the inside. Before her are S. John the
Baptist, S. Julian, S. Nicholas, and S. Dominic. The S. Julian has a
great similarity to the S. Michael of Perugino, and the S. John, by its
good modelling, shows the result of his studies from the antique in the
Medici garden.
For the same church he did the curious conventional painting of the
Trinity on a gold ground. The subject is inartistic, because
unapproachable; the attempt to paint that which is a deep spiritual
mystery degrades both the art and the subject; the latter because it
lowers it to human grasp, the former because it shows its powerlessness
to shadow forth the infinite. There is beautiful painting in the heads
of the angels, at the foot of the Cross, but the brilliancy of the gold
ground is overpowering to the colours, albeit he has balanced it by
reproducing Cosimo Roselli’s red-winged cherubs. Nothing but Fra
Angelico’s delicate tints can bear such a background. No doubt Piero,
Baccio’s brother, helped to lay on this gold, for one of the
stipulations in the contract with Mariotto was that he was to “metter
d’ oro ed altre cose di mazoneria” (to put on gold and other articles
of emblazonment).
It has been a great subject of conjecture at what part of his life
Albertinelli took the rash step of throwing up his art and opening a
tavern at Porta S. Gallo. Some say it was in his despair at Fra
Bartolommeo having taken the vows, but this is disproved by his having
at that time finished the Last Judgment, and taken pupils in Val
Fonda. Others assert that it was at the breaking up of the last
partnership in 1513, but there is no hiatus in his work at that time,
existing paintings being dated in 1513 and the following years till his
death, three years after.
Vasari, though not to be depended on in regard to dates–chronology not
being his forte–is generally right in the gossip and stories of the
lives near his own time, and it is by collateral evidence from his
pages that we are able to fix with more certainty 1508 or 1509 as the
time of this episode in Albertinelli’s life. In 1507 we find him as an
artist helping to value his friend’s picture, and mediating between the
convent and Bernardo del Bianco. [Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle,
vol. iii. chap. xvii. p. 544.] Now, in the ’Life of Andrea del Sarto,’
we read that Francia Bigio, Albertinelli’s pupil, made the acquaintance
of Andrea while studying the Cartoons in the Hall of the Council (this
was from 1506 to 1508), and as their friendship increased, Andrea
confided to Francia Bigio that he could no longer endure the
eccentricities of Piero di Cosimo, and determined to seek a home for
himself, and that Francia Bigio being also alone–his master Mariotto
Albertinelli having abandoned the art of painting–they
determined to share a studio and rooms. [Footnote: Vasari, vol. iii. p.
182.] The first works the partners undertook were the frescoes of the
Scalzo and the Servi, which were begun in 1509. Thus the date is
tolerably certain, especially as a gap occurs in Albertinelli’s works
at this time.
Sig. Gaetano Milanesi’s researches in the Archives have thrown a new
light on Mariotto’s motives, which were not entirely connected with
art; it was not that he was discouraged by adverse criticism, nor
wholly that, as time divided him from his friend, he felt he could
produce no great work away from his influence, but it was partly that
he had married a wife named Antonia, whose father kept an inn at S.
Gallo. It is possible the tavern came to him by way of dot, and
the above reasons making him discontented with art for a time, might
have induced him to carry on the business himself. Sig. Milanesi says a
document exists of a contract in which Mariotto’s name is connected
with a tavern, but that he has never been able to retrace it since the
first time he found it. It is his opinion that the whole story arose
from the fact of the wife’s family possessing this wine shop, and his
connection with it in that way.
But though Albertinelli passed off his pseudo-hostdom with bravado,
talking very wittily about it, the artistic vein was too strong within
him to be subdued; he soon gave up the flask and returned to the brush,
for in 1509, when his quondam pupil, Francia Bigio, was busy at the
Servi, we again find Mariotto’s hand in a painting of the
Madonna. The Virgin, holding a pomegranate in her hand, supports
with the other the Child, who stands on a parapet, and clings to the
bosom of his mother’s dress for support, in a truly natural way; the
infant Baptist stands by. The painting, signed, and dated 1509, is in
the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, but has been injured by repainting.
In spite of this, Messrs. Crowe and Cavalcaselle believe they perceive
Bugiardini’s hand in it.
In 1510 Albertinelli began one of his masterpieces, the
Annunciation for the company of S. Zenobio, now in the Belle
Arti. All his zeal for art was reawakened, he flung himself con
amore into this work, which, though in oil on panel, was painted on
the spot where it was intended to be placed, that the lights might be
managed with the best effect. He was imbued with Leonardo da Vinci’s
principle, that the greatest relief and force are to be combined with
softness, and wishing to bring this combination to a perfection which
never before had been reached, he depended greatly on the natural light
to further his design. [Footnote: Vasari, vol. ii. p. 469.]
The picture, although a great work of art, and the most laboured of all
his paintings, failed to satisfy the artist. He tried various
experiments, painting in and painting out, but never reaching his own
ideal. According to Leonardo, he was proving himself a good artist, one
of his principles being, “when his (an artist’s) knowledge and light
surpass his work so that he is not satisfied with himself or his
endeavours, it is a happy omen.” [Footnote: Leonardo da Vinci, Treatise
on Painting.]
The work as it stands is a noble one, though darkened by time having
brought out the black pigments used in the shades. The background is an
intricate piece of architecture with vaulted roof, showing that he too
had profited by Raphael’s instructions in perspective to Fra
Bartolommeo.
The Virgin is a tender sweet figure; indeed no artist has given more
gracious dignity to womanhood than Albertinelli, although his
detractors say his life showed no great respect for it. Above, the
Almighty is seen in a yellow light with a circle of angels and seraphs
around. It is strange how the realistic painters stopped at nothing,
not even the representation of the eternal in a human form. Is not this
the reason why art ceased about this time to be the interpreter of
religion, and found its true mission in being the interpreter of
nature? Who can draw one soul? How much more impossible then to depict
the incomprehensible soul in which all others have their being? The
utmost we can do is to give the indication of the spirit in the
expression of a face, and that so imperfectly that not two beholders
read it alike. Study Perugino and Raphael, see how they raise human
nature and etherealize it till we see the divinity of soul in the faces
of their saints and martyrs. But the moment they try to depict the
Almighty, or even his angels, they fall at once below humanity.
But to return to the Annunciation of Albertinelli. His impetuous
temper betrayed him even here; he fell into a dispute with his patrons,
who refused to pay the price he asked. The usual “trial by his peers"
was resorted to, Perugino, Granacci, and Ridolfo Ghirlandajo were
called into council to value it according to its merits.
On completing this picture the events we have related in the last
chapter took place, Fra Bartolommeo returned from Venice with his
enterprise renewed, and the convent partnership was commenced.
We now come to the studio of S. Marco, where the two friends, who had
dreamed together as boys, and worked together as youths, now laboured
jointly as men, bringing to light some of the finest works of art that
remain to us. During these three years Albertinelli’s star seems merged
in that of his senior, his hand is to be recognised in the lower parts
of a few altarpieces; but it is always difficult to distinguish the two
styles.
It was a very busy atelier, for they had many patrons. Bugiardini was
still Mariotto’s head assistant, and Fra Paolino, and one or two other
monks, worked under Fra Bartolommeo, besides pupils of both, among whom
were Gabriele Rustici and Benedetto Cianfanini.
The studio was on the part of the convent between the cloister and Via
del Maglio, [Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie, vol. ii. p. 69.]
and we can quite picture its interior. There stands the lay figure on
which Fra Bartolommeo draped the garments that take such majestic folds
in his works; [Footnote:  Fra Bartolommeo was the inventor of the
jointed lay figure.] there are several casts and models in different
parts of the room; grand cartoons in charcoal hang on the walls, like
those we see to this day in the Uffizi and Belle Arti. So many of these
masterly sketches are the Frate’s and so few are Mariotto’s that we may
presume the former was in most instances the designer. And to what
perfection he carried design! Not a figure was drawn except its lines
harmonised with the geometric rhythm in the artist’s mind. His groups
fall by nature into kaleidoscopic figures of circles, triangles,
ellipses, crosses, &c. Not a cartoon was sketched in which the lights
and shadows were not as gradated and finished as a painting, although
they were merely drawn with charcoal. The following was the method of
work in the “bottega.” The panels were prepared with a coating of
plaster of Paris, over which, when dry, a coat of under colour, ground
in oil, was passed. The preparing of the panels fell to the work of one
of the monk scholars, Fra Andrea.[Footnote: The books of the convent
have a note of payment to Fra Bartolommeo for 20th March, 1512, “per
parte di lavoro di Fra Andrea converse per mettere d’oro, et ingessare
alle tavole nella bottega in diversi lavori” (Padre Marchese,
Memorie, lib. ii. chap. in. p. 70).] Then the master made his
sketch in white, or “sgraffito” (i.e. graven on the plaster), as in the
architectural lines of the pictures of patron saints in the Uffizi, and
the Marriage of S. Catherine in the Pitti Palace; he also put in
the shadows in monochrome. But the assistants, who were skilled
artists, were called to put broad level tints of local colour on the
buildings, &c., the master himself finishing the faces. No doubt
Albertinelli was often deputed to the study of the lay figure and its
drapery. Where he assisted, the monogram, a cross with two rings and
the joint names, marked the work, as en a panel of 1510 in Vienna, and
another at Geneva.
Fra Bartolommeo only imitated Leonardo in his intense force and soft
gradations; the general thinness of colour is opposed to his system. He
followed him, however, in his method of painting his shadows with the
brush, instead of “hatching” them; he used the same yellowish ground,
and “sfumato,” [Footnote: Eastlake’s Materials for a History of Oil
Painting, vol. ii. chap. iv.] i.e. the imperceptible softening of the
transition in half-lights and shadows; it was effected by glazes, and is
not adapted to a thin substance. The great mistake in Fra Bartolommeo’s
system was the preparing his paintings like cartoons, and using asphaltum
or lamp-black for outlines and shadows; this in process of time destroys
the super-colour, and gives a general blackness to the painting.
The same kind of talk went on here as in modern studios. When the
frame-maker came, Fra Bartolommeo would be vexed to see how much of his
work was hidden beneath the massive cornice, and would vow to dispense
with frames altogether, which he did in his S. Sebastian and
S. Mark, by painting an architectural niche round the subject
like a carving in relief.
The first work begun at the convent studio was the picture for Father
Dalgano of Venice, the subject of which is the Eternal Father in
Heaven, surrounded by seraphs and angels. Perhaps in this we have
the source of the motive of Albertinelli’s Annunciation. The
colouring is more brilliant than any of the Frate’s works before his
visit to Venice. Vasari says that in this picture Giorgione himself
could not have surpassed him in brilliancy. The saints, although nearly
level with the ground, are given celestial rank by the cherubs and
clouds below them. Fra Bartolommeo was dissatisfied with his angels,
which seemed merely lovely children, and seeking other forms, he
thought to picture them better under shapes which at a distance seem
only clouds, but nearer are full of angels’ faces, as in the S.
Bernard. But this idea, not having aesthetic beauty, was also
abandoned. [Footnote: Padre Marchese, I Puristi ed Accademici.]
The monks of S. Pietro at Murano did not hasten to claim their picture,
but sent two friars to negotiate about the price; they failed to agree,
and the work is now in the Church of S. Romano in Lucca.
Lucca has another exquisite picture of the same year in the Cathedral
of S. Martino, a Madonna and Child–a lovely ideal of joyful
infancy–beneath a veil suspended above her head by two angels. S. John
Baptist and S. Stephen support this airy composition like pillars,
their figures showing in strong relief against the dark shades; the
whole picture is intensely soft, and yet the outlines are perfectly
clear. This is valued at sixty ducats in the Libri di San Marco.
Next followed the Virgin and Child with four Saints, in S.
Marco, which is so fine that it has been taken for a Raphael, although,
owing to the use of lamp-black, it has now become very much darkened.
The Holy Family which he painted for Filippo di Averardo
Salviati, and which is now in Earl Cowper’s collection at Panshanger,
is an almost Raphaelesque work, and attains the greatest excellence in
art. The composition is his favourite triangle, touched in with the
flowing lines of the mother seated on the ground with the two children
before her. S. Joseph is in the background. The greatest softness of
flesh tints must have been perceptible when new, for, “in spite of the
abrasions produced by time, the delicate tones brought out by
transparent glazes fused one over another are apparent.” The landscape
with an echo subject of the flight into Egypt is thought by Crowe and
Cavalcaselle to be by Albertinelli.
In 1510 the partners had a large order from Giuliano da Gagliano, who,
on the 2nd November, 1510, and 14th January, 1511, paid, in two rates,
the sum of 154 ducats. The picture, which is Fra Bartolommeo’s own
painting, unfortunately cannot be traced.
In 1511 a long list of works are enumerated–a Nativity, valued
two ducats, a Christ bearing the Cross, and an Annunciation, sold
to the Gonfaloniere for six ducats–pictures which are dispersed in
England, Pavia, &c.; but the masterpiece of the time is the Marriage of
S. Catherine, now in the Louvre. The Florentine government bought it for
300 ducats in 1512, to present to Jacques Hurault, Bishop of Autun, who
came to Florence as envoy of Louis XII. He left it to his cathedral at
Autun, from whence, at the Revolution, it passed to the Louvre. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, Memorie, lib. iii. ch. iv. p. 77. Crowe and
Cavalcaselle, History of Painting, vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 452.]
Before it was sent away, Fra Bartolommeo made a replica of it, which is
now in the Pitti Palace. There is his favourite canopy supported by
angels; in this case they are beautifully foreshortened. The Virgin is
seated on a pedestal, holding by one arm an exquisitely moulded child
Jesus of about four years old, who is espousing S. Catherine of Siena,
kneeling at His feet on the left. A semicircle of saints group on each
side of the Virgin, and two angels, with musical instruments, are at her
feet; the upturned face of one is exquisitely foreshortened. The S. George
in armour is a powerful figure; and in S. Bartholomew, on the left, is
the same grand feeling which he afterwards brought to perfection in S.
Mark. The grace of the Virgin’s figure is not to be surpassed; if
Raphael’s Madonnas have more sentiment, this has more dignified grace.
He has remembered Leonardo’s precept, “that the two figures of a group
should not look the same way"; the contrast of the flowing lines in
these two forms is very lovely. The same contrast of lines, and yet
balance of form, is carried out in the two S. Catherines who form the
pyramid on each side of her, and in the varied characters of the
encircling group of saints. The deleterious use of lampblack has
spoiled the colouring; it, moreover, hangs in a bad light at the Pitti
Palace.
The original subject at the Louvre differs only in a few particulars
from this–the Virgin’s hand is on the child’s head instead of his arm,
and there are trifling differences in the grouping of the saints, the
semicircle being more rigidly kept. In this the flesh is thin and
uncracked, seeming imbedded in the surrounding colours; the lake
draperies are laid so thinly on the light ground, that the sketch can
be seen through the colour. [Footnote: Eastlake, Materials for a
History of Oil Painting, vol. ii. chap. iv. Crowe and Cavalcaselle
speak of the two paintings as unconnected with each other, and mention
the Pitti one as having unaccountably returned there after having been
given to some bishop. Is it not possible that the gift to a bishop
refers to the painting in the Louvre, and that the other is the replica
spoken of by Vasari, vol. ii. p. 452?]
There is a fine painting in the church of S. Caterina of Pisa, in the
chapel of the Mastiani family, Michele Mastiani having given the
commission, and paid thirty ducats, in October, 1511. It represents the
Madonna and Child seated on a base; the action is quiet and yet
vivacious; she is supported on each side by S. Peter and S. Paul,
figures as large as life, and even more noble than the ones in Rome.
The colouring has been much injured by a fire in the seventeenth
century, but is robust and harmonious. It is dated 1511.
On the 26th of November, 1510, Fra Bartolommeo had a commission from
Pier Soderini, then Gonfaloniere, to paint a picture for the Council
Hall. This was an unfortunate order; for Michelangelo and Leonardo da
Vinci had both been commissioned, neither of them finishing the works.
Fra Bartolommeo’s forms the third uncompleted painting; it exists still
in the form of a half prepared picture, the design being only shadowed
in monochrome, and this in spite of the payment on account of 100 gold
ducats in October, 1513. [Footnote: See Padre Marchese, Memorie,
documenti 5 and 6, vol ii. p. 603.] The reason of this is difficult to
assign, but it might lie in the fact that in 1512 Pier Soderini was
deposed and exiled by Giuliano de’ Medici, who assumed the government.
Another reason may have been the failure of Fra Bartolommeo’s health
after his journey to Rome.
In 1512 Santi Pagnini came back from Siena as prior of S. Marco, and he
having no love for Albertinelli, and perhaps a too jealous affection
for the artist Monk, caused the partnership to be dissolved, much to
Mariotto’s sorrow. The stock, of which a full list is given by Padre
Marchese, was divided, each taking the pictures in which they had most
to do. The properties–amongst which were the lay figures, easels,
casts, sketches, blocks of porphyry to grind colours on, &c. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, vol. ii. pp. 184, 185.]–were to be left for Fra
Bartolommeo’s use till his death, when they were to be divided between
his heirs and Albertinelli.
Mariotto returned disheartened to paint in his solitary studio. A
specimen of this period is the Adam and Eve, now at Castle
Howard, which is said to have been sketched in by Fra Bartolommeo. Eve
stands beneath the serpent-entwined tree, hesitating between the
demon’s temptations and Adam’s persuasions; the feeling and action are
perfectly expressed, the landscape is minute, but has plenty of
atmosphere and good colouring. In the same collection is a Sacrifice
of Abraham, in his best style. The drawing of the father,
reluctantly holding his knife to the throat of the boy, is extremely
true. Munich possesses a fine Annunciation. Characteristic
saints support the composition on each side, the nude S. Sebastian
being a markworthy study; an angel at his side presents the palm of
martyrdom. The picture has suffered much from bad cleaning.
In March, 1513, Albertinelli was commissioned by the Medici to paint
their arms, in honour of Leo X.’s elevation to the papacy. He made a
fine allegorical circular picture, in which the arms were supported by
the figures of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
It is probable that the dissolution of partnership marked the time of
Fra Bartolommeo’s visit to Rome. Fra Mariano Fetti, once a lay brother
of S. Marco, who had gone over to the Medici after Savonarola’s death,
and had kept so much in favour with Pope Leo X. as to obtain the office
of the Seals (del Piombo), [Footnote: An office for appending seals to
papal documents. Fra Mariano Fetti was elected to it in 1514, after
Bramante, the architect; Sebastiano del Piombo succeeded him.] was
pleased to be considered a patron of art; and welcoming Fra Bartolommeo
to Rome, he gave him a commission for two large figures of S. Peter and
S. Paul for his church of S. Silvestro. The cartoons of these pictures
are now in the Belle Arti of Florence; they are grand and majestic
figures, admirably draped. S. Peter holds his keys and a book; S. Paul
rests on his sword. In executing them in colour, he made some
improvements, especially in the head and hand of S. Peter, but he did
not remain long enough in Rome to finish them. “The colour of the first
(S. Peter) is reddish and rather opaque, the shadows of the head being
taken up afresh, and the extremities being by another painter. The head
of the second (S. Paul) is corrected ... but the tone is transparent,
and the execution exclusively that of Fra Bartolommeo. Whoever may have
been employed on the S. Peter, we do not fancy Raphael to have been
that person.” This is the opinion of Crowe and Cavalcaselle, [Footnote:
History of Painting, vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 460.] who,
however, seem to have little faith in any works of the Frate at Rome.
Against this we have the chronicles of quaint old Vasari and Rosini;
besides Baldinucci (ch. iv. p. 83), who says, “Raphael gave great
testimony of his esteem when, in after years, he employed his own brush
in Rome to finish a work begun by Fra Bartolommeo in that city and left
imperfect.”
His reason for leaving it imperfect was that of ill-health, the air of
Rome not agreeing with him. It seems he brought home malaria,
which never entirely left his system, the low fever returning every
year, and being only mitigated by a change to mountain air. He was well
enough at times to resume painting, but never in full health again.
That very summer he was sent to the Hospice of Sta. Maria Maddalena in
Pian di Mugnone, “dove pure non stette in ozio,” [Footnote: Rosini,
Storia della Pittura, chap, xxvii. p. 245.] where he did not
remain idle. The Hospice stands on a high hill, just the place for
Roman fever to disappear as if by magic for a time, and the patient,
relieved of his lassitude, set to work with energy, aided by Fra
Paolino and Fra Agostino. Many of his frescoes still remain, one of
which is a beautiful Madonna, on the wall of the infirmary,
which has since been sawn away from the wall and placed in the
students’ chapel in San Marco, Florence. [Footnote: A document of the
Hospice records these paintings, and dates them 10th of July, 1514.
Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., vol. ii. p. 610.]
He returned to Florence for the winter, and with renewed vigour
produced his San Sebastian, a splendid study from the nude,
which shows the influence upon him of Michelangelo’s paintings in Rome.
The picture was hung in San Marco, but its influence not proving
elevating to the sensuous minds of the Florentines, it was removed to
the chapter-house, and Gio Battista della Palla, the dealer who bought
so many of the best pictures of the time, purchased it to send to the
King of France. Its subsequent fate is not known, although Monsieur
Alaffre, of Toulouse, boasts of its possession. He says his father
bought three paintings which, in the time of the Revolution, had been
taken from the chapel of a royal villa near Paris [Footnote: Padre
Marchese, Memorie, &c., vol. ii. note p. 119.], one of which is
the S. Sebastian. In design and attitude it corresponds to the
one described by Vasari, the saint being in a niche, surrounded by a
double cornice. The left arm is bound; the right, with its cord
hanging, is upraised in attitude of the faith, so fully expressed in
the beautiful face. Three arrows are fixed in the body, which is nude
except a slight veil across the loins; an angel, also nude, holds the
palm to him. Connoisseurs do not think this painting equal in merit to
the other works of Fra Bartolommeo. It is true it may have been
overrated at the time, for the Frate’s chief excellence lay in the
grandeur of his drapery; the test of authenticity for a nude study from
him would lie more in the colouring and handling than in form.
In the early part of 1515 Fra Bartolommeo went to pay his old friend
Santi Pagnini, the Oriental scholar, a visit at the convent of San
Romano, in Lucca, of which he was now prior, passing by Pistoja on
February 17th to sign a contract for an altar-piece to be placed in the
church of San Domenico–a commission from Messer Jacopo Panciatichi.
The price was fixed at 100 gold ducats, and the subject to be the
Madonna and Child, with SS. Paul, John Baptist, and Sebastian. On his
arrival at Lucca he was soon busy with his great work, the Madonna
della Misericordia, for the church of San Romano. The composition
of this is full and harmonious. A populace of all ages and conditions,
grouped around the throne of the Madonna, beg her prayers; she,
standing up, seems to gather all their supplications in her hands and
offer them up to heaven, from which, as a vision, Christ appears from a
mass of clouds in act of benediction. Amongst the crowd of supplicants
are some exquisite groups. Sublime inspiration and powerful expression
are shown in the whole work. On his return he stayed again at Pistoja,
where he painted a fresco of a Madonna on a wall of the convent
of San Domenico; this, which has since been sawn from the wall, is at
present in the church of the same convent, and though much injured, is
a very light and tender bit of colouring and expression. It would seem
that the altar-piece for the same church, spoken of above, was never
finished, as no traces of it are to be found.
In October, 1515, we again find him at Pian di Mugnone; no doubt the
summer heats had induced a return of his fever. Here, again improving
in health, he painted a charming Annunciation in fresco, full of
life and eagerness on the part of the angel, and joy on the Virgin. He
did not remain long, for before the end of the autumn he returned to
visit the home of his youth and see his paternal uncle, Giusto, at
Lastruccio, near Prato. We can imagine the meeting between him and his
relatives, and how the little Paolo, son of Vito, being told to guess
who he was, said, “Bis Zio Bartolommeo,” [Footnote: Padre Marchese,
Memorie, &c., vol. ii. chap. vii. pp. 139, 140.] for which he
was much applauded. And when all the country relatives hoped to see him
again soon, how the Frate said that would be uncertain, because the
King of France had sent for him, and with what awe and family pride
they would have looked at him! But instead of going to France for the
glory of art, he was returning to Florence to sorrow. His life-long
friend, Mariotto Albertinelli, had been brought home on a litter from
La Quercia, near Viterbo, and now lay on his death-bed; and what his
life had lacked in religion, the prayers of his friend would go far to
atone for at his death.
While Fra Bartolommeo had been ailing, Albertinelli had also paid his
visit to the great city, and seen the two great rivals there. He went
from Viterbo, where he had been to finish colouring a work of the
Frate’s left unfinished, and also to paint some frescoes in the convent
of La Quercia, near that town. Being so near Borne, he was seized with
a great desire to see it, and left his picture for that purpose.
Probably Fra Bartolommeo had given him an introduction to his friend
and patron, for Fra Mariano Fetti gave Albertinelli a commission to
paint a Marriage of S. Catherine for his church, which he
completed, and then left Rome at once. Nothing is known of the
impressions made on him by the works of the two great masters, and
unfortunately his death occurred too soon after for his own style to
have given any evidence of their influence.
A Giostra, at Viterbo, proved a very strong attraction to his pleasure-
loving mind. This “Giostra,” which the translators of Vasari seem to
find so “obscure,” [Footnote: Vasari’s Lives, vol. ii. p. 470.]
was no doubt one of those festivals revived by the Medici, in which
mounted cavaliers ride with a lance at a suspended Saracen’s head,
striking it at full gallop. Desirous of appearing to advantage before
the eyes of her whom he had elected his queen, he forgot his mature
age, and rushed into the jousts with all the energies of a youth, but
alas! fell ill from over-exertion. Fearing the malarious air was not
good for him, he had a litter made, and was taken to Florence, where
Fra Bartolommeo placed himself at his bedside, soothing his last
moments, and leading him as far heavenward as he could. When
Albertinelli died, on the 5th of November, 1515, his friend followed
him to an honourable interment in S. Piero Maggiore.
After Albertinelli’s death, the Frate soared to greater heights of
genius than before.
The year 1516 marks the birth of his grandest masterpieces, first the
picture in the Pitti Palace called by Cavalcaselle a Resurrection, but
which is more truly an allegorical impersonation of the Saviour. It was
ordered by a rich merchant, Salvadore Billi, to place in a chapel which
Pietro Roselli had adorned with marbles in the church of the “Annunciata."
He paid 100 ducats in gold for it.
In its original state the picture was a complete allegory of Christ
as the centre of Religion, between two prophets in heaven, and four
apostles, two at each side–beneath him two angels support the world.
The prophets have been removed, and are placed in the Tribune of the
Uffizi; thus the picture as it stands loses half its meaning. The
Christ is a fine nude figure standing in a niche, and in it Fra
Bartolommeo has solved the problem of obtaining complete relief almost
in monochrome, so little do the lights of the flesh tints, and the warm
yellowish tinge of the background differ from each other. All the
positive colour is in the drapery of the saints, one in red and green,
and another in red and blue. The two angels are exquisitely drawn, and
contrast well in their natural innocence with the sentimental pair in
Raphael’s Madonna of the Baldacchino on the same wall of the
Pitti Palace.
San Marco was rich in frescoes of the Madonna and Child, two of
which are still in the chapel of the convent, and two in the Belle
Arti. Some of these are charming in expression, the children clinging
round the mother’s neck in a true childish abandon of affection.
What a tender feeling these monk artists had for the spirit of
maternity! Perhaps by being debarred from the contemplation of maternal
love in its humanity, they more clearly comprehended its divinity. Look
at the little round-backed nestling child in Fra Angelico’s Madonna
della Stella, imperfect as it is in form, the whole spirit of love
is in it. He does not give only the mother-love for the child, but the
child-love for the mother, which is more divine, and the same feeling
is seen in the Madonna of Fra Bartolommeo.
This year, 1516, also marks a journey to a hermitage of his order at
Lecceto, between Florence and Pisa. Here he painted a Deposition
from the Cross on the wall of the Hospice, and two heads of Christ
on two tiles above the doors.
A great many of his works are in private collections in Florence; one
of the most lovely is the Pietà, painted for Agnolo Doni, and
now in the Corsini Gallery at Rome.
All this time the great painting of the Enthronement of the
Virgin, ordered by Pier Soderini, before his exile, was still
unfinished. He seems to have taken it in hand again about this time,
but being attacked with another access of fever, again left it, and the
painting, shadowed in with black, remains in the Uffizi. Lanzi writes
of it that, imperfect as it is, it may be regarded as a true lesson in
art, and bears the same relation to painting as the clay model to the
finished statue, the genius of the inventor being impressed upon it.
Messrs. Crowe and Cavalcaselle [Footnote: History of Painting,
vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 455.] call this a Conception, but
Vasari’s old name of the Patron Saints of Florence seems to fit
it best. S. John the Baptist, S. Reparata, S. Zenobio, &c., stand in an
adoring group around the heavenly powers, S. Anna above the Virgin and
infant Christ forming a charming pyramidal group in the midst. The
whole thing is one of Fra Bartolommeo’s richest compositions. The
centre of the three monks on the left is said to be a portrait of Fra
Bartolommeo himself, and to be the original from which the only known
portrait of him is taken (see Frontispiece). Fra Bartolommeo
left another work also unfinished, an apotheosis of a saint, which is
now at Panshanger. This is supposed to have been a small ideal prepared
for a picture to celebrate the canonisation of S. Antonino, which Leo
X. had almost promised the brethren of S. Marco on his triumphant entry
in 1515. The work, if it had been painted in the larger form, would
have been a perfect masterpiece of composition, “a very Beethoven
symphony in colour,” if we may judge from the sketch at Panshanger,
where a living crowd groups round the bier of the archbishop, and life,
earnestness, harmony, and richness, are all intense.
So ill was Fra Bartolommeo in 1517 that he was ordered to take the
baths at San Filippo, thence he went for the last time to Pian di
Mugnone, where he painted a Vision of the Saviour to Mary
Magdalen, above the door of the chapel. The two figures, nearly
life-size, are at the door of the cave sepulchre. Mary has just
recognised her Lord, and in her ecstasy flings herself forward on her
knees before him. The Saviour is a dignified figure semi-nude, with a
white veil wrapped around him.
In the Pitti Palace, a charming Pietà of Fra Bartolommeo’s
occupies a place near the Pietà of Andrea del Sarto, the two
pictures forming a most interesting contrast of style. The kneeling
Virgin and S. John support the head of the prostrate Saviour, S.
Catherine and Mary Magdalen weep at his feet, the latter in an agony of
grief crouches prone on the ground hiding her face. The colouring is
extremely rich, broad masses of full-tone melting softly into deep
shadows. The handling in the flesh-tones of the dead Saviour, as well
as the modelling of form, are most masterly. It is generally supposed
that this was the picture which Bugiardini is said to have coloured
after the master’s death; but there is much divergence among Italian
authors both as to whether this was the painting spoken of, and also as
to the meaning of Vasari’s words, he using the phrase “finished” in one
place, and “coloured” in another. For charm of colouring and depth of
expression, the Pietà is the most lovely of all the Frate’s
works; therefore Bugiardini who was mediocre, could not have
outdone his great master. It was not coloured by him. Bocchi
[Footnote: Bocchi, Bellezze di Firenze, p. 304.] says there were
two other figures, S. Peter and S. Paul, in the picture, where a
meaningless black shadow stretches across the background; but they were
erased by the antique restorer because they were “troppo deboli.” Is it
not likely that if Bugiardini had any hand in the work, it was to
finish these figures?
Returning in the autumn to Florence, Fra Bartolommeo caught a severe
cold, the effects of which were heightened by eating fruit, and after
four days’ extreme illness he died on October 8th, 1517, aged 42.
The monks felt his death intensely, and buried him with great honour in
San Marco.
He left to art the most valuable legacy possible–a long list of
masterpieces in which religious feeling is expressed in the very
highest language. In all his works there is not a line or tint which
transgresses against either the sentiment of devotion, or the rules of
art. He stands for ever, almost on a level with the great trio of the
culmination, “possessing Leonardo’s grace of colour and more than his
industry, Michelangelo’s force with more softness, and Raphael’s
sentiment with more devotion;” yet with just the inexpressible want of
that supernatural genius which would have placed him above them all.
His legacy to the world is a series of lessons from the very first
setting of his ideal on paper to its finished development. The germ
exists in the charcoal sketches at the Belle Arti and Uffizi; the
under-shadowing of the subject is seen in the Patron Saints at
the Uffizi.
Many of his drawings are not to be traced. Some were used by Fra
Paolino, his pupil, who at his death passed them to Suor Plautilla
Nelli, a nun in Sta. Caterina, Florence (born 1523, died 1587). When
Baldinucci wrote his work, he said 500 of these were in the possession
of Cavaliere Gaburri.
Of these, little more than the names have come down to us. Vasari
speaks of Benedetto Cianfanini, Gabbriele Rustici, and Fra Paolo
Pistojese; Padre Marchese mentions two monks, Fra Andrea and Fra
Agostino. Of these, the two first never became proficient, and have
left no works behind them. Fra Andrea seems to have been more a
journeyman than scholar, being employed to prepare the panels and lay
on the gilding. Fra Agostino assisted his master, and Fra Paolo in the
subordinate parts of a few frescoes, especially at Luco in the Mugnone.
Fra Paolo is the most known, but chiefly as a far-off imitator of Fra
Bartolommeo, without his mellowness of execution. His pictures are
mostly from his master’s designs, which were left him as a legacy, and
this ensures a good composition.
He was born at Pistoja in 1490; his father, Bernardino d’ Antonio del
Signoraccio, a second-rate artist, taught him the first principles of
art. His knowledge of drawing caused him to be noticed by Fra
Bartolommeo, when at a very early age he entered the order. He was
removed from Prato to San Marco, Florence, in 1503; and here he found
another friend who assisted his artistic tendencies. This was Fra
Ambrogio della Robbia, [Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., lib.
in. chap. ii. p. 246.] who taught him to model in clay; a specimen of
his work exists in the Church of Sta. Maddalena in Pian di Mugnone,
where are two statues of S. Domenico and Mary Magdalen by his hand.
His best work is a Crucifixion at Siena, dated 1516, which has
been thought to be Fra Bartolommeo’s; but though that master was asked
to go and paint it as a memorial of a certain Messer Cherubino Ridolfo,
his many occupations prevented his accepting the commission, and his
disciples, Fra Paolo and Fra Agostino, went in his place. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., lib. in. chap. ii. p. 251.] Possibly the
master supplied the design, which is very harmonious. The Virgin and S.
John stand on each side of the cross, and Saint Catherine of Siena and
Mary Magdalen are prostrate before it. One or two of the female saints
are pleasing, but the nude figure of Christ is hard, exaggerated, and
faulty in drawing.
The artists got thirty-five lire for the work, though the record in the
archives allows that it was worth more. There is an Assumption
in the Belle Arti of Florence, of which the design is Fra
Bartolommeo’s, but the colouring Fra Paolo’s. It was painted for the
Dominican monks at Santa Maria del Sasso, near Bibbiena. The colouring
is hard and weak, the shadows heavy, and not fused well in the half
tints. Two monks on the left are tolerably life-like, probably they
were drawn from living models; the S. Catherine on the right is very
inferior.
The Belle Arti also possesses a Deposition from the Cross, which
Fra Bartolommeo had sketched out and left uncoloured at Pian di
Mugnone. In 1519 Fra Paolo finished it, and it presents the usual
disparity between the composition and colouring, the former being good,
the latter weak and crude. His best known works are a Nativity in the
Palazzo Borghese, a Madonna and Child with S. John Baptist in
the Sciarra Colonna, also in Rome; a Madonna and Child with S.
John in the Corsini Gallery, Florence, and another of the same
subject in the Antinori Palace. He painted also at San Gimignano, Pian
di Mugnone, and Pistoja, and died of sunstroke in 1547.
He had as a follower a Suor Plautilla Nelli, born 1523, daughter of a
noble Florentine, Piero di Luca Nelli. She took the vows at the age of
fourteen, in the convent of S. Caterina di Siena, in Via Larga (now
Cavour), Florence. Her sister, Suor Petronilla, in the same convent,
was a writer, and her life of Savonarola is still extant. Suor
Plautilla taught herself to paint. Legend says, that in order to study
the nude for a Christ, she drew from the corpse of a nun–which might
account for the weak stiffness of her design. Fra Paolo, though there
is no record of his having taught her, left her as a legacy the designs
and cartoons of Fra Bartolommeo, one of which, the Pietà, she
has evidently made use of in the painting in the Belle Arti. The
grouping is that of the Pietà of Fra Bartolommeo, now in the
Pitti, of which she must have had the original sketch, for she has put
in the two saints in the background, which have been painted out in
that of the Frate, but we will give her the entire credit of the
colouring, which is extremely crude; the contrasting blues and yellows
are in inharmonious tones, the shading harsh, and the whole picture
wanting in chiaroscuro. The Corsini Gallery, Florence, has a Virgin
and Child by her.
The scholars of Mariotto Albertinelli were much more important in the
annals of art, the principal ones being Bugiardini, Francia Bigio,
Visino, and Innocenza d’ Imola.
Giuliano Bugiardini should be called the assistant rather than the
scholar of Albertinelli, being older than his master. He was born in
1471 in a suburb outside the Via Faenza, Florence, and was placed in
the shop of Domenico Ghirlandajo, where his acquaintance with
Michelangelo–begun in the Medici Gardens–ripened into intimacy, and
he was employed by him in the Sistine Chapel. Giuliano had that happily
constructed mind which, with an ineffable content in its own works,
will pass through life perfectly happy in the feeling that in reaching
mediocrity it has achieved success. Not only wanting talent to produce
better works, he lacked also the faculty of perceiving where his own
were faulty, and having a great aptitude for copying the works of
others, he felt himself as great as the original artists. Michelangelo
was always amused with his naïve self-conceit, and kept up a friendship
with him for many years. He even went so far as to sit to Bugiardini
for his likeness, at the request of Ottaviano de’ Medici. Giuliano,
having painted and talked nonsense for two hours, at last exclaimed, to
his sitter’s great relief, “Now, Michelangelo, come and look at
yourself; I have caught your very expression.” But what was
Michelangelo’s horror to see himself depicted with eyes which were
neither straight nor a pair! The worthy artist looked from his work to
the original, and declared he could see no difference between them, on
which Michelangelo, shrugging his shoulders, said, “It must be a defect
of nature,” and bade his friend go on with it. This charming portrait
was presented to Ottaviano de’ Medici, with that of Pope Clement
VII., copied from Sebastian del Piombo, and is now in the Louvre.
Bugiardini’s works always take the style of other masters. There is a
Madonna in the Uffizi, and one in the Leipsic Museum, both in
Leonardo’s style, with his defects exaggerated. The former is a sickly
woman in a sentimental attitude, the child rather heavy, the colouring
is bright and well fused; he has evidently adopted the method which he
had seen Albertinelli use in his studio.
During a stay in Bologna he painted a Madonna and Saints as an
altar-piece for the church of S. Francesco, besides a Marriage of S.
Catherine, now in the Bologna Pinacoteca. The composition of this
is not without merit; the child Jesus seated on his mother’s knees,
gives the ring to S. Catherine, little S. John stands at the Virgin’s
feet, S. Anthony on her left. The colouring is less pleasing, the flesh
tints too red and raw.
A round picture in the Zambeccari Gallery, Bologna, shows him in
Michelangelo’s style. The Virgin is reading on a wooded bank, but looks
up to see the infant Christ greet the approaching S. John Baptist; this
is carefully, if rather hardly, painted. The lights in the Saviour’s
hair have been touched in with gold. The time of his stay in Bologna is
uncertain, but in 1525 he was in Florence, and drawing designs for the
Ringhiera with Andrea del Sarto. There is a document in the archives,
proving that on October 5th, 1526 Bugiardini was paid twenty florins in
gold for his share of the work. He obtained some rank as a portrait
painter, in spite of his failure in that of Michelangelo; and had
commissions from many of the celebrities of Florence. It was in
original composition that his powers failed him. Messer Palla Rucellai
ordered a picture from him of the Martyrdom of S. Catherine,
which he began with the intention of making it a very fine work indeed.
He spent several years in representing the wheels, the lightnings and
fires in a sufficiently terrible aspect, but had to beg Michelangelo’s
assistance in drawing the men who were to be killed by those heavenly
flames; his design was to have a row of soldiers in the foreground, all
knocked down in different attitudes. His friend took up the charcoal
and sketched in a splendid group of agonised nude figures; but these
were beyond his power to shade and colour, and Tribolo made him a set
of models in clay, in the attitudes given by Michelangelo, and from
these he finished the work; but the great master’s hand was never
apparent in it. Bugiardini died at the age of seventy-five.
Of Francesco Bigi, commonly called Francia Bigio or Franciabigio, so
much is said in the following life of Andrea del Sarto, that a slight
sketch will suffice here. He was the son of Cristofano, and was born in
1482. His early studies were made in the Brancacci Chapel, and the
Papal Hall–where he drew from the cartoons in 1505-6, and the studio
of Mariotto Albertinelli, from which he passed to his partnership with
Andrea del Sarto in 1509. Thus it is that his first style was marked by
the influence of Mariotto and Fra Bartolommeo, while in his later works
he approximated more to Andrea del Sarto.
Two of his early paintings were placed in the church of S. Piero
Maggiore, one a Virgin and Child of great beauty. The infant
clasps its arms round its mother’s neck–a charming attitude–which
suggests a playful effort to hide from the young S. John, who is
running towards him, by nestling closer to the dearer resting place.
The picture is now in the Uffizi and has been long known as
Raphael’s Madonna del Pozzo. [Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle,
History of Painting, vol. iii. chap. xv. p. 501.] No greater
testimony to Francia Bigio’s excellence can be given than the frequency
of his works being mistaken for those of Raphael, but the influence of
his contemporaries was always strong upon him. The Annunciation,
painted for the same church, is also described by Vasari as a carefully
designed work, though somewhat feeble in manner. The angel is lightly
poised in air, the Virgin kneeling before a foreshortened building. The
picture was lost sight of in the demolition of the church, but Crowe
and Cavalcaselle [Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle, History of
Painting, Vol. iii. p. 500.] believe they have discovered it in a
picture at Turin, the authorship of which is avowedly doubtful. They
mention, however, a celestial group of the Eternal Father in a cherub-
peopled cloud, sending his blessing in the form of a dove, with a ray
of glory. Surely if this be the one described by Vasari [Footnote:
Vasari, vol. iii. p. 336] so minutely, he would not have omitted a part
of the subject so important to the picture.
In 1509 we may presumably date the partnership with Andrea del Sarto,
that being about the time when they began to work together in the
Scalzo. Francia Bigio painted some frescoes in the church of S. Giobbe,
behind the Servite Monastery. A Visitation was in a tabernacle
at the corner of the church, and subjects from Job’s life on a pilaster
within it: these have long ago disappeared. The altar-piece of the
Madonna and Job, which he painted in oil for the same church,
has been more fortunate, as it still exists in the Tuscan School in the
Uffizi. Though much injured, it shows his earlier style. The Calumny
of Apelles in the same gallery is a curious picture. It is hard and
dull in colouring, the prevailing tone being a heavy drab; there are
several nude figures, of doubtful forms as to beauty of drawing, the
flesh is painted in a smooth glazed style, without relief or
tenderness.
Francia Bigio shines more in fresco than in oil; his hardness is less
apparent, and he gains in freedom and brilliance of colouring in the
more congenial medium. The finest of his frescoes is, unfortunately,
spoiled by his own hand, and remains as a memorial of his genius and
hasty temper. I allude to the Sposalizio (A.D. 1513) in the
courtyard of the Servite church, where Andrea did his series of
frescoes from the life of Filippo Benizzi. The composition is grand and
carefully thought out, the colouring bright and pleasing; perhaps in
emulating Andrea’s luxurious style of drapery he has gone a little too
far, and crowded the folds. The bridegroom is a noble figure, and shows
in his face his gladness in the blossoming rod. A man in the foreground
breaks a stick across his knees. The commentators of Vasari have taken
this to emblematize the Roman Catholic legend of the Virgin having
given rods to each of her suitors, and chosen him whose rod blossomed.
Graceful women surround the Virgin, but there is perhaps a too marked
sentimentality about these which suggests a striving after Raphael’s
style. There is, however, a great touch of nature in a mother with a
naughty child, who sits crying on the ground, much to the mother’s
distress. Francia Bigio commenced this in Andrea’s absence in France,
which so excited his former comrade’s emulation that he did his
Visitation in great haste, to get it uncovered as soon as
Francia Bigio’s. In fact, Andrea’s works were ready by the date of the
annual festa of the Servites, and the monks, being anxious to uncover
all the new frescoes for that day, took upon them to remove the
mattings from that of Francia Bigio as well, without his permission,
for he wished to give a few more finishing touches. So angry was he, on
arriving in the cloister, to see a crowd of people admiring his work in
what he felt to be an imperfect condition, that in an excess of rage he
mounted on the scaffolding which still remained, and, seizing a hammer,
beat the head of the Madonna to pieces, and ruined the nude figure
breaking the rod. The monks hastened to the scene in an uproar of
remonstrance, the frantic artist’s destructive hand was stayed by the
bystanders, but so deep was his displeasure that he refused to restore
the picture, and no other hand having touched it, the fresco remains to
this day a fine work mutilated. It shows him artistically in his very
best, and morally, at his worst, phase. In 1518, while Andrea was in
France, the monks of the Scalzo employed Francia Bigio to fill two
compartments in their pretty little cloister, where Andrea had
commenced his Life of S. John Baptist. These are spoken of more
at length in the life of that master, who on his return took the work
again in his own hands. In 1521 Bigio competed with Andrea and
Pontormo, in the Medici Villa at Poggio a Cajano; Andrea’s Cæsar
receiving Tribute occupies one wall of the hall, and Francia
Bigio’s Triumph of Cicero another. The subjects were selected by
the historian, Messer Paolo Giovio, Bishop of Nocera; it only remained
for the artists to make the most of the chosen themes. Francia Bigio
filled his background with a careful architectural perspective, and a
crowd of muscular Romans are grouped before it. This also was left
unfinished at the Pope’s death, and Allori completed it in 1582.
Francia Bigio, however, did many of the gilded decorations of the hall.
In the Dresden Gallery is a work, Scenes from the Life of David, signed
A. S., MDXXIII., and his monogram, a painting very much in the style of
Andrea del Sarto’s Life of Joseph. Reumont [Footnote: Life of
Andrea del Sarto, p. 138 et seq.] claims it as the joint work of Andrea
and Francia Bigio, founding his opinion on the letters A. S. before the
date; but the letters mean only Anno salutis, and are used in
very many of Francia Bigio’s signed paintings. He had the commission
from Gio Maria Benintendi in 1523. It is one of those curious pictures
which have many scenes in one–a style which militates greatly against
artistic unity. On the right is David’s palace, on the left Uriah’s;
David is at his door watching Bathsheba and her maidens bathing. In the
centre is the siege of Rabbah; another well-draped group represents
David receiving Uriah’s homage. In the foreground David gives wine to
Uriah at a banquet. There is careful painting and ingenious
composition, but a less finished manner of colouring than in Andrea’s
Joseph, which was painted about the same time for Pier Borgherini.
Like Ridolfo Ghirlandajo, Francia Bigio fell off in his later style,
partly because his ambition failed him, and also because he began to
look on art as a means of livelihood–a motive which is certain death
to high art.
He was especially celebrated as a portrait painter, several of his
works having been attributed to Raphael. Among these are one at the
Louvre and one at the Pitti Palace, both portraits of a youth in tunic
and black cap, with long hair flowing over his shoulders; one in the
National Gallery, formerly in Mr. Fuller Maitland’s collection; the
portrait of a jeweller, dated A. S., MDXVI. in Lord Yarborough’s
gallery; that in the Berlin Museum, of a man sitting at a desk, dated
1522; and the likeness of Pier Francesco de Medici at Windsor–all of
which bear Francia Bigio’s monogram, often with the letters A. S.
(Anno salutis) before the date. He died on January 14th, 1525.
RIDOLFO (DI DOMENICO) BIGORDI, called GHIRLANDAJO, &c., was born on the
4th of January, 1483. Although not strictly a scholar, he is one of Fra
Bartolommeo’s principal followers. When quite a child he lost his
father, the famous Domenico, who died of fever, on January 11th, 1494;
his mother and uncle Benedetto only lived a few years after; and
Ridolfo, with his three sisters and two brothers, was left to the
guardianship of his uncle Davide.
Ridolfo was the only one who chose the family profession, and he became
the fourth painter of the name of Ghirlandajo.
Davide was not a perfect artist, although a good mosaicist, as his
works in the cathedrals of Orvieto, Siena, and Florence show, but he
was for many years Ridolfo’s only instructor. As the boy grew up
Ridolfo frequented those public schools of art before spoken of, the
Brancacci Chapel, and the study of the cartoons in the Papal Hall. Here
he secured the friendship not only of Granacci and Pier di Cosimo, but
of Raphael himself, with whom he visited Fra Bartolommeo in his
convent.
Raphael permitted Ridolfo to assist him in a Madonna for Siena, and
tried to persuade him to accompany him to Rome; but Ridolfo, like a
true Florentine, declined to go “beyond sight of the Duomo.”
His first great picture was done in 1504 for the church of San Gallo.
The subject was Christ Searing His Cross. His uncle Benedetto
had laboured on a similar picture, now in the Louvre, but Ridolfo’s is
a great improvement on this; the composition is well balanced, full of
force and animation, the weeping figures of the Maries and the
solicitude of S. Veronica are very lifelike, although he has not
entirely abolished his uncle’s coarseness in the scowling, low-typed
men. The Christ and the Virgin are, on the contrary, so refined as to
induce the supposition that this force of contrast was intentional; the
landscape is rather hard and crude in tone, the flesh tints smooth, and
the handling similar to that of Credi.
The original is now in Palazzo Antinori, Florence, but a replica, in
which he was assisted by Michele, his favourite pupil and adopted son,
is in Santo Spirito.
Vasari speaks of a Nativity, painted for the Cistercian monks of
Cestello; a beautiful composition, in which the Madonna adores the holy
child, S. Joseph standing near her; S. Francis and S. Jerome kneel in
adoration; the landscape was sketched from the hills near “La Vernia,"
where S. Francis received the stigmata.
Maselli says the picture was lost when the monastery changed hands, but
Messrs. Crowe and Cavalcaselle [Footnote: History of fainting, vol. in.
chap. xvi. pp. 523, 524.] believe they have found it in the Hermitage
at S. Petersburg, under Granacci’s name. It is possible that the
favourite pupil of his father and Ridolfo’s own friend may have
assisted him. The landscape is Raphaelesque, and might mark the time
when that master and Fra Bartolommeo influenced his style. His best
manner approached so nearly to that of the Frate, that had he continued
he would have very nearly rivalled his excellence.
His two masterpieces are now in the Uffizi; they were painted for the
Brotherhood of S. Zenobio, 1510, to stand one on each side of
Albertinelli’s Annunciation. One is S. Zenobio (the first
bishop and patron saint of Florence) restoring a dead child to
life; the other the Funeral Procession of the Saint passing the
Baptistery, where an elm tree, which had been withered, put forth
fresh leaves as the coffin of the bishop touched it. A marble column,
with a bronze tree in relief on it, stands on the spot as a memorial of
this miracle. In these two works Ridolfo Ghirlandajo proved the power
which was in him, but they are the culmination of his art; he never
surpassed, or indeed equalled them again. His richness of colouring and
deep relief equalled that of the Frate, the animation and expression
rivalled Andrea del Sarto. In the first picture, the eagerness of the
crowd, the intense feeling of the mother, in whom grief for the dead
child seems almost greater than the hope of his resuscitation, the
sturdy, solid character of the Florentines of the Republic, are all
given with a masterly hand, while a rich blending of colour fuses the
animated crowd in a harmonious unison. In the latter, grandeur and
dignity mark the group of ecclesiastics which surrounds the
archbishop’s bier, the full solid falls of their drapery show that he
had well studied his father’s works.
Ridolfo’s brothers became monks, Don Bartolommeo lived in the
Camaldoline Monastery of the Angeli, which Ridolfo beautified with many
works. Paolo Uccelli had adorned the Loggia with frescoed stories from
the life of S. Benedict. Ridolfo added two to the series. In one the
Saint is at table with two angels, waiting for S. Romano to send his
bread from the grotto, but the devil has cut the cord and taken it.
Another is S, Benedict investing a youth with the habit of the
order. In the church of the same monastery he painted a beautiful
Madonna and Child, with Angels, above the holy water vase, and
S. Romualdo with the Camaldolese Hermitage in his Hand, in a
lunette in the cloister. All these were done as a brotherly gift, and
after they were finished, the abbot, Don Andrea Dossi, gave him a
commission to paint a Last Supper in the refectory, which he
did, placing the portrait of the abbot in the corner.
Ridolfo, like his father, regarded art rather as a means of livelihood
than with any aesthetic feelings, and this is probably the reason of
his never attaining true excellence. His “bottega” was really a shop
where any one might order a work of art, or of artisanship, and he gave
as much attention to painting a banner for a procession as to composing
an altar-piece. He had a great many assistants, whom he called on for
help in various undertakings. They assisted him to prepare the Medici
Halls for the reception of Pope Leo X., and later for the marriages of
Giuliano and Lorenzo, not disdaining to paint scenes for the dramas
which were then given. He painted banners, and designed costumes for
the processions of the “potenze,” a festive company, the origin of
which is uncertain, but dating certainly from the Middle Ages. Each
quarter of the city had an emperor, lords, and dignitaries, each of
whom carried his banner or emblazonment. Grand processions,
tournaments, and feasts were held once a year, on S. John’s Day, by the
potenze.
Having assisted at the triumphs and marriages of the Medici princes, he
also furnished the funeral pomp and magnificence on the deaths of the
brothers, that of Giuliano occurring in 1516, of Lorenzo 1519.
Lucratively it answered his purpose; the Medici gave him great honour;
he was well paid by them, and got the commission to decorate the Chapel
of the Palazzo Vecchio–a very good specimen of his fresco painting, in
which he never reached his father’s excellence, although in oil he far
surpassed him. The chapel is small; the groined roof is covered with
emblematical designs on a blue ground, a Trinity in the midst with
angels bearing symbols of the passions around. The apostles and
evangelists surround this, and the principal wall has a larger fresco
of the Annunciation–a rather conventional rendering.
Commissions flowed in on him to such a degree, that although he had
fifteen children, he lived to amass money and lands, to see his
daughters well married, and his sons prosperous merchants trading to
distant lands. He died on the 6th of June, 1561, and lies with his
forefathers in the church of S. Maria Novella.
Andrea Del Sarto is a curious instance of the vital power of art,
which, like a flower forcing its way to the light through walls or
rocks, will find expression in spite of obstacles.
Andrea the painter, “senza errori,” was an artist in spite of lowering
home influences, of want of encouragement in his patrons–for his
greatest works only brought the smallest remuneration–and even in
spite of his own nature, which was material, wanting in high aims, and
deficient in ideality; yet his name lives for ever as a great master,
and his works rank close to those of the leaders of the Renaissance.
In looking at them one sighs even in the midst of admiration, thinking
that if the hand which produced them had been guided by a spark of
divine genius instead of the finest talent, what glorious works they
would have been! The truth is that Andrea’s was a receptive, rather
than an original and productive mind. His art was more imitative than
spontaneous, and this forms perhaps the difference between talent and
genius. The art of his time sunk into his mind, and was reproduced. He
lived precisely at the time of the culmination of art, when all the
highest masters were bringing forth their grandest works; therefore he
could not do otherwise than to follow the best examples.
He gathered the experience of all–the force of Michelangelo, the
handling of Leonardo, the sentiment of Raphael, so blending them as to
form a style seemingly his own, and in execution following closely on
their excellence.
In Giotto’s or Masaccio’s case the master created the art; in Andrea’s
it was the art of the age which made the artist.
The question of Andrea del Sarto’s birth is a mooted one. Biadi dates
it 1478, but the register he quotes is both vague and doubtful. He also
tells a curious story of his Flemish origin. Signor Milanesi has
deduced, from the archives of Florence, an authentic pedigree from
which we learn that his remote ancestors were peasants, first at
Buiano, near Fiesole, and later at S. Ilario, near Montereggi. His
grandfather, Francesco, being a linen weaver, came to live nearer
Florence; his father, Agnolo, son of Francesco, followed the trade of a
tailor–hence Andrea’s sobriquet, “del Sarto"–he took a house in Via
Gualfonda, in Florence, about 1487, with his wife Constanza, and here
Andrea was born, he being the eldest of a family of five–three girls
and two boys. From the tax papers of a few years later it is proved
that Andrea was born in 1487. His full name is Andrea d’Agnolo di
Francesco. It is by mistake that he has been called Vannucchi.
His parents were young, his father being only twenty-seven years of age
at Andrea’s birth. They lived at that time in Val Fonda, where
Albertinelli had his shop, but in 1504 they removed to the popolo, or
parish, of S. Paolo. Boys were not allowed to be idle in those days,
but were apprenticed at an early age; thus Andrea, like most artists of
his time, was bound to a goldsmith. It would be interesting to
investigate the great influence of the guild of goldsmiths on the art
of the Renaissance. The reason why youths who showed a talent for
design were entered in that guild is easy to assign–it was one of the
"greater” guilds, that of the painters being a lesser one, and merged
in the “Arte degli Speziali.” At seven years old he left the school
where he had learned to read and write, and entered his very youthful
apprenticeship; but he showed so much more aptitude for the designing
than for the executive part of his profession that Giovanni
Barile, who frequented the bottega, was induced to counsel his
being trained especially as a painter, offering himself as instructor.
If Andrea, a contadino by birth, an artisan by education, was not
originally of the most refined nature, his artistic training did not go
far towards refining him. Giovanni Barile was a coarse painter and a
rough man; he had, however, generosity enough to see that the boy was
worthy of better teaching, and got him entered in the bottega of Piero
di Cosimo, who had attained a good rank as a colourist, his
eccentricities possibly adding to his reputation.
Accordingly in 1498, Andrea being then eleven years of age, a life of
earnest study began. Piero di Cosimo, odd and misanthropic as he was,
had yet a true appreciation of talent, and showed an earnest interest
in his pupil, giving him–with plenty of queer treatment–a thorough
training. “He was not allowed to make a line which was not perfect"
[Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap. xvii. p. 40.]
while in Piero’s school. But excellent as his art teaching may have
been, the boy’s morale could not have been raised more here than under
the rough but good-natured Barile. We have seen Piero di Cosimo in his
youth, the serious, absent young man, who never joked with his juniors
in Cosimo Roselli’s shop; we see him now, with his youthful oddities
hardened into eccentricities, and his reserve deepened to misanthropy.
No woman’s hand softened and refined his house, no cleansing broom was
allowed within his door, and no gardener’s hand cleared the weeds or
pruned the vines in his garden. He so believed in nature unassisted
that he took his meals without the intervention of a cook. When the
fire was lighted to boil his size or glue he would cook fifty or sixty
eggs and set them apart in a basket, to which he had recourse when the
pangs of hunger compelled him. All this was morally very bad for a boy
so young. And then woe betide the poor little fellow if he whistled,
sneezed, or made any other noise! his nervous master would be out of
temper for a day afterwards. On wet days Piero was merrier, for he
would watch the drops splashing into the pools, and laugh as if they
were fairies. Sometimes he would take Andrea for a walk, and all at
once stop and gaze at a heap of rubbish, or mark of damp on a lichened
wall, picturing all kinds of monsters and weird scenes in its
discolourations.
No doubt he was literally carrying out Leonardo da Vinci’s advice,
headed, in his treatise, “A new Art of Invention.” “Look at some old
wall covered with dirt, or the odd appearance of some old streaked
stones; you may discover several things like landscapes, battles,
clouds, humorous faces, &c., to furnish the mind with new designs."
[Footnote: Leonardo da Vinci, Treatise on Painting.] Cosimo’s
mind being fantastic, the pictures he saw were incomparably grotesque.
He delighted in drawing sea monsters, dragons, wonderful adventures,
and heathen scenes; in fact the boy could have learned neither
Christian art nor manners from him. He learned how to use his brush,
however, and, leaving Piero to his minotaurs and dragons, went off at
every spare hour to study at more congenial shrines. He copied Masaccio
at the Brancacci Chapel, and drew so earnestly from the cartoons in the
Hall of the Pope that his achievements reached the ears of Piero
himself, who was not sorry that his pupil surpassed the rest, and gave
him more time for study away from the bottega. Rosini tells us that
"Fra Bartolommeo taught him the first steps.” [Footnote: Storia
della Pittura, chap, xxvii. p. 2.] The influence of the Frate may
have reached him in two ways. It is not unlikely that Piero di Cosimo
kept up an interest in his old fellow-pupil; and then again, as Andrea
lived in Val Fonda, it is probable he often visited Albertinelli’s
studio in that street, and the friendship with Francia Bigio began
before the cartoons of Michelangelo ripened there.
The evidence of style goes to show that the works of Albertinelli and
Fra Bartolommeo influenced him more than those of Piero. Yet though his
sphere was devotional, it was “impelled more by a material sense of
beauty than by the deep religious feeling which inspired the Frate.”
As time went on the youth in strange old Piero’s studio became more
famous than his master, and felt that he could do greater things away
from the stiff method which cramped him, and the whimsicalities which
annoyed him. His friend, Francia Bigio, Mariotto’s pupil, having just
then lost his master, who was giving more attention to his father-in-
law’s business of innkeeper than his own, was willing to enter into
partnership, and the two youths began life together in 1509 or 1510, in
a room near the Piazza del Grano, in the first house in Via del Moro,
which still remains in its old state.
The first bit of patronage recorded is the commission for the frescoes
in the Scalzo; that they had work before is proved by the words in the
contract of the Barefoot Friars, “dettero ad Andrea pittore
celeberrimo il dipingere nel Chiosto.” The “celebrated"
presupposes works already done.
The Scalzo was a name given to the “Compagnia dei Disciplinati di S.
Giovanni Battista,” because they went barefoot when they carried the
cross in their processions. They lived in a convent in Via Larga (now
Cavour), opposite San Marco. A new cloister had been erected there–an
elegant little cortile, thirty-eight feet by thirty-two, adorned with
lovely Corinthian pillars–and the Brethren were anxious to fill the
lunettes of the arches with frescoes at the least possible expense,
wisely judging that a young artist on his way to fame would be the best
to employ.
The frescoes, of which there would be twelve large, and four small ones
in the upright spaces by the doors, were to be done in “terretta,” or
brown earth, and to be paid fifty-six lire (eight scudi) for the large,
and twenty-one lire (three scudi) each for the lesser frescoes. The
small ones were four figures of the Virtues, Faith, Hope,
Justice, and Charity. Hope is exquisitely expressed, and
Charity a charming group, the children most tenderly drawn. The
subjects, though not all finished till many years later, stand now in the
following order; the second row of figures, with the dates, show the
order in which they were painted:–
Of these, No. 6 was the first executed, and it is probable that Francia
Bigio assisted him, for it has not the finished drawing nor careful
handling of any of Andrea’s other frescoes. Possibly this is the cause
of the partners never working together afterwards, each taking his own
subjects and signing his own name. The composition, in the Baptism
of Christ, is not original, being very similar to that of
Verocchio’s, especially in the two angels kneeling on the left bank;
the landscape and figures, however, are far in advance of that master.
It will be well to speak of the whole set of frescoes in this place,
for although they belong to different times and styles, they are a
complete work, and might be taken almost as an epitome of Andrea’s
career; from the one above mentioned in which Piero de Cosimo’s
influence is apparent, to the Nos. 7 and 8, which very nearly approach
Michelangelo’s power and freedom.
In No. 1 the expression of muteness about the mouth of Zacharias, as he
stands by the altar, is wonderfully given; you feel sure he could not
speak if he would. The other figures are superfluous to the motive,
though adding grandeur to the work as a whole.
In composition Andrea differs widely from Fra Bartolommeo. The latter
delighted in building up a single form, every figure in the whole
picture adding its hue and weight to perfect this pyramid or circle.
Andrea spreads his figures more widely; he likes a double composition,
dividing his pictures into two separate groups, connected by one
central figure, or divided entirely. This is seen in Nos. 3, 10 and 12,
which are all double groupings, the last completely divided in the
centre by a table and an archway behind it. Nos. 7 and 9 are pyramidal
compositions. The Preaching of S. John is one of the best works,
and shows his most forcible style. S. John on a rock stands like a
pillar in the centre, the hearers are dressed in the “lucco” (a
Florentine cloak of the 15th century), the grouping following the lines
of the landscape. At the back Jesus kneels on a rising ground. Vasari
says the figures are from Albrecht Dürer, whose works had made a great
impression on the southern world of art; but it is more probable that
they only show his influence, for the dress and style are Florentine.
No. 8, the Baptism of the Gentiles, is another of his best
style, and is, in the drawing of the nude figures, almost
Michelangelesque in power. This is one of his favourite “echo"
subjects, a group in the background of John answering the Pharisees
forming an echo to the principal subject. The muscular life of the
spirited crowd of nude figures is beautifully contrasted by the
graceful draped forms in the background. One of the baptized is the
same child whom he had modelled in the Madonna of S. Francisco.
Nos. 4 and 5 are by Francia Bigio, and were done during Andrea’s
absence in France, showing that he had so far learned from his friend
as almost to rival him in power. The subjects, although not scriptural,
are conjecturally true.
In the Zacharias blessing John before he goes to the Desert, the
sitting figure of S. Elizabeth and the kneeling one of the child are
very lovely; the action of Zacharias is not so well defined, the great
force in the uplifted arm betokens anger more than blessing. The
grouping follows the lines of a flight of steps in the background, and
is triangular.
The same form of composition is apparent in the next group (No. 5),
only the lines form an angle receding from the one just mentioned. The
Virgin is charmingly posed and draped, the children less pleasing.
This elegant little cloister is a true shrine of art, although the
frescoes are all in monochrome. So much were they admired at the time,
that an order was issued prohibiting artists to copy them without the
permission of Duke Cosimo. Cardinal Carlo de’ Medici had them covered
with curtains, [Footnote: Richa, Delle Chiese] but, in spite of
care, they are very much injured, the under parts almost lost. The
precaution of covering the cloister with a glass roof has only been
taken in modern times, and too late.
Andrea’s next patrons were the Eremite monks of S. Agostino, at San
Gallo, who ordered of him two pictures for their church. In 1511 he
painted Christ appearing to Mary Magdalen, and an Annunciation in
1512. The former is said to have had much softness and delicacy, the
latter is to be seen in the Hall of Mars at the Pitti, and is a very
pleasing picture. The Virgin kneels at her prayer desk, S. Joseph behind
her–a rather unusual rendering of the subject–her attitude is graceful
and decorous, the angel calm and gentle, floats in mid air, two other
angels stand on the left. The colouring is varied in the extreme, and the
lights well defined.
These two pictures, and the Disputa, painted later, were removed
to the church of S. Jacopo tra Fossi, when the convent was demolished
in 1529. They were still there in 1677, when Bocchi wrote his Bellezze
di Firenze, but the Christ appearing to Mary Magdalen is said to be
now in the church of the Covoni in the Casentino.
The next great works were the frescoes in the Court of S. Annunziata,
if indeed they were not carried on simultaneously with those in the
Scalzo. This famous series of Andrea’s works was obtained by cunning,
and painted in emulation. While the two partners, who had differed from
the beginning, and had since become rivals, were engaged in the Scalzo,
a certain astute Fra Mariano, the keeper of the wax candle stores at
the Servite Convent–to which the church of the S. Annunziata belonged
–had watched well those two young painters. Fra Mariano understood
human nature, as priests often do; he had seen the envious rivalship
growing between them, as the friends, who should have worked together,
took separate compartments, and cast jealous criticising glances on
each other’s designs and method of work. Having ambition of his own, he
knew how to work on that of others to further his own aspirations,
which were, to be considered a patron of art and a benefactor to his
convent.
Reading Andrea’s heart, he played on all his strongest feelings, placed
before him the glory he would win by covering the lunettes of the
arches in the court of the fine church with frescoes which would carry
his name down to posterity; he said that any other artist would pay
much to obtain leave to paint upon historical walls like those, and how
they would all envy the man who should obtain the coveted honour! Then,
with a half-whispered hint that for one, Francia Bigio was dying to get
the commission for nothing, the wily Frate went his way victorious.
Andrea, scorning to make any pecuniary bargain, only stipulated that no
one else should paint in that courtyard, and forthwith began the
Stories from the Life of S. Filippo Benizzi, having only old
Alesso Baldovinetti’s Nativity, and Cosimo Roselli’s Miracle
of S. Filippo, as foils to his own. These two works were on the
walls on each side of the church door; there were therefore three
entire sides of the cloister to cover, excepting only the entrance into
the courtyard from the Piazza, and no doubt he felt like Ghirlandajo,
when “he wished he had the entire circuit of the city walls to paint.”
On the 16th of June, 1511, he began to paint with such vigour that in a
few months the first three were uncovered.
1. S. Philip at Viterbo with the Court, dressing a naked leper in
his own cloak.
2. S. Philip going from Bologna to Modena. He rebukes some
gamblers, telling them the vengeance of God is near. A sudden
thunderstorm and lightning destroy them, thus fulfilling the
prediction. There is a great deal of fine action in this composition;
the horror and disbelief struggling in the faces of the men, and the
stormy landscape are all well rendered. A horse leaps away with strong,
terrified action, there is a masterly grasp of his vivid subject, and a
rugged strength in the execution which gives great life to it.
3. S. Philip exorcises a Girl possessed of a Demon. Here the
composition is very tender, the mother and father support the sick
girl, and form a very pleasing group; the figures of the spectators are
full of life without exaggeration.
These works have suffered much from exposure, but the colouring is
still good. The praise that Andrea obtained for them was so great that
he followed them up by the two in the next series.
4. A Child brought to life by touching the bier of S. Philip.
This is a kind of double composition, the child being represented in a
twofold condition in the foreground, first as dead, and then revived at
the touch of the bier. The grouping around the dead saint is very
suggestive of Ghirlandajo, and shews a deep study of his frescoes in
the Sassetti Chapel. The colouring is peculiarly his own; there is the
mingling of a great variety of bright tints of equal intensity, which
by some necromancy are made to relieve each other, instead of being
relieved by the art of chiaroscuro as in the handling of other masters.
5. Children healed by the garments of S. Philip, which are held
by a priest, standing before an altar, the women and their children
kneeling in front of him. The grouping is symmetrical, the figures
lifelike, but not refined, round-cheeked buxom women, and rough, human
men’s faces, bespeak Andrea as the painter of reality rather than
ideality; there is vivid life in every attitude, but the life is not
high caste. A fine old man, leaning on his staff, is a portrait of
Andrea della Robbia, whose son Luca stands near.
For all these Fra Mariano paid only ten scudi each, and Andrea, feeling
the remuneration not equal to the merit of the work, would have left
off here, but the Frate held him to his bond. Two more lunettes yet
remained to finish, but as these were of a later date, we will reserve
them for a future chapter. He also painted in the orto, or
garden, of the convent, the now perished fresco of the Parable of
the Vineyard.
Meanwhile, the rival friends had changed lodgings; they left the Piazza
del Grano, and took rooms in the Sapienza, a street between the Piazza
San Marco and the S. Annunziata. Andrea chose this because it was near
his work, and also because his great friends, Sansovino and Rustici,
already lived there. Commissions began to pour in on him, which he
fulfilled, while still at work at the Servi. Judging from the style of
his early manner, we may date at this time a Virgin and Child, with
S. John and S. Joseph, now in the Pitti. It is painted “alla
prima,” i.e. a quick method of giving the effect in the first
painting,–and is probably the one spoken of by Vasari as painted for
Andrea Santini; it formerly belonged to Francesco Troschi. [Footnote:
Life of Andrea del Sarto, vol iii, p. 193.]
A S. Agnes, in the palace of the Prince Palatine, at Düsseldorf,
is in this early style. He also painted some frescoes at San Salvi,
SS. Giovanni Gualberto and Benedict resting on clouds; they
ornamented the recess where the Last Supper was placed at a
later period.
In a narrow alley, behind the church of Or San Michele, is a tabernacle
on the wall beneath an ancient balcony. Here the architect, Baccio
d’Agnolo, commissioned Andrea del Sarto to paint an Annunciation. It
is so much injured as to be almost indistinguishable now, but was much
admired at the time, though some say it was too laboured, and so wanting
in ease and grace. [Footnote: Biadi, 26; Vasari, vol. iii, p 189.] It is
more likely that it was one of his early works, and should be classed
before the frescoes of the Scalzo, for it is said that he was living at
the time with his father, whose shop was over the archway, and that he
had adorned the inner walls of the house with two frescoed angels.
[Footnote: Firenze antica e moderna Ed. Flor. 1794, vol. vi, p. 216.]
These have perished completely.
This chapter will speak of the man, and not of the
artist. As it is now understood that history is not a dry record
of battles and laws, but the story of the inner life of a people, so
the biography of a painter ought not to consist wholly in a list and
description of his works, but a picture of his life and inner mind,
that we may know the character which prompted the works.
First, as to personal appearance. There are two portraits of Andrea del
Sarto in his youth; one in the Duke of Northumberland’s collection
represents him as a young man with long hair, and a black cap, writing
at a table. It is painted in a soft, harmonious style, but not masterly
as regards chiaroscuro. It might be by Francia Bigio, as it has
something of the manner of his master, Albertinelli.
Another now in the Uffizi is a most life-like portrait of sombre
colouring, but not highly finished. Here we have the same black cap and
long hair; the dress is a painter’s blouse of a blue-grey, which well
brings out the flesh tints. The face is intelligent, but not refined;
the clear dark eyes bespeak the artist spirit, but the full mobile
mouth tells the material nature of the man. In looking at this one can
solve the riddle of the dissonance between his art and his life. As a
young man Andrea was full of spirit; he loved lively society, and knew
almost all the young artists who lived very much as students now. They
met each other in the art schools, and dined and feasted together in
the wine shops. Sometimes they formed private clubs, meeting in certain
rooms for purposes of youthful merriment.
Of this kind was the “Society of the Cauldron” ("Società del Paiuolo”),
held at the apartment of the eccentric sculptor, Rustici, which was in
the same street as that of Andrea himself.
Sansovino, who also lived near, was not a member of this rollicking
club; he was one of Andrea’s more serious friends, and served as
companion when his most exalted moods were upon him. Perhaps Rustici’s
rooms did not please Sansovino, for strange inmates were there–a
hedgehog, an eagle, a talking raven, snakes and reptiles, in a kind of
aquarium; besides all these gruesome familiar spirits, Rustici was
addicted to necromancy. The Society of the Cauldron seems only a
natural outgrowth from such a character. It consisted of twelve
members, all artists, goldsmiths, or musicians, each of whom was
allowed to bring four friends to the supper, and bound to provide a
dish. Any two members bringing similar dishes were fined, but the droll
part of it was that the suppers were eaten in a huge cauldron large
enough to put table and chairs into; the handle served as an arched
chandelier, the table was on a lift, and when one course was finished
it disappeared from their midst, and descended to be replenished. As
for the viands, the sculptors displayed their talents in moulding
classical subjects in pastry, and turning boiled fowls into figures of
Ulysses and Laertes. The architects built up temples and palaces of
jellies, cakes, and sausages; the goldsmith, Robetta, produced an anvil
and accoutrements made of a calf’s head, the painters treated roast pig
to represent a scullery-maid spinning.
Andrea del Sarto built up the model of the Baptistery with all kinds of
eatables, with a reading desk of veal, and book with letters inlaid
with truffles, at which the choristers were roast thrushes with open
beaks, while the canons were pigeons in red mantles of beetroot–an
idea more droll than reverential.
After this, in 1512, another club, called that of the “Trowel,” was
instituted, of which Andrea was not a member, but was chosen as an
associate. The first supper was arranged by Giuliano Bugiardini, and
was held on the aja or threshing floor of S. Maria Nuova, where
the bronze gates of the Baptistery had been cast.
In this no two members were allowed to wear the same style of dress
under penalty of a fine. The members were in two ranks, the “lesser"
and the “greater,” a parody on the guilds of the city. They were shown
the plan of a building, and the “greater” members, furnished with
trowels, were obliged to build it in edibles, the “lesser” acting as
hodmen, and bringing materials. Pails of ricotta or goat’s milk cheese
served for mortar, grated cheese for sand, sugar plums for gravel,
cakes and pastry for bricks, the basement was of meats, the pillars
fowls or sausages.
Some suppers were classical scenes, others allegorical representations,
always in the same edible form. We can imagine the wit which sparkled
round these strange tables, the jokes of the artists, the songs of the
musicians. Andrea del Sarto is said to have recited an heroi-comic poem
in six cantos called the “Battle of the frogs and mice.” Biadi gives it
entire; it seems a kind of satire on Rustici’s tastes, with perhaps a
hit at the government, and shows no lack of wit of rather unrefined
style; but the authorship is not proved. Some say Ottaviano de Medici
assisted Andrea in it.
It would have been well for Andrea if this innocent jollity had
sufficed for him, but unfortunately he admired a woman whose beauty was
greater than her merits. Probably he began by mere artistic
appreciation of her personal charms, for she sat to him for the
Madonna of the Visitation, which was painted in 1514, two years
before their marriage. This Lucrezia della Fede was the wife of a
hatter who lived in Via San Gallo. Her husband dying after a short
illness, Andrea del Sarto married her, and whatever were her faults,
she retained his life-long love. Biadi and Reumont give the date 26th
of December, 1512, as that of the death of her husband, but Signor
Milanesi, from more authentic sources, proves it to have been in 1516.
A great deal has been said and written of the evil influence this woman
had on him, and his very house bears an inscription recording his fame
together with “affanni domestici,” but it would seem that posterity has
taken for truth more than the facts of the time imply. That she was
proud, haughty, exacting, and not of a high moral nature, that she was
selfish, and begrudged his helping his own family, her every action
proves. That her manners were not conciliating to the pupils is
possible, perhaps their manners savoured too much of familiarity for a
woman who believed in her own charms; but that she was faithless, which
her biographers assert on the strength of Vasari’s phrase, “that Andrea
was tormented by jealousy,” there is literally nothing to show.
In the first place Vasari–who was one of the scholars she offended and
put down–gives vent to his private pique in his first edition, and in
the second, which only contains a slight mention of her, omits almost
all he had previously said. Now, if the first assertions were true why
should he retract them? Secondly, the sixteenth century was an age of
license in writing and speaking, and had any immoralities been laid to
her charge, not a biographer would have scrupled to particularize them;
but no! her name is never mentioned, except with her husband’s, even
by her greatest enemies, who say she was as haughty as she was
beautiful. Thirdly, a faithless woman could never have kept her
husband’s devoted love, and had she been so, would that affectionate
though exaggerated letter of hers, recalling him from France, have been
written? That a man who thinks his wife the most lovely creature living
may be tormented with jealousy without wrong doing on her part is more
than possible.
Let us then place Lucrezia’s character where it ought to stand in
Andrea del Sarto’s life–as a powerful influence, lowering his moral
nature, weaning him from his duties as a son and brother, by fixing all
his care and affection on herself; she, however, not allowing her own
family to be losers by her marriage, although causing him to slight his
own. Even this much-spoken-of neglect of his own family seems disproved
by his will, which, after a very little more than her own dot left to
his wife, makes his brother and niece heirs of all his estate.
Except that she cared more for her own pleasure than his true
advancement, she was not any great hindrance to his artistic career; he
painted an incredible number of pictures, and she was willing to sit
for him over and over again. Indeed if she were his model for all the
Madonnas in which her features are recognisable, she must have had
either inexhaustible patience or great love for the artist.
In fact she was thoroughly selfish; as long as she reaped the benefit
of his work she furthered his art; where she was left out of his
consideration he must be brought back to her side at any sacrifice to
him. This is not the stuff of which an artist’s wife ought to be made;
the influence of a strong-willed selfish nature on his weak and
material one was not good, and his morale became lowered.
He felt this deterioration less than his friends felt it for him; even
Vasari says that “though he lived in torment, he yet accounted it a
high pleasure.” It was one of those unions in which the man gives
everything, and the woman receives and allows every sacrifice. Her
family were kept at his expense, her daughter loved as his own, and if
she were haughty or exacting, he suffered with a Socratic patience,
thinking life with her a privilege.
It is to be supposed that a member of the societies of the Cauldron and
the Trowel would appreciate good living. He was so devoted to the
pleasures of the table that he went to market himself early every
morning and came home laden with delicacies. [Footnote: Biadi,
Notixie inedite, &c., chap. xix. p. 62.] A curious confirmation
of this is to be found in his house, the dining-room of which is
beautifully frescoed, the arched roof in Raphaelesque scrolls and
grotesques; while the lunettes of one wall have two large pictures, one
of a woman roasting birds over a fire, the other of a servant preparing
the table for dinner. This love of good living, however, in the end
shortened his life, according to Biadi.
After his marketing was over he turned his attention to art, going to
his fresco painting followed by his scholars, or superintending their
work in the “bottega.” He was always a kind and thorough master, his
manner just and fatherly.
Sometimes he and Sansovino or other friends lounged away an hour in the
neighbouring shop of Nanni Unghero, where their mutual friend, Niccolò
Tribolo, did all the hard work, fetching and carrying blocks and saws
grumblingly. Tribolo often begged Sansovino to take him as his pupil,
which he did afterwards, and he became a famous sculptor. One of
Andrea’s acquaintances was Baccio Bandinelli, who, as he thought he
could equal Michelangelo in sculpture, imagined that only a knowledge
of Andrea del Sarto’s method of colouring was necessary to enable him
to surpass him in painting. To gain this knowledge he proposed to sit
to Andrea for his portrait. His friend, discovering his motive,
succeeded in frustrating it by mixing a quantity of colours in seeming
confusion on his palette, and yet getting from this chaos exactly the
tints he required. So Baccio never rivalled his friend in colouring
after all, not being able to understand his method.
From 1511 to 1514 Andrea was employed on the two last frescoes in the
courtyard of the SS. Annunziata the Epiphany and the Nativity
of the Virgin. The sum fixed for these was ninety-eight lire, but
the Servite brothers augmented it by forty-two lire more, seeing the
work was “veramente maravigliosa"; thus these two were paid at the same
rate as the other five of S. Filippo–seventy lire or ten scudi each.
In the Nativity, one of the finest of his frescoes, we see his
favourite double grouping, the interest in the mother being kept to one
side, that of the child and its attendants to the other-a balance of
form united by Joachim, a stern, finely moulded figure in the centre.
The attitudes are natural, the draperies free and graceful. Old Vasari
justly remarks “pajono di carne le figure.” The woman standing in the
centre of the room is Lucrezia della Fede; this is the first known
likeness of her. There is a richness of colour without impasto, a
modulation of shade giving full relief without startling contrast, a
clear air below and celestial haze in the angel-peopled clouds above.
This might well be classed as on the highest level ever reached in
fresco. Nearly fifty years after it was painted, while Jacopo d’Empoli
was copying this fresco, an old woman came through the courtyard to
mass, and, stopping to watch the young artist at his work, began to
talk of the days of her youth and beauty when she sat for the likeness
of that natural figure in the midst, no doubt sighing as she looked at
the freshness of the fresco, and thought of her many wrinkles and aged
limbs, she being nearly fourscore at the time.
The Epiphany is also a remarkable work, more lively than the
last; it is also less carefully painted, the graceful feminine element
is wanting; there is plenty of activity, a crowded composition, and
richness of colour. Three figures are especially interesting as
likenesses; that of the musician Francesco Ajolle–a great composer of
madrigals, who went to France in 1530, and spent the remainder of his
life there; Sansovino, on the right of Ajolle; and near him Andrea
himself–the same face as the portrait in the Uffizi already spoken of.
The Madonna del Sacco, over the door of the entrance to the
church from the cloister, would seem to have been painted in the same
year, 1514, judging from Biadi’s extract from the MS. account books of
the Servite Fathers existing in the archives, where is an entry
"Giugno, 1514, ad Andrea del Sarto, per resto della Madonna del Sacco,
lire 56.” This term resto (remainder) would imply a previous
payment. The money was a thank-offering from a woman for having been
absolved from a vow by one of the Servite priests. Like all his other
frescoes of this church, Andrea only gained ten scudi for this
masterpiece. The date of MDXXV. and the words “Quem genuit adoravit” on
the pilasters of this work have led most writers to suppose it painted
in that year; but it is probable they were added by a later hand. Biadi
[Footnote: Biadi, Notizie, &c., p. 42 note.] says the letters
are of the style of nearly two centuries later, that Andrea would have
signed it, like all his other and works, with his monogram of the
crossed A’s (i.e. Andrea d’ Agnolo). For charming soft harmonies of
colour, simplicity, and grace of design, this surpasses all his other
frescoes. The Madonna has an imposing grandeur of form, there is a
boyish strength and moulding in the limbs of the child which is very
expressive, the dignity of Joseph and majesty of the Virgin are not to
be surpassed; and yet the whole is given in a space so cramped that all
the figures have to be reclining or sitting.
[Illustration of Monogram]
After this Andrea returned to the Scalzo, the Barefoot Brothers
offering better pay than the Servites. Here he did the allegory of
Justice and the Sermon of S. John in monochrome. In these
he took a fancy to retrograde his style, for they have the rugged force
and angular form that recalls the more stern old Italian masters, or
that Titan of northern art, Albrecht Dürer.
Of his works in oil at this era we may class–
1. The Story of Joseph, painted for Zanobi Girolami Bracci,
which Borghini judges a beautiful picture. The figures were small, but
the painting highly finished. It came afterwards into the possession of
the Medici family.
2. A Madonna, with decorations and models surrounding it like a
frame, was painted for Sansovino’s patron, Giovanni Gaddi, afterwards
clerk of the chamber to Ferdinand I. It was existing in the collection
of the Gaddi Pozzi family in Borghini’s time.
3. Annunciation, for Giovanni di Paolo Merciajo, now in the Hall
of Saturn in the Pitti Palace. It is a pretty composition, the Virgin
sitting, yet half kneeling, the angel on his knees before her. There is
a yellowish light in the sky between two looped dark green curtains;
the angel’s yellow robe takes the light beautifully.
4. Madonna and Child, in the “Hall of the Education of Jupiter"
in the Pitti Palace, one of his most pleasing groups. This is supposed
by the commentators of Vasari to be the altarpiece painted for Giovanni
di Paolo Merciajo, but Biadi traces it through the possession of
Antonio, son of Zanobi Bracci, to its present possessors. The mistake
arises from Vasari often confusing the names Annunciations and
Assumptions with Madonnas.
5. A Holy Family, for Andrea Santini, which awakened great
admiration in Florence. It was in the possession of Signer Alessandro
Curti Lepri, by whose permission Morghen’s print was taken.
6. The Head of our Saviour, over the altar of the SS.
Annunziata, ordered by the sacristan of the order. A magnificent head,
full of grandeur and expression, and very clear in the flesh tints.
Empoli made several copies of it.
7. The Madonna di San Francesco, Andrea’s masterpiece among
easel pictures. It was a commission from a monk of the order of
"Minorites of Santa Croce,” who was intendant of the nuns of S.
Francesco, and advised them to employ Andrea. In grandiose simplicity
this surpasses Albertinelli’s Visitation, in soft gradations and
rich mellowness of colour it equals Fra Bartolommeo at his best, for
tenderness in the attitude of the child it is quite Raphaelesque. The
Madonna is standing on a pedestal adorned with sculptured harpies. She
holds the Divine Child in one arm; its little hands are twined tenderly
round her neck, and it seems to be climbing closer to her. The two
children at her feet give a suggestive triangular grouping, while the
dignified figures of S. Francis and S. John the Evangelist form
supports on each side, and rear up a pyramid of beauty. Rosini’s term
"soave” just expresses this picture, so fused and soft, rich yet
transparent in the colouring. The olive-brown robe of one saint is
balanced by the rich red of the other. In the Virgin, a deep blue and
mellow orange are combined by a crimson bodice. The price paid to the
painter for this was low because he asked little; but a century or two
later, Ferdinando de’ Medici, son of Cosmo III., spent 20,000 scudi to
restore the church, and had a copy of the picture made in return for a
gift of the original, which is now the gem of the Tribune in the
Uffizi.
8. The Disputa, di S. Agostino is another masterpiece, showing
as much power as the last-named work displays of softness. It was
painted at the order of the Eremite monks of San Gallo for their church
of San Jacopo tra Fossi, where it was injured by a flood in 1557, and
removed later to the Hall of Saturn in the Pitti Palace. The
composition is level, the four disputing saints standing in a row, the
two listeners, S. Sebastian and Mary Magdalen, kneeling in front. S
Agostino, with fierce vehemence, expounds the mystery of the Trinity;
S. Stephen turns to S. Francesco interrogatively, S. Domenico (whom
Vasari, by the way, calls S. Peter Martyr) has a face full of silent
eloquence–he seems only waiting his turn to speak. In S. Sebastian we
have a good study from the nude, and in Mary Magdalen’s kneeling
figure–a charming portrait of Lucrezia–is concentrated the principal
focus of colour.
9. Four Saints, SS. Gio. Battista, Gio. Gualberto, S. Michele,
and Bernardo Cardinale, a beautifully-painted picture, once in the
Hermitage of Vallombrosa. There were originally two little angels in
the midst dividing the saints, as in our illustration. When the picture
was transferred to the Gallery of the Belle Arti, where it now is, the
angels were taken out and the divided saints brought into a more
compact group. The angels are in a frame between two frescoed Madonnas
of Fra Bartolommeo.
By this time the fame of Andrea del Sarto, both as a fresco and oil
painter, had risen to the highest point. Michelangelo only echoed the
opinion of others when he said to Raphael, “There is a little fellow in
Florence who will bring the sweat to your brow if ever he is engaged in
great works.” His style of composition was important, his figures
varied and life-like, his draperies dignified. “The main excellence,
however, in which Andrea stands unique among his contemporaries rests
in the incomparable blending of colour, in the soft flesh tints, in the
exquisite chiaroscuro, in the transparent clearness even of his deepest
shadows, and in his entirely new manner of perfect modelling."
[Footnote: Lübke History of Art, vol. ii. p. 241.] His method,
as shown in an unfinished picture of the Adoration of the Magi
in the Guadagni Palace, was to paint on a light ground; the sketch was
a black outline, the features and details not defined, but often
roughly indicated. He finished first the sky and background. The flesh
tints, draperies, &c., were all true in tone from the first laying in.
[Footnote: Eastlake’s Materials for History of Oil Fainting.] He
did not place shades one over the other, and fuse them together glaze
by glaze as Leonardo did, but used an opaque dead colouring which
allowed of correction; the system was rapid, but deficient in depth and
mellowness; “the lights are fused and bright,” but “the shadows, owing
to their viscous consistency, imperfectly fill the outlines."
[Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle, vol. in. chap. xvii. p. 670.] In a
Holy Family in the Louvre, S. Elizabeth’s hand is painted across
S. John, and shows the shadow underneath it, being grey at that part.
Though more solid, he could not paint light over dark without injuring
his brilliance of colour.
Albertinelli, on the contrary, when he painted and repainted his
Annunciation, washed out the under layer with essential oil
before making his “pentimenti” or corrections, and in this way the
thinness was kept.
In Andrea’s early style this thinness is apparent, especially in the
Joseph series, painted for Pier Francesco Borgherini.
Biadi classes Andrea’s works in three styles. The first showing the
influence of Piero di Cosimo, the second–to which the best works in
the Servi cloisters belong–is a larger and more natural style, after
the study of Michelangelo and Leonardo.
The third is the natural development in his own practice of a perfect
knowledge of art, and a just appreciation of nature. The Birth of
the Baptist and the Cenacolo, of San Salvi, belong to his
last and greatest manner. In 1515 the Florentine artists were employed
on more perishable works than frescoes. Leo X., the Medici Pope who had
been elected in 1513, made his triumphal entry into Florence on the 3rd
of September, 1515, on his way to meet Francis I. of France at Bologna.
All the guilds and ranks of Florence vied with each other to make his
reception as artistic as possible. He and his suite were obliged to
stay three days in the Villa Gianfigliazzi at Marignolle while the
triumphal preparations were being completed. The churches had temporary
façades of splendid architecture in fresco; arches were erected
at the Porta Romana and Piazza San Felice, covered with historical
paintings; Giuliano del Tasso adorned the Ponte Santa Trinità with
statues; Antonio San Gallo made a temple on the Piazza della Signoria,
and Baccio Bandinelli prepared a colossus in the Loggia dei Lanzi.
Various decorations adorned other streets, and Andrea del Sarto
surpassed them all with a façade to the Duomo, painted in
monochrome on wood. His friend Sansovino designed the architecture, and
he painted the sculpture and adornments with such effect that the Pope
declared no work in marble could have been finer.
Andrea lent his talent to another kind of decorative art. The guild of
merchants were desirous of inaugurating a festa for the day of S.
Giovanni, and had ten chariots made from the model of the ancient Roman
ones, to institute chariot races in the piazza. Andrea painted several
of these with historical subjects, but they have long been lost. The
chariot races were revived under the Grand Dukes, but not with any
success.
Meanwhile fate was working Andrea del Sarto on to what might have been
the culminating point of his fame, had not his weakness rendered it a
blot on his honour; i.e. his journey to France. His fame was rising
high; a picture of the Dead Christ surrounded by Angels, weeping
over the body they support, having been sent to France, [Footnote: It
was engraved by the Venetian, Agostino, before it went to France; the
engraving is signed 1516. It did not please Andrea, who never allowed
any others to be engraved.] the king was so pleased with it that he
wished another work by the same artist. Andrea painted a very beautiful
Madonna, for which, however, he only obtained a quarter of the
price which the king paid to the merchants. The king was so delighted
with it that he sent the artist an invitation to come to Paris in his
employ, promising to pay all his expenses. In the Pitti Palace there is
a portrait of Andrea and his wife, in which he has commemorated the
reception of this letter. He is looking very interested over it, while
his wife has the blankest expression possible.
In the summer of 1518 he started with his pupil, Andrea Sguazzella,
called Nanoccio. Such a journey was in those days considered as little
less than a parting for life. It is plain that Lucrezia’s family looked
on her as almost a widow, for they made him sign a deed of
acknowledgement for the 150 florins of her dote. Some authors
have taken this document as a proof of their marriage in that year, but
it was merely a precaution against loss by her family; the Italian law
being that the husband is obliged to render the portion obtained with
his wife to her family if she dies without issue, and in case of his
own death, the widow is entitled to it.
He was well received in Paris, and employed immediately on a likeness
of the infant Dauphin Henri II., then only a few months old. For this
he obtained 300 scudi: and a monthly salary was allowed him. What a
mine of gold the French court must have seemed to him after working for
years at large frescoes for ten scudi each!
He did no less than fifty works of art while there, most of which have
been engraved by the best French artists.[Footnote: See Catalogue of
Royal Pictures in France, by M. Lepiscié.] The Carità is
signed 1518, and is in Andrea’s best style–perhaps with a leaning
towards Michelangelo. The S. Jerome in Penitence, which he
painted for the king’s mother, and obtained a large price for, cannot
be traced. His life in Paris was a new revelation, and not without its
effect on his character, always alive to substantial pleasure.
The king and his courtiers frequented his atelier, and delighted to
watch him paint, vieing with each other in the richness of their gifts,
among which were splendid brocade dresses and beautiful ornaments and
jewels, in which he longed to adorn his wife. While he was engaged in
painting the S. Jerome for the queen-mother, a letter from
Lucrezia aroused his longings for home to the uttermost; she–the wife
who has been branded by the name of faithless–wrote that she was
disconsolate in his absence, and that if he did not soon return he
would find her dead with grief.
Vasari, quoting this exaggerated letter, says in his first edition that
she only wanted money to give her friends, but this also he retracts in
the second. Whether it expressed her feelings truly or not, the letter
had such an effect on Andrea’s mind that he decided to return home at
any cost.
During Andrea’s absence the house in Via S. Sebastiano, behind the
Annunziata, was being prepared under her superintendence and with his
sanction. His scholars had decorated the walls and ceilings with
frescoes, and no doubt Lucrezia was as anxious for him to see the new
house as he was to adorn her with Parisian brocades and jewellery.
Being able to satisfy her ambitious soul, Andrea too readily flung away
all his brilliant prospects to return, and willingly take again the
yoke of the burden of his wife and her family. He made promises that he
would bring her back to Paris with him, and the king in all faith
allowed him to depart, confiding to him large sums of money for the
purchase of works of art to be sent to France.
Sguazzella, wiser than his master, preferred to stay in Paris under the
patronage of Cardinal de Tournon. He painted a great many works, much
in the style of Andrea, but with less excellence. It is possible that
some of M. Lepiscié’s long list are, in fact, the work of the pupil
rather than the master. When Benvenuto Cellini went to France in 1537
he lodged in Sguazzella’s house, with his three servants and three
horses, at a weekly rate of payment (a tanto la settimana).
But to return to Andrea: this is an episode in his life which we would
gladly pass over if it were possible, for it forms the moral blot on a
great artistic career.
Returning home he fell once more under the strong will of his wife, but
with his principles weakened by the effect of a luxury and prosperity
which has always a greater deteriorating effect on a nature such as his
than on a finer mind. Bringing grand ideas from the palaces of the
French nobles, he not only fell in with Lucrezia’s plans for
beautifying the new house, but even surpassed her wildest schemes. The
staircase was embellished with rich oaken balustrades, the rooms were
all frescoed. Cupids hide in the Raphaelesque scrolls on the arches,
classic divinities rest on the ceilings, but in the dining room the
homely nature of the man who did his own marketing, creeps out. It is a
charming room, the windows opening on a garden courtyard, where a vine
trellis leads round to what used to be the side door of his studio
which has its entrance in another street.
The roof is vaulted and covered with exquisite decorative frescoes, but
in the lunettes of the two largest arches are the domestic scenes of
cooking and laying the cloth, spoken of at page 90. Two or three of the
up stairs rooms are very fine, especially the one in which Andrea is
said to have died. [Footnote: This description is due to the kindness
of the present resident in the house, who kindly showed it to the
writer, pointing out all the unrestored portions.] It is probable the
furniture matched the style of the rooms, and that much money was spent
on carved chairs and cassoni. Certain it is that the King of
France’s commissions were unfulfilled, and his money misappropriated.
Andrea would have returned to France, but his wife, who had an Italian
woman’s dread of leaving her own country, put every obstacle in his
way, adding entreaties to tears which the uxorious Andrea could not
resist. As usual he tried to please her, and she only cared to please
herself.
He fell greatly in the estimation of the King, who was justly angry;
albeit the artist salved his own too easy conscience by sending a few
of his own paintings to Francis I., one of which, the Sacrifice of
Abraham, still remains in France, and another a half length figure
of S. John the Baptist. The place of this picture is much
disputed; it is said to be at present in the Pitti Palace. Argenville
speaks of it among the French pictures as if it had returned
subsequently to Florence, while Vasari asserts that it never went
there, but was sold to Ottaviano de’ Medici. [Footnote: Life of
Andrea, del Sarto, vol. in. p. 212.] As Andrea painted no less than
five pictures of this subject, of which Argenville mentions that there
were two in France, one of which was sold to the Grand Duke of Tuscany,
it is probable that the Pitti one is not that painted for Francis I.
The Medici, always patrons of art, did not neglect to enrich their
palaces with the works of Andrea del Sarto. Ottaviano de’ Medici, a
cousin of the reigning branch, was an especial friend of his, from the
time that Andrea began the fresco of Caesar receiving tribute of
animals in the Hall of Poggio a Cajano. The commission came really
from Pope Leo X., who deputed Cardinal Giulio, his cousin, to have the
hall of the favourite family villa adorned with frescoes. He in turn
handed over the direction to Ottaviano, who was a great amateur of art.
It was designed that Andrea del Sarto should cover a third of the Hall,
the other two-thirds being given to Pontormo and Francia Bigio. The
payment of thirty scudi a month was arranged. In this Andrea has shown
his genius in a style entirely new, the composition being crowded, the
perspective intricate, the background a building adorned with statues.
The subject being allegorical, he has given the reins to his fancy and
produced a wonderful assemblage of strange beasts and stranger human
beings, Moors, Indians, and dwarfs. There are giraffes, lions, and all
kinds of animals, which he had an opportunity of studying in the
Serraglio of Florence. The drawing is true and free, the figures and
animals full of life, the colouring as usual well harmonised and
bright. The Pope died about this time in 1522, and the picture was left
to be finished by Allori in 1580.
Ottaviano de’ Medici, being a great lover of art, was often a patron on
his own account; for him Andrea painted the Holy Family now in
the Pitti Palace. It is a most charmingly natural group: the Virgin
seated on the ground dances the divine child astride on her knee, he is
turning his head to the infant S. John who struggles to escape from his
mother’s arms to get to him. The fresh youth of the Virgin and the
saintly age of S. Elizabeth are well contrasted. By the time this
picture was finished the siege of Florence had begun, and when the
painter took it to Ottaviano, he, having other claims on his means,
excused himself from buying it, and recommended Andrea to offer it
elsewhere. But the artist replied, “I have laboured for you, and the
work shall be always yours.” “Sell it and get what you can for it,"
again replied Ottaviano. Andrea carried the painting home again and
would never sell it to any one. A few years after, the siege being
over, and the Medici re-instated, he again took the Holy Family
to Ottaviano, who was so delighted that he paid him double the price
for it.
Ottaviano also bought from Carlo Ginori a Madonna and S.
Job, a nude half figure, which were by Andrea’s hand. He it was who
commissioned him to paint the portrait of Cardinal Giulio, afterwards
Pope Clement VII., and it was also at his instance that the imitation
Raphael was painted for the Duke of Mantua. The Duke had set his heart
on obtaining the picture painted by Raphael representing Leo X.
between the Cardinals Giulio and Rossi, and got a promise of it as
a gift from Pope Clement. His Holiness wrote to Ottaviano desiring him
to have it sent to Mantua. But Ottaviano, appreciating the treasure as
much as the Duke of Mantua, determined to secure it to the house of
Medici. Under the pretence of having a new frame made he gained time,
and meanwhile employing Andrea del Sarto secretly to make an exact copy
of it, he sent that to the Duke instead of the original. So well had
Andrea imitated the great master’s style that every one in Mantua, even
Giulio Romano, Raphael’s own scholar, was deceived, and it was only
some years later that George Vasari divulged the secret and showed
Andrea’s monogram on the side of the panel beneath the frame. This copy
is now at Naples.
The fresco at Poggio a Cajano abandoned, Andrea returned to the Scalzo,
where he painted the Dance of Herodias, Martyrdom of S. John
Baptist, Presentation of the Head, Allegory of Hope, and the
Apparition of the Angel to Zacharias. The last was paid for
August 22nd, 1523.
About this time there was a great wedding in Florence. Pier Francesco
Borgherini espoused Margherita Accajuoli, and Salvi, the bridegroom’s
father, determined to prepare for his son’s bride a wedding chamber
which should be famous in all ages.
Baccio d’ Agnolo had carved wonderful coffers, chairs, and bedsteads in
walnut wood. Pontormo painted beautiful cabinets and cassoni,
and Granacci, Francesco d’ Ubertini Verdi, called Bacchiacca, and
Andrea were all employed on the walls. Andrea furnished two pictures;
the one tells the story of Joseph in Canaan, the other gives his life
in Egypt. The style is that of Piero di Cosimo, but with greater
excellence and more dignified figures. The landscape is highly finished
and minute, and has a part of the story in every nook of it.
The centre group, where Joseph leaves his father and mother to go to
his brethren, is very dignified, although fine enough to be a
miniature. In the second Pharaoh’s palace is [Footnote: Reumont
(Life of Andrea del Sarto, p. 134) dates these works 1523; the
style, which is very much that of Piero di Cosimo, would seem to place
them earlier.] represented as a medieval Italian castle, the dresses
are all Italian, and as an instance of Andrea’s versatility of talent
they are very interesting paintings.
During the siege of Florence, Borgherini was absent, and the picture
dealer, Giovanni Battista della Palla, who prowled like a harpy to
carry off treasures for the King of France, made an effort to obtain
these paintings by inducing the government to confiscate them and sell
them to him. But Margherita was equal to the occasion, and meeting the
despoiler at her door, she poured out such a torrent of indignation,
exhortation, and defiance as drove the broker away crestfallen.
On the Medici’s return della Palla was imprisoned as a traitor, and
beheaded at Pisa. The paintings passed into the possession of the
Medici, by purchase, during Andrea’s life. [Footnote: Biadi,
Notizie, &c., p. 146, note 2.]
From 1524 to 1528 the plague desolated Italy, never entirely leaving
it. During this time Andrea obtained a commission through Antonio
Brancacci, to paint some pictures in the convent of S. Piero at Luco in
Mugello, where he retired with his wife and her relations, and his
pupil Raffaelo. They spent a very pleasant summer: the nuns made much
of his wife and her sisters, and he passed his time in earnest
painting. The fruits of his labour are a Pietà, a Visitation, and
a Head of Christ–almost a replica of the one in the SS. Annunziata.
The Pietà is full of expression and feeling, but more realistic
and less dignified than that of Fra Bartolommeo, which now hangs on the
same wall of the Hall of Apollo at the Pitti.
In colouring also there is a great contrast between the two, that of
Fra Bartolommeo being deep, rich, and mellow, while Andrea’s is more
profuse, diffused, and wanting in depth of shadow.
S. John and the Virgin raise the dead Saviour, the Magdalen and S.
Catherine weep at his feet; S. Peter and S. Paul at the back express
their grief in the manner natural to their characters. S. Peter, in his
vehemence, flings up his arms in a madness of sorrow. S. Paul, with
more dignity, is half stupefied with the intensity of woe.
If those saints had been left in Fra Bartolommeo’s Pietà, the
two pictures would have had the very same figures, in each: but how
different the composition, feeling, and expression! The Frate’s group
is a compact triangle; that of Andrea a scattered arrangement. The
Magdalen of the Frate is overwhelmed with the very excess of love and
grief, all of which is expressed intensely, yet her face is hidden;
that of Andrea is a mere woman dressed in flying scarf and flowing
garments, but with very little soul in her face.
The characteristics of the two painters can be well studied in these
works, so near together, so similar, and yet so different.
For the three works painted at Luco Andrea was paid ninety florins in
gold. The Pietà, was bought in later years by the Grand Duke
Leopold, and now adorns the Pitti Palace.
The Visitation was placed in the church of the convent over a
presepio. [Footnote: In 1818 it was restored by Luigi Scotti and sold.]
Biadi gives the following document:–"Io Andrea d’Angiolo del Sarto, à
di 11 Ottobre 1528 ho ricevuto fiorini 80 d’ oro di quei larghi
[i.e. of two scudi each] della Tavola dell’ Altar grande e di
una mezza tavola della Visitazione, da Donna Caterina della Casa
Fiorentina, Badessa di Luco.” [Footnote: 2 Vol. in. p, 571, note.]
Andrea was paid ten florins for the Head of the Saviour, through
his assistant, Raffaello. This receipt would prove either that he went
to Luco later than 1524, or that he returned there to finish the works
in the year 1528.
On their return to Florence in the autumn Andrea painted a fine work
for his friend, Beccuccio da Gambassi, a glass-worker. It is an
apotheosis of the Madonna, with four figures beneath–S. John
Baptist, Mary Magdalen, S. Sebastian, and S. Rocco; not S.
Onofrio, as Bottari has named it. The predella, now lost, had
portraits of the patron and his wife. Crowe and Cavalcaselle speak of
six saints in this picture, four standing and two kneeling.
This description seems to point more certainly to the Sarzana
Madonna, which is now in the Hall of Apollo, in the Pitti
Palace. That for Beccuccio is described, with the four above-mentioned
saints only, by all the Italian authors.
The tabernacle, at the corner of the convent, outside the Porta Pinti,
Florence, was painted about this time. It is now quite destroyed by age
and weather; a good copy by Empoli, exists, however, in the western
corridor of the Uffizi. It is a charming Holy Family, with the
infant S. John,–a sweet laughing face. The Madonna is a portrait
of Lucrezia.
In the siege when the convent of the Ingesuate–at the corner of which
it stood–was razed to the ground, this fresco, although loosened from
the wall, was spared by the soldiers, who had not courage to injure it.
The Grand Duke Cosimo was anxious to have it brought to Florence, and
often came with engineers and architects, but they never hazarded its
removal. [Footnote: Bocchi, Bellezze di Firenze, p. 482.]
The Duomo of Pisa has five saints painted by Andrea; they originally
formed one large picture in five compartments, and were painted for the
church of the now suppressed convent of S. Agnes; but in 1618 they were
divided into five pictures, and removed to the Duomo, where S.
Catherine Martyr, S. Margaret, S. Peter, and S. John the Baptist
hang on each side of the altar. S. Agnes, with her lamb by her
side, is placed on a pilaster towards the southern door. This and S.
Margaret are especially graceful and expressive. There is much of the
feeling of Correggio, but with more natural grace and less voluptuousness.
The cutting and retouching had injured them greatly, but in 1835 Antonio
Garazalli took off the repainting and restored them more delicately.
In 1525 Andrea had a commission to draw cartoons for painting the
balustrade of the Ringhiera–a kind of wide terrace in front of the
Palazzo della Signoria, from which speeches were made to the populace.
His designs were very beautiful and appropriate, the compartments being
emblematical of the different quarters of the city; besides which were
allegories of mountains, rivers, and virtues. The designs were left
unfinished at his death, and the Ringhiera was never painted.
In 1526-7 he worked at the fresco of the Last Supper, at S.
Salvi, which was intended to have been done when he began the four
saints there, in 1510, had not some misunderstanding between the rulers
of the order prevented their continuation. [Footnote: Vasari’s
Lives, vol. iii. p. 224.] Even now he worked in a desultory
manner, doing it bit by bit, but in the end producing a marvellous
work.
The refectory is a long vaulted hall, and the frescoed table, with its
life-size figures, fills the whole arch of the wall opposite the door.
One’s natural impulse on entering it is to exclaim, “How life-like!"
There is a great and living animation in the figures; the characters of
the Apostles are written on their expressive faces. Judas is not placed
away alone, as in many renderings of the subject, but is next to
Christ, the contrast of the two faces being thus emphasized by
proximity. S. Peter, though old, has all the vehemence and intensity of
his character. Add to the feeling a brilliancy of colour of which
Andrea alone had the secret, for without deep shadows, and keeping up
the same intensity of tone throughout, he yet obtained great harmony
and full relief where others would have produced a clash and flatness.
Messrs. Crowe and Cavalcaselle say with justice, “From the
contemplation of the Cena, at Milan, we should say that the
painter is high bred; looking at that of S. Salvi, that he is
accustomed to lowly company.” [Footnote: Hist. of Painting, vol.
iii. chap. xvii. p. 574.] But in some subjects a rugged strength is
more important than a high refinement, and in the group of humble
fishermen who formed the first church this is not out of place. If he
could only have spiritualised Christ, nothing would be left to be
desired.
Andrea del Sarto was a member of a sacred company called the
"Fraternità del Nicchio,” for which he painted a standard to be carried
in their processions. It is now in the Hall of the Old Masters in the
Uffizi, and is a charming group of S. James, with two children
dressed in white surplices–the habit of the company. The saint is
caressing one, who kneels at his feet; the other has an open book in
his hand. The draperies are especially graceful, and the expressions
soft and pleasing.
After finishing a portrait of the Intendant of the monks at
Vallombrosa, which the said monk afterwards placed in an arbour covered
with vines, regardless of the injuries of wind and rain–Andrea, having
some colours still left on his palette, took up a tile and called his
wife to sit for her portrait, that all might see how well she had kept
her good looks from her youth; but Lucrezia not being inclined to sit,
he got a mirror and painted his own portrait on the tile
instead. It was one of his later works, and Lucrezia kept it till her
death. It is now in the room of portraits in the Uffizi, but much
blackened by time; probably also from the tile not having been properly
prepared. [Footnote: This portrait is given as a frontispiece.]
The next year or two were taken up in producing a number of large
altar-pieces, and in painting pictures for the dealer, Giovanni
Battista della Palla, who was still intent on supplying the King of
France with Italian works of art. For him he painted a Sacrifice of
Abraham, which Vasari thinks one of his most excellent works. The
face of the patriarch is full of faith, and yet self-sacrifice; the
nude figure of Isaac, bronzed in the parts which have been exposed to
the sun, most tenderly expresses a trembling dread, mingled with trust
in his father; the landscape is also very airy and beautiful, and a
characteristic group of a servant and the browsing ass is very
effective in the background.
He also painted a lovely picture of Charity with three Children
for Della Palla. Both these works were done with great care, for he
hoped by their means to regain the lost favour of the King of France.
It was too late for this, however; and, as it happened, neither of
these works reached its destination. The siege of Florence took place
about this time (1529); the dealer, Battista della Palla, had his head
cut off in his dungeon at Pisa, and all hope of his mediation with
Francis I. was at an end. The Charity was sold to Domenico
Conti, the painter, after Andrea’s death, and thence passed into the
hands of the Antinori family. The Sacrifice of Abraham has had
more vicissitudes. Filippo Strozzi purchased and gave it to the
Marchese del Vasto, who had it in his castle at Ischia many years.
Later it was sent from Florence to Modena in exchange for a Correggio,
and Augustus II. of Saxony becoming its purchaser, placed it in the
Dresden Gallery.
This seems to have been a favourite subject with Andrea del Sarto, who
repeated it five times.
1. The one done by himself for the King of France.
2. Also in France, having been purchased from the Grand Duke of
Tuscany. (See Argenville.)
3. The one mentioned above, done for G. B. della Palla.
4. A smaller one, painted for Paolo da Terra Rossa; a fine painting,
for which the artist asked so small a price that the purchaser was
ashamed to pay it. Paolo sent it to Naples.
5. An unfinished painting of Abraham holding Isaac by the Hand,
now in the possession of the Zonadari family, who obtained it from the
Peruzzi.
During the siege, work was found for artists, but of an unpleasant
nature. Andrea was commissioned, in 1530, to paint the effigies of some
traitors on the palace of the Signoria. He dared not refuse, but
remembering that his namesake, Andrea del Castagno, who had been
similarly employed, gained the name of “Andrea degli Impiccati,” he was
anxious that the same name should not attach to himself. Accordingly he
had an enclosed platform made, and giving out that his pupil,
Bernardino del Buda, was going to paint the effigies, he worked at them
himself secretly, till, on being uncovered, they seemed to be real
persons writhing on the gibbet.
No trace of them remains now, but the studies are in the collection of
drawings in the Uffizi.
A fine half-length figure of S. Sebastian, for the brotherhood
of that name, which had its head-quarters in the street in which Andrea
lived, was almost his last work in Florence.
The siege was now over, but the influx of soldiers from the camp
brought a return of the plague, which awakened great terror in the
city. Andrea’s mode of life and love of good living did not conduce to
his safety; he was taken ill suddenly, and gave himself up for lost.
Neither Vasari nor Biadi says he was entirely deserted by his wife;
they only hint that she came to his room as little as she could, having
a great fear of the plague.
It is more than probable that Andrea himself kept her away from him,
for his love was always unselfish, and he thought only of her good.
However this be, he died, aged forty-two, on the 22nd of January, 1531,
and was buried very quietly by the “Brethren of the Scalzo” in the
church of the S. Annunziata. His tomb is beneath the pavement of the
presbytery, on the left hand. His older biographers seem to think this
unostentatious funeral a great slight to his merits, but if there were
any doubts as to his illness being the plague, it would only have been
a natural precaution to avoid spreading contagion by making his
interment quite private.
That Andrea had not wholly neglected his own family is proved by his
will, which left his property (after paying back Lucrezia’s dot
of 100 scudi, and the money for the improvement of the new house in Via
Crocetta for her and her daughter) to his brother Domenico, with the
proviso that after his death half the bequest should be given to
Domenico’s daughter as dot, the rest to accrue to the hospital
of the Innocenti (Foundlings). [Footnote: Ricordanze nel Archivio del
E. Spedate degli Innocenti di Firenze. Biadi, Notizie, p. 127.]
Lucrezia lived to a good old age, being nearly ninety when she died;
she seems to have lived a very quiet life, and to have kept Andrea’s
paintings with great care, except a few only which she sold. The house
in Via Crocetta passed many years afterwards into the possession of
another painter, Zuccheri, who embellished the studio front with
reliefs in stone, representing the paraphernalia of an atelier; but it
is Andrea’s name which lives in the house, as his memory does in the
hearts of the Florentine people, and his works in the cloisters of the
Florentine churches. The people of the city always seem to claim Del
Sarto as especially their own. He is always nostro pittore, or
nostro maestro-and indeed as a master of fresco he never was
surpassed. In colouring he was in his way unique; in modelling,
original and graceful; while the transparent clearness of his shadows
and brilliant blending of tints in the lights render his handling
incomparable. A little more refinement and aesthetic feeling would have
placed him on a level with the great leaders of the Renaissance.
Andrea’s scholars were numerous, though only a few rose to any great
eminence. Of these, JACOPO CARRUCCI, “da Pontormo” (born 1494, died
1557), was by far the most talented. Left an orphan at an early age,
the charge of his sister devolved on him, and he placed her with a
relation while he was pursuing his art training. He studied under a
diversity of masters, including Leonardo da Vinci, Albertinelli, Piero
di Cosimo; and finally, in 1512, he entered Andrea del Sarto’s school,
but did not stay long there either. Some say Andrea was jealous of his
success; he, however, had generosity enough to praise and acknowledge
his talent, and to show his appreciation by giving him important work
to do in his own studio.
Pontormo did the predella to Andrea’s altar-piece of the
Annunciation for the convent of S. Gallo. His hand is to be seen
also in several of his master’s works. He drew public attention first
by painting two figures of Faith and Charity on the escutcheon
of the Medici for Andrea di Cosimo, who had obtained the commission, but
did not feel equal to executing it. Michelangelo, on seeing these figures,
prophesied great things for the youth, who was at that time only nineteen
years of age.
The people of Pontormo, his native town, were so proud of him, that
they sent for him to emblazon the arms of Pope Leo over the gate of
their city.
He was next employed by one of the festal companies of the age, called
the Company of the Diamond, to design cars, banners, and costumes for a
triumphal procession in honour of Leo X.’s elevation to the papal
chair; and he organised a very suggestive array of the ages of man,
illustrated historically. He decorated the Papal Hall for Leo X.’s
entrance, and later began to be employed on more serious and lasting
works.
Some good frescoes of his existed in the convent of Santa Caterina, but
were destroyed when the building was reconstructed in 1688.
A very charming fresco of the Visitation still exists in the
court of the SS. Annunziata. It shows him as a good pure colourist, the
flesh tints being especially tender; the composition is lively, full,
and effective.
In 1518 he painted a fine altar-piece for the church of S. Michele
Visdomini, Florence, by commission of Francesco Pucci. The
Madonna, seated, is showing the Child Jesus to S. Joseph, whose
face is most expressive and full of smiling admiration. S. John Baptist
stands near, at the sides are S. John Evangelist, S. James, and S.
Francis, the latter kneeling in ecstatic admiration.
In some cases he was placed in direct competition with his master,
Andrea del Sarto, being employed by Borgherini to paint the coffers and
cabinets in the same room for which Andrea did the History of
Joseph; and again later at Poggio a Cajano, where the ends of the
great hall were assigned to him to paint, Andrea and Francia Bigio
taking the larger walls at the sides. On one end he designed an
allegory of Vertumnus, with his husbandmen around him busy with
their labours, and on the other Pomona, Diana, &c. Perhaps in
these last he has carried his imitation of Andrea del Sarto rather too
far in the matter of draperies, which are too profuse and studied.
Indeed the whole works are overdone; he was so anxious to rival his
master that he forced his invention, altering and labouring till all
spontaneity was taken out of his work. Some of his frescoes were in the
cloister of the Certosa, but they are not fair specimens of his best
style, as they were done when the Florentine artists were smitten with
the mania of imitating Albrecht Dürer, and in these he has entirely
followed the harder manner of that artist without obtaining his
strength. The frescoes are all scenes from the Life of Christ,
and he spent several years over them; after which he painted an altar-
piece.
Giovanni Battista della Palla commissioned him to paint a picture to be
sent to the King of France, and Pontormo returning wisely to his
natural style, painted one of his masterpieces, the Resurrection of
Lazarus. The Pitti Palace possesses a curious specimen of his work,
the 11,000 martyrs crucified in a wood in the persecution under the
Emperor Diocletian.
He rose to renown as a portrait painter, but lost patronage in later
year by his capricious behaviour, refusing to work except for whom and
when he pleased. In company with his favourite pupil, Bronzino, he did
the frescoes in the Loggie of the Medici villa at Careggi; one Loggia
was soon completed, to the great delight of the Duke, but Jacopo shut
himself up in the second and allowed no one to see what he was doing
for five years; when at length he uncovered the frescoes general
disappointment was the result. He pursued much the same line of conduct
in the frescoes of the roof of the Medici Chapel in San Lorenzo. He
kept the chapel closed with walls and planks for eleven years, no one
seeing his progress except some young men who removed one of the
rosettes from the ceiling to peep in on him, but he discovered their
plan, and closed the holes more assiduously than ever. The composition
is as confused as it is diffusive; he tried to embody the whole
teaching of the Bible, but becoming overwhelmed with the vastness of
his subject, fell short even of the excellence of his own previous
works. He died before this work was completed, of hydropsy, and was
buried in the Servite Church.
GIORGIO VASARI, better known as the chronicler of the works of other
artists than for the excellence of his own, was born at Arezzo, 1512–
died at Florence, 1574. His father was a painter, and the family was
connected by ties of relationship with Luca Signorelli of Cortona.
Among the many masters under whom he studied was Andrea del Sarto. He
did not remain long under his tuition, having contrived to offend
Lucrezia in some way. He painted a great many frescoes at Arezzo, where
he lived in his youth with his paternal uncle Don Antonio. Don Miniato
Pitti, prior of the convent of Monte Oliveti, near Siena, next employed
him to adorn the portico of his church. He had the good fortune to
attract the notice of Cardinal Ippolito de’ Medici, who took him to
Rome in his suite, where he gained much advantage by the study of the
works of the great masters there. The Medici family, especially Andrea
del Sarto’s patron, Ottaviano, were his constant friends: and their
palaces are profusely decorated by him. The Riccardi Palace has a room
with fresco scenes from the life of Cæsar. While painting these Duke
Alessandro gave him a salary of six crowns a month with a place at his
table, and board for his servant, &c. The palace has several oil
paintings by Vasari, amongst which are portraits of the Duke and his
sister. After the death of Duke Alessandro and Ottaviano he wandered
from city to city, painting so energetically that there are few of the
principal towns which do not possess some of his works, especially
Naples, Pisa, Bologna, and Arezzo. The Palazzo San Giorgio of the
Farnese family, in Rome, has a large hall richly frescoed by Vasari,
but the best of his works are to be seen on the walls of the great hall
of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, where he has illustrated the
battles of the Florentines, and in several other rooms of the same
palace; he having continued all the later years of his life in the
service of Duke Cosimo, by whom the palace was restored and decorated.
His works are too numerous and not sufficiently important to catalogue
or describe, his composition is overcrowded and wanting in perspective.
There is generally a superabundance of flesh; muscular limbs in all
attitudes form a great part of his pictures, but as the flesh tints he
used were wanting in mellowness and shadow, and have turned pink with
age, they compare disadvantageously with those of the more solid
masters who preceded him. After all, Vasari’s name and fame rest
principally on the labours of his pen, not those of his brush. His
”Lives of the Painters," although not a model of precision in
facts or chronology, is nevertheless the mine from which all subsequent
art historians quarry to obtain their information.
One of the most valuable books of the day is probably the new edition
of Vasari with corrections and notes taken from the archives by Signer
Gaetano Milanesi.
FRANCESCO ROSSI, DE’ SALVIATI (born at Florence, 1510–died at Borne,
1563) was a great friend of Vasari; his real name was Rossi, his father
being a weaver of velvets, but he obtained the name of Salviati from
being the protégé of the Cardinal of that name. His first master was
Raffaello del Brescia, but in 1529 he, with his friend Nannoccio,
entered the school of Andrea del Sarto, with whom they stayed during
the siege. Becoming known by some paintings done for the friars of the
Badia, Cardinal Salviati took him into his house, gave him a stipend of
four crowns a month, and an apartment at the Borgo Vecchio, he painting
any works the Cardinal wished. Francesco was not idle, a great number
of frescoes, altar-pieces, and portraits, &c., &c., testifying to his
industry. In his later years he was employed with his friend Vasari in
the Palazzo Vecchio, where he painted the frescoes in the smaller Hall
of Audience. These are principally scenes from the Life of
Camillus. The story of the schoolmaster of Falerii is very
spirited, and the Triumph of Camillus varied and pleasing in
colouring. Although melancholy and suspicious, often making enemies and
losing patronage by misunderstandings, Rossi and Vasari were always
faithful to their first boyish friendship, often working together, but
never with any spirit of rivalry. Salviati’s style was bold and
spirited; he was rich in invention, but perhaps a little wild in the
matter of draperies and bizarre costumes. His colouring is more
pleasing than that of Vasari, but is diffusive and wanting in depth.
DOMENICO CONTI never became famous, but in spite of want of genius, he
was Andrea’s favourite pupil. All his master’s designs and cartoons
came into his possession at Andrea’s death, but he was unfortunately
robbed of them soon afterwards. The inscription to Andrea del Sarto
which once existed in the church of SS. Annunziata was put up by Conti.
JACOPO DEL CONTE (1510-1598), who in Vasari’s time lived in Rome, is
chiefly noted for his likenesses of several pontiffs and personages of
the Papal Court. There are a few altar-pieces by him in Rome, and a
Deposition in the church of the Misericordia in Florence, but he
was almost exclusively a portrait painter.
ANDREA SGUAZZELLA, called NANNOCCIO, remained in France after having
accompanied Andrea del Sarto thither. Cardinal Tournon took him under
his patronage, and he painted a large number of works in the style of
Andrea.
JACOPO, called JACONE, was another of Andrea’s favourite disciples. His
frescoes, of which some existed till of late years on the façade of the
Palazzo Buondelmonte, in Florence, were much in Del Sarto’s manner. He
assisted his master in a great many of his works, while of his
independent paintings many were sent to France; no doubt some of these,
as well as Sguazzella’s, figure under the master’s name in that list of
fifty works given by Argenville. He was too idle and fond of pleasure
to rise to eminence, though he did some good frescoes in the Palazzo
Capponi at Florence, and in the Capponi Villa at Montici, and assisted
Jacopo da Pontormo in the Hall of the Medici villa at Careggi. He died
in 1553, in great poverty.
PIER FRANCESCO DI JACOPO DI SANDRO was said to have had some talent. He
and Domenico Conti were employed among others in decorating the court
of the Palazzo Vecchio on the occasion of Cosimo de’ Medici’s marriage
with Leonora di Toledo. There are some altar-pieces of his in the
church of Santo Spirito, Florence.
SOLOSMEO, RAFFAELLO, and BERNARDINO DEL BUDA were three garzoni
in Andrea’s studio. They were employed in the subordinate work and
manual labour, but were not trained as artists.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1886. G. GRUYER. Fra Bartolommeo della Porta and M. Albertinelli.
1903. F. KNAPP. Fra Bartolommeo della Porta.
1922. H. GABLENTZ. Fra Bartolommeo.
1902. M. E. JAMES. Fra Bartolommeo.
1899. H. GUINNESS. Andrea del Sarto. (The Great Masters Series.)
1905. MASTERPIECES OF ANDREA DEL SARTO. (Gowan’s Art Books.)
1928. F. KNAPP. Andrea del Sarto.
1864-66. CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE. A New History of Painting in Italy
from the 2nd to the 16th Century. Three Volumes.

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.

Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
