


Padre Marchese, himself a Dominican, speaks thus of his convent:–"San
Marco has within its walls the Renaissance, a compendium in two
artists. Fra Angelico, the painter of the ideal, Fra Bartolommeo, of
form. The first closes the antique Tuscan school. He who has seen Fra
Angelico, has seen also Giotto, Cimabue, &c. The second represents the
modern school. In him are almost comprised Masaccio, Lorenzo di Credi,
Leonardo, Buonarroti, and Andrea del Sarto.”
The first, Fra Angelico, “sets himself to contemplate in God the fount
and architype of the beautiful, and, as much as is possible to mortal
hands, reproduces and stamps it in those works which a sensual mind
cannot understand, but which to the heavenly soul speak an eloquent
language. Fra Bartolommeo, with more analysis, works thoughtfully ...
he ascends from the effect to the cause, and in created things
contemplates a reflection of spiritual beauty.”
It is true the Dominican order has been as great a patron of arts as
the Franciscan of literature. It united with Niccolo Pisano to give
form to national architecture. It had sculptors, miniaturists, and
glass painters. As a building San Marco has been a shrine of art; since
the time that Michelozzi, with the assistance of the Medici, built the
convent for Sant’ Antonino, and Fra Angelico left the impress of his
soul on the walls, a long line of artist monks has lived within its
cloisters. With San Marco our story has now to deal, for it is
impossible to write Fra Bartolommeo’s life without touching on the
well-known history of Savonarola. The great preacher’s influence in
these years, from 1492 to 1497, entered into almost every individual in
Florence, either to draw them to devotion, or to stir them up to the
greatest opposition.
The artists, whose minds were probably the most impressional, were his
fervent adherents. He has been accused of being the ruin of art, but
“this cry has only arisen in our time; the silence of contemporaries,
although not friendly to him, proves that he was not in that century so
accused.” [Footnote: Gino Capponi, Storia delta Republica di
Firenze, lib. vi. chap. ii.] The only mention of anything of
artistic value is a “tavoliere” [Footnote: A chess or draught board.]
of rich work, spoken of by Burlamacchi and Benivieni, in a “Canzone di
un Piagnone sul bruciamento delle Vanità.” Savonarola himself was an
artist and musician in early life, the love of the beautiful was strong
within him, only he would have it go hand in hand with the good and
true. His dominant spirit was that of reform; as he tried to regenerate
mind, morals, literature, and state government, so he would reform art,
and fling over it the spiritual light which illumed his own soul.
It was natural that such a mind should act on the devotional character
of Baccio. What could he do but join when every church was full of
worshippers, each shrine at the street corners had a crowd of devout
women on their knees before it–when thousands of faces were uplifted
in the vast expanse of the Duomo, and every face burned with fervour as
the divine flame from the preacher lit the lamp of each soul–when in
the streets he met long processions of men, women, and children, the
echoes of whose hymns (Laudi) filled the narrow streets, and went up to
the clear air above them?
Then came that strange carnival when there were no maskers in the city,
but white-robed boys went from house to house to collect the vanities
for the burning–when the flames of the fires, hitherto saturnalian,
were the flames of a holocaust, wherein each one cast the sins and
temptations, even the pretty things which, though dear to himself,
withdrew him from God. And when the white-robed boys came to the studio
of the friends at the gate of S. Pier Gattolini, with what sighs and
self-immolation Baccio looked for the last time at some of his studies
which he judged to come under the head of anathemata, and handed
them over to the acolytes. How Mariotto’s soul, warm to Pagan art,
burned within him at this sacrifice! And how he would talk more than
ever against the monks, and hang up his own cartoons and studies of the
Greek Venus in the studio for Baccio’s behoof!
In these years we have no notice of authentic works done by the
youthful partners, though biographers talk of their having commissions
for madonnas, and other works of art.
In 1497 Francesco Valori, the grand-featured, earnest admirer of
Savonarola, became Gonfaloniere in the time of Piero de’ Medici’s
exile, [Footnote: Gino Capponi, Storia delta Republica di
Firenze, lib. vi. chap. xi. p. 233.] and the friar’s party was in
the ascendent. Rosini [Footnote: Storia delta Pittura, chap.
xvii. p. 48.] says that belonging to a faction was a means of fame, and
that the Savonarola party was powerful, giving this as a reason for
Baccio’s partisanship; but this we can hardly believe, his whole life
proved his earnestness. He was much beloved in Florence for his calm
upright nature and good qualities. He delighted in the society of pious
and learned men, spent much time in the convent, where he had many
friends among the monks; yet with all he kept still faithful to his
early friend Mariotto, whose life was cast so differently. Savonarola’s
faction was powerful, but the Medici had still adherents who stirred up
a strong party against him.
His spirit of reform at length aroused the ire of the Pope, who forbade
him to preach. He disobeyed, and the sermons on Ezekiel were scenes of
tumult; no longer a group of rapt faces dwelling on his words, but
frowns, murmurs, and anathemas from a crowd only kept off him by a
circle of armed adherents round his pulpit.
At length, on June 22nd, the excommunication by Pope Alessandro VI.
(Borgia) fell like a thunderclap, and the Medicean youths marched in
triumphant procession with torches and secular music to burlesque the
Laudi; no doubt Albertinelli was one of these, while Baccio grieved
among the awestruck friars in the convent.
In 1498 Savonarola again lifted up his voice; the church was not large
enough, so he preached beneath the blue sky on the Piazza San Marco;
and Fra Domenico Buonvicini da Pescia, in the eagerness of
partisanship, said that his master’s words would stand the ordeal of
fire. Then came that tumultuous day of April 7th, the “Sunday of the
Olives,” when the Franciscans and Dominicans argued while the fire
burnt out before them, when Savonarola’s great spirit quailed within
him, and the ordeal failed; a merciful rain quenching the flames which
none dared to brave save the undaunted Fra Domenico himself.
There was no painting done in the studio on that day we may be sure.
Baccio was one of the surging, conflicting crowd gathered beneath the
mingling shadows of Orcagna’s arches and Arnolfo’s great palace, and at
eventide he was one of the armed partisans who protected the friar back
to his convent, menaced not only by rains from heaven, but by the
stormy wrath of an angry populace, defrauded of the sight they came to
see.
The next day was the one which determined the painter’s future life.
There was in the city a curious process of crystallisation of all the
particles held in solution round the fire the previous day. The Palazzo
Vecchio attracted about its doors the “Arrabiati.” The “Compagnacci"
assembled, armed, by the Duomo. The streets were full of detached
parties of Piagnoni, treading ways of peril to their centre, San Marco.
Passions raged and seethed all day, till at the hour of vespers a cry
arose, “à San Marco,” and thither the multitude–500 Compagnacci, and
300 Palleschi–rushed, armed with picks and arquebusses, &c. They killed
some stray Piagnoni whom they found praying by a shrine, and placed
guards at the streets which led to the convent; then the assault began.
The church was dimly lighted. Savonarola and Fra Domenico kneeled on
the steps of the altar, with many worshippers around them, singing
tremulous hymns; amongst these were Francesco Valori, Ridolfi, and
Baccio della Porta, but all armed, as Cronaca tells us. They still sang
hymns when the doors were attacked with stones; then leaving the
priests and women to pray for them the men rushed to the defence.
Old Valori, with a few brave friends, guarded the door; others made
loop-holes of the windows and fired out; some went up the campanile,
and some on the roof. Baccio fought bravely among the rest. The
Palleschi were almost repulsed, but at length succeeded in setting fire
to the doors. The church was filled with smoke; a turbulent crowd
rushed wildly in. Savonarola saw his people fall dead beside him on the
altar steps, and, taking up the Sacrament, he fled to the Greek
library, where the messengers of the Signoria came and arrested both
himself and Fra Domenico. It was in the fierce fight that ensued when
the enemies poured in, laying hands sacrilegiously on every thing
sacred, that Baccio made the vow that if he were saved this peril, he
would take the habit–a vow which certainly was not made in a cowardly
spirit, he fighting to the death, and then espousing the losing cause.
[Footnote: Gino Capponi, lib. vi. chaps. i. and ii., and Padre
Marchese, San Marco, p. 147 et seq.]
Then came that sad 23rd of May, the eve of the Ascension, when three
martyrs went calmly to their death beneath the shadow of the old
palace, amidst the insults of an infuriated crowd, and Arno’s yellow
waters received their ashes. [Footnote: Capponi, chap. ii. p. 253.]
[Illustration: SAVONAROLO AS PETER MARTYR. BY FRA BARTOLOMMEO. In
the Accademia delle Belle Arti, Florence.]
After the death of Savonarola the party had many defaulters; but
Baccio, the Delia Robbias, Credi, Cronaca, and many other artists, were
faithful, and even showed their grief by abandoning for a time the arts
they loved. “It almost seemed as if with him they had lost the sacred
flame from which their fervid imagination drew life and aliment."
[Footnote: Marchese, San Marco, lib. iii. p. 261.]
While all these events had been taking place, Baccio had worked as
often as his perturbed spirit would allow, at a great fresco of the
Last Judgment, in a chapel of the cemetery of S. Maria Nuova. A
certain Gerozzi, di Monna Venna Dini, gave him the commission, and as
far as he had gone, the painter had given entire satisfaction. This
fresco, his first as far as is known, shows Baccio’s style as fully as
his later ones. We have here his great harmony of form, and intense
suggestiveness in composition. The infinity of heaven is emblematised
in circles of saints and cherubim around the enthroned Christ. The
cross, a link between heaven and earth, is borne by a trinity of
angels; S. Michael, as the avenging spirit, stands a powerful figure in
the foreground dividing the saved from the lost; the whole composition
forming a heavenward cross on an earthly foundation. There are no caves
and holes of torture with muscular bodies writhing within them; but in
the despairing figures passing away on the right, some with heads bowed
on clasped hands, others lifting up faces and arms in a vain cry for
mercy, what suggestions there are of infinite remorse!–more dignified
far than the distorted sufferers in the torture pits of previous
masters. These are just indicated by two demons, and a subterranean
fire behind the unblest souls. Miss Owen, [Footnote: Art Schools of
Christendom, edited by Prof. Ruskin.] speaking Mr. Ruskin’s
sentiments, calls this a great falling off from Giotto and Orcagna’s
conceptions; but though theirs may be more powerful and terrible, a
greater suggestion of Christian religion is here.
They, and later, Michelangelo, flung Dante’s great struggling soul in
tangible forms upon the walls, and embodied his poem, awful, grand, and
earnest, with all the human passion intensified into human suffering.
Fra Bartolommeo shows the Christian spirit; his faces look beyond the
present judgment, and, instead of wrath, mercy is the predominating
idea. It is like the difference in spirit between the Old Testament and
the New.
The painter’s reverence of Fra Angelico, and estimation of the divinity
of art, is shown by Fra Angelico being placed among the saints of
heaven on the right of the Saviour.
Leonardo’s instructions for shading off a light sky will occur to any
one who studies the finely gradated tints mingling with the clouds
around the celestial group. But grand as the fresco is, and interesting
as it must have been to the artist at this time, when thoughts of
Savonarola mingled with every stroke, he felt he was not fulfilling his
true mission in the world. Drawn more and more to the convent, hallowed
to him by the memory of the martyr-friar, he was also more attuned to
thoughts of retirement by family bereavements–one young brother,
Piero, only being left to him out of the whole circle. The reluctance
to leave this youth alone may have deferred for a time his taking the
monastic vows; but having placed him under the guardianship of Santi
Pagnini, a Dominican, he consigned the Last Judgment to Mariotto
to finish, and leaving his worldly goods to his brother, took the habit
in the convent of S. Domenico, at Prato, on July 26th, 1500, two years
after first making the resolution. His year of probation over, he took
the final vows and became Fra Bartolommeo.
A document in S. Marco proves that he was possessed of worldly goods
when he entered, [Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap
xxvii.] among which were the house of his father in S. Pier Gattolini,
and the podere at Brozzi. Having once given himself up to monasticism,
Fra Bartolommeo would offer no half-service, his brushes were left
behind with all other worldly things, and here closes Baccio della
Porta’s first artistic career.
His sun was set only to rise again to greater brilliance in the future
as Fra Bartolommeo, a name famous for ever in the annals of art.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
