


Andrea’s scholars were numerous, though only a few rose to any great
eminence. Of these, JACOPO CARRUCCI, “da Pontormo” (born 1494, died
1557), was by far the most talented. Left an orphan at an early age,
the charge of his sister devolved on him, and he placed her with a
relation while he was pursuing his art training. He studied under a
diversity of masters, including Leonardo da Vinci, Albertinelli, Piero
di Cosimo; and finally, in 1512, he entered Andrea del Sarto’s school,
but did not stay long there either. Some say Andrea was jealous of his
success; he, however, had generosity enough to praise and acknowledge
his talent, and to show his appreciation by giving him important work
to do in his own studio.
Pontormo did the predella to Andrea’s altar-piece of the
Annunciation for the convent of S. Gallo. His hand is to be seen
also in several of his master’s works. He drew public attention first
by painting two figures of Faith and Charity on the escutcheon
of the Medici for Andrea di Cosimo, who had obtained the commission, but
did not feel equal to executing it. Michelangelo, on seeing these figures,
prophesied great things for the youth, who was at that time only nineteen
years of age.
The people of Pontormo, his native town, were so proud of him, that
they sent for him to emblazon the arms of Pope Leo over the gate of
their city.
He was next employed by one of the festal companies of the age, called
the Company of the Diamond, to design cars, banners, and costumes for a
triumphal procession in honour of Leo X.’s elevation to the papal
chair; and he organised a very suggestive array of the ages of man,
illustrated historically. He decorated the Papal Hall for Leo X.’s
entrance, and later began to be employed on more serious and lasting
works.
Some good frescoes of his existed in the convent of Santa Caterina, but
were destroyed when the building was reconstructed in 1688.
A very charming fresco of the Visitation still exists in the
court of the SS. Annunziata. It shows him as a good pure colourist, the
flesh tints being especially tender; the composition is lively, full,
and effective.
In 1518 he painted a fine altar-piece for the church of S. Michele
Visdomini, Florence, by commission of Francesco Pucci. The
Madonna, seated, is showing the Child Jesus to S. Joseph, whose
face is most expressive and full of smiling admiration. S. John Baptist
stands near, at the sides are S. John Evangelist, S. James, and S.
Francis, the latter kneeling in ecstatic admiration.
In some cases he was placed in direct competition with his master,
Andrea del Sarto, being employed by Borgherini to paint the coffers and
cabinets in the same room for which Andrea did the History of
Joseph; and again later at Poggio a Cajano, where the ends of the
great hall were assigned to him to paint, Andrea and Francia Bigio
taking the larger walls at the sides. On one end he designed an
allegory of Vertumnus, with his husbandmen around him busy with
their labours, and on the other Pomona, Diana, &c. Perhaps in
these last he has carried his imitation of Andrea del Sarto rather too
far in the matter of draperies, which are too profuse and studied.
Indeed the whole works are overdone; he was so anxious to rival his
master that he forced his invention, altering and labouring till all
spontaneity was taken out of his work. Some of his frescoes were in the
cloister of the Certosa, but they are not fair specimens of his best
style, as they were done when the Florentine artists were smitten with
the mania of imitating Albrecht Dürer, and in these he has entirely
followed the harder manner of that artist without obtaining his
strength. The frescoes are all scenes from the Life of Christ,
and he spent several years over them; after which he painted an altar-
piece.
Giovanni Battista della Palla commissioned him to paint a picture to be
sent to the King of France, and Pontormo returning wisely to his
natural style, painted one of his masterpieces, the Resurrection of
Lazarus. The Pitti Palace possesses a curious specimen of his work,
the 11,000 martyrs crucified in a wood in the persecution under the
Emperor Diocletian.
He rose to renown as a portrait painter, but lost patronage in later
year by his capricious behaviour, refusing to work except for whom and
when he pleased. In company with his favourite pupil, Bronzino, he did
the frescoes in the Loggie of the Medici villa at Careggi; one Loggia
was soon completed, to the great delight of the Duke, but Jacopo shut
himself up in the second and allowed no one to see what he was doing
for five years; when at length he uncovered the frescoes general
disappointment was the result. He pursued much the same line of conduct
in the frescoes of the roof of the Medici Chapel in San Lorenzo. He
kept the chapel closed with walls and planks for eleven years, no one
seeing his progress except some young men who removed one of the
rosettes from the ceiling to peep in on him, but he discovered their
plan, and closed the holes more assiduously than ever. The composition
is as confused as it is diffusive; he tried to embody the whole
teaching of the Bible, but becoming overwhelmed with the vastness of
his subject, fell short even of the excellence of his own previous
works. He died before this work was completed, of hydropsy, and was
buried in the Servite Church.
GIORGIO VASARI, better known as the chronicler of the works of other
artists than for the excellence of his own, was born at Arezzo, 1512–
died at Florence, 1574. His father was a painter, and the family was
connected by ties of relationship with Luca Signorelli of Cortona.
Among the many masters under whom he studied was Andrea del Sarto. He
did not remain long under his tuition, having contrived to offend
Lucrezia in some way. He painted a great many frescoes at Arezzo, where
he lived in his youth with his paternal uncle Don Antonio. Don Miniato
Pitti, prior of the convent of Monte Oliveti, near Siena, next employed
him to adorn the portico of his church. He had the good fortune to
attract the notice of Cardinal Ippolito de’ Medici, who took him to
Rome in his suite, where he gained much advantage by the study of the
works of the great masters there. The Medici family, especially Andrea
del Sarto’s patron, Ottaviano, were his constant friends: and their
palaces are profusely decorated by him. The Riccardi Palace has a room
with fresco scenes from the life of Cæsar. While painting these Duke
Alessandro gave him a salary of six crowns a month with a place at his
table, and board for his servant, &c. The palace has several oil
paintings by Vasari, amongst which are portraits of the Duke and his
sister. After the death of Duke Alessandro and Ottaviano he wandered
from city to city, painting so energetically that there are few of the
principal towns which do not possess some of his works, especially
Naples, Pisa, Bologna, and Arezzo. The Palazzo San Giorgio of the
Farnese family, in Rome, has a large hall richly frescoed by Vasari,
but the best of his works are to be seen on the walls of the great hall
of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, where he has illustrated the
battles of the Florentines, and in several other rooms of the same
palace; he having continued all the later years of his life in the
service of Duke Cosimo, by whom the palace was restored and decorated.
His works are too numerous and not sufficiently important to catalogue
or describe, his composition is overcrowded and wanting in perspective.
There is generally a superabundance of flesh; muscular limbs in all
attitudes form a great part of his pictures, but as the flesh tints he
used were wanting in mellowness and shadow, and have turned pink with
age, they compare disadvantageously with those of the more solid
masters who preceded him. After all, Vasari’s name and fame rest
principally on the labours of his pen, not those of his brush. His
“Lives of the Painters," although not a model of precision in
facts or chronology, is nevertheless the mine from which all subsequent
art historians quarry to obtain their information.
One of the most valuable books of the day is probably the new edition
of Vasari with corrections and notes taken from the archives by Signer
Gaetano Milanesi.
FRANCESCO ROSSI, DE’ SALVIATI (born at Florence, 1510–died at Borne,
1563) was a great friend of Vasari; his real name was Rossi, his father
being a weaver of velvets, but he obtained the name of Salviati from
being the protégé of the Cardinal of that name. His first master was
Raffaello del Brescia, but in 1529 he, with his friend Nannoccio,
entered the school of Andrea del Sarto, with whom they stayed during
the siege. Becoming known by some paintings done for the friars of the
Badia, Cardinal Salviati took him into his house, gave him a stipend of
four crowns a month, and an apartment at the Borgo Vecchio, he painting
any works the Cardinal wished. Francesco was not idle, a great number
of frescoes, altar-pieces, and portraits, &c., &c., testifying to his
industry. In his later years he was employed with his friend Vasari in
the Palazzo Vecchio, where he painted the frescoes in the smaller Hall
of Audience. These are principally scenes from the Life of
Camillus. The story of the schoolmaster of Falerii is very
spirited, and the Triumph of Camillus varied and pleasing in
colouring. Although melancholy and suspicious, often making enemies and
losing patronage by misunderstandings, Rossi and Vasari were always
faithful to their first boyish friendship, often working together, but
never with any spirit of rivalry. Salviati’s style was bold and
spirited; he was rich in invention, but perhaps a little wild in the
matter of draperies and bizarre costumes. His colouring is more
pleasing than that of Vasari, but is diffusive and wanting in depth.
DOMENICO CONTI never became famous, but in spite of want of genius, he
was Andrea’s favourite pupil. All his master’s designs and cartoons
came into his possession at Andrea’s death, but he was unfortunately
robbed of them soon afterwards. The inscription to Andrea del Sarto
which once existed in the church of SS. Annunziata was put up by Conti.
JACOPO DEL CONTE (1510-1598), who in Vasari’s time lived in Rome, is
chiefly noted for his likenesses of several pontiffs and personages of
the Papal Court. There are a few altar-pieces by him in Rome, and a
Deposition in the church of the Misericordia in Florence, but he
was almost exclusively a portrait painter.
ANDREA SGUAZZELLA, called NANNOCCIO, remained in France after having
accompanied Andrea del Sarto thither. Cardinal Tournon took him under
his patronage, and he painted a large number of works in the style of
Andrea.
JACOPO, called JACONE, was another of Andrea’s favourite disciples. His
frescoes, of which some existed till of late years on the façade of the
Palazzo Buondelmonte, in Florence, were much in Del Sarto’s manner. He
assisted his master in a great many of his works, while of his
independent paintings many were sent to France; no doubt some of these,
as well as Sguazzella’s, figure under the master’s name in that list of
fifty works given by Argenville. He was too idle and fond of pleasure
to rise to eminence, though he did some good frescoes in the Palazzo
Capponi at Florence, and in the Capponi Villa at Montici, and assisted
Jacopo da Pontormo in the Hall of the Medici villa at Careggi. He died
in 1553, in great poverty.
PIER FRANCESCO DI JACOPO DI SANDRO was said to have had some talent. He
and Domenico Conti were employed among others in decorating the court
of the Palazzo Vecchio on the occasion of Cosimo de’ Medici’s marriage
with Leonora di Toledo. There are some altar-pieces of his in the
church of Santo Spirito, Florence.
SOLOSMEO, RAFFAELLO, and BERNARDINO DEL BUDA were three garzoni
in Andrea’s studio. They were employed in the subordinate work and
manual labour, but were not trained as artists.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1886. G. GRUYER. Fra Bartolommeo della Porta and M. Albertinelli.
1903. F. KNAPP. Fra Bartolommeo della Porta.
1922. H. GABLENTZ. Fra Bartolommeo.
1902. M. E. JAMES. Fra Bartolommeo.
1899. H. GUINNESS. Andrea del Sarto. (The Great Masters Series.)
1905. MASTERPIECES OF ANDREA DEL SARTO. (Gowan’s Art Books.)
1928. F. KNAPP. Andrea del Sarto.
1864-66. CROWE AND CAVALCASELLE. A New History of Painting in Italy
from the 2nd to the 16th Century. Three Volumes.
 

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
