


From 1511 to 1514 Andrea was employed on the two last frescoes in the
courtyard of the SS. Annunziata the Epiphany and the Nativity
of the Virgin. The sum fixed for these was ninety-eight lire, but
the Servite brothers augmented it by forty-two lire more, seeing the
work was “veramente maravigliosa"; thus these two were paid at the same
rate as the other five of S. Filippo–seventy lire or ten scudi each.
In the Nativity, one of the finest of his frescoes, we see his
favourite double grouping, the interest in the mother being kept to one
side, that of the child and its attendants to the other-a balance of
form united by Joachim, a stern, finely moulded figure in the centre.
The attitudes are natural, the draperies free and graceful. Old Vasari
justly remarks “pajono di carne le figure.” The woman standing in the
centre of the room is Lucrezia della Fede; this is the first known
likeness of her. There is a richness of colour without impasto, a
modulation of shade giving full relief without startling contrast, a
clear air below and celestial haze in the angel-peopled clouds above.
This might well be classed as on the highest level ever reached in
fresco. Nearly fifty years after it was painted, while Jacopo d’Empoli
was copying this fresco, an old woman came through the courtyard to
mass, and, stopping to watch the young artist at his work, began to
talk of the days of her youth and beauty when she sat for the likeness
of that natural figure in the midst, no doubt sighing as she looked at
the freshness of the fresco, and thought of her many wrinkles and aged
limbs, she being nearly fourscore at the time.
The Epiphany is also a remarkable work, more lively than the
last; it is also less carefully painted, the graceful feminine element
is wanting; there is plenty of activity, a crowded composition, and
richness of colour. Three figures are especially interesting as
likenesses; that of the musician Francesco Ajolle–a great composer of
madrigals, who went to France in 1530, and spent the remainder of his
life there; Sansovino, on the right of Ajolle; and near him Andrea
himself–the same face as the portrait in the Uffizi already spoken of.
The Madonna del Sacco, over the door of the entrance to the
church from the cloister, would seem to have been painted in the same
year, 1514, judging from Biadi’s extract from the MS. account books of
the Servite Fathers existing in the archives, where is an entry
“Giugno, 1514, ad Andrea del Sarto, per resto della Madonna del Sacco,
lire 56.” This term resto (remainder) would imply a previous
payment. The money was a thank-offering from a woman for having been
absolved from a vow by one of the Servite priests. Like all his other
frescoes of this church, Andrea only gained ten scudi for this
masterpiece. The date of MDXXV. and the words “Quem genuit adoravit” on
the pilasters of this work have led most writers to suppose it painted
in that year; but it is probable they were added by a later hand. Biadi
[Footnote: Biadi, Notizie, &c., p. 42 note.] says the letters
are of the style of nearly two centuries later, that Andrea would have
signed it, like all his other and works, with his monogram of the
crossed A’s (i.e. Andrea d’ Agnolo). For charming soft harmonies of
colour, simplicity, and grace of design, this surpasses all his other
frescoes. The Madonna has an imposing grandeur of form, there is a
boyish strength and moulding in the limbs of the child which is very
expressive, the dignity of Joseph and majesty of the Virgin are not to
be surpassed; and yet the whole is given in a space so cramped that all
the figures have to be reclining or sitting.
[Illustration of Monogram]
After this Andrea returned to the Scalzo, the Barefoot Brothers
offering better pay than the Servites. Here he did the allegory of
Justice and the Sermon of S. John in monochrome. In these
he took a fancy to retrograde his style, for they have the rugged force
and angular form that recalls the more stern old Italian masters, or
that Titan of northern art, Albrecht Dürer.
Of his works in oil at this era we may class–
1. The Story of Joseph, painted for Zanobi Girolami Bracci,
which Borghini judges a beautiful picture. The figures were small, but
the painting highly finished. It came afterwards into the possession of
the Medici family.
2. A Madonna, with decorations and models surrounding it like a
frame, was painted for Sansovino’s patron, Giovanni Gaddi, afterwards
clerk of the chamber to Ferdinand I. It was existing in the collection
of the Gaddi Pozzi family in Borghini’s time.
3. Annunciation, for Giovanni di Paolo Merciajo, now in the Hall
of Saturn in the Pitti Palace. It is a pretty composition, the Virgin
sitting, yet half kneeling, the angel on his knees before her. There is
a yellowish light in the sky between two looped dark green curtains;
the angel’s yellow robe takes the light beautifully.
4. Madonna and Child, in the “Hall of the Education of Jupiter"
in the Pitti Palace, one of his most pleasing groups. This is supposed
by the commentators of Vasari to be the altarpiece painted for Giovanni
di Paolo Merciajo, but Biadi traces it through the possession of
Antonio, son of Zanobi Bracci, to its present possessors. The mistake
arises from Vasari often confusing the names Annunciations and
Assumptions with Madonnas.
5. A Holy Family, for Andrea Santini, which awakened great
admiration in Florence. It was in the possession of Signer Alessandro
Curti Lepri, by whose permission Morghen’s print was taken.
6. The Head of our Saviour, over the altar of the SS.
Annunziata, ordered by the sacristan of the order. A magnificent head,
full of grandeur and expression, and very clear in the flesh tints.
Empoli made several copies of it.
7. The Madonna di San Francesco, Andrea’s masterpiece among
easel pictures. It was a commission from a monk of the order of
“Minorites of Santa Croce,” who was intendant of the nuns of S.
Francesco, and advised them to employ Andrea. In grandiose simplicity
this surpasses Albertinelli’s Visitation, in soft gradations and
rich mellowness of colour it equals Fra Bartolommeo at his best, for
tenderness in the attitude of the child it is quite Raphaelesque. The
Madonna is standing on a pedestal adorned with sculptured harpies. She
holds the Divine Child in one arm; its little hands are twined tenderly
round her neck, and it seems to be climbing closer to her. The two
children at her feet give a suggestive triangular grouping, while the
dignified figures of S. Francis and S. John the Evangelist form
supports on each side, and rear up a pyramid of beauty. Rosini’s term
“soave” just expresses this picture, so fused and soft, rich yet
transparent in the colouring. The olive-brown robe of one saint is
balanced by the rich red of the other. In the Virgin, a deep blue and
mellow orange are combined by a crimson bodice. The price paid to the
painter for this was low because he asked little; but a century or two
later, Ferdinando de’ Medici, son of Cosmo III., spent 20,000 scudi to
restore the church, and had a copy of the picture made in return for a
gift of the original, which is now the gem of the Tribune in the
Uffizi.
8. The Disputa, di S. Agostino is another masterpiece, showing
as much power as the last-named work displays of softness. It was
painted at the order of the Eremite monks of San Gallo for their church
of San Jacopo tra Fossi, where it was injured by a flood in 1557, and
removed later to the Hall of Saturn in the Pitti Palace. The
composition is level, the four disputing saints standing in a row, the
two listeners, S. Sebastian and Mary Magdalen, kneeling in front. S
Agostino, with fierce vehemence, expounds the mystery of the Trinity;
S. Stephen turns to S. Francesco interrogatively, S. Domenico (whom
Vasari, by the way, calls S. Peter Martyr) has a face full of silent
eloquence–he seems only waiting his turn to speak. In S. Sebastian we
have a good study from the nude, and in Mary Magdalen’s kneeling
figure–a charming portrait of Lucrezia–is concentrated the principal
focus of colour.
9. Four Saints, SS. Gio. Battista, Gio. Gualberto, S. Michele,
and Bernardo Cardinale, a beautifully-painted picture, once in the
Hermitage of Vallombrosa. There were originally two little angels in
the midst dividing the saints, as in our illustration. When the picture
was transferred to the Gallery of the Belle Arti, where it now is, the
angels were taken out and the divided saints brought into a more
compact group. The angels are in a frame between two frescoed Madonnas
of Fra Bartolommeo.
By this time the fame of Andrea del Sarto, both as a fresco and oil
painter, had risen to the highest point. Michelangelo only echoed the
opinion of others when he said to Raphael, “There is a little fellow in
Florence who will bring the sweat to your brow if ever he is engaged in
great works.” His style of composition was important, his figures
varied and life-like, his draperies dignified. “The main excellence,
however, in which Andrea stands unique among his contemporaries rests
in the incomparable blending of colour, in the soft flesh tints, in the
exquisite chiaroscuro, in the transparent clearness even of his deepest
shadows, and in his entirely new manner of perfect modelling."
[Footnote: Lübke History of Art, vol. ii. p. 241.] His method,
as shown in an unfinished picture of the Adoration of the Magi
in the Guadagni Palace, was to paint on a light ground; the sketch was
a black outline, the features and details not defined, but often
roughly indicated. He finished first the sky and background. The flesh
tints, draperies, &c., were all true in tone from the first laying in.
[Footnote: Eastlake’s Materials for History of Oil Fainting.] He
did not place shades one over the other, and fuse them together glaze
by glaze as Leonardo did, but used an opaque dead colouring which
allowed of correction; the system was rapid, but deficient in depth and
mellowness; “the lights are fused and bright,” but “the shadows, owing
to their viscous consistency, imperfectly fill the outlines."
[Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle, vol. in. chap. xvii. p. 670.] In a
Holy Family in the Louvre, S. Elizabeth’s hand is painted across
S. John, and shows the shadow underneath it, being grey at that part.
Though more solid, he could not paint light over dark without injuring
his brilliance of colour.
Albertinelli, on the contrary, when he painted and repainted his
Annunciation, washed out the under layer with essential oil
before making his “pentimenti” or corrections, and in this way the
thinness was kept.
In Andrea’s early style this thinness is apparent, especially in the
Joseph series, painted for Pier Francesco Borgherini.
Biadi classes Andrea’s works in three styles. The first showing the
influence of Piero di Cosimo, the second–to which the best works in
the Servi cloisters belong–is a larger and more natural style, after
the study of Michelangelo and Leonardo.
The third is the natural development in his own practice of a perfect
knowledge of art, and a just appreciation of nature. The Birth of
the Baptist and the Cenacolo, of San Salvi, belong to his
last and greatest manner. In 1515 the Florentine artists were employed
on more perishable works than frescoes. Leo X., the Medici Pope who had
been elected in 1513, made his triumphal entry into Florence on the 3rd
of September, 1515, on his way to meet Francis I. of France at Bologna.
All the guilds and ranks of Florence vied with each other to make his
reception as artistic as possible. He and his suite were obliged to
stay three days in the Villa Gianfigliazzi at Marignolle while the
triumphal preparations were being completed. The churches had temporary
façades of splendid architecture in fresco; arches were erected
at the Porta Romana and Piazza San Felice, covered with historical
paintings; Giuliano del Tasso adorned the Ponte Santa Trinità with
statues; Antonio San Gallo made a temple on the Piazza della Signoria,
and Baccio Bandinelli prepared a colossus in the Loggia dei Lanzi.
Various decorations adorned other streets, and Andrea del Sarto
surpassed them all with a façade to the Duomo, painted in
monochrome on wood. His friend Sansovino designed the architecture, and
he painted the sculpture and adornments with such effect that the Pope
declared no work in marble could have been finer.
Andrea lent his talent to another kind of decorative art. The guild of
merchants were desirous of inaugurating a festa for the day of S.
Giovanni, and had ten chariots made from the model of the ancient Roman
ones, to institute chariot races in the piazza. Andrea painted several
of these with historical subjects, but they have long been lost. The
chariot races were revived under the Grand Dukes, but not with any
success.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
