


Four years had passed, and the monk had never touched a pencil, but his
mission in art was not fulfilled, and events were working towards that
end, for the spirit of art once awakened could not die either in that
convent or in that age.
His friend, Mariotto, kept him au courant in all the gossip of
art, and told him of the great cartoons of Leonardo and Michelangelo,
which he too went to see. They might have inspired him afresh, or
perhaps in advising Albertinelli he himself felt impelled to paint, or
possibly the visits of Raphael in 1504 influenced him.
Padre Marchese takes the conventional view, and says that Santi
Pagnini, the oriental scholar and lover of art, came back to S. Marco
in 1504 as prior, and used not only his entreaties, but his authority,
to induce Fra Bartolommeo to recommence painting. However this may be,
it is certain that when Bernardo del Bianco, who had built a beautiful
chapel in the Badia from Rovezzano’s designs, wished for an altar-piece
worthy of its beauty, which he felt no hand could execute so well as
that of the Frate–he yielded to persuasion, and the Vision of S.
Bernard was begun. The contract is dated 18th November, 1504; a
part payment of sixty florins in gold was made 16th of June, 1507.
[Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie, iii. vol. ii. p. 594.]
This picture, now in the Belle Arti of Florence, is so much injured by
re-painting that some parts seem even crude. The saint is on his knees
writing, while the vision of the Virgin and Child stands poised in air
before him; she inspires his pen, and the infant Christ gives His
blessing on the work. There is great spirituality and ecstasy in St.
Bernard’s face, his white robe contrasts well with two saints behind
him, which carry out Fra Bartolommeo’s favourite triangular grouping,
and with a rich harmony of colour balance his white robe.
The Virgin is drawn with great nobility and grace, her drapery
admirably majestic, yet airy, and a sweet, infantile playfulness
renders the Child charming. The angels beneath the Virgin’s feet are
lovely, but the group of seraphs behind are the least pleasing of all.
They are of the earth, earthy, and seem reminiscences of the Florentine
maidens the artist met in the streets. Possibly this is the part most
injured by the restorer’s hand. The colouring of the two saints behind
S. Bernard-one in a green robe with bronze-gold shades, and the other
blue and orange-is very suggestive of Andrea del Sarto, and seems to
render probable Rosini’s assertion that the Frate “taught the first
steps of this difficult career to that artist who alone was called
’senz’ errori.’”
Having once retaken the brush, Fra Bartolommeo recovered his former
skill and fame; a beautiful specimen of this period is the Meeting
of Christ with the Disciples of Emmaus (1506), a fresco in a lunette
over the door of the refectory at S. Marco; in which he combines a
richness of colouring rarely obtained in fresco, with a drawing which
is almost perfect. Fra Niccolò della Magna, who was prior in that year,
and left in 1507 to become Archbishop of Capua, sat for one of the
saints. Contemporory with this may be dated also the figure of the
Virgin, painted for Agnolo Doni, now in the Corsini gallery in Rome.
Giovanni de’ Medici also gave him a commission.
Meanwhile the S. Bernard was not paid for. Fra Bartolommeo
priced it at 200 ducats, and the convent being the gainer by his works,
took his own valuation. Bernardo offered only eighty ducats; the Frati
were indignant, and called in the Abbot of the Badia as umpire; he
being unable to move Bernardo, retired from office; then a council of
friends was resolved on, in which Mariotto was for the painter, and
Lorenzo de Credi for the purchaser; but this also failed.
It was next proposed to submit the question to the Guild of Druggists
(arte degli speziali), which included at that time also doctors
and painters; but the convent, refusing lay judgment, took the offer of
Francesco Magalotti, a relative of Bernardo, who priced it at 100
ducats, and the monks had to be satisfied. The dispute ended July 17th,
1507. [Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap, xxvii. p.
245, and Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., vol. ii. pp. 42 to 45.]
All writers agree as to the fact of Fra Bartolommeo’s friendship with
Raphael, but very few are decided as to its date. Raphael was in
Florence in 1504, but then Fra Bartolommeo had not re-commenced
painting, and would have no works in the convent to excite his
admiration of the colouring. Padre Marchese, following Rosini and Padre
Luigi Pungeleoni, asserts that this intimacy was during Raphael’s
second visit in 1506, when he might have seen the newly-finished fresco
of The Disciples at Emmaus. It is undoubted that their intercourse
was beneficial to both. Raphael studied anew Leonardo’s principles of
colour under Fra Bartolommeo’s interpretation of them, and the Frate
improved his knowledge of perspective and harmony of composition. It is
said they worked together at some pictures, of which one is in France, and
another at Milan; but there is not sufficient evidence to prove this.
It is also thought that Fra Bartolommeo helped in the composition of
Raphael’s famous Madonna del Baldacchino, which is truly very
much in his style.
The year 1508 marks the Frate’s first acquaintance with the Venetian
school, which was not without its influence upon him. Frequent
interchange of visits took place between the Dominicans in the
different parts of Italy; and Fra Bartolommeo took the opportunity then
offered him of going to visit his brethren at Venice.
His namesake, Baccio di Monte Lupo, a sculptor who had fled from
Florence after the death of Savonarola, and who had fought side by side
with Baccio in the siege of S. Mark’s church, was in Venice at that
time, working on the tomb of Benedetto da Pesaro in the church of the
Frati, and he was only too delighted to show the beauties of the Queen
of the Adriatic to an artistic mind. Tintoretto was not yet born;
Titian was only just rising into fame, though his style had not yet
become what it was after Giorgione’s influence; but Fra Bartolommeo
must have found much that was sympathetic in the exquisite works of
Giovanni Bellini and his school, and much to admire in the glorious
colouring of Giorgione.
Father Dalzano, the vicar of the monastery of S. Peter Martyr at
Murano, gave the Florentine monk a commission for a picture of the
value of seventy or 100 ducats. Not having time to paint this during
his stay, he promised to execute it on his return to Florence, and the
vicar paid him in advance twenty-eight ducats in money and colours; the
rest was to be raised by the sale of some MS. letters from S. Catherine
of Siena, which a friend of Father Dalzano near Florence held in
possession.
Fra Bartolommeo, having brought home from the Venetian school a new
impulse for painting, and wishing to diffuse the religious influence of
art more widely, desired to enlarge his atelier and school at San
Marco. His only assistants in the convent were Fra Paolino of Pistoja,
and one or two miniaturists, who were only good at missals. Fra Paolino
(born 1490) took the vows at a very early age, and was removed to
Florence from Prato with Fra Bartolommeo. He was the son of a painter,
Bernardino di Antonio, but though he learned the first principles from
him, his real art was imbibed from the Frate, under whom, together with
Mariotto, he worked for years.
But this youthful scholar was not enough for Fra Bartolommeo’s new
energies. He pined for his old friend, Mariotto, who could follow out
his designs in his own style so closely, that an unpractised eye could
not see the difference of hand; and such was his influence on the
rulers of the order, that they allowed a most unique partnership to be
entered into.
The parties were, Albertinelli on one side, and the convent and Fra
Bartolommeo on the other. The partners to provide the expenses, and the
profits to be divided between the convent and Mariotto; the vow of
poverty not allowing Fra Bartolommeo as an individual any personal
share. This began in 1509 and lasted till 1512. The inventory of the
profits and the division made when the partnership was dissolved, given
entire by Padre Marchese, [Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie,
&c., vol. ii.] are very interesting. The two artists had separate
monograms to distinguish the pictures which were specially their own,
besides which the monk signed his with the touching petition, “orate
pro pictore,” his friend merely Latinising his name; the works
painted together were signed by the combined monograms. Before setting
a hand to anything else, the Frate fulfilled his engagement to the
Venetian prior, for whom he painted the Eternal in Heaven,
surrounded by saints and angels; but of this we will speak later.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
