


The scholars of Mariotto Albertinelli were much more important in the
annals of art, the principal ones being Bugiardini, Francia Bigio,
Visino, and Innocenza d’ Imola.
Giuliano Bugiardini should be called the assistant rather than the
scholar of Albertinelli, being older than his master. He was born in
1471 in a suburb outside the Via Faenza, Florence, and was placed in
the shop of Domenico Ghirlandajo, where his acquaintance with
Michelangelo–begun in the Medici Gardens–ripened into intimacy, and
he was employed by him in the Sistine Chapel. Giuliano had that happily
constructed mind which, with an ineffable content in its own works,
will pass through life perfectly happy in the feeling that in reaching
mediocrity it has achieved success. Not only wanting talent to produce
better works, he lacked also the faculty of perceiving where his own
were faulty, and having a great aptitude for copying the works of
others, he felt himself as great as the original artists. Michelangelo
was always amused with his naïve self-conceit, and kept up a friendship
with him for many years. He even went so far as to sit to Bugiardini
for his likeness, at the request of Ottaviano de’ Medici. Giuliano,
having painted and talked nonsense for two hours, at last exclaimed, to
his sitter’s great relief, “Now, Michelangelo, come and look at
yourself; I have caught your very expression.” But what was
Michelangelo’s horror to see himself depicted with eyes which were
neither straight nor a pair! The worthy artist looked from his work to
the original, and declared he could see no difference between them, on
which Michelangelo, shrugging his shoulders, said, “It must be a defect
of nature,” and bade his friend go on with it. This charming portrait
was presented to Ottaviano de’ Medici, with that of Pope Clement
VII., copied from Sebastian del Piombo, and is now in the Louvre.
Bugiardini’s works always take the style of other masters. There is a
Madonna in the Uffizi, and one in the Leipsic Museum, both in
Leonardo’s style, with his defects exaggerated. The former is a sickly
woman in a sentimental attitude, the child rather heavy, the colouring
is bright and well fused; he has evidently adopted the method which he
had seen Albertinelli use in his studio.
During a stay in Bologna he painted a Madonna and Saints as an
altar-piece for the church of S. Francesco, besides a Marriage of S.
Catherine, now in the Bologna Pinacoteca. The composition of this
is not without merit; the child Jesus seated on his mother’s knees,
gives the ring to S. Catherine, little S. John stands at the Virgin’s
feet, S. Anthony on her left. The colouring is less pleasing, the flesh
tints too red and raw.
A round picture in the Zambeccari Gallery, Bologna, shows him in
Michelangelo’s style. The Virgin is reading on a wooded bank, but looks
up to see the infant Christ greet the approaching S. John Baptist; this
is carefully, if rather hardly, painted. The lights in the Saviour’s
hair have been touched in with gold. The time of his stay in Bologna is
uncertain, but in 1525 he was in Florence, and drawing designs for the
Ringhiera with Andrea del Sarto. There is a document in the archives,
proving that on October 5th, 1526 Bugiardini was paid twenty florins in
gold for his share of the work. He obtained some rank as a portrait
painter, in spite of his failure in that of Michelangelo; and had
commissions from many of the celebrities of Florence. It was in
original composition that his powers failed him. Messer Palla Rucellai
ordered a picture from him of the Martyrdom of S. Catherine,
which he began with the intention of making it a very fine work indeed.
He spent several years in representing the wheels, the lightnings and
fires in a sufficiently terrible aspect, but had to beg Michelangelo’s
assistance in drawing the men who were to be killed by those heavenly
flames; his design was to have a row of soldiers in the foreground, all
knocked down in different attitudes. His friend took up the charcoal
and sketched in a splendid group of agonised nude figures; but these
were beyond his power to shade and colour, and Tribolo made him a set
of models in clay, in the attitudes given by Michelangelo, and from
these he finished the work; but the great master’s hand was never
apparent in it. Bugiardini died at the age of seventy-five.
Of Francesco Bigi, commonly called Francia Bigio or Franciabigio, so
much is said in the following life of Andrea del Sarto, that a slight
sketch will suffice here. He was the son of Cristofano, and was born in
1482. His early studies were made in the Brancacci Chapel, and the
Papal Hall–where he drew from the cartoons in 1505-6, and the studio
of Mariotto Albertinelli, from which he passed to his partnership with
Andrea del Sarto in 1509. Thus it is that his first style was marked by
the influence of Mariotto and Fra Bartolommeo, while in his later works
he approximated more to Andrea del Sarto.
Two of his early paintings were placed in the church of S. Piero
Maggiore, one a Virgin and Child of great beauty. The infant
clasps its arms round its mother’s neck–a charming attitude–which
suggests a playful effort to hide from the young S. John, who is
running towards him, by nestling closer to the dearer resting place.
The picture is now in the Uffizi and has been long known as
Raphael’s Madonna del Pozzo. [Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle,
History of Painting, vol. iii. chap. xv. p. 501.] No greater
testimony to Francia Bigio’s excellence can be given than the frequency
of his works being mistaken for those of Raphael, but the influence of
his contemporaries was always strong upon him. The Annunciation,
painted for the same church, is also described by Vasari as a carefully
designed work, though somewhat feeble in manner. The angel is lightly
poised in air, the Virgin kneeling before a foreshortened building. The
picture was lost sight of in the demolition of the church, but Crowe
and Cavalcaselle [Footnote: Crowe and Cavalcaselle, History of
Painting, Vol. iii. p. 500.] believe they have discovered it in a
picture at Turin, the authorship of which is avowedly doubtful. They
mention, however, a celestial group of the Eternal Father in a cherub-
peopled cloud, sending his blessing in the form of a dove, with a ray
of glory. Surely if this be the one described by Vasari [Footnote:
Vasari, vol. iii. p. 336] so minutely, he would not have omitted a part
of the subject so important to the picture.
In 1509 we may presumably date the partnership with Andrea del Sarto,
that being about the time when they began to work together in the
Scalzo. Francia Bigio painted some frescoes in the church of S. Giobbe,
behind the Servite Monastery. A Visitation was in a tabernacle
at the corner of the church, and subjects from Job’s life on a pilaster
within it: these have long ago disappeared. The altar-piece of the
Madonna and Job, which he painted in oil for the same church,
has been more fortunate, as it still exists in the Tuscan School in the
Uffizi. Though much injured, it shows his earlier style. The Calumny
of Apelles in the same gallery is a curious picture. It is hard and
dull in colouring, the prevailing tone being a heavy drab; there are
several nude figures, of doubtful forms as to beauty of drawing, the
flesh is painted in a smooth glazed style, without relief or
tenderness.
Francia Bigio shines more in fresco than in oil; his hardness is less
apparent, and he gains in freedom and brilliance of colouring in the
more congenial medium. The finest of his frescoes is, unfortunately,
spoiled by his own hand, and remains as a memorial of his genius and
hasty temper. I allude to the Sposalizio (A.D. 1513) in the
courtyard of the Servite church, where Andrea did his series of
frescoes from the life of Filippo Benizzi. The composition is grand and
carefully thought out, the colouring bright and pleasing; perhaps in
emulating Andrea’s luxurious style of drapery he has gone a little too
far, and crowded the folds. The bridegroom is a noble figure, and shows
in his face his gladness in the blossoming rod. A man in the foreground
breaks a stick across his knees. The commentators of Vasari have taken
this to emblematize the Roman Catholic legend of the Virgin having
given rods to each of her suitors, and chosen him whose rod blossomed.
Graceful women surround the Virgin, but there is perhaps a too marked
sentimentality about these which suggests a striving after Raphael’s
style. There is, however, a great touch of nature in a mother with a
naughty child, who sits crying on the ground, much to the mother’s
distress. Francia Bigio commenced this in Andrea’s absence in France,
which so excited his former comrade’s emulation that he did his
Visitation in great haste, to get it uncovered as soon as
Francia Bigio’s. In fact, Andrea’s works were ready by the date of the
annual festa of the Servites, and the monks, being anxious to uncover
all the new frescoes for that day, took upon them to remove the
mattings from that of Francia Bigio as well, without his permission,
for he wished to give a few more finishing touches. So angry was he, on
arriving in the cloister, to see a crowd of people admiring his work in
what he felt to be an imperfect condition, that in an excess of rage he
mounted on the scaffolding which still remained, and, seizing a hammer,
beat the head of the Madonna to pieces, and ruined the nude figure
breaking the rod. The monks hastened to the scene in an uproar of
remonstrance, the frantic artist’s destructive hand was stayed by the
bystanders, but so deep was his displeasure that he refused to restore
the picture, and no other hand having touched it, the fresco remains to
this day a fine work mutilated. It shows him artistically in his very
best, and morally, at his worst, phase. In 1518, while Andrea was in
France, the monks of the Scalzo employed Francia Bigio to fill two
compartments in their pretty little cloister, where Andrea had
commenced his Life of S. John Baptist. These are spoken of more
at length in the life of that master, who on his return took the work
again in his own hands. In 1521 Bigio competed with Andrea and
Pontormo, in the Medici Villa at Poggio a Cajano; Andrea’s Cæsar
receiving Tribute occupies one wall of the hall, and Francia
Bigio’s Triumph of Cicero another. The subjects were selected by
the historian, Messer Paolo Giovio, Bishop of Nocera; it only remained
for the artists to make the most of the chosen themes. Francia Bigio
filled his background with a careful architectural perspective, and a
crowd of muscular Romans are grouped before it. This also was left
unfinished at the Pope’s death, and Allori completed it in 1582.
Francia Bigio, however, did many of the gilded decorations of the hall.
In the Dresden Gallery is a work, Scenes from the Life of David, signed
A. S., MDXXIII., and his monogram, a painting very much in the style of
Andrea del Sarto’s Life of Joseph. Reumont [Footnote: Life of
Andrea del Sarto, p. 138 et seq.] claims it as the joint work of Andrea
and Francia Bigio, founding his opinion on the letters A. S. before the
date; but the letters mean only Anno salutis, and are used in
very many of Francia Bigio’s signed paintings. He had the commission
from Gio Maria Benintendi in 1523. It is one of those curious pictures
which have many scenes in one–a style which militates greatly against
artistic unity. On the right is David’s palace, on the left Uriah’s;
David is at his door watching Bathsheba and her maidens bathing. In the
centre is the siege of Rabbah; another well-draped group represents
David receiving Uriah’s homage. In the foreground David gives wine to
Uriah at a banquet. There is careful painting and ingenious
composition, but a less finished manner of colouring than in Andrea’s
Joseph, which was painted about the same time for Pier Borgherini.
Like Ridolfo Ghirlandajo, Francia Bigio fell off in his later style,
partly because his ambition failed him, and also because he began to
look on art as a means of livelihood–a motive which is certain death
to high art.
He was especially celebrated as a portrait painter, several of his
works having been attributed to Raphael. Among these are one at the
Louvre and one at the Pitti Palace, both portraits of a youth in tunic
and black cap, with long hair flowing over his shoulders; one in the
National Gallery, formerly in Mr. Fuller Maitland’s collection; the
portrait of a jeweller, dated A. S., MDXVI. in Lord Yarborough’s
gallery; that in the Berlin Museum, of a man sitting at a desk, dated
1522; and the likeness of Pier Francesco de Medici at Windsor–all of
which bear Francia Bigio’s monogram, often with the letters A. S.
(Anno salutis) before the date. He died on January 14th, 1525.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
