


The Medici, always patrons of art, did not neglect to enrich their
palaces with the works of Andrea del Sarto. Ottaviano de’ Medici, a
cousin of the reigning branch, was an especial friend of his, from the
time that Andrea began the fresco of Caesar receiving tribute of
animals in the Hall of Poggio a Cajano. The commission came really
from Pope Leo X., who deputed Cardinal Giulio, his cousin, to have the
hall of the favourite family villa adorned with frescoes. He in turn
handed over the direction to Ottaviano, who was a great amateur of art.
It was designed that Andrea del Sarto should cover a third of the Hall,
the other two-thirds being given to Pontormo and Francia Bigio. The
payment of thirty scudi a month was arranged. In this Andrea has shown
his genius in a style entirely new, the composition being crowded, the
perspective intricate, the background a building adorned with statues.
The subject being allegorical, he has given the reins to his fancy and
produced a wonderful assemblage of strange beasts and stranger human
beings, Moors, Indians, and dwarfs. There are giraffes, lions, and all
kinds of animals, which he had an opportunity of studying in the
Serraglio of Florence. The drawing is true and free, the figures and
animals full of life, the colouring as usual well harmonised and
bright. The Pope died about this time in 1522, and the picture was left
to be finished by Allori in 1580.
Ottaviano de’ Medici, being a great lover of art, was often a patron on
his own account; for him Andrea painted the Holy Family now in
the Pitti Palace. It is a most charmingly natural group: the Virgin
seated on the ground dances the divine child astride on her knee, he is
turning his head to the infant S. John who struggles to escape from his
mother’s arms to get to him. The fresh youth of the Virgin and the
saintly age of S. Elizabeth are well contrasted. By the time this
picture was finished the siege of Florence had begun, and when the
painter took it to Ottaviano, he, having other claims on his means,
excused himself from buying it, and recommended Andrea to offer it
elsewhere. But the artist replied, “I have laboured for you, and the
work shall be always yours.” “Sell it and get what you can for it,"
again replied Ottaviano. Andrea carried the painting home again and
would never sell it to any one. A few years after, the siege being
over, and the Medici re-instated, he again took the Holy Family
to Ottaviano, who was so delighted that he paid him double the price
for it.
Ottaviano also bought from Carlo Ginori a Madonna and S.
Job, a nude half figure, which were by Andrea’s hand. He it was who
commissioned him to paint the portrait of Cardinal Giulio, afterwards
Pope Clement VII., and it was also at his instance that the imitation
Raphael was painted for the Duke of Mantua. The Duke had set his heart
on obtaining the picture painted by Raphael representing Leo X.
between the Cardinals Giulio and Rossi, and got a promise of it as
a gift from Pope Clement. His Holiness wrote to Ottaviano desiring him
to have it sent to Mantua. But Ottaviano, appreciating the treasure as
much as the Duke of Mantua, determined to secure it to the house of
Medici. Under the pretence of having a new frame made he gained time,
and meanwhile employing Andrea del Sarto secretly to make an exact copy
of it, he sent that to the Duke instead of the original. So well had
Andrea imitated the great master’s style that every one in Mantua, even
Giulio Romano, Raphael’s own scholar, was deceived, and it was only
some years later that George Vasari divulged the secret and showed
Andrea’s monogram on the side of the panel beneath the frame. This copy
is now at Naples.
The fresco at Poggio a Cajano abandoned, Andrea returned to the Scalzo,
where he painted the Dance of Herodias, Martyrdom of S. John
Baptist, Presentation of the Head, Allegory of Hope, and the
Apparition of the Angel to Zacharias. The last was paid for
August 22nd, 1523.
About this time there was a great wedding in Florence. Pier Francesco
Borgherini espoused Margherita Accajuoli, and Salvi, the bridegroom’s
father, determined to prepare for his son’s bride a wedding chamber
which should be famous in all ages.
Baccio d’ Agnolo had carved wonderful coffers, chairs, and bedsteads in
walnut wood. Pontormo painted beautiful cabinets and cassoni,
and Granacci, Francesco d’ Ubertini Verdi, called Bacchiacca, and
Andrea were all employed on the walls. Andrea furnished two pictures;
the one tells the story of Joseph in Canaan, the other gives his life
in Egypt. The style is that of Piero di Cosimo, but with greater
excellence and more dignified figures. The landscape is highly finished
and minute, and has a part of the story in every nook of it.
The centre group, where Joseph leaves his father and mother to go to
his brethren, is very dignified, although fine enough to be a
miniature. In the second Pharaoh’s palace is [Footnote: Reumont
(Life of Andrea del Sarto, p. 134) dates these works 1523; the
style, which is very much that of Piero di Cosimo, would seem to place
them earlier.] represented as a medieval Italian castle, the dresses
are all Italian, and as an instance of Andrea’s versatility of talent
they are very interesting paintings.
During the siege of Florence, Borgherini was absent, and the picture
dealer, Giovanni Battista della Palla, who prowled like a harpy to
carry off treasures for the King of France, made an effort to obtain
these paintings by inducing the government to confiscate them and sell
them to him. But Margherita was equal to the occasion, and meeting the
despoiler at her door, she poured out such a torrent of indignation,
exhortation, and defiance as drove the broker away crestfallen.
On the Medici’s return della Palla was imprisoned as a traitor, and
beheaded at Pisa. The paintings passed into the possession of the
Medici, by purchase, during Andrea’s life. [Footnote: Biadi,
Notizie, &c., p. 146, note 2.]
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
