


The next great works were the frescoes in the Court of S. Annunziata,
if indeed they were not carried on simultaneously with those in the
Scalzo. This famous series of Andrea’s works was obtained by cunning,
and painted in emulation. While the two partners, who had differed from
the beginning, and had since become rivals, were engaged in the Scalzo,
a certain astute Fra Mariano, the keeper of the wax candle stores at
the Servite Convent–to which the church of the S. Annunziata belonged
–had watched well those two young painters. Fra Mariano understood
human nature, as priests often do; he had seen the envious rivalship
growing between them, as the friends, who should have worked together,
took separate compartments, and cast jealous criticising glances on
each other’s designs and method of work. Having ambition of his own, he
knew how to work on that of others to further his own aspirations,
which were, to be considered a patron of art and a benefactor to his
convent.
Reading Andrea’s heart, he played on all his strongest feelings, placed
before him the glory he would win by covering the lunettes of the
arches in the court of the fine church with frescoes which would carry
his name down to posterity; he said that any other artist would pay
much to obtain leave to paint upon historical walls like those, and how
they would all envy the man who should obtain the coveted honour! Then,
with a half-whispered hint that for one, Francia Bigio was dying to get
the commission for nothing, the wily Frate went his way victorious.
Andrea, scorning to make any pecuniary bargain, only stipulated that no
one else should paint in that courtyard, and forthwith began the
Stories from the Life of S. Filippo Benizzi, having only old
Alesso Baldovinetti’s Nativity, and Cosimo Roselli’s Miracle
of S. Filippo, as foils to his own. These two works were on the
walls on each side of the church door; there were therefore three
entire sides of the cloister to cover, excepting only the entrance into
the courtyard from the Piazza, and no doubt he felt like Ghirlandajo,
when “he wished he had the entire circuit of the city walls to paint.”
On the 16th of June, 1511, he began to paint with such vigour that in a
few months the first three were uncovered.
1. S. Philip at Viterbo with the Court, dressing a naked leper in
his own cloak.
2. S. Philip going from Bologna to Modena. He rebukes some
gamblers, telling them the vengeance of God is near. A sudden
thunderstorm and lightning destroy them, thus fulfilling the
prediction. There is a great deal of fine action in this composition;
the horror and disbelief struggling in the faces of the men, and the
stormy landscape are all well rendered. A horse leaps away with strong,
terrified action, there is a masterly grasp of his vivid subject, and a
rugged strength in the execution which gives great life to it.
3. S. Philip exorcises a Girl possessed of a Demon. Here the
composition is very tender, the mother and father support the sick
girl, and form a very pleasing group; the figures of the spectators are
full of life without exaggeration.
These works have suffered much from exposure, but the colouring is
still good. The praise that Andrea obtained for them was so great that
he followed them up by the two in the next series.
4. A Child brought to life by touching the bier of S. Philip.
This is a kind of double composition, the child being represented in a
twofold condition in the foreground, first as dead, and then revived at
the touch of the bier. The grouping around the dead saint is very
suggestive of Ghirlandajo, and shews a deep study of his frescoes in
the Sassetti Chapel. The colouring is peculiarly his own; there is the
mingling of a great variety of bright tints of equal intensity, which
by some necromancy are made to relieve each other, instead of being
relieved by the art of chiaroscuro as in the handling of other masters.
5. Children healed by the garments of S. Philip, which are held
by a priest, standing before an altar, the women and their children
kneeling in front of him. The grouping is symmetrical, the figures
lifelike, but not refined, round-cheeked buxom women, and rough, human
men’s faces, bespeak Andrea as the painter of reality rather than
ideality; there is vivid life in every attitude, but the life is not
high caste. A fine old man, leaning on his staff, is a portrait of
Andrea della Robbia, whose son Luca stands near.
For all these Fra Mariano paid only ten scudi each, and Andrea, feeling
the remuneration not equal to the merit of the work, would have left
off here, but the Frate held him to his bond. Two more lunettes yet
remained to finish, but as these were of a later date, we will reserve
them for a future chapter. He also painted in the orto, or
garden, of the convent, the now perished fresco of the Parable of
the Vineyard.
Meanwhile, the rival friends had changed lodgings; they left the Piazza
del Grano, and took rooms in the Sapienza, a street between the Piazza
San Marco and the S. Annunziata. Andrea chose this because it was near
his work, and also because his great friends, Sansovino and Rustici,
already lived there. Commissions began to pour in on him, which he
fulfilled, while still at work at the Servi. Judging from the style of
his early manner, we may date at this time a Virgin and Child, with
S. John and S. Joseph, now in the Pitti. It is painted “alla
prima,” i.e. a quick method of giving the effect in the first
painting,–and is probably the one spoken of by Vasari as painted for
Andrea Santini; it formerly belonged to Francesco Troschi. [Footnote:
Life of Andrea del Sarto, vol iii, p. 193.]
A S. Agnes, in the palace of the Prince Palatine, at Düsseldorf,
is in this early style. He also painted some frescoes at San Salvi,
SS. Giovanni Gualberto and Benedict resting on clouds; they
ornamented the recess where the Last Supper was placed at a
later period.
In a narrow alley, behind the church of Or San Michele, is a tabernacle
on the wall beneath an ancient balcony. Here the architect, Baccio
d’Agnolo, commissioned Andrea del Sarto to paint an Annunciation. It
is so much injured as to be almost indistinguishable now, but was much
admired at the time, though some say it was too laboured, and so wanting
in ease and grace. [Footnote: Biadi, 26; Vasari, vol. iii, p 189.] It is
more likely that it was one of his early works, and should be classed
before the frescoes of the Scalzo, for it is said that he was living at
the time with his father, whose shop was over the archway, and that he
had adorned the inner walls of the house with two frescoed angels.
[Footnote: Firenze antica e moderna Ed. Flor. 1794, vol. vi, p. 216.]
These have perished completely.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
