


It is probable that the dissolution of partnership marked the time of
Fra Bartolommeo’s visit to Rome. Fra Mariano Fetti, once a lay brother
of S. Marco, who had gone over to the Medici after Savonarola’s death,
and had kept so much in favour with Pope Leo X. as to obtain the office
of the Seals (del Piombo), [Footnote: An office for appending seals to
papal documents. Fra Mariano Fetti was elected to it in 1514, after
Bramante, the architect; Sebastiano del Piombo succeeded him.] was
pleased to be considered a patron of art; and welcoming Fra Bartolommeo
to Rome, he gave him a commission for two large figures of S. Peter and
S. Paul for his church of S. Silvestro. The cartoons of these pictures
are now in the Belle Arti of Florence; they are grand and majestic
figures, admirably draped. S. Peter holds his keys and a book; S. Paul
rests on his sword. In executing them in colour, he made some
improvements, especially in the head and hand of S. Peter, but he did
not remain long enough in Rome to finish them. “The colour of the first
(S. Peter) is reddish and rather opaque, the shadows of the head being
taken up afresh, and the extremities being by another painter. The head
of the second (S. Paul) is corrected ... but the tone is transparent,
and the execution exclusively that of Fra Bartolommeo. Whoever may have
been employed on the S. Peter, we do not fancy Raphael to have been
that person.” This is the opinion of Crowe and Cavalcaselle, [Footnote:
History of Painting, vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 460.] who,
however, seem to have little faith in any works of the Frate at Rome.
Against this we have the chronicles of quaint old Vasari and Rosini;
besides Baldinucci (ch. iv. p. 83), who says, “Raphael gave great
testimony of his esteem when, in after years, he employed his own brush
in Rome to finish a work begun by Fra Bartolommeo in that city and left
imperfect.”
His reason for leaving it imperfect was that of ill-health, the air of
Rome not agreeing with him. It seems he brought home malaria,
which never entirely left his system, the low fever returning every
year, and being only mitigated by a change to mountain air. He was well
enough at times to resume painting, but never in full health again.
That very summer he was sent to the Hospice of Sta. Maria Maddalena in
Pian di Mugnone, “dove pure non stette in ozio,” [Footnote: Rosini,
Storia della Pittura, chap, xxvii. p. 245.] where he did not
remain idle. The Hospice stands on a high hill, just the place for
Roman fever to disappear as if by magic for a time, and the patient,
relieved of his lassitude, set to work with energy, aided by Fra
Paolino and Fra Agostino. Many of his frescoes still remain, one of
which is a beautiful Madonna, on the wall of the infirmary,
which has since been sawn away from the wall and placed in the
students’ chapel in San Marco, Florence. [Footnote: A document of the
Hospice records these paintings, and dates them 10th of July, 1514.
Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., vol. ii. p. 610.]
He returned to Florence for the winter, and with renewed vigour
produced his San Sebastian, a splendid study from the nude,
which shows the influence upon him of Michelangelo’s paintings in Rome.
The picture was hung in San Marco, but its influence not proving
elevating to the sensuous minds of the Florentines, it was removed to
the chapter-house, and Gio Battista della Palla, the dealer who bought
so many of the best pictures of the time, purchased it to send to the
King of France. Its subsequent fate is not known, although Monsieur
Alaffre, of Toulouse, boasts of its possession. He says his father
bought three paintings which, in the time of the Revolution, had been
taken from the chapel of a royal villa near Paris [Footnote: Padre
Marchese, Memorie, &c., vol. ii. note p. 119.], one of which is
the S. Sebastian. In design and attitude it corresponds to the
one described by Vasari, the saint being in a niche, surrounded by a
double cornice. The left arm is bound; the right, with its cord
hanging, is upraised in attitude of the faith, so fully expressed in
the beautiful face. Three arrows are fixed in the body, which is nude
except a slight veil across the loins; an angel, also nude, holds the
palm to him. Connoisseurs do not think this painting equal in merit to
the other works of Fra Bartolommeo. It is true it may have been
overrated at the time, for the Frate’s chief excellence lay in the
grandeur of his drapery; the test of authenticity for a nude study from
him would lie more in the colouring and handling than in form.
In the early part of 1515 Fra Bartolommeo went to pay his old friend
Santi Pagnini, the Oriental scholar, a visit at the convent of San
Romano, in Lucca, of which he was now prior, passing by Pistoja on
February 17th to sign a contract for an altar-piece to be placed in the
church of San Domenico–a commission from Messer Jacopo Panciatichi.
The price was fixed at 100 gold ducats, and the subject to be the
Madonna and Child, with SS. Paul, John Baptist, and Sebastian. On his
arrival at Lucca he was soon busy with his great work, the Madonna
della Misericordia, for the church of San Romano. The composition
of this is full and harmonious. A populace of all ages and conditions,
grouped around the throne of the Madonna, beg her prayers; she,
standing up, seems to gather all their supplications in her hands and
offer them up to heaven, from which, as a vision, Christ appears from a
mass of clouds in act of benediction. Amongst the crowd of supplicants
are some exquisite groups. Sublime inspiration and powerful expression
are shown in the whole work. On his return he stayed again at Pistoja,
where he painted a fresco of a Madonna on a wall of the convent
of San Domenico; this, which has since been sawn from the wall, is at
present in the church of the same convent, and though much injured, is
a very light and tender bit of colouring and expression. It would seem
that the altar-piece for the same church, spoken of above, was never
finished, as no traces of it are to be found.
In October, 1515, we again find him at Pian di Mugnone; no doubt the
summer heats had induced a return of his fever. Here, again improving
in health, he painted a charming Annunciation in fresco, full of
life and eagerness on the part of the angel, and joy on the Virgin. He
did not remain long, for before the end of the autumn he returned to
visit the home of his youth and see his paternal uncle, Giusto, at
Lastruccio, near Prato. We can imagine the meeting between him and his
relatives, and how the little Paolo, son of Vito, being told to guess
who he was, said, “Bis Zio Bartolommeo,” [Footnote: Padre Marchese,
Memorie, &c., vol. ii. chap. vii. pp. 139, 140.] for which he
was much applauded. And when all the country relatives hoped to see him
again soon, how the Frate said that would be uncertain, because the
King of France had sent for him, and with what awe and family pride
they would have looked at him! But instead of going to France for the
glory of art, he was returning to Florence to sorrow. His life-long
friend, Mariotto Albertinelli, had been brought home on a litter from
La Quercia, near Viterbo, and now lay on his death-bed; and what his
life had lacked in religion, the prayers of his friend would go far to
atone for at his death.
While Fra Bartolommeo had been ailing, Albertinelli had also paid his
visit to the great city, and seen the two great rivals there. He went
from Viterbo, where he had been to finish colouring a work of the
Frate’s left unfinished, and also to paint some frescoes in the convent
of La Quercia, near that town. Being so near Borne, he was seized with
a great desire to see it, and left his picture for that purpose.
Probably Fra Bartolommeo had given him an introduction to his friend
and patron, for Fra Mariano Fetti gave Albertinelli a commission to
paint a Marriage of S. Catherine for his church, which he
completed, and then left Rome at once. Nothing is known of the
impressions made on him by the works of the two great masters, and
unfortunately his death occurred too soon after for his own style to
have given any evidence of their influence.
A Giostra, at Viterbo, proved a very strong attraction to his pleasure-
loving mind. This “Giostra,” which the translators of Vasari seem to
find so “obscure,” [Footnote: Vasari’s Lives, vol. ii. p. 470.]
was no doubt one of those festivals revived by the Medici, in which
mounted cavaliers ride with a lance at a suspended Saracen’s head,
striking it at full gallop. Desirous of appearing to advantage before
the eyes of her whom he had elected his queen, he forgot his mature
age, and rushed into the jousts with all the energies of a youth, but
alas! fell ill from over-exertion. Fearing the malarious air was not
good for him, he had a litter made, and was taken to Florence, where
Fra Bartolommeo placed himself at his bedside, soothing his last
moments, and leading him as far heavenward as he could. When
Albertinelli died, on the 5th of November, 1515, his friend followed
him to an honourable interment in S. Piero Maggiore.
After Albertinelli’s death, the Frate soared to greater heights of
genius than before.
The year 1516 marks the birth of his grandest masterpieces, first the
picture in the Pitti Palace called by Cavalcaselle a Resurrection, but
which is more truly an allegorical impersonation of the Saviour. It was
ordered by a rich merchant, Salvadore Billi, to place in a chapel which
Pietro Roselli had adorned with marbles in the church of the “Annunciata."
He paid 100 ducats in gold for it.
In its original state the picture was a complete allegory of Christ
as the centre of Religion, between two prophets in heaven, and four
apostles, two at each side–beneath him two angels support the world.
The prophets have been removed, and are placed in the Tribune of the
Uffizi; thus the picture as it stands loses half its meaning. The
Christ is a fine nude figure standing in a niche, and in it Fra
Bartolommeo has solved the problem of obtaining complete relief almost
in monochrome, so little do the lights of the flesh tints, and the warm
yellowish tinge of the background differ from each other. All the
positive colour is in the drapery of the saints, one in red and green,
and another in red and blue. The two angels are exquisitely drawn, and
contrast well in their natural innocence with the sentimental pair in
Raphael’s Madonna of the Baldacchino on the same wall of the
Pitti Palace.
San Marco was rich in frescoes of the Madonna and Child, two of
which are still in the chapel of the convent, and two in the Belle
Arti. Some of these are charming in expression, the children clinging
round the mother’s neck in a true childish abandon of affection.
What a tender feeling these monk artists had for the spirit of
maternity! Perhaps by being debarred from the contemplation of maternal
love in its humanity, they more clearly comprehended its divinity. Look
at the little round-backed nestling child in Fra Angelico’s Madonna
della Stella, imperfect as it is in form, the whole spirit of love
is in it. He does not give only the mother-love for the child, but the
child-love for the mother, which is more divine, and the same feeling
is seen in the Madonna of Fra Bartolommeo.
This year, 1516, also marks a journey to a hermitage of his order at
Lecceto, between Florence and Pisa. Here he painted a Deposition
from the Cross on the wall of the Hospice, and two heads of Christ
on two tiles above the doors.
A great many of his works are in private collections in Florence; one
of the most lovely is the Pietà, painted for Agnolo Doni, and
now in the Corsini Gallery at Rome.
All this time the great painting of the Enthronement of the
Virgin, ordered by Pier Soderini, before his exile, was still
unfinished. He seems to have taken it in hand again about this time,
but being attacked with another access of fever, again left it, and the
painting, shadowed in with black, remains in the Uffizi. Lanzi writes
of it that, imperfect as it is, it may be regarded as a true lesson in
art, and bears the same relation to painting as the clay model to the
finished statue, the genius of the inventor being impressed upon it.
Messrs. Crowe and Cavalcaselle [Footnote: History of Painting,
vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 455.] call this a Conception, but
Vasari’s old name of the Patron Saints of Florence seems to fit
it best. S. John the Baptist, S. Reparata, S. Zenobio, &c., stand in an
adoring group around the heavenly powers, S. Anna above the Virgin and
infant Christ forming a charming pyramidal group in the midst. The
whole thing is one of Fra Bartolommeo’s richest compositions. The
centre of the three monks on the left is said to be a portrait of Fra
Bartolommeo himself, and to be the original from which the only known
portrait of him is taken (see Frontispiece). Fra Bartolommeo
left another work also unfinished, an apotheosis of a saint, which is
now at Panshanger. This is supposed to have been a small ideal prepared
for a picture to celebrate the canonisation of S. Antonino, which Leo
X. had almost promised the brethren of S. Marco on his triumphant entry
in 1515. The work, if it had been painted in the larger form, would
have been a perfect masterpiece of composition, “a very Beethoven
symphony in colour,” if we may judge from the sketch at Panshanger,
where a living crowd groups round the bier of the archbishop, and life,
earnestness, harmony, and richness, are all intense.
So ill was Fra Bartolommeo in 1517 that he was ordered to take the
baths at San Filippo, thence he went for the last time to Pian di
Mugnone, where he painted a Vision of the Saviour to Mary
Magdalen, above the door of the chapel. The two figures, nearly
life-size, are at the door of the cave sepulchre. Mary has just
recognised her Lord, and in her ecstasy flings herself forward on her
knees before him. The Saviour is a dignified figure semi-nude, with a
white veil wrapped around him.
In the Pitti Palace, a charming Pietà of Fra Bartolommeo’s
occupies a place near the Pietà of Andrea del Sarto, the two
pictures forming a most interesting contrast of style. The kneeling
Virgin and S. John support the head of the prostrate Saviour, S.
Catherine and Mary Magdalen weep at his feet, the latter in an agony of
grief crouches prone on the ground hiding her face. The colouring is
extremely rich, broad masses of full-tone melting softly into deep
shadows. The handling in the flesh-tones of the dead Saviour, as well
as the modelling of form, are most masterly. It is generally supposed
that this was the picture which Bugiardini is said to have coloured
after the master’s death; but there is much divergence among Italian
authors both as to whether this was the painting spoken of, and also as
to the meaning of Vasari’s words, he using the phrase “finished” in one
place, and “coloured” in another. For charm of colouring and depth of
expression, the Pietà is the most lovely of all the Frate’s
works; therefore Bugiardini who was mediocre, could not have
outdone his great master. It was not coloured by him. Bocchi
[Footnote: Bocchi, Bellezze di Firenze, p. 304.] says there were
two other figures, S. Peter and S. Paul, in the picture, where a
meaningless black shadow stretches across the background; but they were
erased by the antique restorer because they were “troppo deboli.” Is it
not likely that if Bugiardini had any hand in the work, it was to
finish these figures?
Returning in the autumn to Florence, Fra Bartolommeo caught a severe
cold, the effects of which were heightened by eating fruit, and after
four days’ extreme illness he died on October 8th, 1517, aged 42.
The monks felt his death intensely, and buried him with great honour in
San Marco.
He left to art the most valuable legacy possible–a long list of
masterpieces in which religious feeling is expressed in the very
highest language. In all his works there is not a line or tint which
transgresses against either the sentiment of devotion, or the rules of
art. He stands for ever, almost on a level with the great trio of the
culmination, “possessing Leonardo’s grace of colour and more than his
industry, Michelangelo’s force with more softness, and Raphael’s
sentiment with more devotion;” yet with just the inexpressible want of
that supernatural genius which would have placed him above them all.
His legacy to the world is a series of lessons from the very first
setting of his ideal on paper to its finished development. The germ
exists in the charcoal sketches at the Belle Arti and Uffizi; the
under-shadowing of the subject is seen in the Patron Saints at
the Uffizi.
Many of his drawings are not to be traced. Some were used by Fra
Paolino, his pupil, who at his death passed them to Suor Plautilla
Nelli, a nun in Sta. Caterina, Florence (born 1523, died 1587). When
Baldinucci wrote his work, he said 500 of these were in the possession
of Cavaliere Gaburri.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
