


RIDOLFO (DI DOMENICO) BIGORDI, called GHIRLANDAJO, &c., was born on the
4th of January, 1483. Although not strictly a scholar, he is one of Fra
Bartolommeo’s principal followers. When quite a child he lost his
father, the famous Domenico, who died of fever, on January 11th, 1494;
his mother and uncle Benedetto only lived a few years after; and
Ridolfo, with his three sisters and two brothers, was left to the
guardianship of his uncle Davide.
Ridolfo was the only one who chose the family profession, and he became
the fourth painter of the name of Ghirlandajo.
Davide was not a perfect artist, although a good mosaicist, as his
works in the cathedrals of Orvieto, Siena, and Florence show, but he
was for many years Ridolfo’s only instructor. As the boy grew up
Ridolfo frequented those public schools of art before spoken of, the
Brancacci Chapel, and the study of the cartoons in the Papal Hall. Here
he secured the friendship not only of Granacci and Pier di Cosimo, but
of Raphael himself, with whom he visited Fra Bartolommeo in his
convent.
Raphael permitted Ridolfo to assist him in a Madonna for Siena, and
tried to persuade him to accompany him to Rome; but Ridolfo, like a
true Florentine, declined to go “beyond sight of the Duomo.”
His first great picture was done in 1504 for the church of San Gallo.
The subject was Christ Searing His Cross. His uncle Benedetto
had laboured on a similar picture, now in the Louvre, but Ridolfo’s is
a great improvement on this; the composition is well balanced, full of
force and animation, the weeping figures of the Maries and the
solicitude of S. Veronica are very lifelike, although he has not
entirely abolished his uncle’s coarseness in the scowling, low-typed
men. The Christ and the Virgin are, on the contrary, so refined as to
induce the supposition that this force of contrast was intentional; the
landscape is rather hard and crude in tone, the flesh tints smooth, and
the handling similar to that of Credi.
The original is now in Palazzo Antinori, Florence, but a replica, in
which he was assisted by Michele, his favourite pupil and adopted son,
is in Santo Spirito.
Vasari speaks of a Nativity, painted for the Cistercian monks of
Cestello; a beautiful composition, in which the Madonna adores the holy
child, S. Joseph standing near her; S. Francis and S. Jerome kneel in
adoration; the landscape was sketched from the hills near “La Vernia,"
where S. Francis received the stigmata.
Maselli says the picture was lost when the monastery changed hands, but
Messrs. Crowe and Cavalcaselle [Footnote: History of fainting, vol. in.
chap. xvi. pp. 523, 524.] believe they have found it in the Hermitage
at S. Petersburg, under Granacci’s name. It is possible that the
favourite pupil of his father and Ridolfo’s own friend may have
assisted him. The landscape is Raphaelesque, and might mark the time
when that master and Fra Bartolommeo influenced his style. His best
manner approached so nearly to that of the Frate, that had he continued
he would have very nearly rivalled his excellence.
His two masterpieces are now in the Uffizi; they were painted for the
Brotherhood of S. Zenobio, 1510, to stand one on each side of
Albertinelli’s Annunciation. One is S. Zenobio (the first
bishop and patron saint of Florence) restoring a dead child to
life; the other the Funeral Procession of the Saint passing the
Baptistery, where an elm tree, which had been withered, put forth
fresh leaves as the coffin of the bishop touched it. A marble column,
with a bronze tree in relief on it, stands on the spot as a memorial of
this miracle. In these two works Ridolfo Ghirlandajo proved the power
which was in him, but they are the culmination of his art; he never
surpassed, or indeed equalled them again. His richness of colouring and
deep relief equalled that of the Frate, the animation and expression
rivalled Andrea del Sarto. In the first picture, the eagerness of the
crowd, the intense feeling of the mother, in whom grief for the dead
child seems almost greater than the hope of his resuscitation, the
sturdy, solid character of the Florentines of the Republic, are all
given with a masterly hand, while a rich blending of colour fuses the
animated crowd in a harmonious unison. In the latter, grandeur and
dignity mark the group of ecclesiastics which surrounds the
archbishop’s bier, the full solid falls of their drapery show that he
had well studied his father’s works.
Ridolfo’s brothers became monks, Don Bartolommeo lived in the
Camaldoline Monastery of the Angeli, which Ridolfo beautified with many
works. Paolo Uccelli had adorned the Loggia with frescoed stories from
the life of S. Benedict. Ridolfo added two to the series. In one the
Saint is at table with two angels, waiting for S. Romano to send his
bread from the grotto, but the devil has cut the cord and taken it.
Another is S, Benedict investing a youth with the habit of the
order. In the church of the same monastery he painted a beautiful
Madonna and Child, with Angels, above the holy water vase, and
S. Romualdo with the Camaldolese Hermitage in his Hand, in a
lunette in the cloister. All these were done as a brotherly gift, and
after they were finished, the abbot, Don Andrea Dossi, gave him a
commission to paint a Last Supper in the refectory, which he
did, placing the portrait of the abbot in the corner.
Ridolfo, like his father, regarded art rather as a means of livelihood
than with any aesthetic feelings, and this is probably the reason of
his never attaining true excellence. His “bottega” was really a shop
where any one might order a work of art, or of artisanship, and he gave
as much attention to painting a banner for a procession as to composing
an altar-piece. He had a great many assistants, whom he called on for
help in various undertakings. They assisted him to prepare the Medici
Halls for the reception of Pope Leo X., and later for the marriages of
Giuliano and Lorenzo, not disdaining to paint scenes for the dramas
which were then given. He painted banners, and designed costumes for
the processions of the “potenze,” a festive company, the origin of
which is uncertain, but dating certainly from the Middle Ages. Each
quarter of the city had an emperor, lords, and dignitaries, each of
whom carried his banner or emblazonment. Grand processions,
tournaments, and feasts were held once a year, on S. John’s Day, by the
potenze.
Having assisted at the triumphs and marriages of the Medici princes, he
also furnished the funeral pomp and magnificence on the deaths of the
brothers, that of Giuliano occurring in 1516, of Lorenzo 1519.
Lucratively it answered his purpose; the Medici gave him great honour;
he was well paid by them, and got the commission to decorate the Chapel
of the Palazzo Vecchio–a very good specimen of his fresco painting, in
which he never reached his father’s excellence, although in oil he far
surpassed him. The chapel is small; the groined roof is covered with
emblematical designs on a blue ground, a Trinity in the midst with
angels bearing symbols of the passions around. The apostles and
evangelists surround this, and the principal wall has a larger fresco
of the Annunciation–a rather conventional rendering.
Commissions flowed in on him to such a degree, that although he had
fifteen children, he lived to amass money and lands, to see his
daughters well married, and his sons prosperous merchants trading to
distant lands. He died on the 6th of June, 1561, and lies with his
forefathers in the church of S. Maria Novella.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
