


Meanwhile fate was working Andrea del Sarto on to what might have been
the culminating point of his fame, had not his weakness rendered it a
blot on his honour; i.e. his journey to France. His fame was rising
high; a picture of the Dead Christ surrounded by Angels, weeping
over the body they support, having been sent to France, [Footnote: It
was engraved by the Venetian, Agostino, before it went to France; the
engraving is signed 1516. It did not please Andrea, who never allowed
any others to be engraved.] the king was so pleased with it that he
wished another work by the same artist. Andrea painted a very beautiful
Madonna, for which, however, he only obtained a quarter of the
price which the king paid to the merchants. The king was so delighted
with it that he sent the artist an invitation to come to Paris in his
employ, promising to pay all his expenses. In the Pitti Palace there is
a portrait of Andrea and his wife, in which he has commemorated the
reception of this letter. He is looking very interested over it, while
his wife has the blankest expression possible.
In the summer of 1518 he started with his pupil, Andrea Sguazzella,
called Nanoccio. Such a journey was in those days considered as little
less than a parting for life. It is plain that Lucrezia’s family looked
on her as almost a widow, for they made him sign a deed of
acknowledgement for the 150 florins of her dote. Some authors
have taken this document as a proof of their marriage in that year, but
it was merely a precaution against loss by her family; the Italian law
being that the husband is obliged to render the portion obtained with
his wife to her family if she dies without issue, and in case of his
own death, the widow is entitled to it.
He was well received in Paris, and employed immediately on a likeness
of the infant Dauphin Henri II., then only a few months old. For this
he obtained 300 scudi: and a monthly salary was allowed him. What a
mine of gold the French court must have seemed to him after working for
years at large frescoes for ten scudi each!
He did no less than fifty works of art while there, most of which have
been engraved by the best French artists.[Footnote: See Catalogue of
Royal Pictures in France, by M. Lepiscié.] The Carità is
signed 1518, and is in Andrea’s best style–perhaps with a leaning
towards Michelangelo. The S. Jerome in Penitence, which he
painted for the king’s mother, and obtained a large price for, cannot
be traced. His life in Paris was a new revelation, and not without its
effect on his character, always alive to substantial pleasure.
The king and his courtiers frequented his atelier, and delighted to
watch him paint, vieing with each other in the richness of their gifts,
among which were splendid brocade dresses and beautiful ornaments and
jewels, in which he longed to adorn his wife. While he was engaged in
painting the S. Jerome for the queen-mother, a letter from
Lucrezia aroused his longings for home to the uttermost; she–the wife
who has been branded by the name of faithless–wrote that she was
disconsolate in his absence, and that if he did not soon return he
would find her dead with grief.
Vasari, quoting this exaggerated letter, says in his first edition that
she only wanted money to give her friends, but this also he retracts in
the second. Whether it expressed her feelings truly or not, the letter
had such an effect on Andrea’s mind that he decided to return home at
any cost.
During Andrea’s absence the house in Via S. Sebastiano, behind the
Annunziata, was being prepared under her superintendence and with his
sanction. His scholars had decorated the walls and ceilings with
frescoes, and no doubt Lucrezia was as anxious for him to see the new
house as he was to adorn her with Parisian brocades and jewellery.
Being able to satisfy her ambitious soul, Andrea too readily flung away
all his brilliant prospects to return, and willingly take again the
yoke of the burden of his wife and her family. He made promises that he
would bring her back to Paris with him, and the king in all faith
allowed him to depart, confiding to him large sums of money for the
purchase of works of art to be sent to France.
Sguazzella, wiser than his master, preferred to stay in Paris under the
patronage of Cardinal de Tournon. He painted a great many works, much
in the style of Andrea, but with less excellence. It is possible that
some of M. Lepiscié’s long list are, in fact, the work of the pupil
rather than the master. When Benvenuto Cellini went to France in 1537
he lodged in Sguazzella’s house, with his three servants and three
horses, at a weekly rate of payment (a tanto la settimana).
But to return to Andrea: this is an episode in his life which we would
gladly pass over if it were possible, for it forms the moral blot on a
great artistic career.
Returning home he fell once more under the strong will of his wife, but
with his principles weakened by the effect of a luxury and prosperity
which has always a greater deteriorating effect on a nature such as his
than on a finer mind. Bringing grand ideas from the palaces of the
French nobles, he not only fell in with Lucrezia’s plans for
beautifying the new house, but even surpassed her wildest schemes. The
staircase was embellished with rich oaken balustrades, the rooms were
all frescoed. Cupids hide in the Raphaelesque scrolls on the arches,
classic divinities rest on the ceilings, but in the dining room the
homely nature of the man who did his own marketing, creeps out. It is a
charming room, the windows opening on a garden courtyard, where a vine
trellis leads round to what used to be the side door of his studio
which has its entrance in another street.
The roof is vaulted and covered with exquisite decorative frescoes, but
in the lunettes of the two largest arches are the domestic scenes of
cooking and laying the cloth, spoken of at page 90. Two or three of the
up stairs rooms are very fine, especially the one in which Andrea is
said to have died. [Footnote: This description is due to the kindness
of the present resident in the house, who kindly showed it to the
writer, pointing out all the unrestored portions.] It is probable the
furniture matched the style of the rooms, and that much money was spent
on carved chairs and cassoni. Certain it is that the King of
France’s commissions were unfulfilled, and his money misappropriated.
Andrea would have returned to France, but his wife, who had an Italian
woman’s dread of leaving her own country, put every obstacle in his
way, adding entreaties to tears which the uxorious Andrea could not
resist. As usual he tried to please her, and she only cared to please
herself.
He fell greatly in the estimation of the King, who was justly angry;
albeit the artist salved his own too easy conscience by sending a few
of his own paintings to Francis I., one of which, the Sacrifice of
Abraham, still remains in France, and another a half length figure
of S. John the Baptist. The place of this picture is much
disputed; it is said to be at present in the Pitti Palace. Argenville
speaks of it among the French pictures as if it had returned
subsequently to Florence, while Vasari asserts that it never went
there, but was sold to Ottaviano de’ Medici. [Footnote: Life of
Andrea, del Sarto, vol. in. p. 212.] As Andrea painted no less than
five pictures of this subject, of which Argenville mentions that there
were two in France, one of which was sold to the Grand Duke of Tuscany,
it is probable that the Pitti one is not that painted for Francis I.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
