


We now come to the studio of S. Marco, where the two friends, who had
dreamed together as boys, and worked together as youths, now laboured
jointly as men, bringing to light some of the finest works of art that
remain to us. During these three years Albertinelli’s star seems merged
in that of his senior, his hand is to be recognised in the lower parts
of a few altarpieces; but it is always difficult to distinguish the two
styles.
It was a very busy atelier, for they had many patrons. Bugiardini was
still Mariotto’s head assistant, and Fra Paolino, and one or two other
monks, worked under Fra Bartolommeo, besides pupils of both, among whom
were Gabriele Rustici and Benedetto Cianfanini.
The studio was on the part of the convent between the cloister and Via
del Maglio, [Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie, vol. ii. p. 69.]
and we can quite picture its interior. There stands the lay figure on
which Fra Bartolommeo draped the garments that take such majestic folds
in his works; [Footnote:  Fra Bartolommeo was the inventor of the
jointed lay figure.] there are several casts and models in different
parts of the room; grand cartoons in charcoal hang on the walls, like
those we see to this day in the Uffizi and Belle Arti. So many of these
masterly sketches are the Frate’s and so few are Mariotto’s that we may
presume the former was in most instances the designer. And to what
perfection he carried design! Not a figure was drawn except its lines
harmonised with the geometric rhythm in the artist’s mind. His groups
fall by nature into kaleidoscopic figures of circles, triangles,
ellipses, crosses, &c. Not a cartoon was sketched in which the lights
and shadows were not as gradated and finished as a painting, although
they were merely drawn with charcoal. The following was the method of
work in the “bottega.” The panels were prepared with a coating of
plaster of Paris, over which, when dry, a coat of under colour, ground
in oil, was passed. The preparing of the panels fell to the work of one
of the monk scholars, Fra Andrea.[Footnote: The books of the convent
have a note of payment to Fra Bartolommeo for 20th March, 1512, “per
parte di lavoro di Fra Andrea converse per mettere d’oro, et ingessare
alle tavole nella bottega in diversi lavori” (Padre Marchese,
Memorie, lib. ii. chap. in. p. 70).] Then the master made his
sketch in white, or “sgraffito” (i.e. graven on the plaster), as in the
architectural lines of the pictures of patron saints in the Uffizi, and
the Marriage of S. Catherine in the Pitti Palace; he also put in
the shadows in monochrome. But the assistants, who were skilled
artists, were called to put broad level tints of local colour on the
buildings, &c., the master himself finishing the faces. No doubt
Albertinelli was often deputed to the study of the lay figure and its
drapery. Where he assisted, the monogram, a cross with two rings and
the joint names, marked the work, as en a panel of 1510 in Vienna, and
another at Geneva.
Fra Bartolommeo only imitated Leonardo in his intense force and soft
gradations; the general thinness of colour is opposed to his system. He
followed him, however, in his method of painting his shadows with the
brush, instead of “hatching” them; he used the same yellowish ground,
and “sfumato,” [Footnote: Eastlake’s Materials for a History of Oil
Painting, vol. ii. chap. iv.] i.e. the imperceptible softening of the
transition in half-lights and shadows; it was effected by glazes, and is
not adapted to a thin substance. The great mistake in Fra Bartolommeo’s
system was the preparing his paintings like cartoons, and using asphaltum
or lamp-black for outlines and shadows; this in process of time destroys
the super-colour, and gives a general blackness to the painting.
The same kind of talk went on here as in modern studios. When the
frame-maker came, Fra Bartolommeo would be vexed to see how much of his
work was hidden beneath the massive cornice, and would vow to dispense
with frames altogether, which he did in his S. Sebastian and
S. Mark, by painting an architectural niche round the subject
like a carving in relief.
The first work begun at the convent studio was the picture for Father
Dalgano of Venice, the subject of which is the Eternal Father in
Heaven, surrounded by seraphs and angels. Perhaps in this we have
the source of the motive of Albertinelli’s Annunciation. The
colouring is more brilliant than any of the Frate’s works before his
visit to Venice. Vasari says that in this picture Giorgione himself
could not have surpassed him in brilliancy. The saints, although nearly
level with the ground, are given celestial rank by the cherubs and
clouds below them. Fra Bartolommeo was dissatisfied with his angels,
which seemed merely lovely children, and seeking other forms, he
thought to picture them better under shapes which at a distance seem
only clouds, but nearer are full of angels’ faces, as in the S.
Bernard. But this idea, not having aesthetic beauty, was also
abandoned. [Footnote: Padre Marchese, I Puristi ed Accademici.]
The monks of S. Pietro at Murano did not hasten to claim their picture,
but sent two friars to negotiate about the price; they failed to agree,
and the work is now in the Church of S. Romano in Lucca.
Lucca has another exquisite picture of the same year in the Cathedral
of S. Martino, a Madonna and Child–a lovely ideal of joyful
infancy–beneath a veil suspended above her head by two angels. S. John
Baptist and S. Stephen support this airy composition like pillars,
their figures showing in strong relief against the dark shades; the
whole picture is intensely soft, and yet the outlines are perfectly
clear. This is valued at sixty ducats in the Libri di San Marco.
Next followed the Virgin and Child with four Saints, in S.
Marco, which is so fine that it has been taken for a Raphael, although,
owing to the use of lamp-black, it has now become very much darkened.
The Holy Family which he painted for Filippo di Averardo
Salviati, and which is now in Earl Cowper’s collection at Panshanger,
is an almost Raphaelesque work, and attains the greatest excellence in
art. The composition is his favourite triangle, touched in with the
flowing lines of the mother seated on the ground with the two children
before her. S. Joseph is in the background. The greatest softness of
flesh tints must have been perceptible when new, for, “in spite of the
abrasions produced by time, the delicate tones brought out by
transparent glazes fused one over another are apparent.” The landscape
with an echo subject of the flight into Egypt is thought by Crowe and
Cavalcaselle to be by Albertinelli.
In 1510 the partners had a large order from Giuliano da Gagliano, who,
on the 2nd November, 1510, and 14th January, 1511, paid, in two rates,
the sum of 154 ducats. The picture, which is Fra Bartolommeo’s own
painting, unfortunately cannot be traced.
In 1511 a long list of works are enumerated–a Nativity, valued
two ducats, a Christ bearing the Cross, and an Annunciation, sold
to the Gonfaloniere for six ducats–pictures which are dispersed in
England, Pavia, &c.; but the masterpiece of the time is the Marriage of
S. Catherine, now in the Louvre. The Florentine government bought it for
300 ducats in 1512, to present to Jacques Hurault, Bishop of Autun, who
came to Florence as envoy of Louis XII. He left it to his cathedral at
Autun, from whence, at the Revolution, it passed to the Louvre. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, Memorie, lib. iii. ch. iv. p. 77. Crowe and
Cavalcaselle, History of Painting, vol. iii. chap. xiii. p. 452.]
Before it was sent away, Fra Bartolommeo made a replica of it, which is
now in the Pitti Palace. There is his favourite canopy supported by
angels; in this case they are beautifully foreshortened. The Virgin is
seated on a pedestal, holding by one arm an exquisitely moulded child
Jesus of about four years old, who is espousing S. Catherine of Siena,
kneeling at His feet on the left. A semicircle of saints group on each
side of the Virgin, and two angels, with musical instruments, are at her
feet; the upturned face of one is exquisitely foreshortened. The S. George
in armour is a powerful figure; and in S. Bartholomew, on the left, is
the same grand feeling which he afterwards brought to perfection in S.
Mark. The grace of the Virgin’s figure is not to be surpassed; if
Raphael’s Madonnas have more sentiment, this has more dignified grace.
He has remembered Leonardo’s precept, “that the two figures of a group
should not look the same way"; the contrast of the flowing lines in
these two forms is very lovely. The same contrast of lines, and yet
balance of form, is carried out in the two S. Catherines who form the
pyramid on each side of her, and in the varied characters of the
encircling group of saints. The deleterious use of lampblack has
spoiled the colouring; it, moreover, hangs in a bad light at the Pitti
Palace.
The original subject at the Louvre differs only in a few particulars
from this–the Virgin’s hand is on the child’s head instead of his arm,
and there are trifling differences in the grouping of the saints, the
semicircle being more rigidly kept. In this the flesh is thin and
uncracked, seeming imbedded in the surrounding colours; the lake
draperies are laid so thinly on the light ground, that the sketch can
be seen through the colour. [Footnote: Eastlake, Materials for a
History of Oil Painting, vol. ii. chap. iv. Crowe and Cavalcaselle
speak of the two paintings as unconnected with each other, and mention
the Pitti one as having unaccountably returned there after having been
given to some bishop. Is it not possible that the gift to a bishop
refers to the painting in the Louvre, and that the other is the replica
spoken of by Vasari, vol. ii. p. 452?]
There is a fine painting in the church of S. Caterina of Pisa, in the
chapel of the Mastiani family, Michele Mastiani having given the
commission, and paid thirty ducats, in October, 1511. It represents the
Madonna and Child seated on a base; the action is quiet and yet
vivacious; she is supported on each side by S. Peter and S. Paul,
figures as large as life, and even more noble than the ones in Rome.
The colouring has been much injured by a fire in the seventeenth
century, but is robust and harmonious. It is dated 1511.
On the 26th of November, 1510, Fra Bartolommeo had a commission from
Pier Soderini, then Gonfaloniere, to paint a picture for the Council
Hall. This was an unfortunate order; for Michelangelo and Leonardo da
Vinci had both been commissioned, neither of them finishing the works.
Fra Bartolommeo’s forms the third uncompleted painting; it exists still
in the form of a half prepared picture, the design being only shadowed
in monochrome, and this in spite of the payment on account of 100 gold
ducats in October, 1513. [Footnote: See Padre Marchese, Memorie,
documenti 5 and 6, vol ii. p. 603.] The reason of this is difficult to
assign, but it might lie in the fact that in 1512 Pier Soderini was
deposed and exiled by Giuliano de’ Medici, who assumed the government.
Another reason may have been the failure of Fra Bartolommeo’s health
after his journey to Rome.
In 1512 Santi Pagnini came back from Siena as prior of S. Marco, and he
having no love for Albertinelli, and perhaps a too jealous affection
for the artist Monk, caused the partnership to be dissolved, much to
Mariotto’s sorrow. The stock, of which a full list is given by Padre
Marchese, was divided, each taking the pictures in which they had most
to do. The properties–amongst which were the lay figures, easels,
casts, sketches, blocks of porphyry to grind colours on, &c. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, vol. ii. pp. 184, 185.]–were to be left for Fra
Bartolommeo’s use till his death, when they were to be divided between
his heirs and Albertinelli.
Mariotto returned disheartened to paint in his solitary studio. A
specimen of this period is the Adam and Eve, now at Castle
Howard, which is said to have been sketched in by Fra Bartolommeo. Eve
stands beneath the serpent-entwined tree, hesitating between the
demon’s temptations and Adam’s persuasions; the feeling and action are
perfectly expressed, the landscape is minute, but has plenty of
atmosphere and good colouring. In the same collection is a Sacrifice
of Abraham, in his best style. The drawing of the father,
reluctantly holding his knife to the throat of the boy, is extremely
true. Munich possesses a fine Annunciation. Characteristic
saints support the composition on each side, the nude S. Sebastian
being a markworthy study; an angel at his side presents the palm of
martyrdom. The picture has suffered much from bad cleaning.
In March, 1513, Albertinelli was commissioned by the Medici to paint
their arms, in honour of Leo X.’s elevation to the papacy. He made a
fine allegorical circular picture, in which the arms were supported by
the figures of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
