


Of these, little more than the names have come down to us. Vasari
speaks of Benedetto Cianfanini, Gabbriele Rustici, and Fra Paolo
Pistojese; Padre Marchese mentions two monks, Fra Andrea and Fra
Agostino. Of these, the two first never became proficient, and have
left no works behind them. Fra Andrea seems to have been more a
journeyman than scholar, being employed to prepare the panels and lay
on the gilding. Fra Agostino assisted his master, and Fra Paolo in the
subordinate parts of a few frescoes, especially at Luco in the Mugnone.
Fra Paolo is the most known, but chiefly as a far-off imitator of Fra
Bartolommeo, without his mellowness of execution. His pictures are
mostly from his master’s designs, which were left him as a legacy, and
this ensures a good composition.
He was born at Pistoja in 1490; his father, Bernardino d’ Antonio del
Signoraccio, a second-rate artist, taught him the first principles of
art. His knowledge of drawing caused him to be noticed by Fra
Bartolommeo, when at a very early age he entered the order. He was
removed from Prato to San Marco, Florence, in 1503; and here he found
another friend who assisted his artistic tendencies. This was Fra
Ambrogio della Robbia, [Footnote: Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., lib.
in. chap. ii. p. 246.] who taught him to model in clay; a specimen of
his work exists in the Church of Sta. Maddalena in Pian di Mugnone,
where are two statues of S. Domenico and Mary Magdalen by his hand.
His best work is a Crucifixion at Siena, dated 1516, which has
been thought to be Fra Bartolommeo’s; but though that master was asked
to go and paint it as a memorial of a certain Messer Cherubino Ridolfo,
his many occupations prevented his accepting the commission, and his
disciples, Fra Paolo and Fra Agostino, went in his place. [Footnote:
Padre Marchese, Memorie, &c., lib. in. chap. ii. p. 251.] Possibly the
master supplied the design, which is very harmonious. The Virgin and S.
John stand on each side of the cross, and Saint Catherine of Siena and
Mary Magdalen are prostrate before it. One or two of the female saints
are pleasing, but the nude figure of Christ is hard, exaggerated, and
faulty in drawing.
The artists got thirty-five lire for the work, though the record in the
archives allows that it was worth more. There is an Assumption
in the Belle Arti of Florence, of which the design is Fra
Bartolommeo’s, but the colouring Fra Paolo’s. It was painted for the
Dominican monks at Santa Maria del Sasso, near Bibbiena. The colouring
is hard and weak, the shadows heavy, and not fused well in the half
tints. Two monks on the left are tolerably life-like, probably they
were drawn from living models; the S. Catherine on the right is very
inferior.
The Belle Arti also possesses a Deposition from the Cross, which
Fra Bartolommeo had sketched out and left uncoloured at Pian di
Mugnone. In 1519 Fra Paolo finished it, and it presents the usual
disparity between the composition and colouring, the former being good,
the latter weak and crude. His best known works are a Nativity in the
Palazzo Borghese, a Madonna and Child with S. John Baptist in
the Sciarra Colonna, also in Rome; a Madonna and Child with S.
John in the Corsini Gallery, Florence, and another of the same
subject in the Antinori Palace. He painted also at San Gimignano, Pian
di Mugnone, and Pistoja, and died of sunstroke in 1547.
He had as a follower a Suor Plautilla Nelli, born 1523, daughter of a
noble Florentine, Piero di Luca Nelli. She took the vows at the age of
fourteen, in the convent of S. Caterina di Siena, in Via Larga (now
Cavour), Florence. Her sister, Suor Petronilla, in the same convent,
was a writer, and her life of Savonarola is still extant. Suor
Plautilla taught herself to paint. Legend says, that in order to study
the nude for a Christ, she drew from the corpse of a nun–which might
account for the weak stiffness of her design. Fra Paolo, though there
is no record of his having taught her, left her as a legacy the designs
and cartoons of Fra Bartolommeo, one of which, the Pietà, she
has evidently made use of in the painting in the Belle Arti. The
grouping is that of the Pietà of Fra Bartolommeo, now in the
Pitti, of which she must have had the original sketch, for she has put
in the two saints in the background, which have been painted out in
that of the Frate, but we will give her the entire credit of the
colouring, which is extremely crude; the contrasting blues and yellows
are in inharmonious tones, the shading harsh, and the whole picture
wanting in chiaroscuro. The Corsini Gallery, Florence, has a Virgin
and Child by her.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
