


Andrea Del Sarto is a curious instance of the vital power of art,
which, like a flower forcing its way to the light through walls or
rocks, will find expression in spite of obstacles.
Andrea the painter, “senza errori,” was an artist in spite of lowering
home influences, of want of encouragement in his patrons–for his
greatest works only brought the smallest remuneration–and even in
spite of his own nature, which was material, wanting in high aims, and
deficient in ideality; yet his name lives for ever as a great master,
and his works rank close to those of the leaders of the Renaissance.
In looking at them one sighs even in the midst of admiration, thinking
that if the hand which produced them had been guided by a spark of
divine genius instead of the finest talent, what glorious works they
would have been! The truth is that Andrea’s was a receptive, rather
than an original and productive mind. His art was more imitative than
spontaneous, and this forms perhaps the difference between talent and
genius. The art of his time sunk into his mind, and was reproduced. He
lived precisely at the time of the culmination of art, when all the
highest masters were bringing forth their grandest works; therefore he
could not do otherwise than to follow the best examples.
He gathered the experience of all–the force of Michelangelo, the
handling of Leonardo, the sentiment of Raphael, so blending them as to
form a style seemingly his own, and in execution following closely on
their excellence.
In Giotto’s or Masaccio’s case the master created the art; in Andrea’s
it was the art of the age which made the artist.
The question of Andrea del Sarto’s birth is a mooted one. Biadi dates
it 1478, but the register he quotes is both vague and doubtful. He also
tells a curious story of his Flemish origin. Signor Milanesi has
deduced, from the archives of Florence, an authentic pedigree from
which we learn that his remote ancestors were peasants, first at
Buiano, near Fiesole, and later at S. Ilario, near Montereggi. His
grandfather, Francesco, being a linen weaver, came to live nearer
Florence; his father, Agnolo, son of Francesco, followed the trade of a
tailor–hence Andrea’s sobriquet, “del Sarto"–he took a house in Via
Gualfonda, in Florence, about 1487, with his wife Constanza, and here
Andrea was born, he being the eldest of a family of five–three girls
and two boys. From the tax papers of a few years later it is proved
that Andrea was born in 1487. His full name is Andrea d’Agnolo di
Francesco. It is by mistake that he has been called Vannucchi.
His parents were young, his father being only twenty-seven years of age
at Andrea’s birth. They lived at that time in Val Fonda, where
Albertinelli had his shop, but in 1504 they removed to the popolo, or
parish, of S. Paolo. Boys were not allowed to be idle in those days,
but were apprenticed at an early age; thus Andrea, like most artists of
his time, was bound to a goldsmith. It would be interesting to
investigate the great influence of the guild of goldsmiths on the art
of the Renaissance. The reason why youths who showed a talent for
design were entered in that guild is easy to assign–it was one of the
“greater” guilds, that of the painters being a lesser one, and merged
in the “Arte degli Speziali.” At seven years old he left the school
where he had learned to read and write, and entered his very youthful
apprenticeship; but he showed so much more aptitude for the designing
than for the executive part of his profession that Giovanni
Barile, who frequented the bottega, was induced to counsel his
being trained especially as a painter, offering himself as instructor.
If Andrea, a contadino by birth, an artisan by education, was not
originally of the most refined nature, his artistic training did not go
far towards refining him. Giovanni Barile was a coarse painter and a
rough man; he had, however, generosity enough to see that the boy was
worthy of better teaching, and got him entered in the bottega of Piero
di Cosimo, who had attained a good rank as a colourist, his
eccentricities possibly adding to his reputation.
Accordingly in 1498, Andrea being then eleven years of age, a life of
earnest study began. Piero di Cosimo, odd and misanthropic as he was,
had yet a true appreciation of talent, and showed an earnest interest
in his pupil, giving him–with plenty of queer treatment–a thorough
training. “He was not allowed to make a line which was not perfect"
[Footnote: Rosini, Storia della Pittura, chap. xvii. p. 40.]
while in Piero’s school. But excellent as his art teaching may have
been, the boy’s morale could not have been raised more here than under
the rough but good-natured Barile. We have seen Piero di Cosimo in his
youth, the serious, absent young man, who never joked with his juniors
in Cosimo Roselli’s shop; we see him now, with his youthful oddities
hardened into eccentricities, and his reserve deepened to misanthropy.
No woman’s hand softened and refined his house, no cleansing broom was
allowed within his door, and no gardener’s hand cleared the weeds or
pruned the vines in his garden. He so believed in nature unassisted
that he took his meals without the intervention of a cook. When the
fire was lighted to boil his size or glue he would cook fifty or sixty
eggs and set them apart in a basket, to which he had recourse when the
pangs of hunger compelled him. All this was morally very bad for a boy
so young. And then woe betide the poor little fellow if he whistled,
sneezed, or made any other noise! his nervous master would be out of
temper for a day afterwards. On wet days Piero was merrier, for he
would watch the drops splashing into the pools, and laugh as if they
were fairies. Sometimes he would take Andrea for a walk, and all at
once stop and gaze at a heap of rubbish, or mark of damp on a lichened
wall, picturing all kinds of monsters and weird scenes in its
discolourations.
No doubt he was literally carrying out Leonardo da Vinci’s advice,
headed, in his treatise, “A new Art of Invention.” “Look at some old
wall covered with dirt, or the odd appearance of some old streaked
stones; you may discover several things like landscapes, battles,
clouds, humorous faces, &c., to furnish the mind with new designs."
[Footnote: Leonardo da Vinci, Treatise on Painting.] Cosimo’s
mind being fantastic, the pictures he saw were incomparably grotesque.
He delighted in drawing sea monsters, dragons, wonderful adventures,
and heathen scenes; in fact the boy could have learned neither
Christian art nor manners from him. He learned how to use his brush,
however, and, leaving Piero to his minotaurs and dragons, went off at
every spare hour to study at more congenial shrines. He copied Masaccio
at the Brancacci Chapel, and drew so earnestly from the cartoons in the
Hall of the Pope that his achievements reached the ears of Piero
himself, who was not sorry that his pupil surpassed the rest, and gave
him more time for study away from the bottega. Rosini tells us that
“Fra Bartolommeo taught him the first steps.” [Footnote: Storia
della Pittura, chap, xxvii. p. 2.] The influence of the Frate may
have reached him in two ways. It is not unlikely that Piero di Cosimo
kept up an interest in his old fellow-pupil; and then again, as Andrea
lived in Val Fonda, it is probable he often visited Albertinelli’s
studio in that street, and the friendship with Francia Bigio began
before the cartoons of Michelangelo ripened there.
The evidence of style goes to show that the works of Albertinelli and
Fra Bartolommeo influenced him more than those of Piero. Yet though his
sphere was devotional, it was “impelled more by a material sense of
beauty than by the deep religious feeling which inspired the Frate.”
As time went on the youth in strange old Piero’s studio became more
famous than his master, and felt that he could do greater things away
from the stiff method which cramped him, and the whimsicalities which
annoyed him. His friend, Francia Bigio, Mariotto’s pupil, having just
then lost his master, who was giving more attention to his father-in-
law’s business of innkeeper than his own, was willing to enter into
partnership, and the two youths began life together in 1509 or 1510, in
a room near the Piazza del Grano, in the first house in Via del Moro,
which still remains in its old state.
The first bit of patronage recorded is the commission for the frescoes
in the Scalzo; that they had work before is proved by the words in the
contract of the Barefoot Friars, “dettero ad Andrea pittore
celeberrimo il dipingere nel Chiosto.” The “celebrated"
presupposes works already done.
The Scalzo was a name given to the “Compagnia dei Disciplinati di S.
Giovanni Battista,” because they went barefoot when they carried the
cross in their processions. They lived in a convent in Via Larga (now
Cavour), opposite San Marco. A new cloister had been erected there–an
elegant little cortile, thirty-eight feet by thirty-two, adorned with
lovely Corinthian pillars–and the Brethren were anxious to fill the
lunettes of the arches with frescoes at the least possible expense,
wisely judging that a young artist on his way to fame would be the best
to employ.
The frescoes, of which there would be twelve large, and four small ones
in the upright spaces by the doors, were to be done in “terretta,” or
brown earth, and to be paid fifty-six lire (eight scudi) for the large,
and twenty-one lire (three scudi) each for the lesser frescoes. The
small ones were four figures of the Virtues, Faith, Hope,
Justice, and Charity. Hope is exquisitely expressed, and
Charity a charming group, the children most tenderly drawn. The
subjects, though not all finished till many years later, stand now in the
following order; the second row of figures, with the dates, show the
order in which they were painted:–
Of these, No. 6 was the first executed, and it is probable that Francia
Bigio assisted him, for it has not the finished drawing nor careful
handling of any of Andrea’s other frescoes. Possibly this is the cause
of the partners never working together afterwards, each taking his own
subjects and signing his own name. The composition, in the Baptism
of Christ, is not original, being very similar to that of
Verocchio’s, especially in the two angels kneeling on the left bank;
the landscape and figures, however, are far in advance of that master.
It will be well to speak of the whole set of frescoes in this place,
for although they belong to different times and styles, they are a
complete work, and might be taken almost as an epitome of Andrea’s
career; from the one above mentioned in which Piero de Cosimo’s
influence is apparent, to the Nos. 7 and 8, which very nearly approach
Michelangelo’s power and freedom.
In No. 1 the expression of muteness about the mouth of Zacharias, as he
stands by the altar, is wonderfully given; you feel sure he could not
speak if he would. The other figures are superfluous to the motive,
though adding grandeur to the work as a whole.
In composition Andrea differs widely from Fra Bartolommeo. The latter
delighted in building up a single form, every figure in the whole
picture adding its hue and weight to perfect this pyramid or circle.
Andrea spreads his figures more widely; he likes a double composition,
dividing his pictures into two separate groups, connected by one
central figure, or divided entirely. This is seen in Nos. 3, 10 and 12,
which are all double groupings, the last completely divided in the
centre by a table and an archway behind it. Nos. 7 and 9 are pyramidal
compositions. The Preaching of S. John is one of the best works,
and shows his most forcible style. S. John on a rock stands like a
pillar in the centre, the hearers are dressed in the “lucco” (a
Florentine cloak of the 15th century), the grouping following the lines
of the landscape. At the back Jesus kneels on a rising ground. Vasari
says the figures are from Albrecht Dürer, whose works had made a great
impression on the southern world of art; but it is more probable that
they only show his influence, for the dress and style are Florentine.
No. 8, the Baptism of the Gentiles, is another of his best
style, and is, in the drawing of the nude figures, almost
Michelangelesque in power. This is one of his favourite “echo"
subjects, a group in the background of John answering the Pharisees
forming an echo to the principal subject. The muscular life of the
spirited crowd of nude figures is beautifully contrasted by the
graceful draped forms in the background. One of the baptized is the
same child whom he had modelled in the Madonna of S. Francisco.
Nos. 4 and 5 are by Francia Bigio, and were done during Andrea’s
absence in France, showing that he had so far learned from his friend
as almost to rival him in power. The subjects, although not scriptural,
are conjecturally true.
In the Zacharias blessing John before he goes to the Desert, the
sitting figure of S. Elizabeth and the kneeling one of the child are
very lovely; the action of Zacharias is not so well defined, the great
force in the uplifted arm betokens anger more than blessing. The
grouping follows the lines of a flight of steps in the background, and
is triangular.
The same form of composition is apparent in the next group (No. 5),
only the lines form an angle receding from the one just mentioned. The
Virgin is charmingly posed and draped, the children less pleasing.
This elegant little cloister is a true shrine of art, although the
frescoes are all in monochrome. So much were they admired at the time,
that an order was issued prohibiting artists to copy them without the
permission of Duke Cosimo. Cardinal Carlo de’ Medici had them covered
with curtains, [Footnote: Richa, Delle Chiese] but, in spite of
care, they are very much injured, the under parts almost lost. The
precaution of covering the cloister with a glass roof has only been
taken in modern times, and too late.
Andrea’s next patrons were the Eremite monks of S. Agostino, at San
Gallo, who ordered of him two pictures for their church. In 1511 he
painted Christ appearing to Mary Magdalen, and an Annunciation in
1512. The former is said to have had much softness and delicacy, the
latter is to be seen in the Hall of Mars at the Pitti, and is a very
pleasing picture. The Virgin kneels at her prayer desk, S. Joseph behind
her–a rather unusual rendering of the subject–her attitude is graceful
and decorous, the angel calm and gentle, floats in mid air, two other
angels stand on the left. The colouring is varied in the extreme, and the
lights well defined.
These two pictures, and the Disputa, painted later, were removed
to the church of S. Jacopo tra Fossi, when the convent was demolished
in 1529. They were still there in 1677, when Bocchi wrote his Bellezze
di Firenze, but the Christ appearing to Mary Magdalen is said to be
now in the church of the Covoni in the Casentino.
Continue...

This complete text of Fra Bartolommeo by Leader Scott (re-edited by Horace Shipp and Flora Kendrick) 
is in the public domain.

Fra Bartolommeo: A Selection From the Rotterdam Albums and Landscape Drawings at Amazon.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Fra BartolommeoBy Leader ScottAt Amazon
