


The summer vacation that year was great fun. My cousins from Belgaum
arrived on schedule and since no one had Board exams that year the
holiday season began in the first week of April itself. We would enjoy
two whole months of the sea, swimming as often as we could in the river
that joins the sea at Baga.
One morning in May my dad asked me whether I’d like to participate in a
project that the Goa Foundation, an environment organisation of which
my dad is Executive Secretary, was organising for college students. I
agreed. The project turned out to be field visits to the forests in
Betim in order to identify which areas were still forest, which areas
had been cut down and by whom, which projects/constructions had come
up, and so on. The two students who had opted for this project were
Stephen and Jerry, both from St. Xavier’s College, Mapusa doing their
graduation degree. I joined the team as an extra.
On the morning of the 20th of May, Dad and I set out in the car for
Betim. On the way we picked up Stephen and Jerry. Dad showed us the
different spots in and around the area he wanted us to cover and then
left.
Steven was the leader of the team. He had obviously been briefed by Dad
on how we were to proceed for he soon took out a note book and started
writing notes. I took my notebook and wrote down some names of birds.
Stephen said that just in case anybody questioned us, we were to say we
were birdwatchers!
We found two illegal houses in the middle of the forest and a huge
clearing made by cutting a lot of big trees. The trees appeared to be
cut with the use of an electric saw and tar was smeared on top of them
to prevent further growth. Many logs were thrown nearby. It was a
tiring task and being the month of May, it was extremely hot and my
shoes had begun cooking my poor feet. Even if we saw a small path,
Steven would insist we go to the end. Jerry would sometimes complain,
“Steven who the hell do you think will go down there, in that
inaccessible valley, to cut trees?” But Steven was stubborn and would
retort, “Jerry if we don’t go down there we will have it on our
conscience that there was a path which we could have checked out but
didn’t.” So we trudged down each and every pathway we saw, howsoever
narrow and unused it appeared to be.
On the second day, I went on my bicycle to Betim. We continued and we
found another two illegal houses and a big tree cut, on the hill. This
tree was also smeared with tar. The exercise usually took the whole
morning and we would call it a day by about 2 p.m. or so.
On the third day, my Dad and my cousin Luke joined us. We showed my
father the different spots we had visited, the places where trees were
cut and the illegal houses. Dad had brought along a camera which he
gave to Stephen to take photographs of the different patches of forest,
the felling and the constructions. In some areas we found that fire had
been set to the area after the trees were cut and this had destroyed
the scrub bushes as well.
I was glad that the fourth day would be the last, since by now I was
quite tired of this assignment. I had a lot of thorn pricks all over my
body and they had become little itchy swellings. My feet were also sore
and the heat was killing. But I carried on, as the project was near
completion. On the hill we found a lot of houses, several of them
illegal, coming up in the forest. We also found clear-felled plots with
barbed wire fences around.
My part of the assignment was over that day and I received a small
stipend for my work from the Goa Foundation. Steven and Jerry later
prepared the project report with photographs and write-up. The report
was submitted by the Foundation to the Forest Department. The
department sent an officer to investigate the matter and also issued
orders not to allow felling or constructions in the area.
Continue...

This eBook of “Free From School” by Rahul Alvares belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Free From SchoolBy Rahul AlvaresAt Amazon
