


On the 6th of November, I was put on the Chennai Express, which was to
leave Dadar Railway station at 7 p.m., by my Uncle Alan who is very
knowledgeable about trains since he has worked in the railways all his
working life. My mum had requested him to check my departure from
Mumbai since Dadar railway station is a crowded and busy place and I
too was not confident of finding my way around. Earlier Grandpapa had
brought me to the railway station by cab after making me double-check
that I had my ticket, sufficient cash, little tidbits to eat and my
water bottle filled for the long journey ahead.
I was to spend one night and the whole of the next day in the train for
it was due to arrive in Chennai at about 8.30 p.m. on the 7th. Having
travelled on a couple of journeys by train during the past few months I
was quite relaxed on this one although I continued to be watchful and
careful of my things throughout.
The train journey from Mumbai was entirely uneventful. I had a window
seat and slept the night on the lower berth. Around me was a family of
migrant workers who spoke neither Hindi nor English and who were quite
busy doing their own things. I did not speak with them nor with anyone
else on the journey but contented myself with watching the countryside
we passed through and the hustle and bustle at each station, and when I
was bored I just went to sleep. I had about Rs.500 with me in cash and
some of this was carefully tucked away in different pockets of my
jeans, the balance in various compartments of the haversack. When I
slept the haversack was my pillow. I also carried a water bottle, some
snacks and some fruit which was all I ate during the journey.
The train was delayed by 3 hours and it was well past 11.30 p.m. when
it arrived at Chennai Central railway station. I was to be met at the
station by my parents’ long-time friend K. Manoharan. Uncle Mano and
Aunty Sagu had willingly agreed to look after me during my stay in
Chennai, even though both of them were not keeping good health. Not
knowing where exactly Uncle Mano would be waiting I walked towards the
entrance keeping a careful lookout for him. Yet, I failed to recognise
him when I saw him for his hair was whiter than when I had seen him
last. He recognised me, however, from the bright yellow haversack that
I carried. He took me home in a rickshaw. I had some food there and
went straight off to sleep. Uncle Mano suggested that I relax the next
day, which I did, watching T.V., looking at photo albums and generally
chatting with them about my sabbatical so far and about my plans in
Chennai.
Early the following morning Uncle Mano and I set off for New College
where Dr Sultan Ismail’s Earthworm Institute is located and where I
would spend the next fortnight studying earthworms and vermiculture.
Actually I had a choice of studying at Dr Bhawalkar’s centre in Pune or
Dr Ismail’s institute in Chennai. But I chose Chennai because I had
heard Dr Ismail speak at the organic farmers’ convention in Kottayam
and had liked his talk very much. Another reason of course was that I
was dying to get to the Crocodile Bank in Mamallapuram and being in
Chennai which was close to the Croc Bank was infinitely better than
being far away in Pune where Dr Bhawalkar works.
Although Uncle Mano, being a heart patient, does not usually travel by
bus, he deliberately took me by bus that morning so that I could get to
know the route to New College. On the way he pointed out to me various
landmarks which would help me know my way around, and gave me general
bits of advice on how to travel in the city. I had to learn well and
quickly, for language would be the main problem for me in this city
where I spoke no Tamil.
At the College we met Dr Ismail who took us through the college campus
down to the fields where the vermi-pits were and we saw the biogas
plant, the garbage collection pits, the culture crates and the organic
compost now ready for use. I was quite eager to begin and happy when
“Sir” as everyone calls him, suggested I start work from the next day
itself.
Every day, except Sundays, for the next 15 days I followed the same
routine which was: wake up at 6 a.m or so, eat a hot breakfast of
idlis, sambar, dosas, vadas or whatever was cooked for breakfast, carry
a hot packed lunch which Aunty Sagu prepared for me and catch a bus by
7 a.m. from Ashok Pillar to Panagal where I had to change buses and get
on one going to New College. Usually I would land up at the College by
8.30 a.m. or so and would be at the College till about 3.30 or 4 p.m.,
after which the journey would be reversed. These timings helped me to
avoid the office rush both ways. My dad had suggested to Prof Ismail
that I be given practical experience and so my programme included a
mixture of study from books, taking down notes, watching and helping
the others and finally making my own vermi-pits.
During the first two days I read up as much as I could about earthworms
and the world they inhabit from books which were recommended to me by
Dr Ismail. Later I started to observe the different types of
earthworms, their movements, colour and other characteristics. I also
learnt a lot about different types of soils, their textures and nature,
and was taught how to take soil samples using the tulgren funnel.
There were about 8 to 10 students doing different kinds of research
under Dr Ismail and all of us worked in a large room which was formerly
the main library. Each one had a separate desk to work and when I came
I was also given my own desk and chair. The big hall also had a mini
library on earthworm related books at one end and it was a simple
matter therefore to find the books I needed to read.
The main vermi-beds, compost pits and so on were on the ground floor
but some of the vermi-beds which were in crates were stacked in the
narrow corridor outside the study hall, where we also gathered to eat
our lunch in the afternoons. Usually any one of the students would
briefly guide me in the work that I was assigned for the day after
which I would manage on my own.
During my fortnight stay at the Institute I learnt a lot about
earthworm environments, including determination of porosity of soil,
moisture content and texture. I also observed the other organisms
present in the soil and took photos of microarthropods with the help of
a compound microscope. At the end of the course, I practically prepared
a vermi-bed and also ate a few earthworms and cockroaches for
experience!
My stay in Chennai was not without its share of adventure. I recall
that on my second day, I had entered a bus and rushed for an empty
seat. I was completely unaware of the procedure, that while in Goa the
ticket collector comes to you and sells you the ticket in the bus, in
Chennai one has to go to the conductor (who is seated at the end of the
bus) and buy the ticket. So while I waited for the conductor to come on
his rounds two inspectors came up to me and caught me for not buying
the ticket. One of them started shouting at me in a forceful stream of
Tamil. After much action and hand waving, I explained that I did not
know Tamil, that I was from Goa and it was the first time I was
travelling in a bus in Chennai. He fined me Rs.25! Fortunately, I had
enough money on me and paid the fine but when I got down from the bus,
I found that my empty purse had also been pick-pocketed!
Another time I was on the last step of a bus which I thought would be
quite okay for I had seen many people travelling while hanging at the
doors of crowded buses. However, as this bus started gathering speed I
found it very difficult to hold on because the weight of so many people
began to press against me and it felt like I was literally holding
everyone in with my outstretched arms as I hung practically out of the
door. I resolved never to travel on the footboard, if I could help it,
again.
I also got lost several times. But I would never phone for help with
directions but would struggle away, walking this side or that, asking
passers-by till I reached familiar landmarks which would get me home.
Often I found that I had alighted from the bus a few stops before or
after my destination. On one such occasion the next stop was so far
away that I jumped out of the bus while it slowed down at a traffic
light and then spent nearly 30 minutes walking back!
Although Uncle Mano and Aunty Sagu had welcomed me very warmly. Looking
back, I think I must have given them quite a headache during my stay at
their house because of my rather careless and casual ways and the
laid-back lifestyle I had acquired and was thoroughly enjoying. Uncle
Mano would constantly be shouting at me for not having a bath regularly
or for staying in the bathroom forever when I decided to have a bath or
for wearing soiled clothes again instead of washing them.
Aunty Sagu cooks well and I enjoyed her food but both she and Uncle
Mano would notice that I ate much more when there was chicken or fish
for dinner rather than vegetarian food and I would get a lecture again
for my poor appetite for simple food. I was also quite a sloppy fellow
and would slouch around on the sofas after coming back from the
college, channel surfing as I watched TV, which must have been quite
exasperating for both of them. Anyway, they took very good care of me,
not only in terms of feeding me but also going out of their way to make
arrangements for me to study at the Earthworm Institute, the spider
centre and later at the Crocodile Bank and I am most grateful for that.
I hope when they read this book they will forgive me for all the
trouble I must have caused them.
Extracts from Diary:
Earthworms
10th November: Sir gave me a book on earthworms to read, then Jagan
took me down to the field. There I was able to observe many organisms
other than earthworms. We took a soil sample from one place and then
went back to the lab where we put the soil sample into the tulgren
funnel. I then went and brought three more samples from the vermi-tech
pit. We then put these also into three other tulgren funnels. By then
it was lunch time and we all ate together. After lunch I weighed the
soil samples and got to see the organisms that were in the beaker under
the tulgren funnel. At 3.30 p.m I left for home.
11th November: In the morning, I was given two types of earthworms i.e.
Lampito mauritii and Perionyx excavatus and told to observe them. I
spent the whole morning doing this. After lunch, I wrote down the
observations that I had made. In the evening we went out to the College
playground and also to the area near the College Boarding to make some
observations. We dug two pits of 25 cm x 25 cm x 25 cm each at the
playground and one, of the same size, at the Boarding. We made many
observations which included the number and species of earthworms we
found and whether they were clitellates or not. We also made
observations regarding soil, atmospheric temperature and relative
humidity and took soil samples to measure the moisture content.
12th November: Left for New College as usual. I was told that Sir did
not come today as he had a high viral fever. Yesterday a research
scholar had expired and so there was a condolence meeting today. After
that everybody left as it was declared a holiday. I arrived home at
about 10.30 a.m. I had a bath and then some food. I then watched a bit
of TV and wrote my diary. In the night Uncle Mano and Aunty Sagu had
invited some guests and had cooked chicken curry which I enjoyed very
much.
14th November: Sir did not arrive today either. With the help of Jagan
I used the Infrared Moisture Balance to find out the moisture content
of the soil samples which we had taken on Saturday. After we finished
one sample, the voltage started fluctuating so we used the tulgren
funnel instead. Then Jagan sent me to get soil samples from the field
and from the area near the Boarding. We put the soil samples in the
tulgren funnel and observed the arthropods that fell into the beaker
under a compound microscope. We also observed some preserved specimens
of microarthropods.
15th November: Pounded 100 gms of soil sample and then sieved each soil
sample through 5 sieves. Then weighed the soil in each sieve and noted
this down.
16th November: Did sieving of soil in the morning. In the evening, used
Keenscups to find out the waterholding capacity/porosity.
18th November: Sir arrived this morning. Read some books in the library
for sometime. Then did a bit of soil sieving and then did burning of
soil in a bunsen burner. In the afternoon, I watched a very comic film
called “Junior Shylock”.
19th November: Started preparing my report in rough. In the evening I
went with Babu to buy a film roll for taking photographs for my report.
20th November: Did burning of a second sample of soil. After that
Jagan, Sir and I photographed microarthropods with the help of the
compound microscope that has a camera attached to it. After lunch, I
attended a seminar conducted by one of the students.
21st November: Ate a Perionyx excavatus earthworm in the morning. Then
weighed some soil samples to find out the waterholding capacity of
different soils, weighed burnt soil, also learnt how to calculate and
find out soil texture of different samples of soil. Continued writing
my report.
22nd November: Sat and wrote the final parts of my report. Then I gave
it to Chitra who corrected it. After she finished, she gave it to Sir
who also made some corrections.
23rd November: Wrote my report in fair in the new notebook I had
bought. Then Jagan and I stuck the photographs we had clicked earlier
in the various spaces in the notebook. Then Sir said that I would have
to prepare a vermi-bed on my own. He gave me a bucket and I made a
vermi-bed in it. Sir checked that I had done it correctly.
24th November: Drew some diagrams that remained to be done in my
notebook. Then gave it to Sir for final approval. He made me write a
few lines about each photograph. He said I should come and collect it
after a week or so. After that I said bye to everyone and left at 4.30
for home.
5th December: Today was a holiday, so I went to collect my report book
from New College where I had given it to Sir for his signing. Met all
my friends there. All of them wrote their remarks in my report book and
then it was stamped. Sir gave me a certificate for the earthworm course
I had finished at the Institute. Then Chitra dropped me in her Fiat car
near the Panagal Park bus stop.
Field Notes on Vermiculture:
Turning Garbage into Gold
Vermicompost and vermiwash are the two earthworm products that have
become very popular nowadays. Ordinary organic garbage which consists
of litter, such as, kitchen waste and dead plant material is used and
converted into manure with the help of earthworms.
There are three kinds of earthworms. One, the epigeal or surface
earthworm (Perionyx excavatus) which eats only organic litter which is
present on the top layer of the soil. Two, the anecic earthworms
(Lampito mauritii) which are present in the upper layers of soil and
feed on waste and leaf litter. The third kind are present deep inside
the soil and are known as endogeic earthworms (Octochaetona
thriretonis).
The most suitable earthworms recommended for vermiculture are the
epigeic and anecic earthworms. Perionyx excavatus is purplish red and
rough. Near the two ends the Perionyx excavatus is almost black in
colour. It is smaller and thinner (approx. 10 cms long) and more active
compared to the Lampito mauritii. They also breed faster than Lampito
mauritii. Lampito mauritii are greyish white in colour and shiny,
thicker and longer (length-16 cms) compared to Perionyx excavatus.
Earthworms prefer cool temperatures, moist soil, humidity, relatively
less sunlight and neither too coarse nor too fine sand. These are the
ideal conditions that must be kept in mind when using them for
vermiculture. Since earthworms breathe through the skin, they perish if
their skin becomes dry or the quantity of mucus diminishes. Hence to
keep earthworms alive in the vermicompost containers, care should be
taken to ensure that the vermibed remains moist. Earthworms however do
not prefer waterlogged soils. In fact if earthworms are kept in water
for too long, the concentration of ammonia that is discharged through
their excreta makes the water too toxic for the earthworms to survive.
Earthworms also cannot tolerate salt or salt water even briefly.
Earthworms are hermaphrodites. Depending on the species, their life
span is between six months to one year. Fully matured earthworms upon
mating shed their clitellum (a small band like an overgrowth of skin)
and produce cocoons which take about 14 days to incubate and hatch into
juveniles. Maximum three juveniles are hatched from each cocoon. From
the juvenile to the clitellate stage i.e. the fully matured or
reproductive stage it takes 15-18 days. Thus earthworms are able to
multiply several times in their life span which makes them ideally
suited to process even large quantities of garbage.
A pit, a small plastic or wooden crate or, even a bucket, can be used
for vermicomposting organic matter. Although not necessary, two crates
can be used simultaneously; while one is being used for fresh garbage,
the garbage in the other can be allowed to decompose.
First, 6-8 holes should be made (one at each corner and four in the
middle of the crate). A pot or a bucket needs about 3-5 holes. The
crate or pit must first be filled with a one inch layer of pebbles or
broken bricks. Then, a half to one inch layer of sand should be spread.
Over that, a five to six inch layer of soil should be spread. Then
Lampito mauritii and Perionyx excavatus earthworms should be
introduced. The soil must then be moistened with water. A little bit of
cowdung (nitrogen) and some hay (carbon) should be spread on it, and
the contents of the pit left for 20-30 days. This is called a vermibed.
The cowdung and hay will allow the worms to multiply. With this, the
vermicompost crate or pit will be ready for processing organic waste.
All organic waste should be evenly spread out on the vermibed. As far
as possible add garbage in small quantities regularly rather than
dumping large quantities at one go. The earthworm begins processing the
garbage immediately. Water the container occasionally so that the
vermibed remains moist. Once the container is full with organic waste,
it should be covered with a little soil and allowed to decompose
undisturbed. Only watering the pit should continue. After it has
decomposed fully (roughly 45 days) watering must be stopped for about 3
to 5 days. This will force the earthworms to migrate down to the bottom
of the container which will have some moisture as compared with the top
soil. Then the top layer of soil which is really the organic matter
which has been converted into manure should be removed without
disturbing the vermibed. This organic manure can be used for plants.
A drum, barrel or bucket can be used for making vermiwash. The drum or
bucket should be placed on supports a little above the ground. A hole
should be made at the bottom of the container. A pipe should be pushed
through the hole and a tap attached to the outer end.
The bottom of the drum should be covered with a layer of gravel (about
6-8 inches). Over it, a layer of sand (6-8 inches), and then a layer of
soil (6-8 inches) should be spread. The earthworms should then be
introduced and the soil moistened a little. Then a little bit of
cowdung and hay should be mixed together and scattered over it. This
should be left for a few days.
Whenever vermiwash is needed, water should be sprinkled with a shower
or, gradually poured on top of it (5 litres of water for a 150 litres
drum). The water will pass through the earthworm burrows and the
organically rich soil will become liquid manure and can be collected at
the bottom of the container. As the hay and cowdung is eaten up by the
earthworms, this should gradually be replaced.
In nature, litter is decomposed in a way similar to what happens in a
vermicompost pit. Litter (consisting of leaf material, twigs, bark,
dead wood, flowers, fruits and other plant and animal material) that
falls on the ground is constantly moistened by dew or rain.
Decomposition then sets in with the help of microbes, fungi and
microarthropods.
Microarthropods are of two kinds-the detritivores that feed on the
litter attacked by the microbes and fungi and the predators that feed
on the detritivores. The litter that has not been decomposed, dead
microbes and microarthropods, along with their excretions and
secretions, mix and form humus. This humus is in a complex form and
therefore not available to the plants for use. Here is where earthworms
come into the picture. The earthworms present in the soil feed on the
humus. The castings (wormicasts) excreted by these earthworms, as a
result, contain nutrients in a form that is readily available to the
plants for their growth. The plants in turn, when they die or shed
leaves, contribute to the litter which becomes food for microbes and
fungi. Thus nature’s cycle is made whole and complete.
Earthworms have proven that they are wonderful creatures for they can
truly turn garbage into gold.
Continue...

This eBook of “Free From School” by Rahul Alvares belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Free From SchoolBy Rahul AlvaresAt Amazon
