


On the morning of the 3d the battle was renewed, but the enemy seemed
to have expended his energy in the assault of the previous night, and
the firing along the lines was desultory until stopped by my sending
the following letter within the Spanish lines:
“Headquarters U. S. Forces, near San Juan River,
“July 3, 1898–8:30 a. m.
“Sir,–I shall be obliged, unless you surrender, to shell Santiago de
Cuba. Please inform the citizens of foreign countries, and all the
women and children, that they should leave the city before 10 o’clock
to-morrow morning.
“Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
“William R. Shafter,
“Maj.-Gen. U. S. Vols.
“The Commanding General of the Spanish Forces, Santiago de Cuba.”
To this letter I received the following reply:
“Santiago de Cuba, July 3, 1898.
“His Excellency the General Commanding Forces of the United States,
near San Juan River:
“Sir,–I have the honor to reply to your communication of to-day,
written at 8:30 a. m. and received at 1 p. m., demanding the surrender
of this city, or, in the contrary case, announcing to me that you will
bombard this city, and that I advise the foreigners, women and
children, that they must leave the city before 10 o’clock to-morrow
morning.
“It is my duty to say to you that this city will not surrender, and
that I will inform the foreign consuls and inhabitants of the contents
of your message.
“Very respectfully, Jose Toral,
“Commander-in-Chief 4th Corps.”
Several of the foreign consuls came into my lines and asked that the
time given for them–the women and children–to depart from the city
be extended until 10 o’clock on July 5th. This induced me to write a
second letter, as follows:
“Santiago de Cuba, July 3d, 1898.
“Sir,–In consideration of a request of the consular officers in your
city for further delay in carrying out my intentions to fire on the
city, and in the interests of the poor women and children who will
suffer very greatly by their hasty and enforced departure from the
city, I have the honor to announce that I will delay such action,
solely in their interests, until noon of the 5th, provided that during
the interim your forces make no demonstration whatever upon those of
my own.
“I am, with great respect, your obedient servant,
“William R Shafter,
“Maj.-Gen. U. S. A.
“The Commanding General, Spanish Forces.”
My first message went under a flag of truce at 12:42 p.m. I was of the
opinion that the Spaniards would surrender if given a little time, and
I thought this result would be hastened if the men of their army could
be made to understand they would be well treated as prisoners of war.
Acting upon this presumption, I determined to offer to return all the
wounded Spanish officers at El Caney who were able to bear
transportation, and who were willing to give their paroles not to
serve against the forces of the United States until regularly
exchanged. This offer was made and accepted. These officers, as well
as several of the wounded Spanish privates, twenty-seven in all, were
sent to their lines under the escort of some of our mounted cavalry.
Our troops were received with honors, and I have every reason to
believe the return of the Spanish prisoners produced a good impression
on their comrades.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
