


Headquarters U. S. Troops,
Santiago de Cuba, July 19, 1898.
General Orders No. 26.
The successful accomplishment of the campaign against Santiago de
Cuba, resulting in its downfall and surrender of Spanish forces, the
capture of large military stores, together with the destruction of the
entire Spanish fleet in the harbor, which, upon the investment of the
city, was forced to leave, is one of which the Army can well be proud.
This has been accomplished through the heroic deeds of the Army and
its officers and men. The major-general commanding offers his sincere
thanks for their endurance of hardships heretofore unknown in the
American Army.
The work you have accomplished may well appeal to the pride of your
countrymen and has been rivaled upon but few occasions in the world’s
history. Landing upon an unknown coast, you faced dangers in
disembarking and overcame obstacles that even in looking back upon
seem insurmountable. Seizing, with the assistance of the Navy, the
towns of Baiquiri and Siboney, you pushed boldly forth, gallantly
driving back the enemy’s outposts in the vicinity of La Guasimas, and
completed the concentration of the army near Sevilla, within sight of
the Spanish stronghold at Santiago de Cuba. The outlook from Sevilla
was one that might have appalled the stoutest heart. Behind you ran a
narrow road made well-nigh impassable by rains, while to the front you
looked upon high foot-hills covered with a dense tropical growth,
which could only be traversed by bridle-paths terminating within range
of the enemy’s guns. Nothing daunted, you responded eagerly to the
order to close upon the foe, and, attacking at El Caney and San Juan,
drove him from work to work until he took refuge within his last and
strongest entrenchment immediately surrounding the city. Despite the
fierce glare of a Southern sun and rains that fell in torrents, you
valiantly withstood his attempts to drive you from the position your
valor had won, holding in your vise-like grip the army opposed to you.
After seventeen days of battle and siege, you were rewarded by the
surrender of nearly 24,000 prisoners, 12,000 being those in your
immediate front, the others scattered in the various towns of eastern
Cuba, freeing completely the eastern part of the island from Spanish
troops.
This was not done without great sacrifices. The death of 230 gallant
soldiers and the wounding of 1,284 others shows but too plainly the
fierce contest in which you were engaged. The few reported missing are
undoubtedly among the dead, as no prisoners were taken. For those who
have fallen in battle, with you the commanding general sorrows, and
with you will ever cherish their memory. Their devotion to duty sets a
high example of courage and patriotism to our fellow-countrymen. All
who have participated in the campaign, battle, and siege of Santiago
de Cuba will recall with pride the grand deeds accomplished, and will
hold one another dear for having shared great suffering, hardships,
and triumphs together.
All may well feel proud to inscribe on their banners the name of
Santiago de Cuba.
By command of Major-General Shafter.
Official: John B. Miley,     E. J. McClernand,
             Aide.              Asst. Adj.-Gen.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
