


On July 8th Gen. Toral offered to march out of the city with arms and
baggage, provided he would not be molested before reaching Holquin,
and to surrender to the American forces the territory then occupied by
him. I replied that while I would submit his proposition to my home
government. I did not think it would be accepted.
In the meanwhile arrangements were made with Admiral Sampson that when
the Army again engaged the enemy the Navy would assist by shelling the
city from ships stationed off Aguadores, dropping a shell every few
minutes.
On July 10th the 1st Illinois and the 1st District of Columbia arrived
and were placed on the line to the right of the Cavalry division. This
enabled me to push Lawton farther to the right and to practically
command the Cobre road.
On the afternoon of the date last mentioned the truce was broken off
at 4 p.m., and I determined to open with four batteries of artillery
and went forward in person to the trenches to give the necessary
orders, but the enemy anticipated us by opening fire with his
artillery a few minutes after the hour stated. His batteries were
apparently silenced before night, while ours continued playing upon
his trenches until dark. During this firing the Navy fired from
Aguadores, most of the shells falling in the city. There was also some
small arms firing. On this afternoon and the next morning, we lost
Capt. Charles W. Rowell, 2d Infantry, and one man killed, and Lieut.
Lutz, 2d Infantry, and ten men wounded.
On the morning of July 11th the bombardment by the Navy and my field
guns was renewed, and continued until nearly noon, and on the same day
I reported to the Adjutant General of the Army that the right of
Ludlow’s brigade of Lawton’s division rested on the bay. Thus our hold
upon the enemy was complete.
At 2 p. m. on this date, the 11th, the surrender of the city was again
demanded. The firing ceased, and was not again renewed. By this date
the sickness in the Army was increasing very rapidly, as a result of
exposure in the trenches to the intense heat of the sun and the heavy
rains. Moreover, the dews in Cuba are almost equal to rains. The
weakness of the troops was becoming so apparent I was anxious to bring
the siege to an end, but in common with most of the officers of the
Army, I did not think an assault would be justifiable, especially as
the enemy seemed to be acting in good faith in their preliminary
propositions to surrender.
On July 11th I wrote to General Toral as follows:
“With the largely increased forces which have come to me and the fact
that I have your line of retreat securely in my hands, the time seems
fitting that I should again demand of your excellency the surrender of
Santiago and of your excellency’s army. I am authorized to state that
should your excellency so desire, the Government of the United States
will transport the entire command of your excellency to Spain.”
General Toral replied that he had communicated my proposition to his
General-in-Chief, General Blanco.
July 12th I informed the Spanish commander that Major General Miles,
Commander-in-Chief of the American Army, had just arrived in my camp,
and requested him to grant us a personal interview on the following
day. He replied he would be pleased to meet us. The interview took
place on the 13th, and I informed him his surrender only could be
considered, and that as he was without hope of escape he had no right
to continue the fight.
On the 14th another interview took place, during which General Toral
agreed to surrender, upon the basis of his army, the 4th Army Corps,
being returned to Spain, the capitulation embracing all of Eastern
Cuba, east of a line passing from Aserraderos, on the south, to Sagua
de Tanamo, on the north, via Palma, Soriano. It was agreed
Commissioners should meet during the afternoon to definitely arrange
the terms of surrender, and I appointed Major Generals Wheeler and
Lawton and Lieutenant Miley to represent the United States.
The Spanish Commissioners raised many points, and were especially
desirous of retaining their arms. The discussion lasted until late at
night and was renewed at 9:30 o’clock next morning. The terms of
surrender finally agreed upon included about 12,000 Spanish troops in
the city and as many more in the surrendered district.
It was arranged that the formal surrender should take place between
the lines on the morning of July 17th, each army being represented by
100 armed men. At the time appointed, I appeared at the place agreed
upon, with my general officers, staff, and 100 troopers of the 2d
Cavalry, under Captain Brett. General Toral also arrived with a number
of his officers and 100 infantry. We met midway between the
representatives of our two Armies, and the Spanish commander formally
consummated the surrender of the city and the 24,000 troops in
Santiago and the surrendered district.
After this ceremony I entered the city with my staff and escort, and
at 12 o’clock, noon, the American flag was raised over the Governor’s
palace with appropriate ceremonies.
The 9th Infantry immediately took possession of the city and perfect
order was maintained. The surrender included a small gunboat and about
200 seamen, together with five merchant ships in the harbor. One of
these vessels, the Mexico, had been used as a war vessel, and had
four guns mounted on it.
In taking charge of the civil government, all officials who were
willing to serve were retained in office, and the established order of
government was preserved as far as consistent with the necessities of
military rule.
I soon found the number of officials was excessive, and I greatly
reduced the list, and some departments were entirely abolished.
A collector of customs, Mr. Donaldson, arrived soon after the
surrender, and, due to his energy and efficiency, this department was
soon working satisfactorily. The total receipts had, up to my
departure, been $102,000.
On August 4th I received orders to begin the embarkation of my command
and ship them to Montauk Point Long Island, New York. The movement
continued without interruption until August 25th, when I sailed for
Montauk with the last troops in my command, turning over the command
of the district to Major General Lawton.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
