


Early on the morning of July 1st, Lawton was in position around El
Caney, Chaffee’s Brigade on the right, across the Guantanamo road,
Miles’ Brigade in the center, and Ludlow’s on the left. The duty of
cutting off the enemy’s retreat along the Santiago road was assigned
to the latter brigade. The artillery opened on the town at 6:15 a. m.
The battle here soon became general, and was hotly contested. The
enemy’s position was naturally strong, and was rendered more so by
block-houses, a stone fort, and intrenchments cut in solid rock, and
the loop-holing of a solidly built stone church. The opposition
offered by the enemy was greater than had been anticipated, and
prevented Lawton from joining the right of the main line during the
day, as had been intended. After the battle had continued for some
time, Bates’ Brigade of two regiments reached my headquarters from
Siboney. I directed him to move near El Caney, to give assistance if
necessary. He did so, and was put in position between Miles and
Chaffee. The battle continued with varying intensity during most of
the day and until the place was carried by assault about 4:30 p. m. As
the Spaniards endeavored to retreat along the Santiago road, Ludlow’s
position enabled him to do very effective work, and to practically cut
off all retreat in that direction.
After the battle at El Caney was well opened, and the sound of the
small-arm fire caused us to believe that Lawton was driving the enemy
before him, I directed Grimes’ Battery to open fire from the heights
of El Pozo on the San Juan block-house, which could be seen situated
in the enemy’s intrenchments extending along the crest of San Juan
Hill. This fire was effective, and the enemy could be seen running
away from the vicinity of the block-house. The artillery fire from El
Pozo was soon returned by the enemy’s artillery. They evidently had
the range of this hill, and their first shells killed and wounded
several men. As the Spaniards used smokeless powder, it was very
difficult to locate the position of their pieces, while, on the
contrary, the smoke caused by our black powder plainly indicated the
position of our battery.
At this time the cavalry division, under Gen. Sumner, which was lying
concealed in the general vicinity of the El Pozo house, was ordered
forward with directions to cross the San Juan River and deploy to the
right of the Santiago side, while Kent’s Division was to follow
closely in its rear and deploy to the left.
These troops moved forward in compliance with orders, but the road was
so narrow as to render it impracticable to retain the column of fours
formation at all points, while the undergrowth on either side was so
dense as to preclude the possibility of deploying skirmishers. It
naturally resulted that the progress made was slow, and the long-range
rifles of the enemy’s infantry killed and wounded a number of our men
while marching along this road, and before there was any opportunity
to return this fire. At this time Generals Kent and Sumner were
ordered to push forward with all possible haste and place their troops
in position to engage the enemy. Gen. Kent, with this end in view,
forced the head of his column alongside of the cavalry column as far
as the narrow trail permitted, and thus hurried his arrival at the San
Juan and the formation beyond that stream. A few hundred yards before
reaching the San Juan the road forks, a fact that was discovered by
Lieut.-Col. Derby of my staff, who had approached well to the front in
a war balloon. This information he furnished to the troops, resulting
in Sumner moving on the right-hand road, while Kent was enabled to
utilize the road to the left.
Gen. Wheeler, the permanent commander of the cavalry division, who had
been ill, came forward during the morning, and later returned to duty
and rendered most gallant and efficient service during the remainder
of the day.
After crossing the stream, the cavalry moved to the right with a view
of connecting with Lawton’s left, when he could come up, and with
their left resting near the Santiago road.
In the meantime Kent’s Division, with the exception of two regiments
of Hawkins’ Brigade, being thus uncovered, moved rapidly to the front
from the forks previously mentioned in the road, utilizing both
trails, but more especially the one to the left, and, crossing the
creek, formed for attack in front of San Juan Hill. During the
formation the 2d Brigade suffered severely. While personally
superintending this movement, its gallant commander, Col. Wikoff, was
killed. The command of the brigade then devolved upon Lieut.-Col.
Worth, 13th Infantry, who was soon severely wounded, and next upon
Lieut.-Col. Liscum, 24th Infantry, who, five minutes later, also fell
under the terrible fire of the enemy, and the command of the brigade
then devolved upon Lieut.-Col. Ewers, 9th Infantry.
While the formation just described was taking place, Gen. Kent took
measures to hurry forward his rear brigade. The 10th and 2d Infantry
were ordered to follow. Wikoff’s Brigade, while the 21st was sent on
the right-hand road to support the 1st Brigade, under Gen. Hawkins,
who had crossed the stream and formed on the right of the division.
The 2d and 10th Infantry, Col. E. P. Pearson commanding, moved forward
in good order on the left of the division, passed over a green knoll,
and drove the enemy back toward his trenches.
After completing their formation under a destructive fire, and
advancing a short distance, both divisions found in their front a wide
bottom, in which had been placed a barbed-wire entanglement, and
beyond which there was a high hill, along the crest of which the enemy
was strongly posted. Nothing daunted, these gallant men pushed on to
drive the enemy from his chosen position, both divisions losing
heavily. In this assault Col. Hamilton, Lieuts. Smith and Shipp were
killed, and Col. Carroll, Lieuts. Thayer and Myer, all in the cavalry,
were wounded.
Great credit is due to Brig.-Gen. H. S. Hawkins, who, placing himself
between his regiments, urged them on by voice and bugle calls to the
attack so brilliantly executed.
In this fierce encounter words fail to do justice to the gallant
regimental commanders and their heroic men, for, while the generals
indicated the formations and the points of attack, it was, after all,
the intrepid bravery of the subordinate officers and men that planted
our colors on the crest of San Juan Hill and drove the enemy from his
trenches and block-houses, thus gaining a position which sealed the
fate of Santiago.
In this action on this part of the field most efficient service was
rendered by Lieut. John H. Parker, 13th Infantry, and the Gatling Gun
Detachment under his command. The fighting continued at intervals
until nightfall, but our men held resolutely to the positions gained
at the cost of so much blood and toil.
I am greatly indebted to Gen. Wheeler, who, as previously stated,
returned from the sick-list to duty during the afternoon. His
cheerfulness and aggressiveness made itself felt on this part of the
battle-field, and the information he furnished to me at various stages
of the battle proved to be most useful.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
