


The Ordnance Depot at Tampa was located on Lafayette Street, at the
end of the bridge over the river, next to the Tampa Bay Hotel. The
river washed the sides of the building, which was occupied by the
Tampa Athletic Club, and had formerly been used as a club-house. There
were two stories and a basement. The basement was nearly on a level
with the river, the main floor on a level with the bridge, and there
was also a spacious upper floor. The main floor was used for storage
of light articles of ordnance; the basement for heavy articles and
ammunition. Hundreds of thousands of rounds of rifle and revolver ball
cartridges, thousands of rounds of Hotchkiss fixed ammunition, and
many hundreds of pounds of powder charges for field artillery and
mortars were here stored. Miscellaneous assortments were daily coming
in, generally without any mark on the box by which to learn what were
the contents. The name of the arsenal, if from an arsenal, was usually
stamped on the seal; generally there was no mark whatever to designate
the origin or contents of the many boxes which came from ordinary
posts. The invoices came from a week to ten days behind or in advance
of the arrival of the boxes, and there was not the slightest clue to
be gained from them. Consequently those who had to check up invoices
and prepare for issues were at their wits’ end to keep things
straight. A requisition for so many articles would come in, duly
approved; unless the boxes containing these articles happened to have
been unpacked, it was uncertain whether they were on hand or not. No
wholesale merchant of any sense would ship out boxes of goods without
some indication of their contents; but that was exactly what was done
from all over the country to the Ordnance Depot at Tampa.
The upper floor consisted of one large room. A rope railing was placed
around it to preserve clear space around the desks. There were several
of these for the ordnance officer and the various clerks. A chief
clerk, an assistant clerk, a stenographer, and two ordnance sergeants
looked after the red tape. An overseer with four subordinates and a
gang of negro stevedores attended to loading and unloading boxes,
storing them, counting out articles for issue or receipt, and such
other duties as they were called on to perform. There was an old
janitor named McGee, a veteran of the Civil War, whose business it was
to look after the sweeping and keep the floors clean.
Four guns in their original boxes were issued to the detachment on the
27th of May. They were new, and apparently had never been assembled.
On assembling them it was found that the parts had been constructed
with such “scientific” accuracy that the use of a mallet was
necessary. The binder-box on the pointing lever was so tight that in
attempting to depress the muzzle of the gun it was possible to lift
the trail off the ground before the binder-box would slide on the
lever. The axis-pin had to be driven in and out with an axe, using a
block of wood, of course, to prevent battering. A truly pretty state
of affairs for a gun the value of which depends on the ease with which
it can be pointed in any direction.
Inquiry after the war at the factory where the guns are made disclosed
the fact that these parts are rigidly tested by a gauge by the
Government inspectors, and that looseness is regarded as a fatal
defect. Even play of half a hundredth of an inch is enough to insure
the rejection of a piece. The very first thing done by the Gatling Gun
Detachment, upon assembling these guns, was to obtain a set of
armorers’ tools and to file away these parts by hand until the aim of
the piece could be changed by the touch of a feather. The detachment
was ordered to rely upon the friction clutches for steadiness of aim,
when necessary, and not upon the tight fit of the parts. It was
ordered that there must be no doubt whatever of easy, perfectly free
manipulation at any and all times, even if the pointing lever should
become rusted. This precaution proved on July 1st to have been of
great value.
The instruction of the detachment began immediately, and consisted, at
first, of unpacking, mounting, dismounting, and repacking the guns.
The four guns were mounted and a drill held each time in the loading
and firing of the piece. This system of instruction was continued
until the detachment was ordered on board ship on the 6th of June.
During this instruction members of the detachment were designated by
name to fall out, and the remainder of the detachment required to
execute all the maneuvers of the piece as before. In fact, this
instruction was carried to such a point that one man alone was
required to load, aim, and fire the gun at designated objects without
any assistance.
The detachment at once assumed the position of an independent command.
It reported directly to Maj.-Gen. W. R. Shafter, commanding the 5th
Corps, in everything so far as its duties with Gatling guns were
concerned, was regarded as an independent command, kept its own
records in the same manner as a company, obtained cooking utensils
from the quartermaster and ran its own mess, and furnished its own
guard. This status, that of a separate command, continued until the
detachment was finally disbanded at Montauk.
On the 27th of May the detachment commander was summoned to Gen.
Wheeler’s headquarters and there requested to explain to the general
in person his plans for organizing a Gatling gun detachment. Gen.
Wheeler had just assumed command of all the Cavalry belonging to the
5th Army Corps. His headquarters, instead of being in a suite of rooms
in the palatial Tampa Bay Hotel, where all the other general officers
had their headquarters, were located about half a mile from the hotel
in a treeless pasture. The cavalry guidon floating from a lance-head
was the only indication of headquarters, and the half-dozen “A” tents
in an irregular line gave no sign that one of the most distinguished
generals in the world had here his headquarters in the field.
The general was easily accessible. The first thing that impressed one
of him was his extraordinary quickness. His eye seemed to take in
everything within sight of him at a single glance, and to read one’s
thoughts before the tongue could give expression to them. He grasped
ideas when they were only half uttered and immediately drew deductions
from mere statements of simple facts, the result of years of careful
study. These deductions, which Gen. Wheeler drew instantly, were in
every case correct, and showed a keener and more correct appreciation
of the proper tactical employment of machine guns than was shown by
any other officer of the 5th Corps. The result of the interview with
the general was that a scheme for the organization of a tactical unit
to be composed of three Gatling guns and to be employed with the
cavalry division, was drawn up on the spot, under Gen. Wheeler’s
personal direction, and was submitted by him to Gen. Shafter, with the
request that authority be granted for the organization of this command
for the purpose indicated.
In the application Gen. Wheeler stated that he believed that such a
battery of machine guns, if properly handled, could go anywhere that
cavalry could go, could take the place of infantry supports, could
dash up and hold any ground or advantageous position that a body of
cavalry might seize, could be thrown out to one flank of the enemy and
assist in his demoralization in preparation for the cavalry charge,
and would be of particular service in case the enemy attempted to form
infantry squares, which were at that time supposed to be the main part
of the Spanish tactics of battle. This application was disapproved.
On the 30th of May, Gen. Lee sent for the detachment commander for an
interview on the subject of Gatling guns. Gen. Lee was at this time
quartered at the Tampa Bay Hotel, and was engaged in the organization
of the 7th Army Corps. It was supposed that the 7th Corps was designed
for the Havana campaign, and it was believed that the attack upon
Havana would begin at a very early date. The result of the interview
with Gen. Lee was that he directed a scheme for the organization of a
tactical unit to be composed of 9 guns, 3 batteries of 3 guns each, to
be prepared for service with the 7th Army Corps.
It was desired that this organization be a volunteer organization, and
the application was therefore made for authority from the President,
under that law of Congress authorizing the employment of special
troops. Col. Guild, well and favorably known from his connection with
the Massachusetts National Guard, was prepared to furnish a volunteer
organization already in existence, well drilled and already officered,
composed of the flower of the youth of Massachusetts, very largely of
college graduates, who had already been communicated with on the
subject, and who were even at that time expecting momentarily a
telegram calling them to this duty. Nothing resulted from this effort.
Meantime the drill instruction of the little detachment continued. Its
members had acquired a considerable degree of proficiency in the
mechanical handling of their guns, and were beginning to appreciate
the destructive possibilities of their weapon. They were enjoying a
degree of liberty which they had not found in their regimental camp,
because when not on duty they were free to come and go at will, when
and where they pleased. The hours for instruction were designated in
the morning and in the cool of the afternoon, leaving the middle of
the day and the evening for the men’s own recreation. The result of
this system of treatment was that esprit-du-corps began to be
developed in the detachment. They began to feel that they were a
special organization, expected to do special work, and that they were
receiving very special treatment. They began to be proud of being
members of the Gatling Gun Detachment, to take greater interest in the
work, and when on the first of June they received their monthly pay
not a single member of the detachment committed any excesses in
consequence of this unusual degree of freedom. No one was intoxicated.
No one was absent without permission.
The detachment had not been at the Ordnance Depot very long before an
opportunity occurred for some of its members to exhibit those
qualities which made the success of the battery so conspicuous on the
battle-field afterward. The detachment commander had been detailed by
verbal orders on the first of June in charge of the issues of ordnance
property to the Santiago expedition. This was in addition to his
duties with the Gatling guns. The work would commence about 6 o’clock
in the morning, and from that time until dark there was a continual
stream of wagons carrying away stores such as rifles, haversacks, meat
ration cans, tin cups, and all the articles needed by troops in the
field during a campaign. The ammunition which was issued to the troops
at this time was drawn at the same place.
When wagons arrived to receive issues, stevedores were directed to
count out the different articles under the direction of an overseer,
and these piles of articles were verified by the officer in charge of
the issues. The stevedores then loaded them on the wagons which were
to haul them to the different camps. Receipts in duplicate were always
taken and invoices in duplicate were always given, in the name, of
course, of Lieut. John T. Thompson, who was responsible for the
stores.
On the 4th of June issues were being made of rifle-ball cartridges.
These cartridges came packed in boxes of 1000 rounds each, and each
box weighed 78 pounds. A great quantity of it was stored in the
basement, where there was also a considerable quantity of fixed
Hotchkiss ammunition, as well as several thousand rounds of powder
charges in boxes. The Hotchkiss ammunition, which comes with
projectile and powder both set in a brass case, is bad ammunition to
pack; for, no matter how carefully it is handled, there is almost
always some leakage of powder from the cartridge case, thus causing a
certain amount of loose powder to sift into the box in which it is
packed.
About half past 11 o’clock on this morning a negro stevedore
accidentally dropped a box of rifle ammunition near a pile of
Hotchkiss fixed, and the next instant the laborers saw smoke ascending
toward the ceiling of the basement. They yelled “Fire! fire!” at the
top of their voices, and everybody in the basement at once made a rush
for the two doors. It was a panic. The danger was imminent. The smoke
curled up to the ceiling and then curled down again, and the excited,
panic-stricken faces of the negroes as they rushed through the door
made an awful picture of human terror. People on the outside of the
building began to shout “Fire!”
At this juncture McGee, the old janitor, who had just reached the
door, cried out, “Lieutenant, there is a box in here on fire!"
speaking to Lieut. Parker, who was verifying issues just outside the
door. The lieutenant replied, “Let’s throw it into the river,” and
dashed toward the box through the door, pushing the excited negroes to
each side in order to assist McGee, who had instantly started for the
box. When Lieut. Parker reached the box, he found that McGee had
already taken it up, and was staggering under its weight. He placed
one arm around McGee’s shoulder and with the other assisted him to
support the box, from which the smoke was still ascending, and the two
rushed for the door, throwing the whole momentum of their weight and
speed against the crowd of frightened negroes, who were falling over
each other in their panic-stricken efforts to escape. Priv. Greenberg,
of the 13th Infantry, a member of the Gatling Gun Detachment, who was
the sentinel on post at the time, saw the two men coming with the box,
and with great presence of mind added his own weight with a rapid rush
to the shock they had produced, thus enabling them to break their way
through the dense throng at the door. It was only the work of an
instant to then throw the box in the river, where it sank in the water
and for a moment the blue smoke continued to bubble up from the box,
which lay clearly visible on the bed of the river, the water being
only about two feet deep at this point, which was, however, enough to
entirely cover the box and thus extinguish the fire. At the outcry of
“Fire!” Lieut. H. L. Kinnison, of the 25th Infantry, who was waiting
outside of the basement with a wagon, started in at the other door,
and Serg. Weischaar, acting first sergeant of the Gatling Gun
Detachment, started for water. Just as the two men emerged from the
door carrying the box, Lieut. Kinnison reached the spot where the fire
had originated, and Serg. Weischaar appeared with two buckets of
water. He and Lieut. Kinnison at once flooded the floor, seized a
woolen cloth which happened to be near, and wetted down the boxes of
Hotchkiss ammunition as a measure of precaution.
McGee, the hero of this episode, is an old veteran of the Civil War,
having served three years in the Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry
during the war, and five years in the Regular Army after the war. He
has never drawn a pension nor applied for one, although he suffers
considerably from disease and wounds contracted and received during
the war, and certainly should be rewarded by a grateful government for
his conspicuous heroism. The explosion of this magazine would have
brought the whole expedition to a standstill, besides inflicting
tremendous destruction of property and frightful loss of life.
The same day the Artillery of the army began to draw its material for
the campaign, and for a period of thirty-nine hours there was no rest
for anybody connected with the issue of ordnance stores. It was at
this time that the lack of intelligent marking and packing of the
boxes was keenly felt. The greatest difficulty was experienced in
selecting, from the mass of stores in the depot, the stores that were
required by the Artillery. It was especially difficult during the work
by night, when the only light that could possibly be allowed was a
single lantern, on account of the danger of fire.
At the close of this thirty-nine hours of arduous duty, the officer in
command of the Gatling Gun Detachment learned that orders had been
issued for the embarkation of the 5th Army Corps at Port Tampa, and
that no reference had been made to the Gatling Gun Detachment in these
orders. He at once sought Lieut. Thompson, who could offer no light on
the omission, but said, “I have orders to send at once to the
Cherokee 521,000 rounds of rifle-ball cartridges and all the
revolver ammunition on hand. This is the reserve ammunition of the 5th
Army Corps. I will send you in charge of this ammunition and you will
see it to its destination. You may take an escort or not, as you
please. The ammunition is to go on the 4 o’clock train and you must
make all the arrangements in regard to it. Get box-cars, haul the
ammunition over there and put it in the cars, see that it goes on that
train, and as soon as it arrives at Port Tampa, see that it is
properly put on board the Cherokee.”
In order to fully understand the situation of the Gatling Gun
Detachment at this juncture, the following correspondence on the
subject is necessary:
“Office of Ordnance Officer,
“Lafayette Street, West of Bridge,
“Tampa, Fla., June 3, 1898.
“The Assistant Adjutant-General, 5th Army Corps, Tampa,
Florida:
“Sir,–Replying to your letter of June 1,1898, in reference to Gatling
Gun Detachment, I have the honor to submit the following report:
Guns, men, and equipment required for a 4-gun detachment:
                   Guns. Serg. Corp. Priv.
  Total required:      4     5     4    28
  On hand:             4     2     0    10
  Required:                  3     4    18
The gun crews thus organized will give most effective service for the
detachment.
Ammunition: Each limber carries 9,840 rounds cal. .30. Four limbers,
27,360; necessary reserve, 32,640; total, 60,000.
Tentage: Two conical wall-tents for enlisted men; one ’A’ wall-tent
for officer.
Camp equipage, in addition to that on hand in Gatling Gun Detachment:
one buzzacot, small; four mess-pans, one dish-pan, one coffee-mill.
Blanket-roll complete; revolver with 50 rounds per man; waist-belts
and entrenching-knives.
“It is recommended that Priv. Butz, ’G’ Co., 13th Infantry, Corp.
Robert S. Smith, ’C’ Co., 13th Infantry, and Serg. Weigle, 9th
Infantry, be members of the detachment; and that detachment be taken
from 9th Infantry, which has some well-instructed men.
“It is further recommended that the detachment be fully horsed as soon
as practicable, and that the whole be placed under the command of
Lieut. John H. Parker, 13th Infantry, as acting captain.
“I recommend that I be authorized to issue the 4 Gatling guns and
parts to him.
“The details should carry the rations prescribed in General Orders
5th, May 31, 1898, 5th Army Corps. Very respectfully,
(Signed) “Jno. T. Thompson,
“1st Lieut., Ord. Dept, U. S. A.”
This letter, prepared by Lieut. Parker and signed by Lieut. Thompson,
was endorsed as follows:
First Endorsement.
“Headquarters 5th Army Corps,
“Tampa, Fla., June 5, 1898.
“Respectfully returned to Lieut. J. T. Thompson, Ordnance Officer.
“If Lieut. Parker, in charge of the detachment as at present
constituted, can make the arrangements suggested within, he may take
action; but, in view of the limited time remaining, it is thought the
detachment already organized will answer.
“By command of Maj.-Gen. Shafter.
“E. J. McClernand,
“Assistant Adjutant-General.”
Second Endorsement.
“Office of the Ordnance Officer,
“Lafayette Street Bridge,
“Tampa, Fla., June 5, 1898.
“Respectfully referred to Lieut. John H. Parker for his information.
“Jno. T. Thompson,
“1st Lieut., Ordnance Dept, U. S. A.”
It will be seen from the first endorsement that a certain amount of
discretion was left to the detachment commander. He was authorized to
take action if he could make the arrangements suggested within. Lieut.
Thompson had authorized an escort for the reserve ammunition, if it
was considered necessary. The detachment commander resolved to take
action by using his whole detachment as an escort, putting it on board
the Cherokee, with the reserve ammunition, and accompanying it to its
destination–in Cuba, trusting to the future to enable him to complete
the detachment according to the first endorsement.
It was now 11 o’clock in the forenoon. Between that time and 4 o’clock
it was necessary to obtain two freight cars, have them placed upon the
siding at a convenient point, have more than twenty wagon-loads of
ammunition, camp equipage, etc., placed in these cars, have the four
guns with their limbers placed on board, and, more difficult than all
the rest, go through the necessary red tape at the quartermaster’s
office in order to get the two cars moved to Port Tampa. It was all
accomplished.
The general freight agent was bluffed into believing that unless the
two cars were instantly set where they were wanted his whole railroad
would be tied up. The quartermaster was hypnotized and dropped
formality, putting all the clerks to work upon papers and making out
the necessary bill of lading, invoices, etc., in time to catch the 4
o’clock train. He also issued the necessary transportation for the
officer and men of the detachment from Tampa to Port Tampa, accepting
the first endorsement above as sufficient orders for that purpose.
One member of the detachment, Priv. Murray, had been very ill with
what we afterward learned to call the Cuban fever, and, while
apparently convalescent, was entirely too weak to accompany the
detachment. He was a splendid fellow, and the tears rolled down his
emaciated face when he was told he must remain behind. He was
furnished with a descriptive list and a letter was written to the
chief surgeon of the Division Hospital, requesting him to send an
ambulance immediately for the sick man. One member of the detachment
carried this letter to Tampa Heights, and so sharp was the work of
getting away that this man had to board a moving train as it was
pulling out to keep from getting left; but Priv. Murray was taken to
the hospital and cared for, and Priv. Bremer did not get left.
The detachment reached Port Tampa about sundown, and Maj. Cushing, who
had charge of the loading of the transports, at once authorized the
cars to be set alongside the Cherokee. The ammunition, guns, camp
equipage, men, and all were promptly put aboard. The training in
packing and unpacking the guns was the only thing which enabled the
work to be done in the limited time allotted. Not so much as a
ten-penny nail belonging to the detachment was left behind.
During the night the troops that were to occupy the Cherokee came on
board, and it was found the next morning that five or six tons of
regimental baggage had been piled on top of the guns, making it
practically impossible to disembark, even if such a movement should be
ordered.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
