


Before closing my report I wish to dwell upon the natural obstacles I
had to encounter and which no foresight could have overcome or
obviated. The rocky and precipitous coast afforded no sheltered
landing places, the roads were mere bridle-paths, the effect of the
tropical sun and rains upon the unacclimated troops was deadly, and a
dread of strange and unknown diseases had its effect on the Army.
At Baiquiri the landing of the troops and stores was made a small
wooden wharf, which the Spaniards tried to burn, but unsuccessfully,
and the animals were pushed into the water and guided to a sandy beach
about 200 yards in extent. At Siboney the landing was made on the
beach and at a small wharf erected by the engineers.
I had neither the time nor the men to spare to construct permanent
wharves.
In spite of the fact that I had nearly 1,000 men continuously at work
on the roads, they were at times impassable for wagons.
The San Juan and Aguadores rivers would often suddenly rise so as to
prevent the passage of wagons, and then the eight pack trains with the
command had to be depended upon for the victualing of my Army, as well
as the 20,000 refugees, who could not in the interests of humanity be
left to starve while we had rations.
Often for days nothing could be moved except on pack trains.
After the great physical strain and exposure of July 1st and 2d, the
malarial and other fevers began to rapidly advance throughout the
command, and on July 4th the yellow fever appeared at Siboney. Though
efforts were made to keep this fact from the Army, it soon became
known.
The supply of Quartermaster and Commissary stores during the campaign
was abundant, and notwithstanding the difficulties in landing and
transporting the ration, the troops on the firing line were at all
times supplied with its coarser components, namely, of bread, meat,
sugar, and coffee.
There was no lack of transportation, for at no time up to the
surrender could all the wagons I had be used.
In reference to the sick and wounded, I have to say that they received
every attention that was possible to give them. The medical officers,
without exception, worked night and day to alleviate the suffering,
which was no greater than invariably accompanies a campaign. It would
have been better if we had had more ambulances, but as many were taken
as was thought necessary, judging from previous campaigns.
The discipline of the command was superb, and I wish to invite
attention to the fact that not an officer was brought to trial by
court martial, and, as far as I know, no enlisted men. This speaks
volumes for an Army of this size and in a campaign of such duration.
In conclusion, I desire to express to the members of my staff my
thanks for their efficient performance of all the duties required of
them, and the good judgment and bravery displayed on all occasions
when demanded.
I submit the following recommendations for promotion, which I
earnestly desire to see made. It is a very little reward to give them
for their devotion and fearless exposure of their lives in their
country’s cause:
E. J. McClernand, Lieutenant Colonel and Adjutant General, U. S. A.,
to be brevetted Colonel for gallantry in the face of the enemy on the
1st and 2d of July, and to be brevetted Brigadier General for faithful
and meritorious service throughout the campaign.
Geo. McC. Derby, Lieutenant Colonel of Engineers, U. S. V., to be
brevetted Colonel for hazardous service on July 1st and 2d in
reconnoitering the enemy’s lines, and to be brevetted Brigadier
General for hazardous and meritorious service in ascending, under a
hot fire, in a war balloon on July 1st, thus gaining valuable
information.
J. D. Miley, Lieutenant Colonel and Inspector General, U. S. A., to be
brevetted Colonel for conspicuous gallantry in the battle of San Juan
on July 1st, and to be brevetted Brigadier General for faithful and
meritorious service throughout the campaign.
R. H. Noble, Major and Adjutant General, U. S. V., to be brevetted
Lieutenant Colonel for faithful and meritorious service throughout the
campaign.
J. J. Astor, Lieutenant Colonel and Inspector General, U. S. V., to be
brevetted Colonel for faithful and meritorious service during the
campaign.
B. F. Pope, Lieutenant Colonel and Surgeon, U. S. V., to be brevetted
Colonel for faithful and meritorious service during the campaign.
Maj. S. W. Groesbeck, Judge Advocate, U. S. A., to be brevetted
Lieutenant Colonel for faithful and meritorious service throughout the
campaign.
Charles F. Humphrey, Lieutenant Colonel, Quartermaster’s Department,
to be brevetted Brigadier General for faithful and meritorious service
throughout the campaign.
John F. Weston, Colonel and Assistant Commissary General of
Subsistence, Chief Commissary, to be brevetted Brigadier General for
meritorious service throughout the campaign.
C. G. Starr, Major and Inspector General, U. S. V., to be brevetted
Lieutenant Colonel for faithful and meritorious service throughout the
campaign.
Leon Roudiez, Major and Quartermaster, U. S. V., to be brevetted
Lieutenant Colonel for faithful and meritorious conduct throughout the
campaign.
H. J. Gallagher, Major and Commissary of Subsistence, U. S. V., to be
brevetted Lieutenant Colonel for faithful and meritorious service
throughout the campaign.
Capt. Brice, Commissary of Subsistence, U. S. V., to be brevetted
Major for faithful and meritorious service throughout the campaign.
E. H. Plummer, Captain, U. S. A., A. D. C., to be brevetted Major for
faithful and meritorious service throughout the campaign.
J. C. Gilmore, Jr., Captain and Assistant Adjutant General, U. S. V.,
to be brevetted Major for faithful and meritorious service during the
campaign.
W. H. McKittrick, Captain and Assistant Adjutant General, U. S. V., to
be brevetted Major for faithful and meritorious service during the
campaign.
Capt. Johnson, Assistant Quartermaster, U. S. V., to be brevetted
Major for faithful and meritorious service during the campaign.
I wish to invite special attention to Dr. G. Goodfellow, of New York,
who accompanied me throughout the campaign and performed much
professional service as well as duties as Volunteer aid. I recommend
him for favorable consideration of the War Department.
Mr. G. F. Hawkins, of New York, also accompanied me as Volunteer aid,
and I recommend him for favorable consideration of the War Department
for faithful and important services rendered.
My thanks are due to Admiral Sampson and Captain Goodrich, U. S. N.,
for their efficient aid in disembarking my Army. Without their
assistance it would have been impossible to have landed in the time I
did.
I also express my warmest thanks to division, brigade, and regimental
commanders, without exception, for their earnest efforts in carrying
out my wishes and for the good judgment they invariably displayed in
handling their troops.
The reports of the division commanders are attached hereto, and those
of the brigade and regimental commanders forwarded herewith, and
attention respectfully invited to them. Very respectfully,
Wm. R. Shafter,
Major-General, United States Volunteers,
Commanding United States Forces in Cuba.
Adjutant General of the Army, Washington, D. C.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
