


Ever since the receipt of my orders I had made a study of the terrain
surrounding Santiago, gathering information mainly from the former
residents of the city, several of whom were on the transports with me.
At this interview all the possible points of attack were for the last
time carefully weighed, and then, for the information and guidance of
Admiral Sampson and Gen. Garcia, I outlined the plan of campaign,
which was as follows:
With the assistance of the small boats of the Navy, the disembarkation
was to commence on the morning of the 22d at Baiquiri; on the 21st 500
insurgent troops were to be transferred from Aserraderos to Cujababo,
increasing the force already there to 1,000 men. This force, under
Gen. Castillo, was to attack the Spanish force at Baiquiri in the rear
at the time of disembarkation. This movement was successfully made. To
mislead the enemy as to the real point of our intended landing, I
requested Gen. Garcia to send a small force (about 500 men), under
Gen. Rabi, to attack the little town of Cabanas, situated on the coast
a few miles to the west of the entrance to Santiago harbor, and where
it was reported the enemy had several men intrenched, and from which a
trail leads around the west side of the bay to Santiago.
I also requested Admiral Sampson to send several of his warships, with
a number of my transports, opposite this town, for the purpose of
making a show of disembarking there.
In addition, I asked the admiral to cause a bombardment to be made at
Cabanas and also at the forts around the Morro and at the towns of
Aguadores, Siboney, and Baiquiri. The troops under Gen. Garcia
remaining at Aserraderos were to be transferred to Baiquiri or Siboney
on the 24th. This was successfully accomplished at Siboney.
These movements committed me to approaching Santiago from the east
over a narrow road, at first in some places not better than a trail,
running from Baiquiri through Siboney and Sevilla, and making attack
from that quarter. This, in my judgment, was the only feasible plan,
and subsequent information and results confirmed my judgment.
On the morning of the 22d the Army commenced to disembark at Baiquiri.
The following general order indicates the manner in which the troops
left the transports and the amount of supplies carried immediately
with them:
“Headquarters 5th Army Corps,
“On board S. S. Seguransa,
“At Sea, June 20, 1898.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
