


The orders for June 24th contemplated Gen. Lawton’s Division taking a
strong defensive position a short distance from Siboney, on the road
to Santiago; Kent’s Division was to be held near Santiago, where he
disembarked; Bates’ Brigade was to take position in support of Lawton,
while Wheeler’s Division was to be somewhat to the rear on the road
from Siboney to Baiquiri. It was intended to maintain this situation
until the troops and transportation were disembarked and a reasonable
quantity of necessary supplies landed. Gen. Young’s Brigade, however,
passed beyond Lawton on the night of the 23d-24th, thus taking the
advance, and on the morning of the latter date became engaged with a
Spanish force intrenched in a strong position at La Guasima, a point
on the Santiago road about three miles from Siboney. Gen. Young’s
force consisted of one squadron of the 1st Cavalry, one of the 10th
Cavalry, and two of the 1st United States Volunteer Cavalry; in all,
964 officers and men.
The enemy made an obstinate resistance, but were driven from the field
with considerable loss. Our own loss was 1 officer and 15 men killed,
6 officers and 46 men wounded. The reported losses of the Spaniards
were 9 killed and 27 wounded. The engagement had an inspiring effect
upon our men and doubtless correspondingly depressed the enemy, as it
was now plainly demonstrated to them that they had a foe to meet who
would advance upon them under a heavy fire delivered from
intrenchments. Gen. Wheeler, division commander, was present during
the engagement and reports that our troops, officers and men, fought
with the greatest gallantry. His report is attached, marked “A.” This
engagement gave us a well-watered country farther to the front on
which to encamp our troops.
My efforts to unload transportation and subsistence stores, so that we
might have several days’ rations on shore, were continued during the
remainder of the month. In this work I was ably seconded by
Lieut.-Col. Charles F. Humphrey, deputy Q. M. G., U. S. A., chief
quartermaster, and Col. John F. Weston, A. O. G. S., chief commissary;
hut, notwithstanding the utmost efforts, it was difficult to land
supplies in excess of those required daily to feed the men and
animals, and the loss of the scow, mentioned as having broken away
during the voyage, as well as the loss at sea of lighters sent by
Quartermaster’s Department was greatly felt. Indeed, the lack of steam
launches, lighters, scows, and wharves can only be appreciated by
those who were on the ground directing the disembarkation and landing
of supplies. It was not until nearly two weeks after the army landed
that it was possible to place on shore three days’ supplies In excess
of those required for the daily consumption.
After the engagement at La Guasima, and before the end of the month,
the army, including Gen. Garcia’s command, which had been brought on
transports to Siboney from Aserraderos, was mostly concentrated at
Sevilla, with the exception of the necessary detachments at Baiquiri
and Siboney.
On June 30th I reconnoitered the country about Santiago and made my
plan of attack. From a high hill, from which the city was in plain
view, I could see the San Juan Hill and the country about El Caney.
The roads were very poor, and, indeed, little better than bridle-paths
until the San Juan River and El Caney were reached.
The position of El Caney, to the northeast of Santiago, was of great
importance to the enemy as holding the Guantanamo road, as well as
furnishing shelter for a strong outpost that might be used to assail
the right flank of any force operating against San Juan Hill.
In view of this, I decided to begin the attack next day at El Caney
with one division, while sending two divisions on the direct road to
Santiago, passing by the El Pozo house, and as a diversion to direct a
small force against Aguadores, from Siboney along the railroad by the
sea, with a view of attracting the attention of the Spaniards in the
latter direction and of preventing them from attacking our left flank.
During the afternoon I assembled the division commanders and explained
to them my general plan of battle. Lawton’s Division, assisted by
Capron’s Light Battery, was ordered to move out during the afternoon
toward El Caney, to begin the attack there early the next morning.
After carrying El Caney, Lawton was to move by the El Caney road
toward Santiago, and take position on the right of the line. Wheeler’s
Division of dismounted cavalry, and Kent’s Division of infantry, were
directed on the Santiago road, the head of the column resting near El
Pozo, toward which heights Grimes’ Battery moved on the afternoon of
the 30th, with orders to take position thereon early the next morning,
and at the proper time prepare the way for the advance of Wheeler and
Kent, on San Juan Hill. The attack at this point was to be delayed
until Lawton’s guns were heard at El Caney and his infantry fire
showed he had become well engaged.
The remainder of the afternoon and night was devoted to cutting out
and repairing the roads, and other necessary preparations for battle.
These preparations were far from what I desired them to be, but we
were in a sickly climate; our supplies had to be brought forward by a
narrow wagon road, which the rains might at any time render
impassable; fear was entertained that a storm might drive the vessels
containing our stores to sea, thus separating us from our base of
supplies; and, lastly, it was reported that Gen. Pando, with 8,000
reinforcements for the enemy, was en route from Manzanillo, and
might be expected in a few days. Under these conditions, I determined
to give battle without delay.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
