


My own health was impaired by overexertion in the sun and intense heat
of the day before, which prevented me from participating as actively
in the battle as I desired; but from a high hill near my headquarters
I had a general view of the battle-field, extending from El Caney on
the right to the left of our lines on San Juan Hill. His staff
officers were stationed at various points on the field, rendering
frequent reports, and through them, by the means of orderlies and the
telephone, I was enabled to transmit my orders. During the afternoon I
visited the position of Grimes’ Battery on the heights of El Pozo, and
saw Sumner and Kent in firm possession of San Juan Hill, which I
directed should be intrenched during the night. My engineer officer,
Lieut.-Col. Derby, collected and sent forward the necessary tools, and
during the night trenches of very considerable strength were
constructed.
During the afternoon, Maj. Dillenback, by my order, brought forward
the two remaining batteries of his battalion and put them in position
at El Pozo, to the left of Grimes. Later in the afternoon all three
batteries were moved forward to positions near the firing-line, but
the nature of the country and the intensity of the enemy’s small-arm
fire was such that no substantial results were gained by our artillery
in the new positions. The batteries were intrenched during the night.
Gen. Duffield, with the 33d Michigan, attacked Aguadores, as ordered,
but was unable to accomplish more than to detain the Spaniards in that
vicinity.
After the brilliant and important victory gained at El Caney, Lawton
started his tried troops, who had been fighting all day and marching
much of the night before, to connect with the right of the cavalry
division. Night came on before this movement could be accomplished. In
the darkness the enemy’s pickets were encountered, and the division
commander, being uncertain of the ground and as to what might be in
his front, halted his command and reported the situation to me. This
information was received about 12:30 a. m., and I directed Gen. Lawton
to return by my headquarters and the El Pozo house as the only certain
way of gaining his new position.
This was done, and the division took position on the right of the
cavalry early next morning; Chaffee’s Brigade arriving first, about
half-past seven, and the other brigades before noon.
On the night of July 1st, I ordered Gen. Duffield, at Siboney, to send
forward the 34th Michigan and the 9th Massachusetts. Both of which had
just arrived from the United States. These regiments reached the front
the next morning. The 34th was placed in rear of Kent, and the 9th was
assigned to Bates, who placed it on his left.
Soon after daylight on July 2d the enemy opened battle, but because of
the intrenchments made during the night, the approach of Lawton’s
Division, and the presence of Bates’ Brigade, which had taken position
during the night on Kent’s left, little apprehension was felt as to
our ability to repel the Spaniards.
It is proper here to state that Gen. Bates and his brigade had
performed most arduous and efficient service, having marched much of
the night of June 30th-July 1st, and a good part of the latter day,
during which he also participated in the battle of El Caney, after
which he proceeded, by way of El Pozo, to the left of the line at San
Juan, reaching his new position about midnight.
All day on the 2d the battle raged with more or less fury, but such of
our troops as were in position at daylight held their ground, and
Lawton gained a strong and commanding position on the right.
About 10 p. m. the enemy made a vigorous assault to break through my
lines, but he was repulsed at all points.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
