


The cessation of firing about noon on the 3d practically terminated
the battle of Santiago; all that occurred after this time may properly
be treated under the head of the siege which followed. After deducting
the detachments required at Siboney and Baiquiri to render those
depots secure from attack, organizations held to protect our flanks,
others acting as escorts and guards to light batteries, the members of
the Hospital Corps, guards left in charge of blanket-rolls which the
intense heat caused the men to cast aside before entering battle,
orderlies, etc., it is doubtful if we had more than 12,000 men on the
firing-line on July 1, when the battle was fiercest and when the
important and strong positions of El Caney and San Juan were captured.
A few Cubans assisted in the attack at El Caney, and fought valiantly,
but their numbers were too small to materially change the strength, as
indicated above. The enemy confronted us with numbers about equal to
our own; they fought obstinately in strong and intrenched positions,
and the results obtained clearly indicate the intrepid gallantry of
the company officers and men, and the benefits derived from the
careful training and instruction given in the company in the recent
years in rifle practice and other battle exercises. Our losses in
these battles were 22 officers and 208 men killed, and 81 officers and
1,203 men wounded; missing, 79. The missing, with few exceptions,
reported later.
The arrival of Gen. Escario on the night of July 2d, and his entrance
into the city was not anticipated, for although it was known, as
previously stated, that Gen. Pando had left Manzanillo with
reinforcements for the garrison of Santiago, it was not believed his
troops could arrive so soon. Gen. Garcia, with between 4,000 and 5,000
Cubans, was intrusted with the duty of watching for and intercepting
the reinforcement expected. This, however, he failed to do, and
Escario passed into the city along on my extreme right and near the
bay. Up to this time I had been unable to complete investment of the
town with my own men; but to prevent any more reinforcements coming in
or the enemy escaping. I extended my lines as rapidly as possible to
the extreme right, and completed the investment of the place, leaving
Gen. Garcia’s forces in the rear of my right flank to scout the
country for any approaching Spanish reinforcements, a duty which his
forces were very competent to perform.
It had been reported that 8,000 Spanish troops had left Holquin for
Santiago. It was also known that there was a considerable force at San
Luis, twenty miles to the north.
In the battle of Santiago the Spanish navy endeavored to shell our
troops on the extreme right, but the latter were concealed by the
inequalities of the ground, and the shells did little, if any, harm.
Their naval forces also assisted in the trenches, having 1,000 on
shore, and I am informed they sustained considerable loss; among
others, Admiral Cervera’s chief-of-staff was killed. Being convinced
that the city would fall, Admiral Cervera determined to put to sea,
informing the French consul it was better to die fighting than to sink
his ships. The news of the great naval victory which followed was
enthusiastically received by the Army.
The information of our naval victory was transmitted under flag of
truce to the Spanish commander in Santiago on July 4th, and the
suggestion again made that he surrender to save needless effusion of
blood.
On the same date I informed Admiral Sampson that if he would force his
way into the harbor the city would surrender without any further
sacrifice of life. Commodore Watson replied that Admiral Sampson was
temporarily absent, but that in his (Watson’s) opinion the Navy should
not enter the harbor.
In the meanwhile letters passing between Gen. Toral and myself caused
the cessation of hostilities to continue. Each army, however,
continued to strengthen its intrenchments. I was still of the opinion
the Spaniards would surrender without much more fighting, and on July
6th called Gen. Toral’s attention to the changed conditions, and at
his request gave him time to consult his home government. This he did,
asking that the British consul, with the employees of the cable
company, be permitted to return from El Caney to the city. This I
granted.
The strength of the enemy’s position was such I did not wish to
assault if it could be avoided.
An examination of the enemy’s works, made after the surrender, fully
justifies the wisdom of the course adopted. The intrenchments could
only have been carried with very great loss of life, probably with not
less than 6,000 killed and wounded.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
