



It seemed that the work had been accomplished none too soon, for on
the morning of June 7th orders came to the Cherokee to leave the slip
and proceed down the bay. There were on board at this time, beside the
little Gatling Gun Detachment, the 17th Infantry, under command of
Col. Haskell, and a battalion of the 12th Infantry, under command of
Col. Comba, who was the senior officer on board. The ship was
frightfully crowded. The berth deck and lower deck had been arranged
for the accommodation of the men by nailing rows of two 2x4 scantlings
just far enough apart to leave room for a man to lie down, and
fastening three tiers of bunks to these scantlings. The men were
packed in these bunks like sardines in a box. The ventilation was
conspicuous by its absence, the heat below deck was frightful and the
misery entailed by such accommodations was beyond description. But the
men were very cheerful, and, being allowed the privilege of the upper
deck, very little in the way of complaint was heard. Everybody was
anxious to be off. The hope most frequently expressed was for a quick
passage and a sharp, swift campaign. It was easily foreseen by the
officers on board the ship that a long sojourn on shipboard under such
conditions would have a very bad effect on the men.
The ship dropped down the bay to the quarantine station, starting
about noon, and there lay to, waiting, as was supposed, for the
remainder of the fleet. Suddenly, about 8 p. m., one of the torpedo
cruisers came tearing down the bay under full steam, and we heard the
message sounded through the megaphone: “Return to port. Three Spanish
cruisers within three hours’ sail of the offing.” It was a thrilling
moment. Officers and men were lounging, taking, as they supposed,
their last view of the American shores, without a suspicion of present
danger, when they were rapidly brought to a realizing sense that “war
is hell,” by a notice that the enemy was upon them. Whether they were
in danger or not, the danger was deadly real and imminent to them at
the time.
The Cherokee had been anchored pretty well inside. She immediately got
up steam and went out to warn other vessels farther out in the offing,
and then made safely for the harbor. Officers and men behaved with
perfect coolness. It was hopeless to attempt to escape by concealment,
so Col. Comba ordered out the band of the 17th Infantry and the good
ship fled up the bay, in momentary expectation of a smashing shot from
the enemy, to the strains of “There’ll be a hot time.” What little
excitement there was displayed itself in a feverish searching of the
bay with field-glasses for signs of the enemy. The older officers,
upon whom the responsibility was resting, sat upon the quarter-deck,
smoking their pipes and discussing the situation. The captains quietly
moved about, assigning stations to their companies, in case of attack,
with the view of trying the effect of the modern rifle upon the
armored sides of a Spanish man-of-war, and two of the younger officers
took advantage of the catchy air which the band was playing to dance a
two-step on the quarter-deck. So the evening wore away. The moon went
down. The myriad little stars came out, twinkling in the deep blue
sky, and at last both officers and men, tired of looking for an enemy
who was never to appear, turned in for such sleep as they could get,
leaving a small guard on deck to keep a lookout. When they awoke next
morning, the ship was in the deepest part of the nearest slip, moored
fast by her guy-ropes to the dock. Thus ended the first engagement
with the enemy.
From the 8th until the 13th, the Cherokee lay at anchor in the slip.
She was relieved on the 10th of about 200 men, thus slightly
lightening her overcrowded condition. In the meantime, this
overcrowded condition of the ship had led to some discussion as to who
could best be moved on board some other ship, with some prospect that
the Gatling Gun Detachment might be disturbed. The situation was not
at all satisfactory. With four guns, no mules, no harness, no
authority, and only twelve men, the Gatling Gun Detachment did not
appear to be in a very fair way toward inflicting much damage upon the
enemy. So on the 11th of June the detachment commander visited Gen.
Shafter at his headquarters, determined to bring the matter to an
issue, definitely, one way or the other. This was the first time he
had met the general, and, under the circumstances, the manner of his
reception appeared to be doubtful.
Gen. Shafter is a big man. This is not noticed at first glance. He is
above the average height, but his corpulent figure does not indicate
that he is full five feet nine inches in height, because his girth is
of like proportion. His hands are big; his arm is big; his head is
big. The occiput is especially full, and the width of head just over
the ears is noticeable. There is plenty of room for the organs of
combativeness. One would think he is probably a lover of children;
during this interview he patted the head of an inquisitive dog, which
evidently belonged somewhere on board the flag-ship, and which strayed
into the room. His eyes are big, very full and very keen. As you enter
he says curtly, “Take a seat.” He waits, looking down, for you to
state your business, then suddenly fixes you with a piercing glance,
and goes to the heart of the subject by one incisive sentence, which
leaves no more to be said. This description is a general type of
several interviews with him. On this occasion the general inquired
concerning the facts, looking keenly, searchingly, and meditatively at
the detachment commander. The machine gun man was “on trial.” Then the
general broke the silence by one short question, “What do you want?"
and the reply was in kind, “Twenty men, general, with the privilege of
selecting them.” The general suggested the advisability of taking a
complete organization; to which was replied, “That at this late hour
in the expedition it is imperative to have selected men in order to
perform the required duty; that men taken at random, as would be the
case in a complete organization such as a company, would not be likely
to have the required characteristics.” The general tersely remarked,
“You may have them. Make out your list, name any man in the corps that
you want, and hand the list to me. I will send the men to you.” The
trial was over, and the Machine Gun Detachment was a settled fact.
Accordingly on the following day Special Orders No. 16 were issued, as
follows:
Extract.
“Headquarters 5th Army Corps,
“On Board S. S. Seguransa,
“Tampa Bay, Fla., June 11, 1898.
“Special Orders, No. 16:
“4. The following named enlisted men are detailed for duty with the
Gatling Gun Detachment, 5th Army Corps, and will report at once to 2d
Lieut. John H. Parker, 13th Infantry, commanding the detachment for
duty:
“9th Infantry: Sergeant Weigle.
“12th Infantry: Privates Voelker, Company A; Anderson, Lauer, and
Timberly, Company C; Prazak, Company E.
“13th Infantry: Sergeant Green, Company H; Corporals Stiegerwald,
Company A; Doyle, Smith, and Rose, Company C; Privates Corey and
Power, Company A; Barts, Company E; and Schmadt, Company G.
“17th Infantry: Privates Merryman and Schulze, Company A; McDonald,
Company B; Elkins, Dellett, and McGoin, Company D; Click, Needle,
Shiffer, and Sine, Company E.
“Each of the soldiers will report equipped as follows: Blanket-roll
complete, haversack and contents, canteen, waist-belt of leather,
hunting-knife, and revolver, and they will be rationed with ten days’
travel rations. Descriptive lists of these men will be sent to the
commanding officer of the detachment.
“By command of Maj.-Gen. Shafter.
“Official. J. D. Miley, E. J. McClernand,
                 “Aide.    Asst. Adj.-Gen.”
“Headquarters 5th Army Corps,
“On Board S. S. Seguransa,
“Tampa Bay, June 11, 1898.
“Special Orders, No. 16:
Extract.
“5. 2d Lieut. John H. Parker, 13th Infantry, commanding the Gatling
Gun Detachment, 5th Army Corps, is authorized to make the usual
requisitions for supplies.
“By command of Maj.-Gen. Shafter.
“Official. J. D. Miley, E. J. McClernand,
                 “Aide.    Asst. Adj.-Gen.”
The organization was thus perfected by a single stroke of the
general’s pen on the 11th of June, theoretically; practically it was
the 14th of June before the details from the 12th and 17th Infantry
reported, and when they did, instead of being equipped as directed,
they carried rifles with 100 rounds of ammunition.
Serg. Weigle, of the 9th Infantry, who reported at the same time,
carried a revolver. On the 14th a wigwag message was received from the
13th Infantry, inquiring whether the detail was desired to report at
once or not, to which the reply was sent that it was desired to report
at the earliest possible moment. It did not report.
The detachment was at once organized as well as possible for the trip
on board the transport, and the guns brought up from the hold of the
ship and mounted in such a way that they would be ready for instant
use. It was not known but that the detachment might have to
participate in a naval engagement, and the value of machine guns in
the navy has long been demonstrated. At any rate, it was determined to
be ready to give a warm reception to any torpedo vessel which might
attempt to attack the Cherokee. One object of getting the guns up was
to give instruction to the new men who reported on the 14th. Sergt.
Weigle was well instructed in the use of Gatling guns, but none of the
other members of the detachment had ever received any instruction, and
had been selected rather on the ground of their superior intelligence
and courage than on any special knowledge of machine guns. They were
given a drill each day in loading and firing the piece, during the
time they remained on board the transport, when the weather permitted.
The condition of the troops on board the transport was miserable. The
following extract from a letter written at that time will convey some
idea of the crowded, ill-ventilated condition of the vessel:
“We have now been on board the transport a week, and are getting into
a frame of mind suitable for desperate work. If you can imagine 1000
men crowded into space needed for 500, and then kept there without
room to stand or move or sit for seven days, under a tropical sun, in
foul holds utterly without ventilation (just imagine it!), endured
without a single murmur or complaint, not stoically, but patiently and
intelligently, while every officer on board is kicking as hard and as
often as possible for the relief of his men, then you will have some
idea of the situation. The men are very patient, but they know someone
has blundered. Talk about the heroism of the Light Brigade! It is
nothing to the heroism that goes cheerfully and uncomplainingly into
the Black Hole of Calcutta (there is nothing else that will compare
with these transports), all because it is duty. When will the people
appreciate the heroism of the Regular Army?”
This was the actual condition of affairs on board the Cherokee
up to the time of leaving port on the 14th of June, and it was
modified only by the hoisting of wind-sails, after we got under way.
These were not very efficient and there were only two of them, so very
little relief was given to the overcrowded berth-deck. Most of the men
spent their time on the upper deck, and one whole company was
quartered there. At night, after 8 o’clock, Col. Comba authorized the
men to sleep on deck, and there was always a rush, when the ship’s
bell struck the hour, for good places on the quarter-deck. The only
thing that made the voyage endurable was the good weather which
prevailed. This prevented seasickness, to a certain extent.
The squadron reached Santiago de Cuba, and after tacking about for
several days, either for the purpose of deceiving the enemy, or of
waiting a decision as to the landing-place, finally approached
Baiquiri, which had been selected for the landing. The troops on the
Cherokee began to land on the 23d of June, the battalion of the
12th Infantry going first. This was followed by the 17th Infantry, and
upon its departure the captain of the Cherokee put to sea. The
reason for this maneuver is not known. The orders issued by Gen.
Shafter in regard to the landing were that the Gatling Gun Detachment
should accompany Gen. Lawton’s Division. This movement of the
Cherokee completely blocked the landing of the Gatling guns. The
ship’s captain was finally induced to put back into the bay and speak
to the Seguransa, and Gen. Shafter directed that the detachment should
be taken off the next morning.
An effort was made, therefore, to obtain the use of a lighter which
was not at that time in use, but the Commissary Department refused to
yield the boat, and it remained until 11 o’clock the next morning tied
up to the wharf with half a load of commissaries on board before it
became available, and then was seized by the Quartermaster’s
Department. An effort was then made to obtain the use of three
pontoons, belonging to the Engineer Department, which had been drawn
up to the shore and were of no use to anybody. The young engineer
officer in charge of these boats, a premature graduate of the class of
’98, was “afraid the boats might get smashed in the surf,” and could
not consent without seeing Col. Derby. Col. Derby could not be found.
A wigwag came from Gen. Shafter, asking whether the Gatling guns had
been landed. The reply, “No; may I use pontoons?” was answered at
once, “Use pontoons, and get off immediately.” On returning to shore
with a party to work the pontoons, the party was stopped in the act of
launching the first boat by Gen. Sumner, and ordered to proceed to the
Cherokee, take her out into the offing, and order another to take her
place to unload. Protesting against this action, and informing Gen.
Sumner of the urgent orders for the Gatling guns to disembark at once,
that officer inquired the opinion of the prematurely graduated
engineer as to the practicability of using the pontoons, and this
experienced young man again expressed the fear that the boats might be
injured in the surf. To the detachment commander’s indignant
exclamation, “What the h– were these boats made for, if they are not
to be used and smashed?” Gen. Sumner responded by a peremptory order
to warp the Cherokee out from the pier and send the other vessels in.
The order was obeyed, and all the circumstances reported to Gen.
Shafter the same evening, with the expression of the opinion that if
the general wanted the Gatling guns landed, he would have to attend to
it personally, because the Gatling gun commander did not have
sufficient rank to accomplish it in the face of all these obstacles.
Early on the morning of June 25th, therefore, Gen. Shafter sent
peremptory orders to the lighter to lay alongside the Cherokee, take
the Gatling guns and detachment on board, and land them on the dock.
The transfer began at 8 o’clock in the morning, Gen. Shafter coming
out in person in his steam launch to see that his order was executed.
By 11 o’clock the guns, carriages, 30,000 rounds of ammunition, four
sets of double harness, and the detachment were on board the lighter.
This had been accomplished a mile outside in the offing, with the
vessel rolling and pitching in the trough of the sea and on the crest
of the gigantic rollers in so violent a manner that it was almost
impossible for men to stand on their feet, much less handle such heavy
material as guns and ammunition. The lighter was warped to the pier at
11 o’clock, and the general tied his steam launch alongside to see
that it was not disturbed until the debarkation was completed. At 1
o’clock everything was ashore, and, in compliance with the general’s
instructions, the best mules in the corral were taken, and as they
were led away from the corral-gate, a fat, sleek, black streaked,
long-eared specimen, which had been selected for a saddle-mule, set up
a cheerful “Aw! hee haw! haw!” which produced a burst of laughter and
cheering from the members of the detachment and the soldiers in the
vicinity. It was a cheerful omen. These Missouri mules were capable of
pulling anything loose at both ends, and four experienced drivers had
been selected from the detachment who were capable of riding anything
that walked on four feet, or driving anything from an Arab courser to
a pair of Shetland ponies.
Priv. J. Shiffer had been selected as corral boss of the detachment.
The most picturesque figure, the most boyish member, and as brave a
soldier as ever shouldered a musket; broad of shoulder, stout of limb,
full of joke, as cheerful as a ray of sunlight, this man was the
incarnation of courage and devotion. He loved a mule. He was proud of
the job. With the instinct of a true teamster, he had snapped up the
best pair of mules in the whole corral and was out before the
detachment commander had selected a single mule. This team was as
black as Shiffer’s shoes and as strong as a pair of elephants. They
were worked harder than any other team in the 5th Army Corps, and when
they were turned in to the quartermaster in August, they were as fat,
as sleek, as strong, and as hardy as on the day they were taken from
the corral in Baiquiri. The other three teamsters were like unto the
first. They were all handy men. They were as capable of fighting or
aiming a gun as of driving a team. Any one of the four could take a
team of mules up a mountain-side or down a vertical precipice in
perfect safety. They could do the impossible with a team of mules, and
they had to do it before the detachment reached the firing-line. The
success of the battery was to depend to a very large degree upon the
coolness, good judgment, and perfect bravery of these four teamsters.
It should be noted that the use of mules was an experiment. The
“scientific” branch of service has always held that the proper animal
to draw a field-piece is the horse. They expatiate with great delight
upon the almost human intelligence and sagacity of that noble animal;
upon his courage “when he snuffeth the battle afar,” and upon the
undaunted spirit with which he rushes upon the enemy, and assists his
master to work the destruction of his foes. The Artillery claims that
mules are entirely too stubborn, too cowardly, and too hard to manage
for the purpose of their arm of the service. It was also an experiment
to use two mules per gun. The Engineer Department had reported that
the road to the front was impassable for wheeled vehicles, and even
the general had apparently thought that four mules per gun would be
necessary. The necessity of economizing mules, and the opinion of the
detachment commander that two mules per gun would be sufficient, had
led to the issue of that number. Those who despise the army mule for
the purposes of field artillery know very little of the capacity of
this equine product of Missouri when properly handled. It was
demonstrated that two mules can pull a Gatling gun with 10,000 rounds
of ammunition, loaded down with rations and forage, where eight horses
are required to draw a field-piece; and that mules are equally as easy
to manage under fire as horses.
The landing was completed and the detachment organized at 3 p. m.,
having rations, forage, and ammunition complete. There was no tentage,
except the shelter-halves which some of the men had brought with them.
Capt. Henry Marcotte, retired, the correspondent of the Army and Navy
Journal, requested permission to accompany the detachment, which was
granted, and soon all were en route for the front, entrusted with
the task of opening the way for wheeled transportation and of
demonstrating the practicability of the road for army wagons and field
artillery.
For the first mile the road was excellent. It lay through one of the
most fertile parts of the most fertile island in the world. A little
stream trickling along the side of the road furnished plenty of water
for both men and animals. At the end of the mile the detachment found
a steep hill to descend. The Ordnance Department, which designed and
built the carriage for the Gatling guns, had never foreseen the
necessity for a brake, and it was therefore necessary to cut down
bushes from the roadside and fasten the rear wheels by placing a stout
pole between the spokes and over the trail of the piece. This locked
the wheels, and the guns were thus enabled to slide down the steep
hill without danger of a runaway. From this point the road became a
narrow defile. The rank jungle closed in upon the trail, the long
barbed leaves of the Spanish bayonet hung across and lacerated the
legs of the mules until the blood trickled down to the hoofs; the
boughs of the trees hung down over it so that even the men on foot had
to stoop to pass under them, and the tortuous path winding in and out
amid the dense tropical undergrowth made it impossible to see in
places more than twenty-five or thirty yards ahead at a time.
The advance guard, consisting of all the members of one gun crew, had
been organized at once upon starting, and this guard moved along the
road about two hundred and fifty yards in advance of the detachment,
scouting every path vigilantly to the right and left, and keeping a
constant, careful lookout to the front. Their orders were, in case of
encountering the enemy, to scatter in the underbrush, open fire with
magazines, so as to produce the impression upon the enemy that there
was a large force, and then slowly fall back upon the battery. The
plan was, upon the first alarm, to bring the two leading guns into
battery upon the road, with the fourth gun ready to be opened to
either flank, while the gun crew of the third gun, which formed the
advance guard, were to act as infantry support to the battery. It was
hoped that the enemy would follow the advance guard as it retreated,
and it was believed that the Gatling gun battery could take care of
two or three regiments of Spaniards without help if necessary.
This form for the march had been adopted as the result of mature
reflection. The general had offered a cavalry escort of two troops,
and Gen. Sumner had rather urged the use of an escort, but it was
desired to demonstrate that a battery of machine guns, properly manned
and equipped, is capable of independent action, and does not need the
assistance of either arm of the service. In fact, the Gatling gun men
would have been rather pleased than not to have had a brush with the
enemy without the assistance of either infantry or cavalry. But it was
not to be.
The march was continued until darkness fell over the landscape, and
the battery arrived at a beautiful camping-place about one mile east
of Siboney, where a break in the water-pipe near the railroad track
gave an ample supply of excellent water, and a ruined plantation, now
overgrown with luxuriant sugar-cane, provided ample forage for the
mules. The two troops of cavalry, which had been offered and refused
as an escort, had reached this camping-place some time before, so that
the wearied members of the detachment found pleasant camp-fires
already throwing their weird lights and shadows over the drooping
branches of the royal palm.
Here, in the midst of the jungle, they pitched their first camp in
Cuba. The condition of the mules was duly looked to, their shoulders
washed down with strong salty water, their feet carefully examined,
and the animals then tethered to graze their fill on the succulent
sugar-cane, after having had a bountiful supply of oats. Meantime the
camp cooks had a kettle full of coffee simmering, and canned roast
beef warming over the fire, and after a hearty meal the tired men
stretched themselves upon the ground, with no canopy except the stars
and only one sentinel over the camp, and slept more soundly than they
had on board the tossing Cherokee.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
