


(Extract.)
“1. Under instructions to be communicated to the proper commanders,
troops will disembark in the following order:
“First–The 2d Division, 5th Corps (Lawton’s). The Gatling Gun
Detachment will accompany this division.
“Second–Gen. Bates’ Brigade. This brigade will form as a reserve to
the 2d Division, 5th Corps.
“Third–The dismounted cavalry division (Wheeler’s).
“Fourth–The 1st Division, 5th Corps (Kent’s).
“Fifth–The squadron of the 2d Cavalry (Rafferty’s).
“Sixth–If the enemy in force vigorously resist the landing, the light
artillery, or a part of it, will be disembarked by the battalion
commander, and brought to the assistance of the troops engaged. If no
serious opposition be offered this artillery will be unloaded after
the mounted squadron.
“2. All troops will carry on the person the blanket-roll (with
shelter-tent and poncho), three days’ field rations (with coffee,
ground), canteens filled, and 100 rounds of ammunition per man.
Additional ammunition, already issued to the troops, tentage, baggage,
and company cooking utensils will be left under charge of the
regimental quartermaster, with one non-commissioned officer and two
privates from each company.
“3. All persons not immediately on duty with and constituting a part
of the organizations mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs will remain
aboard ship until the landing be accomplished, and until notified they
can land.
“4. The chief quartermaster of the expedition will control all small
boats and will distribute them to the best advantage to disembark the
troops in the order indicated in paragraph 1.
“5. The ordnance officer–2d Lieut. Brooke, 4th Infantry–will put on
shore at once 100 rounds of ammunition per man, and have it ready for
distribution on the firing-line.
“6. The commanding general wishes to impress officers and men with the
crushing effect a well-directed fire will have upon the Spanish
troops. All officers concerned will rigidly enforce fire discipline,
and will caution their men to fire only when they can be see the
enemy.
“By command of Maj.-Gen. Shafter.
“E. J. McClernand,
“A. A. G.”
The small boats belonging to the Navy and the transports, together
with a number of steam launches, furnished by the Navy, were brought
alongside and loaded with troops as prescribed in the order just
quoted. When Gen. Lawton’s Division was fairly loaded in the small
boats, the latter were towed in long lines by the steam launches
toward the shore. The sea was somewhat rough, but by the exercise of
caution and good judgment the beach was reached and the troops
disembarked satisfactorily. As a precaution against a possible attack
upon the part of any Spaniards who might have been hidden in the
adjacent block-houses and woods, the Navy opened a furious cannonade
on these places while the troops were moving toward the shore. It was
learned afterward that the Spanish garrison had retired in the
direction of Siboney soon after daylight.
By night about 6,000 troops were on shore. Gen. Lawton was ordered to
push down a strong force to seize and hold Siboney.
On the 23d the disembarkation was continued and about 6,000 more men
landed. Early on this date Gen. Lawton’s advance reached Siboney, the
Spanish garrison of about 600 men retiring as he came up, and offering
no opposition except a few scattering shots at long range. Some of the
Cuban troops pursued the retreating Spaniards and skirmished with
them. During the afternoon of this date the disembarkation of Kent’s
Division was commenced at Siboney, which enabled me to establish a
base eight miles nearer Santiago and to continue the unloading of
troops and supplies at both points.
The disembarkation was continued throughout the night of the 23d and
24th, and by the evening of the 24th the disembarkation of my command
was practically completed.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Gatlings at Santiago” by John H. Parker [History of the Gatling Gun Detachment Fifth Army Corps, At Santiago, With a Few Unvarnished Truths Concerning that Expedition -- By John H. Parker, 1st Lieut. 13th Inf. -- (Late) Commanding Gatling Gun Detachment, Fifth Army Corps, at Santiago.]  belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Gatlings at SantiagoBy John H. ParkerAt Amazon
