


The Spanish girl profited by this moment of stupefaction to let
herself fall into the ecstasy of that infinite adoration which seizes
the heart of a woman, when she truly loves and finds herself in the
presence of an idol for whom she has vainly longed. Her eyes were all
joy, all happiness, and sparks flew from them. She was under the
charm, and fearlessly intoxicated herself with a felicity of which she
had dreamed long. She seemed then so marvelously beautiful to Henri,
that all this phantasmagoria of rags and old age, of worn red drapery
and of the green mats in front of the armchairs, the ill-washed red
tiles, all this sick and dilapidated luxury, disappeared.
The room seemed lit up; and it was only through a cloud that one could
see the fearful harpy fixed and dumb on her red sofa, her yellow eyes
betraying the servile sentiments, inspired by misfortune, or caused by
some vice beneath whose servitude one has fallen as beneath a tyrant
who brutalizes one with the flagellations of his despotism. Her eyes
had the cold glitter of a caged tiger, knowing his impotence and being
compelled to swallow his rage of destruction.
“Who is that woman?” said Henri to Paquita.
But Paquita did not answer. She made a sign that she understood no
French, and asked Henri if he spoke English.
De Marsay repeated his question in English.
“She is the only woman in whom I can confide, although she has sold me
already,” said Paquita, tranquilly. “My dear Adolphe, she is my
mother, a slave bought in Georgia for her rare beauty, little enough
of which remains to-day. She only speaks her native tongue.”
The attitude of this woman and her eagerness to guess from the
gestures of her daughter and Henri what was passing between them, were
suddenly explained to the young man; and this explanation put him at
his ease.
“Paquita,” he said, “are we never to be free then?”
“Never,” she said, with an air of sadness. “Even now we have but a few
days before us.”
She lowered her eyes, looked at and counted with her right hand on the
fingers of her left, revealing so the most beautiful hands which Henri
had ever seen.
“One, two, three––”
She counted up to twelve.
“Yes,” she said, “we have twelve days.”
“And after?”
“After,” she said, showing the absorption of a weak woman before the
executioner’s axe, and slain in advance, as it were, by a fear which
stripped her of that magnificent energy which Nature seemed to have
bestowed upon her only to aggrandize pleasure and convert the most
vulgar delights into endless poems. “After––” she repeated. Her eyes
took a fixed stare; she seemed to contemplate a threatening object far
away.
“I do not know,” she said.
“This girl is mad,” said Henri to himself, falling into strange
reflections.
Paquita appeared to him occupied by something which was not himself,
like a woman constrained equally by remorse and passion. Perhaps she
had in her heart another love which she alternately remembered and
forgot. In a moment Henri was assailed by a thousand contradictory
thoughts. This girl became a mystery for him; but as he contemplated
her with the scientific attention of the blase man, famished for new
pleasures, like that Eastern king who asked that a pleasure should be
created for him,–a horrible thirst with which great souls are seized,
–Henri recognized in Paquita the richest organization that Nature had
ever deigned to compose for love. The presumptive play of this
machinery, setting aside the soul, would have frightened any other man
than Henri; but he was fascinated by that rich harvest of promised
pleasures, by that constant variety in happiness, the dream of every
man, and the desire of every loving woman too. He was infuriated by
the infinite rendered palpable, and transported into the most
excessive raptures of which the creature is capable. All that he saw
in this girl more distinctly than he had yet seen it, for she let
herself be viewed complacently, happy to be admired. The admiration of
De Marsay became a secret fury, and he unveiled her completely,
throwing a glance at her which the Spaniard understood as though she
had been used to receive such.
“If you are not to be mine, mine only, I will kill you!” he cried.
Hearing this speech, Paquita covered her face in her hands, and cried
naively:
“Holy Virgin! What have I brought upon myself?”
She rose, flung herself down upon the red sofa, and buried her head in
the rags which covered the bosom of her mother, and wept there. The
old woman received her daughter without issuing from her state of
immobility, or displaying any emotion. The mother possessed in the
highest degree that gravity of savage races, the impassiveness of a
statue upon which all remarks are lost. Did she or did she not love
her daughter? Beneath that mask every human emotion might brood–good
and evil; and from this creature all might be expected. Her gaze
passed slowly from her daughter’s beautiful hair, which covered her
like a mantle, to the face of Henri, which she considered with an
indescribable curiosity.
She seemed to ask by what fatality he was there, from what caprice
Nature had made so seductive a man.
“These women are making sport of me,” said Henri to himself.
At that moment Paquita raised her head, cast at him one of those looks
which reach the very soul and consume it. So beautiful seemed she that
he swore he would possess such a treasure of beauty.
“My Paquita! Be mine!”
“Wouldst thou kill me?” she said fearfully, palpitating and anxious,
but drawn towards him by an inexplicable force.
“Kill thee–I!” he said, smiling.
Paquita uttered a cry of alarm, said a word to the old woman, who
authoritatively seized Henri’s hand and that of her daughter. She
gazed at them for a long time, and then released them, wagging her
head in a fashion horribly significant.
“Be mine–this evening, this moment; follow me, do not leave me! It
must be, Paquita! Dost thou love me? Come!”
In a moment he had poured out a thousand foolish words to her, with
the rapidity of a torrent coursing between the rocks, and repeating
the same sound in a thousand different forms.
“It is the same voice!” said Paquita, in a melancholy voice, which De
Marsay could not overhear, “and the same ardor,” she added. “So be
it–yes,” she said, with an abandonment of passion which no words can
describe. “Yes; but not to-night. To-night Adolphe, I gave too little
opium to La Concha. She might wake up, and I should be lost. At this
moment the whole household believes me to be asleep in my room. In two
days be at the same spot, say the same word to the same man. That man
is my foster-father. Cristemio worships me, and would die in torments
for me before they could extract one word against me from him.
Farewell,” she said seizing Henri by the waist and twining round him
like a serpent.
She pressed him on every side at once, lifted her head to his, and
offered him her lips, then snatched a kiss which filled them both with
such a dizziness that it seemed to Henri as though the earth opened;
and Paquita cried: “Enough, depart!” in a voice which told how little
she was mistress of herself. But she clung to him still, still crying
“Depart!” and brought him slowly to the staircase. There the mulatto,
whose white eyes lit up at the sight of Paquita, took the torch from
the hands of his idol, and conducted Henri to the street. He left the
light under the arch, opened the door, put Henri into the carriage,
and set him down on the Boulevard des Italiens with marvelous
rapidity. It was as though the horses had hell-fire in their veins.
The scene was like a dream to De Marsay, but one of those dreams
which, even when they fade away, leave a feeling of supernatural
voluptuousness, which a man runs after for the remainder of his life.
A single kiss had been enough. Never had rendezvous been spent in a
manner more decorous or chaste, or, perhaps, more coldly, in a spot of
which the surroundings were more gruesome, in presence of a more
hideous divinity; for the mother had remained in Henri’s imagination
like some infernal, cowering thing, cadaverous, monstrous, savagely
ferocious, which the imagination of poets and painters had not yet
conceived. In effect, no rendezvous had ever irritated his senses
more, revealed more audacious pleasures, or better aroused love from
its centre to shed itself round him like an atmosphere. There was
something sombre, mysterious, sweet, tender, constrained, and
expansive, an intermingling of the awful and the celestial, of
paradise and hell, which made De Marsay like a drunken man.
He was no longer himself, and he was, withal, great enough to be able
to resist the intoxication of pleasure.
In order to render his conduct intelligible in the catastrophe of this
story, it is needful to explain how his soul had broadened at an age
when young men generally belittle themselves in their relations with
women, or in too much occupation with them. Its growth was due to a
concurrence of secret circumstances, which invested him with a vast
and unsuspected power.
This young man held in his hand a sceptre more powerful than that of
modern kings, almost all of whom are curbed in their least wishes by
the laws. De Marsay exercised the autocratic power of an Oriental
despot. But this power, so stupidly put into execution in Asia by
brutish men, was increased tenfold by its conjunction with European
intelligence, with French wit–the most subtle, the keenest of all
intellectual instruments. Henri could do what he would in the interest
of his pleasures and vanities. This invisible action upon the social
world had invested him with a real, but secret, majesty, without
emphasis and deriving from himself. He had not the opinion which Louis
XIV. could have of himself, but that which the proudest of the
Caliphs, the Pharoahs, the Xerxes, who held themselves to be of divine
origin, had of themselves when they imitated God, and veiled
themselves from their subjects under the pretext that their looks
dealt forth death. Thus, without any remorse at being at once the
judge and the accuser, De Marsay coldly condemned to death the man or
the woman who had seriously offended him. Although often pronounced
almost lightly, the verdict was irrevocable. An error was a misfortune
similar to that which a thunderbolt causes when it falls upon a
smiling Parisienne in some hackney coach, instead of crushing the old
coachman who is driving her to a rendezvous. Thus the bitter and
profound sarcasm which distinguished the young man’s conversation
usually tended to frighten people; no one was anxious to put him out.
Women are prodigiously fond of those persons who call themselves
pashas, and who are, as it were accompanied by lions and executioners,
and who walk in a panoply of terror. The result, in the case of such
men, is a security of action, a certitude of power, a pride of gaze, a
leonine consciousness, which makes women realize the type of strength
of which they all dream. Such was De Marsay.
Happy, for the moment, with his future, he grew young and pliable, and
thought of nothing but love as he went to bed. He dreamed of the girl
with the golden eyes, as the young and passionate can dream. His
dreams were monstrous images, unattainable extravagances–full of
light, revealing invisible worlds, yet in a manner always incomplete,
for an intervening veil changes the conditions of vision.
For the next and succeeding day Henri disappeared and no one knew what
had become of him. His power only belonged to him under certain
conditions, and, happily for him, during those two days he was a
private soldier in the service of the demon to whom he owed his
talismanic existence. But at the appointed time, in the evening, he
was waiting–and he had not long to wait–for the carriage. The
mulatto approached Henri, in order to repeat to him in French a phrase
which he seemed to have learned by heart.
“If you wish to come, she told me, you must consent to have your eyes
bandaged.”
And Cristemio produced a white silk handkerchief.
“No!” said Henri, whose omnipotence revolted suddenly.
He tried to leap in. The mulatto made a sign, and the carriage drove
off.
“Yes!” cried De Marsay, furious at the thought of losing a piece of
good fortune which had been promised him.
He saw, moreover, the impossibility of making terms with a slave whose
obedience was as blind as the hangman’s. Nor was it this passive
instrument upon whom his anger could fall.
The mulatto whistled, the carriage returned. Henri got in hastily.
Already a few curious onlookers had assembled like sheep on the
boulevard. Henri was strong; he tried to play the mulatto. When the
carriage started at a gallop he seized his hands, in order to master
him, and retain, by subduing his attendant, the possession of his
faculties, so that he might know whither he was going. It was a vain
attempt. The eyes of the mulatto flashed from the darkness. The fellow
uttered a cry which his fury stifled in his throat, released himself,
threw back De Marsay with a hand like iron, and nailed him, so to
speak, to the bottom of the carriage; then with his free hand, he drew
a triangular dagger, and whistled. The coachman heard the whistle and
stopped. Henri was unarmed, he was forced to yield. He moved his head
towards the handkerchief. The gesture of submission calmed Cristemio,
and he bound his eyes with a respect and care which manifested a sort
of veneration for the person of the man whom his idol loved. But,
before taking this course, he had placed his dagger distrustfully in
his side pocket, and buttoned himself up to the chin.
“That nigger would have killed me!” said De Marsay to himself.
Once more the carriage moved on rapidly. There was one resource still
open to a young man who knew Paris as well as Henri. To know whither
he was going, he had but to collect himself and count, by the number
of gutters crossed, the streets leading from the boulevards by which
the carriage passed, so long as it continued straight along. He could
thus discover into which lateral street it would turn, either towards
the Seine or towards the heights of Montmartre, and guess the name or
position of the street in which his guide should bring him to a halt.
But the violent emotion which his struggle had caused him, the rage
into which his compromised dignity had thrown him, the ideas of
vengeance to which he abandoned himself, the suppositions suggested to
him by the circumstantial care which this girl had taken in order to
bring him to her, all hindered him from the attention, which the blind
have, necessary for the concentration of his intelligence and the
perfect lucidity of his recollection. The journey lasted half an hour.
When the carriage stopped, it was no longer on the street. The mulatto
and the coachman took Henri in their arms, lifted him out, and,
putting him into a sort of litter, conveyed him across a garden. He
could smell its flowers and the perfume peculiar to trees and grass.
The silence which reigned there was so profound that he could
distinguish the noise made by the drops of water falling from the
moist leaves. The two men took him to a staircase, set him on his
feet, led him by his hands through several apartments, and left him in
a room whose atmosphere was perfumed, and the thick carpet of which he
could feel beneath his feet.
A woman’s hand pushed him on to a divan, and untied the handkerchief
for him. Henri saw Paquita before him, but Paquita in all her womanly
and voluptuous glory. The section of the boudoir in which Henri found
himself described a circular line, softly gracious, which was faced
opposite by the other perfectly square half, in the midst of which a
chimney-piece shone of gold and white marble. He had entered by a door
on one side, hidden by a rich tapestried screen, opposite which was a
window. The semicircular portion was adorned with a real Turkish
divan, that is to say, a mattress thrown on the ground, but a mattress
as broad as a bed, a divan fifty feet in circumference, made of white
cashmere, relieved by bows of black and scarlet silk, arranged in
panels. The top of this huge bed was raised several inches by numerous
cushions, which further enriched it by their tasteful comfort. The
boudoir was lined with some red stuff, over which an Indian muslin was
stretched, fluted after the fashion of Corinthian columns, in plaits
going in and out, and bound at the top and bottom by bands of
poppy-colored stuff, on which were designs in black arabesque.
Below the muslin the poppy turned to rose, that amorous color, which
was matched by window-curtains, which were of Indian muslin lined with
rose-colored taffeta, and set off with a fringe of poppy-color and
black. Six silver-gilt arms, each supporting two candles, were
attached to the tapestry at an equal distance, to illuminate the
divan. The ceiling, from the middle of which a lustre of unpolished
silver hung, was of a brilliant whiteness, and the cornice was gilded.
The carpet was like an Oriental shawl; it had the designs and recalled
the poetry of Persia, where the hands of slaves had worked on it. The
furniture was covered in white cashmere, relieved by black and
poppy-colored ornaments. The clock, the candelabra, all were in white
marble and gold. The only table there had a cloth of cashmere. Elegant
flower-pots held roses of every kind, flowers white or red. In fine,
the least detail seemed to have been the object of loving thought.
Never had richness hidden itself more coquettishly to become elegance,
to express grace, to inspire pleasure. Everything there would have
warmed the coldest of beings. The caresses of the tapestry, of which
the color changed according to the direction of one’s gaze, becoming
either all white or all rose, harmonized with the effects of the light
shed upon the diaphanous tissues of the muslin, which produced an
appearance of mistiness. The soul has I know not what attraction
towards white, love delights in red, and the passions are flattered by
gold, which has the power of realizing their caprices. Thus all that
man possesses within him of vague and mysterious, all his inexplicable
affinities, were caressed in their involuntary sympathies. There was
in this perfect harmony a concert of color to which the soul responded
with vague and voluptuous and fluctuating ideas.
It was out of a misty atmosphere, laden with exquisite perfumes, that
Paquita, clad in a white wrapper, her feet bare, orange blossoms in
her black hair, appeared to Henri, knelt before him, adoring him as
the god of this temple, whither he had deigned to come. Although De
Marsay was accustomed to seeing the utmost efforts of Parisian luxury,
he was surprised at the aspect of this shell, like that from which
Venus rose out of the sea. Whether from an effect of contrast between
the darkness from which he issued and the light which bathed his soul,
whether from a comparison which he swiftly made between this scene and
that of their first interview, he experienced one of those delicate
sensations which true poetry gives. Perceiving in the midst of this
retreat, which had been opened to him as by a fairy’s magic wand, the
masterpiece of creation, this girl, whose warmly colored tints, whose
soft skin–soft, but slightly gilded by the shadows, by I know not
what vaporous effusion of love–gleamed as though it reflected the
rays of color and light, his anger, his desire for vengeance, his
wounded vanity, all were lost.
Like an eagle darting on his prey, he took her utterly to him, set her
on his knees, and felt with an indescribable intoxication the
voluptuous pressure of this girl, whose richly developed beauties
softly enveloped him.
“Come to me, Paquita!” he said, in a low voice.
“Speak, speak without fear!” she said. “This retreat was built for
love. No sound can escape from it, so greatly was it desired to guard
avariciously the accents and music of the beloved voice. However loud
should be the cries, they would not be heard without these walls. A
person might be murdered, and his moans would be as vain as if he were
in the midst of the great desert.”
“Who has understood jealousy and its needs so well?”
“Never question me as to that,” she answered, untying with a gesture
of wonderful sweetness the young man’s scarf, doubtless in order the
better to behold his neck.
“Yes, there is the neck I love so well!” she said. “Wouldst thou
please me?”
This interrogation, rendered by the accent almost lascivious, drew De
Marsay from the reverie in which he had been plunged by Paquita’s
authoritative refusal to allow him any research as to the unknown
being who hovered like a shadow about them.
“And if I wished to know who reigns here?”
Paquita looked at him trembling.
“It is not I, then?” he said, rising and freeing himself from the
girl, whose head fell backwards. “Where I am, I would be alone.”
“Strike, strike! . . .” said the poor slave, a prey to terror.
“For what do you take me, then? . . . Will you answer?”
Paquita got up gently, her eyes full of tears, took a poniard from one
of the two ebony pieces of furniture, and presented it to Henri with a
gesture of submission which would have moved a tiger.
“Give me a feast such as men give when they love,” she said, “and
whilst I sleep, slay me, for I know not how to answer thee. Hearken! I
am bound like some poor beast to a stake; I am amazed that I have been
able to throw a bridge over the abyss which divides us. Intoxicate me,
then kill me! Ah, no, no!” she cried, joining her hands, “do not kill
me! I love life! Life is fair to me! If I am a slave, I am a queen
too. I could beguile you with words, tell you that I love you alone,
prove it to you, profit by my momentary empire to say to you: ’Take me
as one tastes the perfume of a flower when one passes it in a king’s
garden.’ Then, after having used the cunning eloquence of woman and
soared on the wings of pleasure, after having quenched my thirst, I
could have you cast into a pit, where none could find you, which has
been made to gratify vengeance without having to fear that of the law,
a pit full of lime which would kindle and consume you, until no
particle of you were left. You would stay in my heart, mine forever.”
Henri looked at the girl without trembling, and this fearless gaze
filled her with joy.
“No, I shall not do it! You have fallen into no trap here, but upon
the heart of a woman who adores you, and it is I who will be cast into
the pit.”
“All this appears to me prodigiously strange,” said De Marsay,
considering her. “But you seem to me a good girl, a strange nature;
you are, upon my word of honor, a living riddle, the answer to which
is very difficult to find.”
Paquita understood nothing of what the young man said; she looked at
him gently, opening wide eyes which could never be stupid, so much was
pleasure written in them.
“Come, then, my love,” she said, returning to her first idea, “wouldst
thou please me?”
“I would do all that thou wouldst, and even that thou wouldst not,"
answered De Marsay, with a laugh. He had recovered his foppish ease,
as he took the resolve to let himself go to the climax of his good
fortune, looking neither before nor after. Perhaps he counted,
moreover, on his power and his capacity of a man used to adventures,
to dominate this girl a few hours later and learn all her secrets.
“Well,” said she, “let me arrange you as I would like.”
Paquita went joyously and took from one of the two chests a robe of
red velvet, in which she dressed De Marsay, then adorned his head with
a woman’s bonnet and wrapped a shawl round him. Abandoning herself to
these follies with a child’s innocence, she laughed a convulsive
laugh, and resembled some bird flapping its wings; but he saw nothing
beyond.
If it be impossible to paint the unheard-of delights which these two
creatures–made by heaven in a joyous moment–found, it is perhaps
necessary to translate metaphysically the extraordinary and almost
fantastic impressions of the young man. That which persons in the
social position of De Marsay, living as he lived, are best able to
recognize is a girl’s innocence. But, strange phenomenon! The girl of
the golden eyes might be virgin, but innocent she was certainly not.
The fantastic union of the mysterious and the real, of darkness and
light, horror and beauty, pleasure and danger, paradise and hell,
which had already been met with in this adventure, was resumed in the
capricious and sublime being with which De Marsay dallied. All the
utmost science or the most refined pleasure, all that Henri could know
of that poetry of the senses which is called love, was excelled by the
treasures poured forth by this girl, whose radiant eyes gave the lie
to none of the promises which they made.
She was an Oriental poem, in which shone the sun that Saadi, that
Hafiz, have set in their pulsing strophes. Only, neither the rhythm of
Saadi, nor that of Pindar, could have expressed the ecstasy–full of
confusion and stupefaction–which seized the delicious girl when the
error in which an iron hand had caused her to live was at an end.
“Dead!” she said, “I am dead, Adolphe! Take me away to the world’s
end, to an island where no one knows us. Let there be no traces of our
flight! We should be followed to the gates of hell. God! here is the
day! Escape! Shall I ever see you again? Yes, to-morrow I will see
you, if I have to deal death to all my warders to have that joy. Till
to-morrow.”
She pressed him in her arms with an embrace in which the terror of
death mingled. Then she touched a spring, which must have been in
connection with a bell, and implored De Marsay to permit his eyes to
be bandaged.
“And if I would not–and if I wished to stay here?”
“You would be the death of me more speedily,” she said, “for now I
know I am certain to die on your account.”
Henri submitted. In the man who had just gorged himself with pleasure
there occurs a propensity to forgetfulness, I know not what
ingratitude, a desire for liberty, a whim to go elsewhere, a tinge of
contempt and, perhaps, of disgust for his idol; in fine, indescribable
sentiments which render him ignoble and ashamed. The certainty of this
confused, but real, feeling in souls who are not illuminated by that
celestial light, nor perfumed with that holy essence from which the
performance of sentiment springs, doubtless suggested to Rousseau the
adventures of Lord Edward, which conclude the letters of the Nouvelle
Heloise. If Rousseau is obviously inspired by the work of Richardson,
he departs from it in a thousand details, which leave his achievement
magnificently original; he has recommended it to posterity by great
ideas which it is difficult to liberate by analysis, when, in one’s
youth, one reads this work with the object of finding in it the lurid
representation of the most physical of our feelings, whereas serious
and philosophical writers never employ its images except as the
consequence or the corollary of a vast thought; and the adventures of
Lord Edward are one of the most Europeanly delicate ideas of the whole
work.
Henri, therefore, found himself beneath the domination of that
confused sentiment which is unknown to true love. There was needful,
in some sort, the persuasive grip of comparisons, and the irresistible
attraction of memories to lead him back to a woman. True love rules
above all through recollection. A woman who is not engraven upon the
soul by excess of pleasure or by strength of emotion, how can she ever
be loved? In Henri’s case, Paquita had established herself by both of
these reasons. But at this moment, seized as he was by the satiety of
his happiness, that delicious melancholy of the body, he could hardly
analyze his heart, even by recalling to his lips the taste of the
liveliest gratifications that he had ever grasped.
He found himself on the Boulevard Montmartre at the break of day,
gazed stupidly at the retreating carriage, produced two cigars from
his pocket, lit one from the lantern of a good woman who sold brandy
and coffee to workmen and street arabs and chestnut venders–to all
the Parisian populace which begins its work before daybreak; then he
went off, smoking his cigar, and putting his hands in his trousers’
pockets with a devil-may-care air which did him small honor.
“What a good thing a cigar is! That’s one thing a man will never tire
of,” he said to himself.
Of the girl with the golden eyes, over whom at that time all the
elegant youth of Paris was mad, he hardly thought. The idea of death,
expressed in the midst of their pleasure, and the fear of which had
more than once darkened the brow of that beautiful creature, who held
to the houris of Asia by her mother, to Europe by her education, to
the tropics by her birth, seemed to him merely one of those deceptions
by which women seek to make themselves interesting.
“She is from Havana–the most Spanish region to be found in the New
World. So she preferred to feign terror rather than cast in my teeth
indisposition or difficulty, coquetry or duty, like a Parisian woman.
By her golden eyes, how glad I shall be to sleep.”
He saw a hackney coach standing at the corner of Frascati’s waiting
for some gambler; he awoke the driver, was driven home, went to bed,
and slept the sleep of the dissipated, which for some queer reason–of
which no rhymer has yet taken advantage–is as profound as that of
innocence. Perhaps it is an instance of the proverbial axiom,
extremes meet.
About noon De Marsay awoke and stretched himself; he felt the grip of
that sort of voracious hunger which old soldiers can remember having
experienced on the morrow of victory. He was delighted, therefore, to
see Paul de Manerville standing in front of him, for at such a time
nothing is more agreeable than to eat in company.
“Well,” his friend remarked, “we all imagined that you had been shut
up for the last ten days with the girl of the golden eyes.”
“The girl of the golden eyes! I have forgotten her. Faith! I have
other fish to fry!”
“Ah! you are playing at discretion.”
“Why not?” asked De Marsay, with a laugh. “My dear fellow, discretion
is the best form of calculation. Listen–however, no! I will not say a
word. You never teach me anything; I am not disposed to make you a
gratuitous present of the treasures of my policy. Life is a river
which is of use for the promotion of commerce. In the name of all that
is most sacred in life–of cigars! I am no professor of social economy
for the instruction of fools. Let us breakfast! It costs less to give
you a tunny omelette than to lavish the resources of my brain on you.”
“Do you bargain with your friends?”
Continue...

This eBook of “The Girl With the Golden Eyes” by Honore de Balzac belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Girl With the Golden EyesBy Honore De BalzacAt Amazon
