


“My dear fellow,” said Henri, who rarely denied himself a sarcasm,
“since all the same, you may some day need, like anybody else, to use
discretion, and since I have much love for you–yes, I like you! Upon
my word, if you only wanted a thousand-franc note to keep you from
blowing your brains out, you would find it here, for we haven’t yet
done any business of that sort, eh, Paul? If you had to fight
to-morrow, I would measure the ground and load the pistols, so that
you might be killed according to rule. In short, if anybody besides
myself took it into his head to say ill of you in your absence, he
would have to deal with the somewhat nasty gentleman who walks in my
shoes–there’s what I call a friendship beyond question. Well, my good
fellow, if you should ever have need of discretion, understand that
there are two sorts of discretion–the active and the negative.
Negative discretion is that of fools who make use of silence,
negation, an air of refusal, the discretion of locked doors–mere
impotence! Active discretion proceeds by affirmation. Suppose at the
club this evening I were to say: ’Upon my word of honor the
golden-eyed was not worth all she cost me!’ Everybody would exclaim
when I was gone: ’Did you hear that fop De Marsay, who tried to make
us believe that he has already had the girl of the golden eyes? It’s
his way of trying to disembarrass himself of his rivals: he’s no
simpleton.’ But such a ruse is vulgar and dangerous. However gross a
folly one utters, there are always idiots to be found who will believe
it. The best form of discretion is that of women when they want to
take the change out of their husbands. It consists in compromising a
woman with whom we are not concerned, or whom we do not love, in order
to save the honor of the one whom we love well enough to respect. It
is what is called the woman-screen. . . . Ah! here is Laurent. What
have you got for us?”
“Some Ostend oysters, Monsieur le Comte.”
“You will know some day, Paul, how amusing it is to make a fool of the
world by depriving it of the secret of one’s affections. I derive an
immense pleasure in escaping from the stupid jurisdiction of the
crowd, which knows neither what it wants, nor what one wants of it,
which takes the means for the end, and by turns curses and adores,
elevates and destroys! What a delight to impose emotions on it and
receive none from it, to tame it, never to obey it. If one may ever be
proud of anything, is it not a self-acquired power, of which one is at
once the cause and effect, the principle and the result? Well, no man
knows what I love, nor what I wish. Perhaps what I have loved, or what
I may have wished will be known, as a drama which is accomplished is
known; but to let my game be seen–weakness, mistake! I know nothing
more despicable than strength outwitted by cunning. Can I initiate
myself with a laugh into the ambassador’s part, if indeed diplomacy is
as difficult as life? I doubt it. Have you any ambition? Would you
like to become something?”
“But, Henri, you are laughing at me–as though I were not sufficiently
mediocre to arrive at anything.”
“Good Paul! If you go on laughing at yourself, you will soon be able
to laugh at everybody else.”
At breakfast, by the time he had started his cigars, De Marsay began
to see the events of the night in a singular light. Like many men of
great intelligence, his perspicuity was not spontaneous, as it did not
at once penetrate to the heart of things. As with all natures endowed
with the faculty of living greatly in the present, of extracting, so
to speak, the essence of it and assimilating it, his second-sight had
need of a sort of slumber before it could identify itself with causes.
Cardinal de Richelieu was so constituted, and it did not debar in him
the gift of foresight necessary to the conception of great designs.
De Marsay’s conditions were alike, but at first he only used his
weapons for the benefit of his pleasures, and only became one of the
most profound politicians of his day when he had saturated himself
with those pleasures to which a young man’s thoughts–when he has
money and power–are primarily directed. Man hardens himself thus: he
uses woman in order that she may not make use of him.
At this moment, then, De Marsay perceived that he had been fooled by
the girl of the golden eyes, seeing, as he did, in perspective, all
that night of which the delights had been poured upon him by degrees
until they had ended by flooding him in torrents. He could read, at
last, that page in effect so brilliant, divine its hidden meaning. The
purely physical innocence of Paquita, the bewilderment of her joy,
certain words, obscure at first, but now clear, which had escaped her
in the midst of that joy, all proved to him that he had posed for
another person. As no social corruption was unknown to him, as he
professed a complete indifference towards all perversities, and
believed them to be justified on the simple ground that they were
capable of satisfaction, he was not startled at vice, he knew it as
one knows a friend, but he was wounded at having served as sustenance
for it. If his presumption was right, he had been outraged in the most
sensitive part of him. The mere suspicion filled him with fury, he
broke out with the roar of a tiger who has been the sport of a deer,
the cry of a tiger which united a brute’s strength with the
intelligence of the demon.
“I say, what is the matter with you?” asked Paul.
“Nothing!”
“I should be sorry, if you were to be asked whether you had anything
against me and were to reply with a nothing like that! It would be a
sure case of fighting the next day.”
“I fight no more duels,” said De Marsay.
“That seems to me even more tragical. Do you assassinate, then?”
“You travesty words. I execute.”
“My dear friend,” said Paul, “your jokes are of a very sombre color
this morning.”
“What would you have? Pleasure ends in cruelty. Why? I don’t know, and
am not sufficiently curious to try and find out. . . . These cigars
are excellent. Give your friend some tea. Do you know, Paul, I live a
brute’s life? It should be time to choose oneself a destiny, to employ
one’s powers on something which makes life worth living. Life is a
singular comedy. I am frightened, I laugh at the inconsequence of our
social order. The Government cuts off the heads of poor devils who may
have killed a man and licenses creatures who despatch, medically
speaking, a dozen young folks in a season. Morality is powerless
against a dozen vices which destroy society and which nothing can
punish.–Another cup!–Upon my word of honor! man is a jester dancing
upon a precipice. They talk to us about the immorality of the
Liaisons Dangereuses, and any other book you like with a vulgar
reputation; but there exists a book, horrible, filthy, fearful,
corrupting, which is always open and will never be shut, the great
book of the world; not to mention another book, a thousand times more
dangerous, which is composed of all that men whisper into each other’s
ears, or women murmur behind their fans, of an evening in society.”
“Henri, there is certainly something extraordinary the matter with
you; that is obvious in spite of your active discretion.”
“Yes! . . . Come, I must kill the time until this evening. Let’s to
the tables. . . . Perhaps I shall have the good luck to lose.”
De Marsay rose, took a handful of banknotes and folded them into his
cigar-case, dressed himself, and took advantage of Paul’s carriage to
repair to the Salon des Etrangers, where until dinner he consumed the
time in those exciting alternations of loss and gain which are the
last resource of powerful organizations when they are compelled to
exercise themselves in the void. In the evening he repaired to the
trysting-place and submitted complacently to having his eyes bandaged.
Then, with that firm will which only really strong men have the
faculty of concentrating, he devoted his attention and applied his
intelligence to the task of divining through what streets the carriage
passed. He had a sort of certitude of being taken to the Rue
Saint-Lazare, and being brought to a halt at the little gate in the
garden of the Hotel San-Real. When he passed, as on the first occasion,
through this gate, and was put in a litter, carried, doubtless by the
mulatto and the coachman, he understood, as he heard the gravel grate
beneath their feet, why they took such minute precautions. He would
have been able, had he been free, or if he had walked, to pluck a twig
of laurel, to observe the nature of the soil which clung to his boots;
whereas, transported, so to speak, ethereally into an inaccessible
mansion, his good fortune must remain what it had been hitherto, a
dream. But it is man’s despair that all his work, whether for good or
evil, is imperfect. All his labors, physical or intellectual, are
sealed with the mark of destruction. There had been a gentle rain, the
earth was moist. At night-time certain vegetable perfumes are far
stronger than during the day; Henri could smell, therefore, the scent
of the mignonette which lined the avenue along which he was conveyed.
This indication was enough to light him in the researches which he
promised himself to make in order to recognize the hotel which
contained Paquita’s boudoir. He studied in the same way the turnings
which his bearers took within the house, and believed himself able to
recall them.
As on the previous night, he found himself on the ottoman before
Paquita, who was undoing his bandage; but he saw her pale and altered.
She had wept. On her knees like an angel in prayer, but like an angel
profoundly sad and melancholy, the poor girl no longer resembled the
curious, impatient, and impetuous creature who had carried De Marsay
on her wings to transport him to the seventh heaven of love. There was
something so true in this despair veiled by pleasure, that the
terrible De Marsay felt within him an admiration for this new
masterpiece of nature, and forgot, for the moment, the chief interest
of his assignation.
“What is the matter with thee, my Paquita?”
“My friend,” she said, “carry me away this very night. Bear me to some
place where no one can answer: ’There is a girl with a golden gaze
here, who has long hair.’ Yonder I will give thee as many pleasures as
thou wouldst have of me. Then when you love me no longer, you shall
leave me, I shall not complain, I shall say nothing; and your
desertion need cause you no remorse, for one day passed with you, only
one day, in which I have had you before my eyes, will be worth all my
life to me. But if I stay here, I am lost.”
“I cannot leave Paris, little one!” replied Henri. “I do not belong to
myself, I am bound by a vow to the fortune of several persons who
stand to me, as I do to them. But I can place you in a refuge in
Paris, where no human power can reach you.”
“No,” she said, “you forget the power of woman.”
Never did phrase uttered by human voice express terror more
absolutely.
“What could reach you, then, if I put myself between you and the
world?”
“Poison!” she said. “Dona Concha suspects you already . . . and,” she
resumed, letting the tears fall and glisten on her cheeks, “it is easy
enough to see I am no longer the same. Well, if you abandon me to the
fury of the monster who will destroy me, your holy will be done! But
come, let there be all the pleasures of life in our love. Besides, I
will implore, I will weep and cry out and defend myself; perhaps I
shall be saved.”
“Whom will your implore?” he asked.
“Silence!” said Paquita. “If I obtain mercy it will perhaps be on
account of my discretion.”
“Give me my robe,” said Henri, insidiously.
“No, no!” she answered quickly, “be what you are, one of those angels
whom I have been taught to hate, and in whom I only saw ogres, whilst
you are what is fairest under the skies,” she said, caressing Henri’s
hair. “You do not know how silly I am. I have learned nothing. Since I
was twelve years old I have been shut up without ever seeing any one.
I can neither read nor write, I can only speak English and Spanish.”
“How is it, then, that you receive letters from London?”
“My letters? . . . See, here they are!” she said, proceeding to take
some papers out of a tall Japanese vase.
She offered De Marsay some letters, in which the young man saw, with
surprise, strange figures, similar to those of a rebus, traced in
blood, and illustrating phrases full of passion.
“But,” he cried, marveling at these hieroglyphics created by the
alertness of jealousy, “you are in the power of an infernal genius?”
“Infernal,” she repeated.
“But how, then, were you able to get out?”
“Ah!” she said, “that was my ruin. I drove Dona Concha to choose
between the fear of immediate death and anger to be. I had the
curiosity of a demon, I wished to break the bronze circle which they
had described between creation and me, I wished to see what young
people were like, for I knew nothing of man except the Marquis and
Cristemio. Our coachman and the lackey who accompanies us are old
men. . . .”
“But you were not always thus shut up? Your health . . . ?”
“Ah,” she answered, “we used to walk, but it was at night and in the
country, by the side of the Seine, away from people.”
“Are you not proud of being loved like that?”
“No,” she said, “no longer. However full it be, this hidden life is
but darkness in comparison with the light.”
“What do you call the light?”
“Thee, my lovely Adolphe! Thee, for whom I would give my life. All the
passionate things that have been told me, and that I have inspired, I
feel for thee! For a certain time I understood nothing of existence,
but now I know what love is, and hitherto I have been the loved one
only; for myself, I did not love. I would give up everything for you,
take me away. If you like, take me as a toy, but let me be near you
until you break me.”
“You will have no regrets?”
“Not one”! she said, letting him read her eyes, whose golden tint was
pure and clear.
“Am I the favored one?” said Henri to himself. If he suspected the
truth, he was ready at that time to pardon the offence in view of a
love so single minded. “I shall soon see,” he thought.
If Paquita owed him no account of the past, yet the least recollection
of it became in his eyes a crime. He had therefore the sombre strength
to withhold a portion of his thought, to study her, even while
abandoning himself to the most enticing pleasures that ever peri
descended from the skies had devised for her beloved.
Paquita seemed to have been created for love by a particular effort of
nature. In a night her feminine genius had made the most rapid
progress. Whatever might be the power of this young man, and his
indifference in the matter of pleasures, in spite of his satiety of
the previous night, he found in the girl with the golden eyes that
seraglio which a loving woman knows how to create and which a man
never refuses. Paquita responded to that passion which is felt by all
really great men for the infinite–that mysterious passion so
dramatically expressed in Faust, so poetically translated in Manfred,
and which urged Don Juan to search the heart of women, in his hope to
find there that limitless thought in pursuit of which so many hunters
after spectres have started, which wise men think to discover in
science, and which mystics find in God alone. The hope of possessing
at last the ideal being with whom the struggle could be constant and
tireless ravished De Marsay, who, for the first time for long, opened
his heart. His nerves expanded, his coldness was dissipated in the
atmosphere of that ardent soul, his hard and fast theories melted
away, and happiness colored his existence to the tint of the rose and
white boudoir. Experiencing the sting of a higher pleasure, he was
carried beyond the limits within which he had hitherto confined
passion. He would not be surpassed by this girl, whom a somewhat
artificial love had formed all ready for the needs of his soul, and
then he found in that vanity which urges a man to be in all things a
victor, strength enough to tame the girl; but, at the same time, urged
beyond that line where the soul is mistress over herself, he lost
himself in these delicious limboes, which the vulgar call so foolishly
“the imaginary regions.” He was tender, kind, and confidential. He
affected Paquita almost to madness.
“Why should we not go to Sorrento, to Nice, to Chiavari, and pass all
our life so? Will you?” he asked of Paquita, in a penetrating voice.
“Was there need to say to me: ’Will you’?” she cried. “Have I a will?
I am nothing apart from you, except in so far as I am a pleasure for
you. If you would choose a retreat worthy of us, Asia is the only
country where love can unfold his wings. . . .”
“You are right,” answered Henri. “Let us go to the Indies, there where
spring is eternal, where the earth grows only flowers, where man can
display the magnificence of kings and none shall say him nay, as in
the foolish lands where they would realize the dull chimera of
equality. Let us go to the country where one lives in the midst of a
nation of slaves, where the sun shines ever on a palace which is
always white, where the air sheds perfumes, the birds sing of love and
where, when one can love no more, one dies. . . .”
“And where one dies together!” said Paquita. “But do not let us start
to-morrow, let us start this moment . . . take Cristemio.”
“Faith! pleasure is the fairest climax of life. Let us go to Asia; but
to start, my child, one needs much gold, and to have gold one must set
one’s affairs in order.”
She understood no part of these ideas.
“Gold! There is a pile of it here–as high as that,” she said holding
up her hand.
“It is not mine.”
“What does that matter?” she went on; “if we have need of it let us
take it.”
“It does not belong to you.”
“Belong!” she repeated. “Have you not taken me? When we have taken it,
it will belong to us.”
He gave a laugh.
“Poor innocent! You know nothing of the world.”
“Nay, but this is what I know,” she cried, clasping Henri to her.
At the very moment when De Marsay was forgetting all, and conceiving
the desire to appropriate this creature forever, he received in the
midst of his joy a dagger-thrust, which Paquita, who had lifted him
vigorously in the air, as though to contemplate him, exclaimed: “Oh,
Margarita!”
“Margarita!” cried the young man, with a roar; “now I know all that I
still tried to disbelieve.”
He leaped upon the cabinet in which the long poniard was kept. Happily
for Paquita and for himself, the cupboard was shut. His fury waxed at
this impediment, but he recovered his tranquillity, went and found his
cravat, and advanced towards her with an air of such ferocious meaning
that, without knowing of what crime she had been guilty, Paquita
understood, none the less, that her life was in question. With one
bound she rushed to the other end of the room to escape the fatal knot
which De Marsay tried to pass round her neck. There was a struggle. On
either side there was an equality of strength, agility, and
suppleness. To end the combat Paquita threw between the legs of her
lover a cushion which made him fall, and profited by the respite which
this advantage gave to her, to push the button of the spring which
caused the bell to ring. Promptly the mulatto arrived. In a second
Cristemio leaped on De Marsay and held him down with one foot on his
chest, his heel turned towards the throat. De Marsay realized that, if
he struggled, at a single sign from Paquita he would be instantly
crushed.
“Why did you want to kill me, my beloved?” she said. De Marsay made no
reply.
“In what have I angered you?” she asked. “Speak, let us understand
each other.”
Henri maintained the phlegmatic attitude of a strong man who feels
himself vanquished; his countenance, cold, silent, entirely English,
revealed the consciousness of his dignity in a momentary resignation.
Moreover, he had already thought, in spite of the vehemence of his
anger, that it was scarcely prudent to compromise himself with the law
by killing this girl on the spur of the moment, before he had arranged
the murder in such a manner as should insure his impunity.
“My beloved,” went on Paquita, “speak to me; do not leave me without
one loving farewell! I would not keep in my heart the terror which you
have just inspired in it. . . . Will you speak?” she said, stamping
her foot with anger.
De Marsay, for all reply, gave her a glance, which signified so
plainly, ’You must die!_” that Paquita threw herself upon him.
“Ah, well, you want to kill me! . . . If my death can give you any
pleasure–kill me!”
She made a sign to Cristemio, who withdrew his foot from the body of
the young man, and retired without letting his face show that he had
formed any opinion, good or bad, with regard to Paquita.
“That is a man,” said De Marsay, pointing to the mulatto, with a
sombre gesture. “There is no devotion like the devotion which obeys in
friendship, and does not stop to weigh motives. In that man you
possess a true friend.”
“I will give him you, if you like,” she answered; “he will serve you
with the same devotion that he has for me, if I so instruct him.”
She waited for a word of recognition, and went on with an accent
replete with tenderness:
“Adolphe, give me then one kind word! . . . It is nearly day.”
Henri did not answer. The young man had one sorry quality, for one
considers as something great everything which resembles strength, and
often men invent extravagances. Henri knew not how to pardon. That
returning upon itself which is one of the soul’s graces, was a
non-existent sense for him. The ferocity of the Northern man, with
which the English blood is deeply tainted, had been transmitted to
him by his father. He was inexorable both in his good and evil
impulses. Paquita’s exclamation had been all the more horrible to him,
in that it had dethroned him from the sweetest triumph which had ever
flattered his man’s vanity. Hope, love, and every emotion had been
exalted with him, all had lit up within his heart and his
intelligence, then these torches illuminating his life had been
extinguished by a cold wind. Paquita, in her stupefaction of grief,
had only strength enough to give the signal for departure.
“What is the use of that!” she said, throwing away the bandage. “If he
does not love me, if he hates me, it is all over.”
She waited for one look, did not obtain it, and fell, half dead. The
mulatto cast a glance at Henri, so horribly significant, that, for the
first time in his life, the young man, to whom no one denied the gift
of rare courage, trembled. ’If you do not love her well, if you give
her the least pain, I will kill you.” such was the sense of that
brief gaze. De Marsay was escorted, with a care almost obsequious,
along the dimly lit corridor, at the end of which he issued by a
secret door into the garden of the Hotel San-Real. The mulatto made
him walk cautiously through an avenue of lime trees, which led to a
little gate opening upon a street which was at that hour deserted. De
Marsay took a keen notice of everything. The carriage awaited him.
This time the mulatto did not accompany him, and at the moment when
Henri put his head out of the window to look once more at the gardens
of the hotel, he encountered the white eyes of Cristemio, with whom he
exchanged a glance. On either side there was a provocation, a
challenge, the declaration of a savage war, of a duel in which
ordinary laws were invalid, where treason and treachery were admitted
means. Cristemio knew that Henri had sworn Paquita’s death. Henri knew
that Cristemio would like to kill him before he killed Paquita. Both
understood each other to perfection.
“The adventure is growing complicated in a most interesting way,” said
Henri.
“Where is the gentleman going to?” asked the coachman.
De Marsay was driven to the house of Paul de Manerville. For more than
a week Henri was away from home, and no one could discover either what
he did during this period, nor where he stayed. This retreat saved him
from the fury of the mulatto and caused the ruin of the charming
creature who had placed all her hope in him whom she loved as never
human heart had loved on this earth before. On the last day of the
week, about eleven o’clock at night, Henri drove up in a carriage to
the little gate in the garden of the Hotel San-Real. Four men
accompanied him. The driver was evidently one of his friends, for he
stood up on his box, like a man who was to listen, an attentive
sentinel, for the least sound. One of the other three took his stand
outside the gate in the street; the second waited in the garden,
leaning against the wall; the last, who carried in his hand a bunch of
keys, accompanied De Marsay.
“Henri,” said his companion to him, “we are betrayed.”
“By whom, my good Ferragus?”
“They are not all asleep,” replied the chief of the Devourers; “it is
absolutely certain that some one in the house has neither eaten nor
drunk. . . . Look! see that light!”
“We have a plan of the house; from where does it come?”
“I need no plan to know,” replied Ferragus; “it comes from the room of
the Marquise.”
“Ah,” cried De Marsay, “no doubt she arrived from London to-day. The
woman has robbed me even of my revenge! But if she has anticipated me,
my good Gratien, we will give her up to the law.”
“Listen, listen! . . . The thing is settled,” said Ferragus to Henri.
The two friends listened intently, and heard some feeble cries which
might have aroused pity in the breast of a tiger.
“Your marquise did not think the sound would escape by the chimney,"
said the chief of the Devourers, with the laugh of a critic, enchanted
to detect a fault in a work of merit.
“We alone, we know how to provide for every contingency,” said Henri.
“Wait for me. I want to see what is going on upstairs–I want to know
how their domestic quarrels are managed. By God! I believe she is
roasting her at a slow fire.”
De Marsay lightly scaled the stairs, with which he was familiar, and
recognized the passage leading to the boudoir. When he opened the door
he experienced the involuntary shudder which the sight of bloodshed
gives to the most determined of men. The spectacle which was offered
to his view was, moreover, in more than one respect astonishing to
him. The Marquise was a woman; she had calculated her vengeance with
that perfection of perfidy which distinguishes the weaker animals. She
had dissimulated her anger in order to assure herself of the crime
before she punished it.
“Too late, my beloved!” said Paquita, in her death agony, casting her
pale eyes upon De Marsay.
The girl of the golden eyes expired in a bath of blood. The great
illumination of candles, a delicate perfume which was perceptible, a
certain disorder, in which the eye of a man accustomed to amorous
adventures could not but discern the madness which is common to all
the passions, revealed how cunningly the Marquise had interrogated the
guilty one. The white room, where the blood showed so well, betrayed a
long struggle. The prints of Paquita’s hands were on the cushions.
Here she had clung to her life, here she had defended herself, here
she had been struck. Long strips of the tapestry had been torn down by
her bleeding hands, which, without a doubt, had struggled long.
Paquita must have tried to reach the window; her bare feet had left
their imprints on the edge of the divan, along which she must have
run. Her body, mutilated by the dagger-thrusts of her executioner,
told of the fury with which she had disputed a life which Henri had
made precious to her. She lay stretched on the floor, and in her
death-throes had bitten the ankles of Madame de San-Real, who still
held in her hand her dagger, dripping blood. The hair of the Marquise
had been torn out, she was covered with bites, many of which were
bleeding, and her torn dress revealed her in a state of semi-nudity,
with the scratches on her breasts. She was sublime so. Her head, eager
and maddened, exhaled the odor of blood. Her panting mouth was open,
and her nostrils were not sufficient for her breath. There are certain
animals who fall upon their enemy in their rage, do it to death, and
seem in the tranquillity of victory to have forgotten it. There are
others who prowl around their victim, who guard it in fear lest it
should be taken away from them, and who, like the Achilles of Homer,
drag their enemy by the feet nine times round the walls of Troy. The
Marquise was like that. She did not see Henri. In the first place, she
was too secure of her solitude to be afraid of witnesses; and,
secondly, she was too intoxicated with warm blood, too excited with
the fray, too exalted, to take notice of the whole of Paris, if Paris
had formed a circle round her. A thunderbolt would not have disturbed
her. She had not even heard Paquita’s last sigh, and believed that the
dead girl could still hear her.
“Die without confessing!” she said. “Go down to hell, monster of
ingratitude; belong to no one but the fiend. For the blood you gave
him you owe me all your own! Die, die, suffer a thousand deaths! I
have been too kind–I was only a moment killing you. I should have
made you experience all the tortures that you have bequeathed to me. I
–I shall live! I shall live in misery. I have no one left to love but
God!”
She gazed at her.
“She is dead!” she said to herself, after a pause, in a violent
reaction. “Dead! Oh, I shall die of grief!”
The Marquise was throwing herself upon the divan, stricken with a
despair which deprived her of speech, when this movement brought her
in view of Henri de Marsay.
“Who are you?” she asked, rushing at him with her dagger raised.
Henri caught her arm, and thus they could contemplate each other face
to face. A horrible surprise froze the blood in their veins, and their
limbs quivered like those of frightened horses. In effect, the two
Menoechmi had not been more alike. With one accord they uttered the
same phrase:
“Lord Dudley must have been your father!”
The head of each was drooped in affirmation.
“She was true to the blood,” said Henri, pointing to Paquita.
“She was as little guilty as it is possible to be,” replied Margarita
Euphemia Porraberil, and she threw herself upon the body of Paquita,
giving vent to a cry of despair. “Poor child! Oh, if I could bring
thee to life again! I was wrong–forgive me, Paquita! Dead! and I
live! I–I am the most unhappy.”
At that moment the horrible face of the mother of Paquita appeared.
“You are come to tell me that you never sold her to me to kill,” cried
the Marquise. “I know why you have left your lair. I will pay you
twice over. Hold your peace.”
She took a bag of gold from the ebony cabinet, and threw it
contemptuously at the old woman’s feet. The chink of the gold was
potent enough to excite a smile on the Georgian’s impassive face.
“I come at the right moment for you, my sister,” said Henri. “The law
will ask of you––”
“Nothing,” replied the Marquise. “One person alone might ask for a
reckoning for the death of this girl. Cristemio is dead.”
“And the mother,” said Henri, pointing to the old woman. “Will you not
always be in her power?”
“She comes from a country where women are not beings, but things
–chattels, with which one does as one wills, which one buys, sells,
and slays; in short, which one uses for one’s caprices as you, here,
use a piece of furniture. Besides, she has one passion which dominates
all the others, and which would have stifled her maternal love, even
if she had loved her daughter, a passion––”
“What?” Henri asked quickly, interrupting his sister.
“Play! God keep you from it,” answered the Marquise.
“But whom have you,” said Henri, looking at the girl of the golden
eyes, “who will help you to remove the traces of this fantasy which
the law would not overlook?”
“I have her mother,” replied the Marquise, designating the Georgian,
to whom she made a sign to remain.
“We shall meet again,” said Henri, who was thinking anxiously of his
friends and felt that it was time to leave.
“No, brother,” she said, “we shall not meet again. I am going back to
Spain to enter the Convent of los Dolores.”
“You are too young yet, too lovely,” said Henri, taking her in his
arms and giving her a kiss.
“Good-bye,” she said; “there is no consolation when you have lost that
which has seemed to you the infinite.”
A week later Paul de Manerville met De Marsay in the Tuileries, on the
Terrasse de Feuillants.
“Well, what has become of our beautiful girl of the golden eyes, you
rascal?”
“She is dead.”
“What of?”
“Consumption.”
PARIS, March 1834-April 1835.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Girl With the Golden Eyes” by Honore de Balzac belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Girl With the Golden EyesBy Honore De BalzacAt Amazon
