


De Marsay was not impulsive. Any other young man would have obeyed his
impulse to obtain at once some information about a girl who realized
so fully the most luminous ideas ever expressed upon women in the
poetry of the East; but, too experienced to compromise his good
fortune, he had told his coachman to continue along the Rue Saint
Lazare and carry him back to his house. The next day, his confidential
valet, Laurent by name, as cunning a fellow as the Frontin of the old
comedy, waited in the vicinity of the house inhabited by the unknown
for the hour at which letters were distributed. In order to be able to
spy at his ease and hang about the house, he had followed the example
of those police officers who seek a good disguise, and bought up
cast-off clothes of an Auvergnat, the appearance of whom he sought to
imitate. When the postman, who went the round of the Rue Saint Lazare
that morning, passed by, Laurent feigned to be a porter unable to
remember the name of a person to whom he had to deliver a parcel, and
consulted the postman. Deceived at first by appearances, this
personage, so picturesque in the midst of Parisian civilization,
informed him that the house in which the girl with the golden eyes
dwelt belonged to Don Hijos, Marquis de San-Real, grandee of Spain.
Naturally, it was not with the Marquis that the Auvergnat was
concerned.
“My parcel,” he said, “is for the marquise.”
“She is away,” replied the postman. “Her letters are forwarded to
London.”
“Then the marquise is not a young girl who . . . ?”
“Ah!” said the postman, interrupting the valet de chambre and
observing him attentively, “you are as much a porter as I’m . . .”
Laurent chinked some pieces of gold before the functionary, who began
to smile.
“Come, here’s the name of your quarry,” he said, taking from his
leather wallet a letter bearing a London stamp, upon which the
address, “To Mademoiselle Paquita Valdes, Rue Saint Lazare, Hotel
San-Real, Paris,” was written in long, fine characters, which spoke
of a woman’s hand.
“Could you tap a bottle of Chablis, with a few dozen oysters, and a
filet saute with mushrooms to follow it?” said Laurent, who wished
to win the postman’s valuable friendship.
“At half-past nine, when my round is finished–– Where?”
“At the corner of the Rue de la Chaussee-d’Antin and the Rue
Neuve-des-Mathurins, at the Puits sans Vin,” said Laurent.
“Hark ye, my friend,” said the postman, when he rejoined the valet an
hour after this encounter, “if your master is in love with the girl,
he is in for a famous task. I doubt you’ll not succeed in seeing her.
In the ten years that I’ve been postman in Paris, I have seen plenty
of different kinds of doors! But I can tell you, and no fear of being
called a liar by any of my comrades, there never was a door so
mysterious as M. de San-Real’s. No one can get into the house without
the Lord knows what counter-word; and, notice, it has been selected on
purpose between a courtyard and a garden to avoid any communication
with other houses. The porter is an old Spaniard, who never speaks a
word of French, but peers at people as Vidocq might, to see if they
are not thieves. If a lover, a thief, or you–I make no comparisons
–could get the better of this first wicket, well, in the first hall,
which is shut by a glazed door, you would run across a butler
surrounded by lackeys, an old joker more savage and surly even than
the porter. If any one gets past the porter’s lodge, my butler comes
out, waits for you at the entrance, and puts you through a
cross-examination like a criminal. That has happened to me, a mere
postman. He took me for an eavesdropper in disguise, he said, laughing
at his nonsense. As for the servants, don’t hope to get aught out of
them; I think they are mutes, no one in the neighborhood knows the
color of their speech; I don’t know what wages they can pay them to
keep them from talk and drink; the fact is, they are not to be got at,
whether because they are afraid of being shot, or that they have some
enormous sum to lose in the case of an indiscretion. If your master is
fond enough of Mademoiselle Paquita Valdes to surmount all these
obstacles, he certainly won’t triumph over Dona Concha Marialva, the
duenna who accompanies her and would put her under her petticoats
sooner than leave her. The two women look as if they were sewn to one
another.”
“All that you say, worthy postman,” went on Laurent, after having
drunk off his wine, “confirms me in what I have learned before. Upon
my word, I thought they were making fun of me! The fruiterer opposite
told me that of nights they let loose dogs whose food is hung up on
stakes just out of their reach. These cursed animals think, therefore,
that any one likely to come in has designs on their victuals, and
would tear one to pieces. You will tell me one might throw them down
pieces, but it seems they have been trained to touch nothing except
from the hand of the porter.”
“The porter of the Baron de Nucingen, whose garden joins at the top
that of the Hotel San-Real, told me the same thing,” replied the
postman.
“Good! my master knows him,” said Laurent, to himself. “Do you know,"
he went on, leering at the postman, “I serve a master who is a rare
man, and if he took it into his head to kiss the sole of the foot of
an empress, she would have to give in to him. If he had need of you,
which is what I wish for you, for he is generous, could one count on
you?”
“Lord, Monsieur Laurent, my name is Moinot. My name is written exactly
like Moineau, magpie: M-o-i-n-o-t, Moinot.”
“Exactly,” said Laurent.
“I live at No. 11, Rue des Trois Freres, on the fifth floor,” went on
Moinot; “I have a wife and four children. If what you want of me
doesn’t transgress the limits of my conscience and my official duties,
you understand! I am your man.”
“You are an honest fellow,” said Laurent, shaking his hand. . . .
“Paquita Valdes is, no doubt, the mistress of the Marquis de San-Real,
the friend of King Ferdinand. Only an old Spanish mummy of eighty
years is capable of taking such precautions,” said Henri, when his
valet de chambre had related the result of his researches.
“Monsieur,” said Laurent, “unless he takes a balloon no one can get
into that hotel.”
“You are a fool! Is it necessary to get into the hotel to have
Paquita, when Paquita can get out of it?”
“But, sir, the duenna?”
“We will shut her up for a day or two, your duenna.”
“So, we shall have Paquita!” said Laurent, rubbing his hands.
“Rascal!” answered Henri, “I shall condemn you to the Concha, if you
carry your impudence so far as to speak so of a woman before she has
become mine. . . . Turn your thoughts to dressing me, I am going out.”
Henri remained for a moment plunged in joyous reflections. Let us say
it to the praise of women, he obtained all those whom he deigned to
desire. And what could one think of a woman, having no lover, who
should have known how to resist a young man armed with beauty which is
the intelligence of the body, with intelligence which is a grace of
the soul, armed with moral force and fortune, which are the only two
real powers? Yet, in triumphing with such ease, De Marsay was bound to
grow weary of his triumphs; thus, for about two years he had grown
very weary indeed. And diving deep into the sea of pleasures he
brought back more grit than pearls. Thus had he come, like potentates,
to implore of Chance some obstacle to surmount, some enterprise which
should ask the employment of his dormant moral and physical strength.
Although Paquita Valdes presented him with a marvelous concentration
of perfections which he had only yet enjoyed in detail, the attraction
of passion was almost nil with him. Constant satiety had weakened in
his heart the sentiment of love. Like old men and people
disillusioned, he had no longer anything but extravagant caprices,
ruinous tastes, fantasies, which, once satisfied, left no pleasant
memory in his heart. Amongst young people love is the finest of the
emotions, it makes the life of the soul blossom, it nourishes by its
solar power the finest inspirations and their great thoughts; the
first fruits in all things have a delicious savor. Amongst men love
becomes a passion; strength leads to abuse. Amongst old men it turns
to vice; impotence tends to extremes. Henri was at once an old man, a
man, and a youth. To afford him the feelings of a real love, he needed
like Lovelace, a Clarissa Harlowe. Without the magic lustre of that
unattainable pearl he could only have either passions rendered acute
by some Parisian vanity, or set determinations with himself to bring
such and such a woman to such and such a point of corruption, or else
adventures which stimulated his curiosity.
The report of Laurent, his valet de chambre had just given an
enormous value to the girl with the golden eyes. It was a question of
doing battle with some secret enemy who seemed as dangerous as he was
cunning; and to carry off the victory, all the forces which Henri
could dispose of would be useful. He was about to play in that eternal
old comedy which will be always fresh, and the characters in which are
an old man, a young girl, and a lover: Don Hijos, Paquita, De Marsay.
If Laurent was the equal of Figaro, the duenna seemed incorruptible.
Thus, the living play was supplied by Chance with a stronger plot than
it had ever been by dramatic author! But then is not Chance too, a man
of genius?
“It must be a cautious game,” said Henri, to himself.
“Well,” said Paul de Manerville, as he entered the room. “How are we
getting on? I have come to breakfast with you.”
“So be it,” said Henri. “You won’t be shocked if I make my toilette
before you?”
“How absurd!”
“We take so many things from the English just now that we might well
become as great prudes and hypocrites as themselves,” said Henri.
Laurent had set before his master such a quantity of utensils, so many
different articles of such elegance, that Paul could not refrain from
saying:
“But you will take a couple of hours over that?”
“No!” said Henri, “two hours and a half.”
“Well, then, since we are by ourselves, and can say what we like,
explain to me why a man as superior as yourself–for you are superior
–should affect to exaggerate a foppery which cannot be natural. Why
spend two hours and a half in adorning yourself, when it is sufficient
to spend a quarter of an hour in your bath, to do your hair in two
minutes, and to dress! There, tell me your system.”
“I must be very fond of you, my good dunce, to confide such high
thoughts to you,” said the young man, who was at that moment having
his feet rubbed with a soft brush lathered with English soap.
“Have I not the most devoted attachment to you,” replied Paul de
Manerville, “and do I not like you because I know your
superiority? . . .”
“You must have noticed, if you are in the least capable of observing
any moral fact, that women love fops,” went on De Marsay, without
replying in any way to Paul’s declaration except by a look. “Do you
know why women love fops? My friend, fops are the only men who take
care of themselves. Now, to take excessive care of oneself, does it
not imply that one takes care in oneself of what belongs to another?
The man who does not belong to himself is precisely the man on whom
women are keen. Love is essentially a thief. I say nothing about that
excess of niceness to which they are so devoted. Do you know of any
woman who has had a passion for a sloven, even if he were a remarkable
man? If such a fact has occurred, we must put it to the account of
those morbid affections of the breeding woman, mad fancies which float
through the minds of everybody. On the other hand, I have seen most
remarkable people left in the lurch because of their carelessness. A
fop, who is concerned about his person, is concerned with folly, with
petty things. And what is a woman? A petty thing, a bundle of follies.
With two words said to the winds, can you not make her busy for four
hours? She is sure that the fop will be occupied with her, seeing that
he has no mind for great things. She will never be neglected for
glory, ambition, politics, art–those prostitutes who for her are
rivals. Then fops have the courage to cover themselves with ridicule
in order to please a woman, and her heart is full of gratitude towards
the man who is ridiculous for love. In fine, a fop can be no fop
unless he is right in being one. It is women who bestow that rank. The
fop is love’s colonel; he has his victories, his regiment of women at
his command. My dear fellow, in Paris everything is known, and a man
cannot be a fop there gratis. You, who have only one woman, and who,
perhaps, are right to have but one, try to act the fop! . . . You will
not even become ridiculous, you will be dead. You will become a
foregone conclusion, one of those men condemned inevitably to do one
and the same thing. You will come to signify folly as inseparably as
M. de La Fayette signifies America; M. de Talleyrand, diplomacy;
Desaugiers, song; M. de Segur, romance. If they once forsake their
own line people no longer attach any value to what they do. So,
foppery, my friend Paul, is the sign of an incontestable power over
the female folk. A man who is loved by many women passes for having
superior qualities, and then, poor fellow, it is a question who shall
have him! But do you think it is nothing to have the right of going
into a drawing-room, of looking down at people from over your cravat,
or through your eye-glass, and of despising the most superior of men
should he wear an old-fashioned waistcoat? . . . Laurent, you are
hurting me! After breakfast, Paul, we will go to the Tuileries and see
the adorable girl with the golden eyes.”
When, after making an excellent meal, the two young men had traversed
the Terrasse de Feuillants and the broad walk of the Tuileries, they
nowhere discovered the sublime Paquita Valdes, on whose account some
fifty of the most elegant young men in Paris where to be seen, all
scented, with their high scarfs, spurred and booted, riding, walking,
talking, laughing, and damning themselves mightily.
“It’s a white Mass,” said Henri; “but I have the most excellent idea
in the world. This girl receives letters from London. The postman must
be bought or made drunk, a letter opened, read of course, and a
love-letter slipped in before it is sealed up again. The old tyrant,
crudel tirano, is certain to know the person who writes the letters
from London, and has ceased to be suspicious of them.”
The day after, De Marsay came again to walk on the Terrasse des
Feuillants, and saw Paquita Valdes; already passion had embellished
her for him. Seriously, he was wild for those eyes, whose rays seemed
akin to those which the sun emits, and whose ardor set the seal upon
that of her perfect body, in which all was delight. De Marsay was on
fire to brush the dress of this enchanting girl as they passed one
another in their walk; but his attempts were always vain. But at one
moment, when he had repassed Paquita and the duenna, in order to find
himself on the same side as the girl of the golden eyes, when he
returned, Paquita, no less impatient, came forward hurriedly, and De
Marsay felt his hand pressed by her in a fashion at once so swift and
so passionately significant that it was as though he had received the
emotions surged up in his heart. When the two lovers glanced at one
another, Paquita seemed ashamed, she dropped her eyes lest she should
meet the eyes of Henri, but her gaze sank lower to fasten on the feet
and form of him whom women, before the Revolution, called their
conqueror.
“I am determined to make this girl my mistress,” said Henri to
himself.
As he followed her along the terrace, in the direction of the Place
Louis XV., he caught sight of the aged Marquis de San-Real, who was
walking on the arm of his valet, stepping with all the precautions due
to gout and decrepitude. Dona Concha, who distrusted Henri, made
Paquita pass between herself and the old man.
“Oh, for you,” said De Marsay to himself, casting a glance of disdain
upon the duenna, “if one cannot make you capitulate, with a little
opium one can make you sleep. We know mythology and the fable of
Argus.”
Before entering the carriage, the golden-eyed girl exchanged certain
glances with her lover, of which the meaning was unmistakable and
which enchanted Henri, but one of them was surprised by the duenna;
she said a few rapid words to Paquita, who threw herself into the
coupe with an air of desperation. For some days Paquita did not
appear in the Tuileries. Laurent, who by his master’s orders was on
watch by the hotel, learned from the neighbors that neither the two
women nor the aged marquis had been abroad since the day upon which
the duenna had surprised a glance between the young girl in her charge
and Henri. The bond, so flimsy withal, which united the two lovers was
already severed.
Some days later, none knew by what means, De Marsay had attained his
end; he had a seal and wax, exactly resembling the seal and wax
affixed to the letters sent to Mademoiselle Valdes from London; paper
similar to that which her correspondent used; moreover, all the
implements and stamps necessary to affix the French and English
postmarks.
He wrote the following letter, to which he gave all the appearances of
a letter sent from London:–
  “MY DEAR PAQUITA,–I shall not try to paint to you in words the
  passion with which you have inspired me. If, to my happiness, you
  reciprocate it, understand that I have found a means of
  corresponding with you. My name is Adolphe de Gouges, and I live
  at No. 54 Rue de l’Universite. If you are too closely watched to
  be able to write to me, if you have neither pen nor paper, I shall
  understand it by your silence. If then, to-morrow, you have not,
  between eight o’clock in the morning and ten o’clock in the
  evening, thrown a letter over the wall of your garden into that of
  the Baron de Nucingen, where it will be waited for during the
  whole of the day, a man, who is entirely devoted to me, will let
  down two flasks by a string over your wall at ten o’clock the next
  morning. Be walking there at that hour. One of the two flasks will
  contain opium to send your Argus to sleep; it will be sufficient
  to employ six drops; the other will contain ink. The flask of ink
  is of cut glass; the other is plain. Both are of such a size as
  can easily be concealed within your bosom. All that I have already
  done, in order to be able to correspond with you, should tell you
  how greatly I love you. Should you have any doubt of it, I will
  confess to you, that to obtain an interview of one hour with you I
  would give my life.”
“At least they believe that, poor creatures!” said De Marsay; “but
they are right. What should we think of a woman who refused to be
beguiled by a love-letter accompanied by such convincing accessories?”
This letter was delivered by Master Moinot, postman, on the following
day, about eight o’clock in the morning, to the porter of the Hotel
San-Real.
In order to be nearer to the field of action, De Marsay went and
breakfasted with Paul, who lived in the Rue de la Pepiniere. At two
o’clock, just as the two friends were laughingly discussing the
discomfiture of a young man who had attempted to lead the life of
fashion without a settled income, and were devising an end for him,
Henri’s coachman came to seek his master at Paul’s house, and
presented to him a mysterious personage who insisted on speaking
himself with his master.
This individual was a mulatto, who would assuredly have given Talma a
model for the part of Othello, if he had come across him. Never did
any African face better express the grand vengefulness, the ready
suspicion, the promptitude in the execution of a thought, the strength
of the Moor, and his childish lack of reflection. His black eyes had
the fixity of the eyes of a bird of prey, and they were framed, like a
vulture’s, by a bluish membrane devoid of lashes. His forehead, low
and narrow, had something menacing. Evidently, this man was under the
yoke of some single and unique thought. His sinewy arm did not belong
to him.
He was followed by a man whom the imaginations of all folk, from those
who shiver in Greenland to those who sweat in the tropics, would paint
in the single phrase: He was an unfortunate man. From this phrase,
everybody will conceive him according to the special ideas of each
country. But who can best imagine his face–white and wrinkled, red at
the extremities, and his long beard. Who will see his lean and yellow
scarf, his greasy shirt-collar, his battered hat, his green frock
coat, his deplorable trousers, his dilapidated waistcoat, his
imitation gold pin, and battered shoes, the strings of which were
plastered in mud? Who will see all that but the Parisian? The
unfortunate man of Paris is the unfortunate man in toto, for he has
still enough mirth to know the extent of his misfortune. The mulatto
was like an executioner of Louis XI. leading a man to the gallows.
“Who has hunted us out these two extraordinary creatures?” said Henri.
“Faith! there is one of them who makes me shudder,” replied Paul.
“Who are you–you fellow who look the most like a Christian of the
two?” said Henri, looking at the unfortunate man.
The mulatto stood with his eyes fixed upon the two young men, like a
man who understood nothing, and who sought no less to divine something
from the gestures and movements of the lips.
“I am a public scribe and interpreter; I live at the Palais de
Justice, and am named Poincet.”
“Good! . . . and this one?” said Henri to Poincet, looking towards the
mulatto.
“I do not know; he only speaks a sort of Spanish patois, and he has
brought me here to make himself understood by you.”
The mulatto drew from his pocket the letter which Henri had written to
Paquita and handed it to him. Henri threw it in the fire.
“Ah–so–the game is beginning,” said Henri to himself. “Paul, leave
us alone for a moment.”
“I translated this letter for him,” went on the interpreter, when they
were alone. “When it was translated, he was in some place which I
don’t remember. Then he came back to look for me, and promised me two
louis to fetch him here.”
“What have you to say to me, nigger?” asked Henri.
“I did not translate nigger,” said the interpreter, waiting for the
mulatto’s reply. . . .
“He said, sir,” went on the interpreter, after having listened to the
unknown, “that you must be at half-past ten to-morrow night on the
boulevard Montmartre, near the cafe. You will see a carriage there, in
which you must take your place, saying to the man, who will wait to
open the door for you, the word cortejo–a Spanish word, which means
lover,” added Poincet, casting a glance of congratulation upon
Henri.
“Good.”
The mulatto was about to bestow the two louis, but De Marsay would
not permit it, and himself rewarded the interpreter. As he was paying
him, the mulatto began to speak.
“What is he saying?”
“He is warning me,” replied the unfortunate, “that if I commit a
single indiscretion he will strangle me. He speaks fair and he looks
remarkably as if he were capable of carrying out his threat.”
“I am sure of it,” answered Henri; “he would keep his word.”
“He says, as well,” replied the interpreter, “that the person from
whom he is sent implores you, for your sake and for hers, to act with
the greatest prudence, because the daggers which are raised above your
head would strike your heart before any human power could save you
from them.”
“He said that? So much the better, it will be more amusing. You can
come in now, Paul,” he cried to his friend.
The mulatto, who had not ceased to gaze at the lover of Paquita Valdes
with magnetic attention, went away, followed by the interpreter.
“Well, at last I have an adventure which is entirely romantic,” said
Henri, when Paul returned. “After having shared in a certain number I
have finished by finding in Paris an intrigue accompanied by serious
accidents, by grave perils. The deuce! what courage danger gives a
woman! To torment a woman, to try and contradict her–doesn’t it give
her the right and the courage to scale in one moment obstacles which
it would take her years to surmount of herself? Pretty creature, jump
then! To die? Poor child! Daggers? Oh, imagination of women! They
cannot help trying to find authority for their little jests. Besides,
can one think of it, Paquita? Can one think of it, my child? The devil
take me, now that I know this beautiful girl, this masterpiece of
nature, is mine, the adventure has lost its charm.”
For all his light words, the youth in Henri had reappeared. In order
to live until the morrow without too much pain, he had recourse to
exorbitant pleasure; he played, dined, supped with his friends; he
drank like a fish, ate like a German, and won ten or twelve thousand
francs. He left the Rocher de Cancale at two o’clock in the morning,
slept like a child, awoke the next morning fresh and rosy, and dressed
to go to the Tuileries, with the intention of taking a ride, after
having seen Paquita, in order to get himself an appetite and dine the
better, and so kill the time.
At the hour mentioned Henri was on the boulevard, saw the carriage,
and gave the counter-word to a man who looked to him like the mulatto.
Hearing the word, the man opened the door and quickly let down the
step. Henri was so rapidly carried through Paris, and his thoughts
left him so little capacity to pay attention to the streets through
which he passed, that he did not know where the carriage stopped. The
mulatto let him into a house, the staircase of which was quite close
to the entrance. This staircase was dark, as was also the landing upon
which Henri was obliged to wait while the mulatto was opening the door
of a damp apartment, fetid and unlit, the chambers of which, barely
illuminated by the candle which his guide found in the ante-chamber,
seemed to him empty and ill furnished, like those of a house the
inhabitants of which are away. He recognized the sensation which he
had experienced from the perusal of one of those romances of Anne
Radcliffe, in which the hero traverses the cold, sombre, and
uninhabited saloons of some sad and desert spot.
At last the mulatto opened the door of a salon. The condition of the
old furniture and the dilapidated curtains with which the room was
adorned gave it the air of the reception-room of a house of ill fame.
There was the same pretension to elegance, and the same collection of
things in bad taste, of dust and dirt. Upon a sofa covered with red
Utrecht velvet, by the side of a smoking hearth, the fire of which was
buried in ashes, sat an old, poorly dressed woman, her head capped by
one of those turbans which English women of a certain age have
invented and which would have a mighty success in China, where the
artist’s ideal is the monstrous.
The room, the old woman, the cold hearth, all would have chilled love
to death had not Paquita been there, upon an ottoman, in a loose
voluptuous wrapper, free to scatter her gaze of gold and flame, free
to show her arched foot, free of her luminous movements. This first
interview was what every rendezvous must be between persons of
passionate disposition, who have stepped over a wide distance quickly,
who desire each other ardently, and who, nevertheless, do not know
each other. It is impossible that at first there should not occur
certain discordant notes in the situation, which is embarrassing until
the moment when two souls find themselves in unison.
If desire gives a man boldness and disposes him to lay restraint
aside, the mistress, under pain of ceasing to be woman, however great
may be her love, is afraid of arriving at the end so promptly, and
face to face with the necessity of giving herself, which to many women
is equivalent to a fall into an abyss, at the bottom of which they
know not what they shall find. The involuntary coldness of the woman
contrasts with her confessed passion, and necessarily reacts upon the
most passionate lover. Thus ideas, which often float around souls like
vapors, determine in them a sort of temporary malady. In the sweet
journey which two beings undertake through the fair domains of love,
this moment is like a waste land to be traversed, a land without a
tree, alternatively damp and warm, full of scorching sand, traversed
by marshes, which leads to smiling groves clad with roses, where Love
and his retinue of pleasures disport themselves on carpets of soft
verdure. Often the witty man finds himself afflicted with a foolish
laugh which is his only answer to everything; his wit is, as it were,
suffocated beneath the icy pressure of his desires. It would not be
impossible for two beings of equal beauty, intelligence, and passion
to utter at first nothing but the most silly commonplaces, until
chance, a word, the tremor of a certain glance, the communication of a
spark, should have brought them to the happy transition which leads to
that flowery way in which one does not walk, but where one sways and
at the same time does not lapse.
Such a state of mind is always in proportion with the violence of the
feeling. Two creatures who love one another weakly feel nothing
similar. The effect of this crisis can even be compared with that
which is produced by the glow of a clear sky. Nature, at the first
view, appears to be covered with a gauze veil, the azure of the
firmament seems black, the intensity of light is like darkness. With
Henri, as with the Spanish girl, there was an equal intensity of
feeling; and that law of statics, in virtue of which two identical
forces cancel each other, might have been true also in the moral
order. And the embarrassment of the moment was singularly increased by
the presence of the old hag. Love takes pleasure or fright at all, all
has meaning for it, everything is an omen of happiness or sorrow for
it.
This decrepit woman was there like a suggestion of catastrophe, and
represented the horrid fish’s tail with which the allegorical geniuses
of Greece have terminated their chimeras and sirens, whose figures,
like all passions, are so seductive, so deceptive.
Although Henri was not a free-thinker–the phrase is always a mockery
–but a man of extraordinary power, a man as great as a man can be
without faith, the conjunction struck him. Moreover, the strongest men
are naturally the most impressionable, and consequently the most
superstitious, if, indeed, one may call superstition the prejudice of
the first thoughts, which, without doubt, is the appreciation of the
result in causes hidden to other eyes but perceptible to their own.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Girl With the Golden Eyes” by Honore de Balzac belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Girl With the Golden EyesBy Honore De BalzacAt Amazon
