


By comparing the sacred writings of the Persians with the history
of the events connected with the conception and birth of the
mythical Christ as recorded in the New Testament, the fact is
observed that the latter appears to be closely connected with the
central figure of Persian mythology.  It has been found that the
visit of the Magi, who, following a star, were guided to the spot
where the young child lay, was the fulfilment of a Persian
prophecy, which is to be found in the life of Zarathustra as
recorded in the Zendavesta, while the subsequent history of the
same personage is seen to be almost identical with that of the
Hindoo Sun-god Chrishna.
According to the sacred books of the Persians, three sons of the
great Zarathustra were to appear at three successive periods of
time.  These sons were to be incarnations of the sun, and the
result of immaculate conceptions.
“The first is named Oschederbami.  He will appear in the last
millennium of the world.  He will stop the sun for ten days and
ten nights, and the second part of the human race will embrace
the law, of which he will bring the 22d portion.
“The second posthumous son of Zoroaster is Oschedermah.  He will
appear four hundred years after Oschederbami.  He will stop the
sun twenty days and twenty nights, and he will bring the 23d part
of the law, and the third part of the world will be converted.
“The third is named Sosiosch. He will be born at the end of the
ages.  He will bring the 24th part of the law; he will stay the
sun thirty days and thirty nights, and the whole earth will
embrace the law of Zoroaster.  After him will be the
resurrection."[123] This last named son was to be born of a pure
and spotless virgin, whereupon a star would appear blazing even
at noonday with undiminished lustre.
[123] Quoted by Waite, History of the Christian Religion, p. 168.
“You, my sons,” exclaimed the seer, “will perceive its rising
before any other nation.  As soon, therefore, as you shall behold
the star, follow it, withersoever it shall lead you; and adore
that mysterious child, offering your gifts to him, with profound
humility.  He is the Almighty Word, which created the
heavens."[124]
[124] Ibid., 169.
Waite notices the conclusion of Faber that this prediction was
long before the birth of Christ, and states that one of the
reasons for such a conclusion was, that in the old Irish history
a similar prophecy appears–a prophecy which was delivered by a
“Druid of Bokhara.”  The identity of this Irish prophecy with the
one in the East ascribed to Zarathustra or Zoroaster, is so
singular that Faber thinks it can be accounted for only on the
hypothesis “of an ancient emigration from Persia to Ireland by
the northwest passage, which carried the legend with it.”
By those who have investigated the origin of the early gospels,
it is stated that the story of the Magi and the star appeared in
the Gospel of the Infancy early in the second century, and was
subsequently incorporated into the preparatory chapters of Luke
and Matthew.  According to Waite, there was a sect of Christians
called Prodiceans whose leader, Prodicus, about A.D. 120, boasted
that they had the sacred books of Zoroaster.  From an extant
fragment of the Chronography of Africanus is the following:
“Christ first of all became known from Persia.  For nothing
escapes the learned jurists of that country, who investigated all
things with the utmost care.  The facts, therefore, which are
inscribed upon the golden plates, and laid up in the royal
temples, I shall record; for it is from the temples there, and
the priests connected with them, that the name of Christ has been
heard of.  Now, there is a temple there to Juno, surpassing the
royal palace, which temple Cyrus, that prince instructed in all
piety, built, and in which he dedicated, in honor of the gods,
golden and silver statues, and adorned them with precious stones. 
.  .  .  Now about that time [as the records on the plates
testify], the king having entered the temple, with the view of
getting an interpretation of certain dreams, was addressed by the
priest Prupupius thus: ’I congratulate thee, master: Juno has
conceived.’ ’And the king, smiling, said to him: ’Has she who is
dead conceived?’ And he said: ’Yes, she who was dead has come to
life again, and begets life.’ And the king said: ’What is this?
explain it to me.’ And he replied: ’In truth, master, the time
for these things is at hand.  For during the whole night the
images, both of gods and goddesses, continued beating the ground,
saying to each other, Come, let us congratulate Juno.  And they
say to me, Prophet, come forward, congratulate Juno, for she has
been embraced.  And I said, How can she be embraced who no longer
exists?  To which they reply, She has come to life again, and is
no longer called Juno, but Urama.  For the mighty Sol has
embraced her.’ “[125]
[125] Hyppolytus, vol. ii., p. 196.
There is a tradition which asserts that during the early part of
the second century, St. Thomas went as a missionary to Parthia;
that after he had visited the various countries of the Parthian
Empire, tarrying for a time at Balkh, the capital of Bactria, and
the ancient residence of the Magi, he went to India.  Soon after
the visit of Thomas to Persia and India, there appeared in
Palestine and the adjacent countries a gospel of Thomas, in which
were set forth various stories closely resembling the legends
found in the Hindoo sacred writings.  After comparing various
passages of the Bhagavat Purana with those of the Infancy, and
after furnishing conclusive evidence that the latter must have
been copied from the former, Waite says:
“The conclusion must be, that while for some of the salient
points of the Gospels of the Infancy, the authors were indebted
to Zoroaster, and the legends of Persia, the outline of the story
was largely filled up from the history of Crishna, as sent back
to Palestine, by the Apostle Thomas, from the land of the
Brahmins.”
Concerning the story of Herod and his order to slay all the male
infants, there has been discovered in a cavern at Elephanta, in
India, a sculptured representation of a huge and ferocious
figure, bearing a drawn sword and surrounded by slaughtered
children, while mothers appear weeping for their slain.  This
figure is said to be of great antiquity.
Mary, the Mother of Jesus, like Mai, the Mother of Gatama Buddha,
was regarded by certain sects in the earlier ages of Christianity
as an Immortal Virgin whose birth had been announced by an
angel.[126] She was in fact the ancient Virgin of the Sphere–the
Mother of the Gods–the Queen of Heaven.
[126] See Gospels of Mary and the Protovangelion.
As soon as Christ was born he conversed with Mary, as did also
Crishna with his mother, informing her of his divine mission.
Crishna was cradled among shepherds, so was Christ.  Cansa,
fearing the loss of his kingdom, sought to destroy the life of
the divine infant in the same manner as did Herod in the case of
Christ.  Both children are carried away by night, after which an
order is issued by the ruler of the country that all the young
children throughout the kingdom be slaughtered.
When Joseph and Mary arrived in Egypt, they visited the temple of
Serapis, where “all the magistrates and priests of the idols were
assembled.”  Upon the image being interrogated concerning the
“consternation and dread which had fallen upon all our country,"
it answered them as follows: “The unknown god has come hither,
who is truly God; nor is there anyone besides him, who is worthy
of divine worship; for he is truly the son of God.”  And at the
same instant this idol fell down, and at his fall all the
inhabitants of Egypt, besides others, ran together.[127] A
similar story is related of Crishna.  This Indian god, the same
as Christ, cured a leper.  A woman, after having poured a box of
precious ointment on the head of Crishna, was healed; so also a
woman anointed the head of Jesus.  Crishna when but a lad
displayed remarkable mental powers and the most profound wisdom
before the tutor who was sent to instruct him.  Christ astonished
the school-master Zaccheus with his great learning.[128]
[127] Gospel of the Infancy, ch. iv.
[128] Gospel of the Infancy, ch. xx.
Crishna had a terrible encounter with the serpent Calinaga; the
infant Christ had also a dreadful adventure with a serpent.  Now
this Calinaga which Crishna encountered was a serpent goddess who
was worshipped by the sect in India which was opposed to the
adoration of the male principle.  The early Christians, however,
being ignorant of the allegorical meaning of the legend,
transferred it to Christ literally.
The mother of Crishna looked in his mouth and beheld all the
nations of the earth.  The same story is reported of Christ and
his mother.  Finally Christ, like Crishna, was crucified, and
like him was buried.  He descended into hell and on the third day
arose and ascended into heaven.[129]
[129] It will doubtless be urged that I am quoting from the
Apocryphal Gospels–that the genuine books of the New Testament
are silent concerning many of these Eastern legends.  We must
bear in mind, however, that during the earlier ages of
Christianity, these finally rejected gospels were, equally with
the canonical books, considered as the word of God.  The Infancy
is thought to be one of the earliest gospels.  Justin Martyr was
acquainted with it, A.D. 150 to 160.  It is referred to by
Irenaeus, A.D. 190.
In the poetical myths of the ancients the sun is yearly
overpowered by cold or by the destructive agencies in Nature. 
Astronomically, or astrologically, it wanders in darkness and
desolation during the winter months; in fact dies, and descends
into hell in order that he may rise at the Easter season to
gladden and make all things new again.  Mythologically, this new
sun becomes incarnate; enters again his mother’s womb, and is
born into the world in the form of a man whose mission is to
renew human life.  Hence we have an explanation of the Eastern
Buddhas and Crishnas, all of which were born of virgins at the
winter solstice.
The new sun which at the close of each cycle was believed by the
more ancient people of the globe to “issue forth from the womb of
Nature to renew the world,” now that the truths underlying
Nature-worship were lost, became a redeemer or mediator between
earth and heaven, or between spirit and matter.  It is stated
that at the time of the appearance of Christ not alone the Jews,
but the Persians, the Romans, the ancient Irish, and in fact all
the nations of the globe, were anxiously awaiting the event of
another incarnation of the solar Deity; and that maidens of all
classes and conditions were in a state of eager expectation, the
more pious, or at least the more ambitious among them, being in
almost constant attendance at the temples and sacred shrines,
whither they went to pay homage to the male emblem of generation,
thereby hoping to be honored as a Mai or Mary.
On the wall of the temple at Luxor are a series of sculptures,
“in which the miraculous annunciation, conception, birth, and
adoration of Amunoph III., the son of the Virgin Queen Mautmes,
is represented in a manner similar to what is described in St. 
Luke’s Gospel (ch. 1 and 2) of Jesus Christ, the son of the
Virgin Mary, and which is found also in the Gospel of St. 
Matthew (ch. 1) as an addition not met with in the earliest
manuscripts,"[130] which fact has caused Sharpe, from whom the
above is quoted, to suggest that both accounts may have been of
Egyptian origin.
[130] Barlow, Symbolism, p. 127.
The titles “lamb,” “anointed,” etc., which were applied to
Christ, all appear attached to former in- carnations of the sun,
the first named standing for the sun in Aries.  The effigies of a
crucified savior found in Ireland and Scotland in connection with
the figure of a lamb, a bull, or an elephant, the latter of which
is not a native of those countries, shows that they do not
represent Christ, but a crucified sun-god worshipped by the
inhabitants of the British Islands ages before the birth of the
great Judean philosopher and teacher.
It is plain that Crishna of India and the Persian Mithra
furnished the copy for the Jesus of the Romish Church, all of
whom mean one and the same thing–the second person in the Solar
Trinity.  By the Jews, who attempted to ignore the female
principle, this God is called the “Lord of Hosts” and “God of
Sabaoth,” which astronomically means God of the stars and
constellations, and astrologically the creator or producer of the
multitudes.  Of this God, ieue, I H S, the author of Anacalypsis
says that he was the son of the celestial virgin, which she
carries in her arms; the Horus, Lux, of the Egyptians, the Lux of
St. John.
“It is from this infant that Jesus took his origin; or at least
it is from the ceremonies and worship of this infant that this
religion came to be corrupted into what we have of it.  This
infant is the seed of the woman who, according to Genesis, was to
bruise the head of the serpent, which, in return, was to bruise
his foot or heel, or the foot or heel of her seed as the figure
of the Hindoo Crishna proves.  From the traditionary stories of
this god Iao, which was figured annually to be born at the winter
solstice, and to be put to death and raised to life on the third
day at the vernal equinox, the Roman searchers after the
evangelion or gospel made out their Jesus.  The total destruction
of everything at Jerusalem and in Judea–buildings, records,
everything–prevented them from coming to any absolute certainty
respecting this person who, they were told by tradition, had come
to preach the gospel of peace, to be their savior, in fulfilment
of the prophecy which their sect of Israelites found in their
writings, and who had been put to death by the Jews.  From all
these circumstances he came to have applied to him the monogram
of I H S.  .  .  .  and to him at last all the legendary stories
related of the god Iao were attributed."[131]
[131] Godfrey Higgins, Anacalypsis, book vi., ch. iv., p. 455.
According to Faber, Jesus was not originally called Jesus Christ,
but Jescua Hammassiah–Jescua meaning Joshua, and Jesus, Savior. 
Ham is the Om of India, and Messiah, the anointed.  Commenting on
this Higgins remarks: “It will then be, The Savior Om the
Anointed, precisely as Isaiah had literally foretold; or reading
in the Hebrew made, The Anointed Om the Savior.  This was the
name of Jesus of Bethlehem.”
We have observed the fact that at the time of the birth of Christ
the entire world was expecting a Savior–a new incarnation of the
sun.  The end of a cycle had come and the entire earth was to
undergo a process of renovation.
In a poem by Virgil, who was a Druid, the birth of a wonderful
child is celebrated, and the prophecy of a heathen Sibyl is seen
to be identical with that of Isaiah.
“The last period sung by the Sibylline prophetess is now arrived;
and the grand series of ages.  That Series which recurs again and
again in the course of our mundane revolution begins afresh.  Now
the Virgin Astrea returns from heaven; and the primeval reign of
Saturn recommences; now a new race descends from the celestial
realms of holiness.  Do thou, Lucina, smile propitious on the
birth of a boy who will bring to a close the present age of iron
and introduce throughout the whole world, a new age of gold. 
Then shall the herds no longer dread the fury of the lion, nor
shall the poison of the serpent any longer be formidable.  Every
venomous animal and every deleterious plant shell perish
together.  The fields shall be yellow with corn, the grape shall
hang its ruddy clusters from the bramble, and honey shall distil
spontaneously from the rugged oak.  The universal globe shall
enjoy the blessings of peace, secure under the mild sway of its
new and divine sovereign.”
There is no lack of evidence to prove that for several centuries
great numbers of Christians regarded Christ as a solar
incarnation similar to those which from time to time were born in
the valleys of the Nile and the Ganges.  By the fathers in the
church Jesus Christ was named the New Sun, and in the early days
of Christianity the Egyptians struck a coin representing O. B. or
the holy Basilisk, with rays of light darting from his head, on
the reverse side of which was figured “Jesus Christ as the New
Solar Deity.”
The similarity if not the actual identity of the religion of
Christ and that of the pagans in the second century is shown by
various writers.  The Emperor Hadrian writing to his friend
Servianus says:
“Those who worship Serapis are also Christians; even those who
style themselves the Bishops of Christ are devoted to Serapis.  .
.  .  There is but one God for them all; him do the Christians,
him do the Jews, him do all the Gentiles also worship.”
It has been said that the head of Serapis supplied the first idea
of the portrait of Christ.  Before the figure of Serapis, in his
temple, used to stand Isis, the Celestial Virgin, with the
inscription “Immaculate is our Lady Isis.”  In her hand she bore
a sheaf of grain.
As Serapis, or Pan, finally became Christ, so Isis, or the Queen
of Heaven, became his mother, and to the latter were transferred
all the titles, ceremonies, festivals, and seasons which from the
earliest time had belonged to the great Goddess of Nature. 
Subsequently, probably about the close of the second century,
Christianity began slowly to emerge from the worship of Mithras
and Serapis, “changing the names but not the substance.”
Upon the coinage of Constantine appears Soli Invicto Comita–"To
the invincible sun my companion or guardian,” and when the Greek
and Roman Christians finally separated themselves from the great
body of pagan worshippers they apologized for celebrating the
birthday of their Savior on the 25th of December, saying that
“they could better perform their rites when the heathen were busy
with theirs.”  We are assured that the early Christians no less
than the Maji acknowledged Mithras as the first emanation from
Ormuzd, or the God of Light.  He was the Savior which in an
earlier age had represented returning life–that which follows
the cold of winter.  It was doubtless while they worshipped the
Persian Mithras that many of the so-called Christians gathered
their first ideas concerning the immortality of the soul and of
future rewards and punishments.
The analogy existing between the festivals, seasons, mythoses,
etc., of the various incarnations of the sun which were
worshipped by the early historic nations and those belonging to
Christianity is too striking to be the result of chance.
Buddha originally represented the sun in Taurus.  Crishna was the
sun in Aries.  The laborings and sufferings of Hercules, a god
who was an incarnation of the latter, portrays the history of the
passage of the sun through the signs of the Zodiac.
All the principal events of Christ’s life correspond to certain
solar phases; or, in other words, all ecclesiastical calendars
are arranged with reference to the festivals which commemorate
the important events of his life from his conception and birth to
his ascension and reception in heaven.  Each and every one of the
solar deities has been born at midnight, on the 25th of December,
at the time when the sun has reached its lowest position and
begins to ascend.  Macrobius, a learned Roman writer, observes
that the early historic nations “believed that the sun comes
forth as a babe from its cradle at the winter solstice.”  Neith
is made to say, “The sun is the fruit of my womb.”
The 15th of August, assumption day, the time when Mary, the
mother of Jesus, ascends to heaven is the day when the Zodiacal
constellation Virgo, “the Greek Astrea, leaves the European
horizon,” and the “8th of September, when Virgo emerges from the
sun’s rays, is held sacred as the Nativity of the Queen of
Heaven.”
Of the mid-winter festival, Bede says: “The Pagans of these isles
began their year on the eighth of the Kalends of January, which
is now our Christmas Day.  The night before that (24th Dec.  eve)
was called by them the Medre-Nak, or Night of Mothers, because of
the ceremonies which were performed on that night."[132]
[132] Rivers of Life, vol. i., p. 430.
Among Christians as among Pagans the Christmas season was in
honor of “returning light,” the vernal equinox of “growing light"
and St.  John’s day of “perfected light.”
In England, among pagan Saxons, the midwinter festival lasted
twelve days, during which time light, fire, the sun, huge stones
and other similar manifestations of the Deity were adored. 
Christian and pagan alike worshipped these objects.  They called
Christmas “the birthday of the god who is light.”  The Savior, or
the New Sun, was the true light which lighteth every man who
cometh into the world.  According to the testimony of various
writers, the festival held by Christians on Christmas eve used to
resemble the Feast of Lights, celebrated in Egypt in honor of
Neith.  The tokens distributed among friends were cakes made of
paste in the form of babies.  These cakes were called yuledows. 
Dow means to “grow bigger,” or, “to increase.”
The Kalends of January at Rome were sacred to Janus and Juno to
whom sacrifices were offered.  The Etruscans also worshipped
Janus who was the god (or goddess) of the year.  Although this
Deity does not appear among the twelve gods it is said to be the
parent of them all.  It was represented as having two faces. 
Upon one were the letters representing 365, and upon the other
were the keys of life and death.  According to Bryant this Deity
was called Junonius, from the goddess Juno, whose name resolves
itself into Juneh, a dove.  In the Hebrew this name is identical
with Yoni or Yuni–the female principle.  On the coins of this
god (which was subsequently regarded as male) is usually figured
a boat, although a dove with an olive branch is sometimes
observed.[133]
[133] See Faber, Pagan Idolatry.
Juno is thought to be the same as Jana, which came from Jah of
the Hebrews.  Diana was Diva Jana or “Dea Jana who is the same as
Astarte or Ashtaroth of the Sidonians.”
Regarding the transference of the mid-winter festival of the
pagans to the Christian calendar, Forlong says:
“The early Christians undoubtedly selected this Roman Saturnalia
as an important period in the life of Christ, at first calling it
the time of his conception, and later of his birth, this last
best suiting the views and feelings of their Solo- Christian
flocks.  The Jews called the day of the Winter Solstice The Fast
of Tebet.  The previous time was one of darkness, and on the 28th
began their Feast of Lights."[134]
[134] Rivers of Life, vol. i., p. 430.
In France the ancient name for Christmas is Noel, a term which
until recently has baffled all antiquarian research. It is now
thought that it is formed from Nuadh and Vile which together mean
All Heal.
Although every possible effort has been put forward to give to
this date (the 25th of December) the appearance of authenticity
as the birth of Christ, still, so far as I am able to find, no
one accredited with any degree of trustworthiness has ever been
rash enough to attempt its ratification as a matter of history.
Tylor calls attention to the fact that in the religious symbolism
of the material and spiritual sun Augustine and Gregory of Nyssa
discourse on the “growing light and dwindling darkness that
follow the nativity,” and cites the instance of Leo the Great
who, in a sermon, rebukes the “pestiferous persuasion, that this
solemn day is to be honored not for the birth of Christ, but for
the rising of the New Sun.”
On the authority of this same prelate it is found that in the
fifth century, the faithful, before entering the Basilica of St. 
Peter, were wont to turn and salute the shining orb of day.
The Roman winter solstice which was connected with the worship of
Mithra, and which was named the “Birthday of the Unconquered Om,"
was adopted by the western churches some time during the fourth
century.  From the west it passed to the eastern churches, where
it finally became “the solemn anniversary of the birth of
Christ.”
In Ireland the ceremonies attending the mid-winter festival were
formerly regarded as exceedingly important.  A short time before
the approach of the winter solstice, voices were heard throughout
the island proclaiming: “The New Year is at hand! Gather the
Mistletoe!” The mistletoe wreaths which formed the principal
decorations of Venus’ temple were at first proscribed by the
Christian preachers, but, in process of time they not only found
their way into the sanctuary, but were given a place over the
altars, their final signification being “good will to men."[135]
[135] Rivers of Life, vol. i., p. 81.
Although the tokens of friendship which were distributed by the
pagans at the season of the mid- winter festival differed
somewhat from those which at the present time are exchanged among
Christians at the same season of the year, still, there can be no
doubt that the Christmas tree, loaded with gifts, is a remnant of
that worship under which the sun was recognized as the source
whence all blessings flow.  Down to a late date, fire was a
conspicuous element at the festival of the winter solstice.  As
the yule-log blazed upon the hearth, our ancestors set up huge
stones and danced round them, thus worshipping the god of
fertility.
On the 20th and 21st of March the sun illumines exactly half the
earth.  At this time the Day has conquered the Night.  Light has
dethroned Darkness, a complete victory has been gained over
Typhon and the new god comes forth “with healing in his wings.” 
On Lady’s day, the 25th of March, the Virgin conceives.  In
Phoenicia numerous fetes were instituted to rejoice with Astarte
in her conception.  During the months preceding the birth of the
young sun-god the Queen of Heaven receives marked homage.
In a former portion of this work we have observed that the
festival which celebrated the return of spring was instituted by
the inventors of the Neros thousands of years prior to the
beginning of the Christian era, to celebrate the vernal equinox
and to commemorate a return of Nature’s bounties; but, after male
reproductive power began to be regarded as the creator, when
passion came to be considered as the moving force in the
universe, and when the operations of Nature began to be typified
by a dead man on a cross who was to rise again, Easter was
celebrated in commemoration of a risen savior or sun-god.
The following is an account given in Ramsay’s Travels of Cyrus,
concerning the vernal equinox festivals in the East.  When Cyrus
entered the temples he found the public clad in mourning.  In a
cavern lay the image of a young man (the dying savior) on a bed
of flowers and odoriferous herbs Nine days were spent in fasting,
prayers, and lamentations, after which the public sorrow ceased
and was changed into gladness.  Songs of joy succeeded weeping
(for Tamuz), the whole assembly singing hymns: “Adonis is
returned to life, Urania weeps no more, he has ascended to
heaven, he will soon return to earth and banish hence all crimes
and miseries forever.”  This scene, it will be remembered, was
presented 500 years prior to the birth of Christ.  In Rome,
throughout the months preceding the winter solstice, Hilaria or
Ceres, was especially honored.  Apollo and Diana rose on the 7th
of the Julian April and on the 10th their religious festivals
began.
On Easter morn, during the earlier ages of the church, the
observances of Christians were exactly the same as were those of
the so called pagans, all together hurried out long before the
break of day that they might behold the sun ascend, or “dance” as
they called it, for on this morning he was to “make the earth
laugh and sing.”  Pagan and Christian alike greeted each other
with the salutation “The Lord is risen,” and the reply was “The
Lord is risen indeed.”  On Easter morning the peasants of Saxony
and Brandenburg still climb to the hilltops “to see the sun give
his three joyful leaps.”
In Buckland’s Land and Water it is stated that on the first of
May all the choristers of Magdalene College, Oxford, still meet
on the summit of their tower, 150 feet high, and sing a Latin
hymn as the sun rises, during which time ten bells are rung “to
welcome the gracious Apollo.”  Formerly, high mass was celebrated
here and early mass for Sol was held in the College chapel, but,
as at the time of the Reformation this service was forbidden, “it
has since been performed on the top of the tower.”  After the
hymn is sung “boys blow loud blasts to Sol through bright new tin
horns.”
Perhaps none of the ideas which enter into present religious
rites and ceremonies proclaims its eastern origin more forcibly
than do those connected with the veneration of fire.  The
testimony of all writers upon this subject agrees that in Europe,
down to a late date in the Christian era, fire was still adored,
and in some mysterious manner was connected with the Creator.
Upon the subject of the continuation of sun and fire worship to
modern times, it is stated that the ancient bonfires with which
the North German hills used to be ablaze mile after mile are not
altogether given up by local custom.  In Ireland as late as the
year 1829, the ancient Canaanitish and Jewish rite of passing
children through fire as a cleansing or regenerating process was
still in operation.  It is related that at stated seasons great
fires were lighted in public places, on which occasions, fathers,
taking their children in their arms, would leap and run through
the flames.  At the same time, two large fires were kindled a
short distance from each other through which the cattle were
driven.  It was believed that by means of this ceremony,
fecundity is imparted both to man and beast.  May, the month in
which all Nature revives, and in which life starts anew, is the
time selected for the lighting of those sacred fires.  May is the
month of the fires of Baal.  According to Maurice in his work on
the Antiquities of India, the festival and the May-pole of Great
Britain are the remnants of a religious ceremony once common in
Egypt, India, and Phoenicia, which nations all worshipping the
same Deity, celebrated the entrance of the sun into the sign of
Taurus at the vernal equinox, but which in consequence of the
precession of the equinoxes is removed far in the year from its
original situation.  This festival is thought to be coeval with a
time when the equinox actually took place at that time.  It was
formerly in honor of the goddess Bhavania, who, under various
names, was once worshipped in every country of the globe.  “She
is identical with the Dea Syria of Chaldea, and the Venus Urania
of Persia.”
At the present time there is direct and indisputable evidence
that sacred fires once flamed over the whole of Britain.  A few
days prior to Bealtine season, every flame was ordered
extinguished, to be relighted on the first of May by holy fire
drawn directly from the sun.  Of fire-worship Toland observes:
“On May-day the Druids made prodigious fires on these cairns,
which being every one in sight of some other could not but afford
a glorious show over a whole nation.  These fires were in honor
of Beal, or Bealan, Latinized by the Roman writers into Belanus,
by which name the Gauls and their colonies understood the sun,
and therefore, to this hour, the first of May is, by the
aboriginal Irish, called la Bealtine, or the day of Belan’s
fires.  May-day is likewise called la Bealtine by the Highlanders
of Scotland, who are no contemptible part of the Celtic
offspring.  So it is with the Isle of Man: and in Armorica a
priest is called Belee, or the servant of Bel, and the priesthood
Belegieth."[136]
[136] Quoted by Godfrey Higgins, Celtic Druids, ch. v., p. 181.
Down to a comparatively recent time, in the British Isles, the
youth of both sexes used to arise long before daybreak on
May-day, and in large companies set out for the woods, there to
gather flowers, boughs, and branches, which, on returning at
night, were used to decorate their homes.  This festival is said
to be the most ancient of any known, and during the earlier and
purer ages of human faith was celebrated in honor of returning
spring.  In later ages, however, after passion had become the
only recognized god, May-day was celebrated with “all manner of
obscenity and lewdness.”
Although the uneducated masses among the Gauls worshipped Apollo,
Mercury, and Mars without understanding their true significance,
the Druids, who are thought to be Pythagorians, invoked one great
power, the animating force which pervades the universe, the
essence of which they believed resides in fire.
It is related that although after the introduction of Romish
Christianity, May fires still continued to be lighted on Bealtine
day, the more impressive ceremonies took place on the 23d of
June, on the eve of the nativity of St.  John.  The early
preachers, wishing to defer to the prejudices and usages of the
people, “yet not so as to interfere with the celebration of
Easter at the vernal equinox, retained the Bealtine ceremonial,
only transferring it to the saint’s day.”  Of these fire
festivals and their adoption by the Christian church Tylor says:
“The solar Christmas festival has its pendant at mid-summer.  The
summer solstice was the great season of fire festivals throughout
Europe on the heights, of dancing round and leaping through the
fires, of sending blazing fire-wheels to roll down from the hills
into the valleys, in sign of the sun’s descending course.  These
ancient rites attached themselves in Christendom to St. John’s
Eve.
“It seems as though the same train of symbolism which had adapted
the mid-winter festival to the Nativity, may have suggested the
dedication of the mid-summer festival to John the Baptist, in
clear allusion to his words ’He must increase but I must
decrease.’ “[137]
[137] Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. ii., p. 271.
In a description recently given of the “moral, religious, and
social disease” which broke out A.D. 1374, in the lower Rhine
region, and which was denominated as the “greatest, perhaps, of
all manifestations of possession,” Andrew D. White says: “The
immediate origin of these manifestations seems to have been the
wild revels of St. John’s Day."[138]
[138] Pop. Science, vol. xxxv., p. 3.
Upon this subject Toland observes that he has seen the people of
Ireland running and leaping through the St.  John’s fire proud of
passing through it unsinged.  Although ignorant of the origin of
this ceremony, they nevertheless regarded it as some kind of a
lustration by means of which they were to be specially blessed.
To every domestic hearth was carried the seed of Bealtine, or St.
John’s fire, which during the year was not permitted to go
out.[139]
[139] Although the preservation of holy fire upon every hearth
was clearly a religious observance, still, as in those days there
were no matches, the material benefit to be derived from this
precaution doubtless had a significance apart from that connected
with worship.
According to the testimony of Tylor, the festival of John the
Baptist was celebrated in Germany down to a late date.  This
writer quoting from a low German book of the year 1859, refers to
the “nod fire” which was sawed out of wood to light the St.
John’s bonfire “through which the people leapt and ran and drove
their cattle.”
With regard to the worship of Fire and Light it is related that
in Jerusalem, at the present time, the Easter service is
performed by the bishop of the church emerging from a tomb with
lighted tapers “from which all crave lights.”
On the authority of Peter Martyr, Bishop of Alexandria in the
third century, we are informed that the place in Egypt where
Christ was banished, which is called Maturea, a lamp is kept
constantly burning in remembrance of this event.  Although the
story of this banishment is doubtless borrowed from the life of
the Hindoo god Crishna, the fact is evident that those who
appropriated it, and used it in furbishing the mythical history
of Christ, had no scruples against fire worship–a religion which
we have been taught to regard as belonging exclusively to the
pagans.
In the ecclesiastical processions of the Church of Rome is
frequently to be observed the figure of a dragon, in the mouth of
which “holy and everlasting fire” is observed to be burning.  A
boy follows the procession with a lighted taper, so that in case
the fire is extinguished it may be relighted.  In referring to
this subject the Rev. J. B. Deane says:
“The whole ceremony may be considered as a lively representation
of an ophite procession as it advanced through the sinuous
paralleiths of Karnak.  So that no wonder the illiterate races
were deceived into thinking that there was no harm in calling
themselves Christians, for all their dear old faiths are
here–fire, arks, poles, and fire in an ark.”
Almost innumerable instances are given by various writers upon
this subject, showing that the sun worship of the ancients has
been continued to the present time by the so called followers of
Christ, in the shrines of the East, with no change even of names
to distinguish it from that of the Christian faith.  By those who
have spent much time in investigating the Holy Land, it is
related that nearly all the spots in and about Jerusalem, sacred
to Greek and Romish Christians as connected with the life and
death of their risen Lord, are equally sacred to the pagans as
commemorating the life and death of their Savior–the New Sun. 
Even Gethsemane is marked by characteristics which prove that it
is no less interesting to pagans, or, more properly speaking, to
the pagan followers of Christ, than it is to those of the Greek
and Romish churches.  Here is a holy tree, and not far distant is
a cave of Mithras.  There is also to be seen a trinity of stones
“those of Janus (Chemosh), Petros and Ion, all solar terms and
connected with the sitting or sinking down to rest of the Kuros.”
Messrs. Maundrell and Sandys, who in 1697 visited all the holy
places in and around Jerusalem, state that the entire city, but
especially the sites of Moriah, Zion, and suburbs were hotbeds of
fire and phallic worship as usually developed still in the East.
The topography of ancient Delphi, on the site of which was built
the village of Kastri, and at which place excavations are now
being made under the direction of the American School of
Archaeology, has ever been a place of peculiar interest to the
mystic.  Here are to be found all the natural features and
objects which gladden the heart and stimulate the imagination of
a solo-phallic worshipper.  The holy Mt. Parnassus, the fountain
of Kastali, the deep cave said to be Pythian, and the remnants of
huge sepulchres hewn in the rocks all conspire to make of this
spot a perfect abode for the god, or goddess, of fertility. 
Here, too, is a beautiful lake and near it a sacred fig-tree
which has been struck by lightning, or, “touched by holy fire.” 
Of this sacred place Forlong writes:
“Christianity has never neglected this so-called Pagan shrine,
nor yet misunderstood it, if we may judge by the saint she has
located here, for Mr. Hobhouse found in the rocky chasm dipped in
the dews of Castaly, but safe in a rocky niche, a Christian
shrine; and close by a hut called the church of St. John; yea
verily of Ione, she who had once reigned here supreme; whilst on
a green plot a few yards below the basin, in a little grove of
olive trees, stood the monastery of Panhagia or Holy Virgin, so
that here we still have and beside her sacred form in the cleft,
men who have consecrated their manhood to the old Mother and
Queen of Heaven, just as if she of Syria had never been heard of.
Doubtless they knew little of what civilized Europe calls
Christianity, for I have spent many days conversing with such
men, and seen little difference between them and those similarly
placed in the far East–fervid Christians though Greeks and
Syrians are.”
Perhaps nothing shows the extent to which the religion of the
pagans has been retained by Christianity more than does the
worship of the serpent.  It has been said that this reptile
enters into every mythology extant.  Ferguson is authority for
the statement that “he is to be found in the wilderness of Sinai,
the groves of Epidaurus, and in Samothracian huts.”  He
constitutes a prominent factor in the religious worship of India,
Assyria, Palestine, and Egypt, and, notwithstanding the fact that
he is not a native of Ireland, in an earlier age representations
of him appear in profusion among the symbols of that country.  It
has been said that there is scarcely an Egyptian sculpture known
in which this reptile does not figure.  The serpent whenever it
appears as a religious emblem always typifies desire–creative
energy–which, proceeding from the sun, is manifested in man and
in animals.  Whether it be a veritable snake in a box, a serpent
connected with the figure of a woman, or as a carved
representation on monuments or stones, or as chains or wreaths on
columns, bas-reliefs or friezes, the signification is the same.
The sacred character of this reptile among the Gnostics is shown
by the accounts given of their religious rites and ceremonies. 
By many of these sects this holy creature was kept in a box, ark,
or chest, and when the eucharistic service was to be performed,
he was enticed forth from his resting- place by a bit of bread. 
So soon as his holiness had wound himself about the offering, the
sacrifice was complete and the service was concluded by “singing
a hymn to Almighty God, and praying for acceptance in and through
the serpent.”
In later ages when the attempt was made to abolish serpent
worship from the Christian church, it was declared by the leaders
in the movement that Ophiolatry had been imported from
Persia–that it had been brought in by ignorant devotees who were
too weak to renounce their former faith.[140]
[140] Forlong, Rivers of Life.
The extent to which the symbols representing Serpent, Sun, Tree,
and Plant worship are still retained as part and parcel of the
symbolism of Christianity is shown by the following report
regarding the adoption of a seal by the Presbyterian Church which
appeared in the daily press only a few years ago.
“After the assembly opened, the committee for the selection of a
seal made a report recommending: That the general assembly hereby
adopts as its official seal the device of a serpent suspended
upon a cross, uplifted within a wilderness, in form as
represented upon the official seal of the trustees of the general
assembly, and displayed upon a circular field of the same
proportions.  In addition thereto the figure of a rising sun
appearing above the margin of the wilderness, whose out-shooting
beams shall occupy the centre of the field.  Further, the
decoration of a demi-wreath of two palm branches (in the form of
the wreath upon the seal of the Westminster assembly of divines),
placed around the margin of the upper hemisphere of the field;
and on the lower hemisphere of the field a demi-wreath composed
of a branch of oak united with an olive branch. Further, that the
words of the motto, ’Christus Exaltus Salvatar,’ shall be
displayed in a semi-circle upon the upper part of the field, on
either side of the standard of the cross, and, encompassing the
whole in a bordure, the following words, in full or in proper
abbreviation thereof, ’The Seal of the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.’ “
The origin of the rite of Baptism as performed at the present
time in Christian churches, may be traced directly to the worship
of the sun, within which were supposed to reside the reproductive
powers of Nature.  All nations have had ceremonies corresponding
to our baptism and confirmation rites, such baptism being either
by fire or water.  When we remember that for ages fertility, or
the power to reproduce, constituted the idea of the Deity, we are
not surprised to find that the original signification of the rite
of baptism had, and still has, in some of the oriental countries,
special reference to the child’s sexual obligations.
In India, the religious rites performed upon the individual occur
at birth or soon after; at betrothal, which takes place in
childhood; at puberty; at marriage, and at death.  The fact will
be noticed that all sexual (spiritual) obligations and seasons
fall within the domain of priestly supervision and surveillance. 
The child at baptism is dedicated to Vesta, or Hestia, the Queen
of Hearths and Homes, a divinity who is supposed to assist him in
securing the special evidence of divine favor, namely,
fruitfulness of body.
Among Hindoos and Jews, excessive reproduction was the Lord’s
mark of favor.  In India there has been a special hell provided
for childless women, and with Jewesses no curse was equal to
barrenness.
Baptism, or the ceremony connected with the naming of children in
Christian countries, is seen to be identical with that performed
in Mexico among the Aztecs.  After the lips and bosom of the
infant had been sprinkled with water, the Lord was implored to
“permit the holy drops to wash away the sin that was given to it
before the foundation of the world, so that the child might be
born anew.”
Among the petitions which are offered to the Deity is the
following: “Impart to us, out of thy great mercy, thy gifts which
we are not worthy to receive through our own merit.”  In their
moral code appear these maxims: “Keep peace with all; bear
injuries with humility; God who sees, will avenge you.”  “He who
looks too curiously on a woman, commits adultery with his
eyes."[141]
[141] Quoted by Prescott from Sahagun.  Conquest of Mexico, book
i., chap 3.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
