


Glimpses of antiquity as far back as human ken can reach reveal
the fact that in early ages of human society the physiological
question of sex was a theme of the utmost importance, while
various proofs are at hand showing that throughout the past the
question of the relative importance of the female and male
elements in procreation has been a fruitful source of religious
contention and strife.  These struggles, which from time to time
involved the entire habitable globe, were of long duration,
subsiding only after the adherents of the one sex or the other
had gained sufficient ascendancy over the opposite party to
successfully erect its altars and compel the worship of its own
peculiar gods, which worship usually included a large share of
the temporal power.  Only since the male sex has gained
sufficient influence to control not only human action, but human
thought as well, have these contentions subsided.[48]
[48] At the present time, through causes which are not difficult
to understand, the question of the relative importance of the two
sexes is again assuming a degree of importance indicative of the
changes which are taking place in human thought, and for the
reason that we are just witnessing the dawn of an intellectual
age, the problems to be solved will admit of no answers other
than those based upon a scientific foundation.
That religious wars have not been confined to more modern times,
and that among an early race the attempt to exalt the male
principle met with obstinate resistance which involved mankind in
a conflict, the violence of which has never been exceeded, are
facts which seem altogether probable.  Indeed, there is much
evidence going to show that the cause of the original dispersion
of a primitive race was the contention which arose respecting
their religious faith or regarding the physiological question of
the relative importance of the sexes in the function of
reproduction; and that the general war indicated in the Puranas,
which began in India and extended over the entire habitable
globe, and which was celebrated by the poets as “the basis of
Grecian mythology,” originated in this conflict over the
precedence of one or the other of the sex-principles contained in
the Deity.  Although there are no records of these wars in extant
history, accounts of them are still preserved in the traditions
and religious monuments of oriental countries.  In Egypt, in
India, and to a greater or less extent in other Eastern
countries, these physiological contests have been disguised under
a veil of allegory, the true significance of which it is no
longer difficult to understand.  With the light which more recent
investigation has thrown upon the subject of the separation of
the original sex-elements contained in the Deity, the
significance of the following legend in the Servarasa is at once
apparent.
When Parvati (Devi) was united in marriage to Mahadeva (Siva),
the divine pair had once a dispute on the comparative influence
of the sexes in producing animated beings, and each resolved by
mutual agreement to create a new race of men.  The race produced
by Mahadeva were very numerous, and devoted themselves
exclusively to the worship of the male Deity, but their
intellects were dull, their bodies feeble, their limbs distorted,
and their complexions of many different hues.  Parvati had at the
same time created a multitude of human beings, who adored the
female power only, and were well shaped, with sweet aspects and
fine complexions.  A furious contest ensued between the two
nations, and the Lingajas, or adorers of the male principle, were
defeated in battle, but Mahadeva, enraged against the Yonigas
(the worshippers of the female element), would have destroyed
them with the fire of his eye if Parvati had not interposed and
appeased him, but he would spare them only on condition that they
should instantly leave the country with a promise to see it no
more, and from the Yoni, which they adored as the sole cause of
their existence, they were named Yavanas.
The fact has been noticed in a previous work[49] that, according
to Wilford, the Greeks were the descendants of the Yavanas of
India, and that when the Ionians emigrated they adopted the name
to distinguish themselves as adorers of the female, in opposition
to a strong sect of male worshippers which had been driven from
the mother country.  We are taught by the Puranas that they
settled partly on the borders of Varaha-Dwip, or Europe, where
they became the progenitors of the Greeks; and partly in the two
Dwipas of Cusha, Asiatic and African.  In the Asiatic Cusha-Dwip
they supported themselves by violence and rapine.  Parvati,
however, or their tutelary goddess, Yoni, always protected them;
and at length, in the fine country which they occupied, they
became a flourishing nation.[50] Wilford relates that there is a
sect of Hindoos who, attempting to reconcile the two systems,
declare in their allegorical style that “Parvati and Mahadeva
found their concurrence essential to the perfection of their
offspring, and that Vishnu, at the request of the goddess,
effected a reconciliation between them."[51]
[49] See The Evolution of Women, p. 303.
[50] Asiatic Researches, vol. iii., pp. 125-132.
[51] Asiatic Researches, “Egypt and the Nile,” vol. iii., pp.
361-363.
The people who were dominant in Asia long before the rise of the
late Assyrian monarchy, are said to be those whom scriptural
writers represent as Cushim, and the Hindoos as Cushas.  They
were the descendants of Cush, or Cuth, and were believed to have
been the architects of the Tower of Babel.  Epiphanius, Eusebius,
and others assert that at the time of the building of this tower
there existed two rival beliefs, the one demonstrated as
Scuthism, the other as Ionism, or Hellenism, the latter of which
embodied the worship of the Great Mother, or the female element,
which was worshipped in the shape of the mystic “Iona or Dove.” 
The Scuths, on the other hand, believed in the pre-eminence of a
Great Father, or, perhaps I should say, in a Deity composed of a
triad containing the elements of a male  parent.  Upon this
subject the learned Faber remarks: “I am much mistaken if some
dissension on these points did not prevail at Babel itself; and I
think there is reason for believing that the altercation between
the rival sects aided the confusion of languages in producing the
dispersion."[52]
[52] Pagan Idolatry, book vi., ch. ii.
Those who believed in the superiority of the male in the
processes of reproduction, adored the male element in the Deity,
while those who held that the female is the more important,
worshipped the female energy throughout Nature under one or
another of its symbols, sometimes as a woman with her child and
sometimes as a dove, but oftener as an ark, box, or chest.
It is evident from the sacred writings of the Hindoos that in
India, during a period of several thousand years, there existed
various sects, those who worshipped the male as the only creative
force, others who adored the female as the origin of life, and
those who paid homage to both, as alike important in the office
of reproduction.
It would seem that the fierce wars which had devastated the land
had ceased prior to the beginning of the Tower of Babel. 
According to the testimony of Moses, the Lord himself declared
“Behold the people is one.”  This unanimity of belief, as is
plainly shown, was of short duration, for the Tower arose
“upright and defiant,” not, however, as an emblem of the primeval
dual or triune God in which the female energy was predominant,
but as a symbol of male creative power.  It was the type of
virility which in the subsequent history of religion was to
assume the position of the “one only and true God.”
It is not improbable that idolatry began with the Tower of Babel.
Indeed it has been confidently asserted by certain writers that
the earliest idols set up as emblems of the Deity, or as
expressions of the peculiar worship of the Lingajas, were
obelisks, columns, or towers, the first of which we have any
account being the Tower of Babel, erected probably at Nipur in
Chaldea.  Until a comparatively recent time, the actual
significance of this monument seems to have been little
understood.  Later research, however, points to the fact that it
was a phallic device erected in opposition to a religion which
recognized the female element throughout Nature as God.  The
length of time which the adherents of these two doctrines had
contended for the mastery is not known, but through the
deciphered monuments of ancient nations, by facts gathered from
their sacred writings, and by the general voice of tradition, it
has been ascertained with a considerable degree of certainty that
this great upheaval of society was the culmination of a dispute
which had long been waged between two contending powers, and
which finally resulted in a separation of the people, and in the
final success, for the time being, of the sect which refused
longer to recognize the superior importance of the female in the
god-idea.
At what time in the history of mankind the Tower of Babel was
erected has not been ascertained, but the great antiquity of
Chaldea is no longer questioned.  Sir Henry Rawlinson, in the
Royal Geographical Journal says:
“When Chaldea was first colonized, or at any rate when the seat
of empire was first established there, the emporium of trade
seems to have been at Ur of the Chaldees, which is now 150 miles
from the sea, the Persian Gulf having retired nearly that
distance before the sediment brought down by the Euphrates and
Tigris.”
To which Baldwin adds:
“A little reflection on the vast period of time required to
effect geological changes so great as this will enable us to see
to what a remote age in the deeps of antiquity we must go to find
the beginning of civilization in the Mesopotamian Valley."[53]
[53] Prehistoric Nations, p. 191.
Although at the time of the building of the Tower of Babel the
worship of a Deity in which the male principle was pre-eminent
had not become universal, still the facts seem to indicate that
the doctrine of male superiority which for ages had been steadily
advancing had at length gained the ascendancy over the older
religion.  The new faith and worship had corrupted the old, and
through the conditions which had been imposed upon women, and the
consequent stimulation of the lower nature in man, even the
adherents of the older faith were losing sight of those higher
principles which in preceding ages they had adored as God.
We have seen that in every country upon the earth there is a
tradition recounting the ravages of a flood.  Whether or not this
legend is to be traced to an actual calamity by which a large
portion of Asia was inundated, is not for a certainty known; but
the fact that there was a deluge of contention and strife,
surpassing anything perhaps which the world has ever witnessed,
seems altogether probable.
Not long after the catastrophe designated as the flood, emblems
of the Deity, representations of the male and female elements,
appear in profusion.  Babylon, at which place was erected the
Tower of Belus, and Memphis, which contained the Pyramids, were
among the first cities which were built.  As the tower typified
the Deity worshipped by those who claimed superiority for the
male, so the pyramids symbolized the creative agency and peculiar
qualities of the female, or of the dual Deity which was
worshipped as female.
Although the grosser elements in human nature were rapidly
assuming a more intensely aggressive attitude, and although the
higher principles involved in an earlier religion were in a
measure forgotten, it is evident that at this time humanity had
not become wholly sensualized, and that the lower propensities
and appetites had not assumed dominion over the reasoning
faculties.
The Great Mother Cybele, who is represented by the Sphinx, had
doubtless been adored as a pure abstraction, her worship being
that of the universal female principle in Nature.  She is
pictured as the “Eldest Daughter of the Mythologies,” and as “The
Great First Cause.”  She represented the past and the future. 
She was the source whence all that was and is had proceeded.
In its earliest representations, the Sphinx is figured with the
head of a woman and the body of a lion.  By various writers it is
stated that the Sphinxes which were brought as spoils from Asia,
the very cradle of religion, were thus represented.  The lion,
which symbolizes royal power and intellectual strength, is always
attached to the chariot of Cybele.  The Sphinx is supposed to
typify not only Cybele, but the great androgynous God of Africa
as well.  However, as Cybele and Muth portrayed the same idea,
namely, female power and wisdom, we are not surprised that they
should have been worshipped under the same emblem.  Neither is it
remarkable, when we recall the fact that the female was supposed
to comprehend both sexes, that in certain instances a beard
appears as an accompanying feature of the Sphinx.  We are told
that the fourth avatar of Vishnu was a Sphinx, but a further
search into the history of this Deity reveals the fact that her
ninth avatar is Brahm (masculine).  The female principle has at
length succumbed to the predominance of male power, and Vishnu
herself has become transformed into a male God.
Although the rites connected with the worship of Cybele were
phallic they were absolutely pure.  In an allusion to this
worship, Hargrave Jennings admits that the “spirituality to which
women in that age of the world were observed to be more liable
than men was peculiarly adverse to all sensual indulgence, and
especially that of the sexes.”
Although the creative principle was adored under its
representatives, the Yoni and the Lingham, still the principal
object seems to have been, when administering the rites
pertaining to the worship of Cybele, to ignore sex and the usual
sex distinctions; hence we find that, in order to assume an
androgynous appearance, the priestesses of this Goddess
officiated in the costumes of males, while priests appeared in
the dress peculiar to females.  However, that the sensuous
element was to a certain extent already assuming dominion over
the higher nature, and that priests were regarded as being
incapable of self-control, is observed in the fact that in the
later ages of female worship one of the principal requirements of
a priest of Cybele was castration.
It is the opinion of Grote that the story which appears in the
Hesiodic Theogony, of the castration of Saturn and Uranus by
their sons with sickles forged by the mother, was borrowed from
the Phrygians, or from the worship of the Great Mother.
In India, the strictest chastity was prescribed to the priests of
Siva, a God which was worshipped as the Destroyer or Regenerator,
and which in its earlier conception was the same as the Great
Mother Cybele.  These priests were frequently obliged to
officiate in a nude state, and during the ceremony should it
appear that the symbols with which they came in contact had
appealed to other than their highest emotions, they were
immediately stoned by the people.[54]
[54] Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes, i., 311.
The identity of the religions of India and Egypt has been noted
in an earlier portion of this work.  Wilford, in his
dissertations upon Egypt and the Nile, says that in a
conversation which he had with some learned Brahmins, upon
describing to them the form and peculiarities of the Great
Pyramid, they told him that “it was a temple appropriated to the
worship of Padma Devi.”  The true Coptic name of these edifices
is Pire Honc, which signifies a sunbeam.  Padma Devi means the
lotus, or the Deity of generation.
It is thought by many writers that these gigantic structures were
erected by the Cushite conquerors of Egypt, who invaded and
civilized the country, as emblems of the female Deity whom they
worshipped.  Certainly the magnitude of these monuments and the
ingenuity displayed in their construction indicate the
intelligence of their builders and the exalted character of the
Deity adored.  The Great Pyramid is in the form of a square, each
side of whose base is seven hundred and fifty-five feet, and
covers an area of nearly fourteen acres.  An able writer in
describing the pyramids says that the first thing which impresses
one is the uniform precision and systematic design apparent in
their architecture.  They all have their sides accurately adapted
to the four cardinal points.
“In six of them which have been opened, the principal passage
preserves the same inclination of 26 degrees to the horizon,
being directed toward the polar star.  .  .  .  Their obliquity
being so adjusted as to make the north side coincide with the
obliquity of the sun’s rays at the summer’s solstice, has,
combined with the former particulars, led some to suppose they
were solely intended for astronomical uses; and certainly, if not
altogether true, it bespeaks, at all events, an intimate
acquaintance with astronomical rules, as well as a due regard to
the principles of geometry.  Others have fancied them intended
for sepulchres; and as the Egyptians, taught by their ancient
Chaldean victors, connected astronomy with their funereal and
religious ceremonies, they seem in this to be not far astray, if
we but extend the application to their sacred bulls and other
animals, and not merely to their kings, as Herodotus would have
us suppose."[55]
[55] The Round Towers of Ireland, p. 159.
According to the testimony of Inman, the pyramid is an emblem of
the Trinity–three in one.  The triangle typifies the flame of
sacred fire emerging from the holy lamp. With its base upwards it
typifies the Delta, or the door through which all come into the
world.  With its apex uppermost, it is an emblem of the phallic
triad.  The union of these triangles typifies the male and female
principles uniting with each other, thus producing a new figure,
a star, while each retains its own identity.[56]
[56] Ancient Faiths, vol. i., p. 145.
Thus the primary significance of the pyramid was religious, and
in its peculiar architectural construction was manifested the
prevailing conception of the Deity worshipped; namely, the
fructifying energies in the sun.  We are informed that “all
nations have at one time or another passed through violent stages
of pyrolatry, a word which reminds us that fire and phallic cult
flourished around the pyramids.  .  .  .  Every town in Greece
had a Pyrtano."[57]
[57] Forlong, Rivers of Life, or Faiths of Man in All Lands, vol.
i., p. 325.
As not alone the sun but the stars also had come to be venerated
as agencies in reproduction, the worship of these objects was, as
we have seen, closely interwoven with that of the generative
processes throughout Nature.  The attempt to solve the great
problem of the origin of life on the earth led these people to
contemplate with the profoundest reverence all the visible
objects which were believed to affect human destiny.  Hence both
the pyramid and the tower served a double purpose, first, as
emblems of the Deity worshipped, and, second, as monuments for
the study of the heavenly bodies with which their religious ideas
were so intimately connected.
While comparing the early emblems which prefigure the primitive
elements in the god-idea, Hargrave Jennings observes:
“In the conveyance of certain ideas to those who contemplate it,
the pyramid boasts of prouder significance, and impresses with a
hint of still more impenetrable mystery.  We seem to gather dim
supernatural ideas of the mighty Mother of Nature .  .  .  that
almost two-sexed entity, without a name–She of the Veil which is
never to be lifted, perhaps not even by the angels, for their
knowledge is limited.  In short, this tremendous abstraction,
Cybele, Ideae, Mater, Isiac controller of the Zodiacs, whatever
she may be, has her representative in the half-buried Sphinx even
to our own day, watching the stars although nearly swallowed up
in the engulphing sands."[58]
[58] Phallicism, p. 25.
From the time when the two religious elements began to separate
in the minds of the people, the prophets, seers, and priestesses
of the old religion, those who continued to worship the Virgin
and Child, had prophesied that a mortal woman, a virgin, would,
independently of the male principle, bring forth a child, the
fulfilment of which prophecy would vindicate the ancient faith
and forever settle the dispute relative to the superiority of the
female in the office of reproduction.  Thus would the woman
“bruise the serpent’s head.”  In process of time not only
Yonigas, but Lingajas as well, came to accept the doctrine of the
incarnation of the sun in the bodies of earthly virgins.  By
Lingaites, however, it was the seed of the woman and not the
woman herself who was to conquer evil.  Finally, with the
increasing importance of the male in human society, it is
observed that a reconciliation has been effected between the
female worshippers and those of the male.  Athene herself has
acquiesced in the doctrine of male superiority.
Thalat, the great Chaldean Deity, who presided over Chaos prior
to the existence of organized matter, is finally transformed into
a male God.  The Hindoo Vishnu, who as she slept on the bottom of
the sea brought forth all creation, has changed her sex.  Brahm,
the Creator, is male, and appears as a triplicated Deity in the
form of three sons within whom is contained the essence of a
Great Father, the female creative principle being closely veiled.
Hence we see that the God of the ancients, the universal dual
force which resides in the sun and which creates all things, is
no longer worshipped under the figure of a mother and her child. 
Although the female principle is still a necessary factor in the
creative processes, and although it is capable of producing gods,
the mother element possesses none of the essentials which
constitute a Deity.  In other words, woman is not a Creator. 
From the father is derived the soul of the child, while from the
mother, or from matter, the body is formed.  Hence the prevalence
at a certain stage of human history of divine fathers and earthly
mothers; for instance, Alexander of Macedon, Julius Caesar, and
later the mythical Christ who superseded Jesus, the Judean
philosopher and teacher of mankind.
Henceforth, caves, wells, cows, boxes and chests, arks, etc.,
stand for or symbolize the female power.  We are given to
understand, however, that for ages these symbols were as holy as
the God himself, and among many peoples even more revered and
worshipped.
We have seen that the ancients knew that matter and force were
alike indestructible.  According to their doctrine all Nature
proceeded from the sun.  Hence the power back of the sun, which
they worshipped as the Destroyer or Regenerator, or, in other
words, as the mother of the sun, was the Great Aum or Om, the
Aleim or Elohim, who was the indivisible God.  The creative
agency which proceeded from the sun was both male and female, yet
one in essence.  Later, the male appeared as spirit, the female
as matter.  Spirit was something above and independent of Nature.
It had indeed created matter from nothing.  The fact will be
remembered that man claimed supremacy over woman on the ground
that the male is spirit, while the female is only matter; in
other words, that she was simply a covering for the soul, which
is divine.
Thus was the god-idea divorced from Nature, and a masculine
principle, outside and independent of matter, set up as a
personal potentate or ruler over the universe.
The logic by which the great female principle in the Deity has
been eliminated, and the subterfuges which have been and still
are employed to construct and sustain a Creator who of himself is
powerless to create, is as amusing as it is suggestive, and
forcibly recalls to mind la couvade, in which, among certain
tribes, the father, assuming all the duties of procreation, goes
to bed when a child is born.[59]
[59] The Evolution of Woman, p. 127.
All mythologies prove conclusively that ages elapsed before human
beings were rash enough, or sufficiently blinded by falsehood and
superstition, to attempt to construct a creative force unaided by
the female principle.  Just here it may not be out of place to
refer to the fact that in the attempt to divorce God from Nature
have arisen all the superstitions and senseless religious
theories with which, since the earliest ages of metaphysical
speculation, the human mind has been crowded.
To this separation of the two original elements in the Deity, and
the consequent exaltation of one of the factors in the creative
processes, is to be traced the beginning of our present false,
unnatural, and unphilosophical masculine system of religion–a
system under which a father appears as the sole parent of the
universe.
The fact is tolerably well understood that mysticism and the
accumulation of superstitious ideas are the result of the
over-stimulation of the lower animal instincts.  When the
agencies which had hitherto held the lower nature in check became
inoperative–when man began to regard himself as a Creator and
therefore as the superior of woman–he had reached a point at
which he was largely controlled by supernatural or mystical
influences.
The fact is observed that in course of time the governmental
powers are no longer in the hands of the people; the masses have
become enslaved.  Their rulers are priests–deified tyrants who
are unable to maintain their authority except through the
ignorance and credulity of the masses.  Hence one is not
surprised to find that the change which took place at a certain
stage of human growth in respect to the manner of reckoning
descent was instigated and enforced by religion.  Apollo had
declared that woman is but the nurse to her own offspring. 
Neither is it remarkable at this stage in the human career, as
women had lost their position as heads of families, and as they
were no longer recognized as of kin to their children, that man
should have attempted to lessen the importance of the female
element in the god-idea.
Wherever in the history of the human race we observe a change in
the relations of the sexes involving greater or more oppressive
restrictions on the natural rights of women, such change, whether
it assume a legal, social, or religious form, will, if traced to
its source, always be found deeply rooted in the wiles of
priestcraft.  Since the decay of the earliest form of religion,
namely, Nature-worship, the gods have never been found ranged on
the side of women.
Later investigations are proving that the primitive idea of a
Deity had its foundation in actual physical facts and
experiences; and, as the maternal principle constituted the most
important as well as the most obvious of the facts which entered
into the conception of a Creator, and as it was the only natural
bond capable of binding human society together, so long as reason
was not wholly clouded by superstition and warped by sensuality,
it could not be eliminated.  In other words, a Creator in which
the more essential element of creative force was wanting, was
contrary to all human experience and observation.  Indeed nothing
could be plainer than that the deified male principle could of
itself create nothing, and that it was dependent for its very
existence on the female element.
By this attempt to construct a masculine Deity, absurdities were
presented to the human judgment and understanding which for ages
could not be overcome, and by it contradictions were necessitated
which could not be reconciled with human reason and with the
ideas of Nature which had hitherto been held by mankind.  It was
not, therefore, until reason had been suspended in all matters
pertaining to religion, and blind faith in the machinations of
priestcraft had been established, that a male God was set up as
the sole Creator of the universe.
When women, who had become the legitimate plunder not only of
individuals but of bands of warriors whose avowed object was the
capture of women for wives, had degenerated into mere tools or
instruments for the gratification and pleasure of men, Perceptive
Wisdom or Light, and Maternal Affection the Preserver of the
race, gradually became eliminated from the god-idea of mankind. 
Passion became God.  It was the Creator in the narrowest and most
restricted sense.
Although in an age of pure Nature-worship the ideas connected
with reproduction, like those related to all other natural
functions, were wholly unconnected with impurity either of
thought or deed, still when an age arrived in which all checks to
human passion had been withdrawn, and the lower propensities had
gained dominion over the higher faculties, the influence of
fertility or passion-worship on human development or growth may
in a degree be imagined.
The fact must be borne in mind that curing the later ages of
passion-worship the creative processes and the reproductive
organs were deified, not as an expression or symbol of the
operations of Nature, but as a means to the stimulation of the
lower animal instincts in man.
With religion bestialized and its management regulated wholly
with an idea to the gratification of man’s sensuous desires,
religious temples, under the supervision of the priesthood,
became brothels, in which were openly practiced as part and
parcel of religious rites and ceremonies the most wanton
profligacy and the most shameless self-abandonment.  The worship
of Aphrodite or Venus, and also that of Bacchus, originally
consisted in homage paid to the reproductive principles contained
in the earth, water, and sun, but, as is well known, this pure
and beautiful worship, in later times, and especially after it
was carried to Greece, became synonymous with the grossest
practices and the most lawless disregard of human decency.
With the light which in these later ages science and ethnological
research are throwing upon the physiological and religious
disputes of the ancients, the correctness of the primitive
doctrines elaborated under purer conditions at an age when human
beings lived nearer to Nature is being proved–namely, that
matter like spirit is eternal and indestructible, and therefore
that the one is as difficult of comprehension as the other, and
that Nature, instead of being separated from spirit, is filled
with it and can not be divorced from it; also that the female is
the original organic unit of creation, without which nothing is
or can be created.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
