


“Throughout all the world, the first object of idolatry seems to
have been a plain unwrought stone, placed in the ground as an
emblem of the generative or procreative powers of Nature."[157]
[157] Celtic Druids, ch. vi., p. 209.
In the language of symbolism the upright stone prefigures either
a man, reproductive energy, or a god, all of which at a certain
stage in the human career had come to mean one and the same
thing; namely, the Creator.
In the earlier ages of male worship, upright stones as emblems of
the Deity were plain unwrought shafts, but in process of time
they began to be carved into the form of a man–a man who usually
represented the ruler or chief of the people, and who, as he was
the source of all power and wisdom, was supposed by the ignorant
masses to be an incarnation of the sun.  Thus arose the spiritual
power of monarchs, or the “divine right of kings.”
Wherever obelisks, columns, pillars, attenuated spires, upright
stones or crosses at the intersection of roads are found, they
always appear as sacred monuments, or as symbols of the Lingham
god.
The Chaldean Tower of which there are extant traditions in Mexico
and in the South Sea Islands; the Round Towers of Ireland; the
remarkable group of stones known as Stonehenge, in England; the
wonderful circle at Abury through which the figure of a huge
serpent was passed; the monuments which throughout the nations of
the East were set up at the intersection of roads in the center
of market- places, and the bowing stones employed as oracles in
various portions of the world, have all the same signification,
and proclaim the peculiar religion of the people who worshipped
them.
Whether as among the Jews in Egypt, a pillar is set up as a
“sign” and a “witness” to the Lord, or whether as with the
Mohammedans these figures appear as minarets with egg shaped
summits, or as among the Irish they stand forth as stately towers
defying time and the elements, or as among the Christians they
appear as the steeple which points towards heaven, the symbol
remains, and the original significance is the same.
The Lord of the Israelites who was wont to manifest himself to
his chosen people in a “pillar of smoke by day” and a “pillar of
fire by night” is said to be none other than a reproductive
emblem, as was also the “Lord” which “reposed in the ark of the
covenant.”  Monuments set up to symbolize the religion of the
Parsees or fire-worshippers after they had succumbed to the
pressure brought to bear upon them by the adorers of the male
principle were each and all of them, like their great prototype
the tower of Babel, typical of the universal creative power which
was worshipped as male.
Notwithstanding the fact that the male energy had come to be
recognized as the principal factor in reproduction, it is
observed that wherever these monuments or other symbols of
fertility appear, there is always to be found in close connection
with them certain emblems symbolical of the female power; thus
showing that although the people by whom they were erected had
become worshippers of the masculine principle, and although they
had persuaded themselves that it was the more important element
in the deity, they had not become so regardless of the truths of
Nature as to attempt to construct a Creator independently of its
most essential factor.
Protestant Christianity, probably the most intensely masculine of
all religious schemes which have claimed the attention of man,
has not wittingly retained any of the detested female emblems,
yet so deeply has the older symbolism taken root, that even in
the architecture of the modern Protestant church with its
ark-shaped nave and its window toward the rising sun, may be
detected the remnants of that early worship which the devotees of
this more recently developed form of religious faith so piously
ignore.
The large number of upright columns, circles of stone, cromlechs
and cairns still extant in the British Isles, bears testimony to
the peculiar character of the religious worship which once
prevailed in them.  Of these shrines perhaps none is more
remarkable than that of Stonehenge, in England.  Although during
the numberless ages which have passed since this temple was
erected many of the stones have fallen from their original
places, still by the light of more recently established facts
concerning religious symbolism, it has been possible, even under
its present condition of decay, for scholars to unravel the
hitherto mysterious significance of this remarkable structure. 
Stonehenge is composed of four circles of mammoth upright shafts
twenty feet high, the one circle within the other, with immense
stones placed across them like architraves.
In ancient symbolism the circle was the emblem of eternity, or of
the eternal female principle.  Mountains were also sacred to the
gods.  It has been said that a ring of mountains gave rise to
these circular temples.  Faber assures us that a circular stone
temple was called the circle of the world or the circle of the
ark, that it represented at once the inclosure of the Noetic
Ship; the egg from which creation was produced; the earth, and
the zodiacal circle of the universe in which the sun performs its
annual revolutions through the signs.  Stonehenge is said to be
the temple of the water god Noah, who, as we have seen, was first
worshipped as half woman and half fish or serpent, but who
finally came to be regarded as a man serpent (or fish) Deity.
On approaching Stonehenge from the Northeast, the first object
which engages the attention is a rude boulder, sixteen feet high,
in a leaning posture.  This stone has been named the Friar’s
Heel, but until recently its signification has been wholly
unknown.
Regarding the upright shaft which stands sentinel over the
mysterious circles of mammoth stones called Stonehenge, Forlong
says that it is no Friar’s Heel, but an emblem of fertility
dedicated to the Friday divinity.  It is represented as the
“Genius of Fire,” not the genius of ordinary fire, “but of the
super-sensual Divinity, celestial fire.”
Regarding these remarkable stones to which the Lingham god is a
mere introduction, Forlong says:
“No one who has studied phallic and solar worship in the East
could make any mistake as to the purport of the shrine at
Stonehenge .  .  .  yet the indelicacy of the whole subject often
so shocks the ordinary reader, that, in spite of facts, he cannot
grant what he thinks shows so much debasement of the religious
mind; facts are facts, however, and it only remains for us to
account for them.  Perhaps indeed in these later times an
artificial and lower phase of sensuality has taken the place of
the more natural indulgence of the passions, for procreative
purposes, which principally engrossed the thoughts of early
worshippers."[158]
[158] Rivers of Life, vol. ii., p. 233.
Higgins is of the opinion that Stonehenge is the work of the same
era with the caves of India, the pyramids of Egypt, and the
stupendous monument at Carnac–a structure which, it is claimed,
must have required for its construction an amount of labor equal
to that of the pyramids.
Undoubtedly there has never been a religious shrine which has
excited more curiosity than has Abury, of which, unfortunately,
nothing now remains, although in the early part of the eighteenth
century enough had been preserved to prove the identity of its
signification with other ancient religious monuments both in the
British Isles and in the countries of the East.  Perhaps there is
no way by which this shrine can be better understood than by
quoting the exact language of those who have written upon the
subject.  Especially is this true concerning the testimony of
those who, after personal investigation, have given to the public
the results of their research.
In the History of Wiltshisre, published by Sir R. Colt Hoare,
Bart., appears the following from Dr. Stukeley:
“The situation of Abury is finely chosen for the purpose it was
destined to, being the more elevated part of a plain, from whence
there is almost an imperceptible descent every way.  But as the
religious work in Abury, though great in itself, is but a part of
the whole (the avenues stretching above a mile from it each way),
the situation of the whole design is projected with great
judgment, in a kind of large, separate plain, four or five miles
in diameter.  Into this you descend on all sides from higher
ground.  The whole Temple of Abury may be considered as a
picture, and it really is so.  Therefore the founders wisely
contrived that a spectator have an advantageous prospect of it as
he appeared within view.  When I frequented this place, which I
did for some years together, to take an exact account of it,
staying a fortnight at a time, I found out the entire work by
degrees.  The second time I was here, an avenue was a new
amusement; the third year another.  So that at length I
discovered the mystery of it, properly speaking, which was, that
the whole figure represented a snake transmitted through a
circle.  This is an hieroglyphic or symbol of highest note and
antiquity.
“In order to put this design in execution, the founders well
studied their ground; and to make their representation more
natural, they artfully carried it over a variety of elevations
and depressions, which, with the curvature of the avenues,
produces sufficiently the desired effect.  To make it still more
elegant and picture-like, the head of the snake is carried up the
southern promontory of Hackpen Hill, toward the village of West
Kennet; nay, the very name of the hill is derived from the
circumstance.  .  .  .  Thus our antiquity divides itself into
three great parts, which will be our rule in describing this
work.  The circle at Abury, the forepart of the snake leading
toward Kennet, which I call Kennet Avenue; the hinder part of the
snake leading toward Beckhampton, which I call Beckhampton
Avenue; for they may be well looked on as avenues to the great
temple at Abury, which part must be most eminently called the
Temple.
“The plan on which Abury was built, is that sacred hierogram of
the Egyptians and other ancient nations, the circle and snake. 
The whole figure is the circle, snake, and wings.  By this they
meant to picture out, as well as they could, the nature of the
Divinity.”
The temple which represents the body of the snake is formed by a
circular agger of earth having its ditch withinside.  As this is
contrary to the mode adopted in works of defence, it is thought
to prove the religious character of Abury.  In a description
given of this shrine by Higgins is the following:
“These ramparts inclose an area of 1400 feet in diameter, which
on the edge nearest the ditch was set round with a row of rough,
unhewn stones, and in the center was ornamented with two circular
temples, composed of the same native stones."[159]
[159] Celtic Druids.  Description of plates, p. xx.
The space of ground included within the vellum has been estimated
at twenty-two acres, and the outward circumvallation was computed
at 4800 feet.  The number of stones that formed this outer circle
was originally one hundred, of which, in the year 1722, there
were eighteen standing, and twenty-seven thrown down.
In the village of Rudstone in Yorkshire there stands a huge
stone, the significance of which, at the present time, is by
scholars clearly understood.  Its depth below the surface of the
ground is said to be equal to its height above, which is
twenty-four feet.  It is five feet ten inches broad, and two feet
thick, its weight being upwards of forty tons.[160]
[160] See Rivers of Life.
The gigantic rocking stones found in nearly every quarter of the
globe are now known to be religious monuments of remote
antiquity.  Not long ago I saw a description of one of these
oracles in Buenos-Ayres, South America, and a few months later
there appeared the following account of a similar stone found in
Sullivan Co., N. Y.:
“At first sight it would scarcely attract attention, but a closer
observation reveals the remarkable position which it occupies. 
The total weight of the immense boulder has been variously
estimated at from forty to fifty tons, and its bulk at from 500
to 700 cubic feet.  It is almost perfectly round, much resembling
a huge orange, and so nicely balanced on a table of stone as to
be easily set in motion by a single man, providing the operator
exerts his strength on the north or south sides.  On either of
the other sides the combined strength of forty elephants would
not be sufficient to cause the least oscillation.  Although it is
easily rocked, we are assured that as many men as could surround
it would be unable to dislodge it from the pivot on which it
rests."[161]
[161] The St. Louis (Mo.) Republican.
The writer of the above, who was evidently ignorant of the extent
to which these monuments are scattered over the earth, seemed to
regard it as a singular freak of Nature with no significance
other than that of a natural curiosity.
The round towers of Ireland, over the origin of which there has
in the past been so much controversy, are now pretty generally
admitted to be analogous in their use and design to Stonehenge,
Abury, and other extant monolithic structures.
Many writers have endeavored to prove that these towers were
belfries used in connection with Christian churches; others that
they were purgatorial columns or penitential heights, similar in
design to the pillar of St. Simeon Stylites.  Others again have
argued that they were used as beacons and others that they were
intended simply as receptacles for the sacred fire known to have
formerly been in use in the British Isles.  Although numberless
arguments have been brought forward to refute these theories, it
is thought that the expensive architecture alone of the elegant
and stately columns known as Round Towers contradicts all these
“guesses,” and that their grandeur and almost absolute
indestructibility proclaim for them a different origin from that
of the lowly and miserable huts which in a later age were erected
beside them for purposes of worship by the Romish Christians. 
The same objection is made also against the theory that these
monuments were erected in memory of the several defeats of the
Danes.  As an answer to the argument that they were erected by
the Danes to celebrate their victories, it is declared that such
is the character of the hieroglyphics upon them as to make this
theory worthless.  Besides, throughout the country of the Danes
and Ostmen, there is nowhere to be found an example of
architectural splendor such as is displayed in the construction
of these columns.  In the north of Scotland was one of these
monuments upon which were depicted war-like scenes, horses and
their riders, warriors brandishing their weapons, and troops
shouting for victory, while on the other side was a sumptuous
cross, beneath which were two figures, the one evidently female,
the other male.
In Cordiner’s Antiquities of Scotland is a description of an
elaborately carved obelisk.  On one side of this column appears a
mammoth cross, and underneath it are figures of uncouth animals. 
Among these carvings are to be seen the Bulbul of Iran, the Boar
of Vishnu, the elk, the fox, the lamb, and a number of dancing
human figures.  In fact all the configurations are not only in
their nature and import essentially Eastern, but are actually the
symbols of the various animal forms under which “the people of
the East contemplated the properties of the Godhead.”
Carnac, in upper Egypt, is a monolith of the same symbolic
character.  It is hewn from a solid block of black granite and is
eighty feet high.
Henry O’Brien, a cultured Irishman, who when in London became, in
his own line of investigation, one of the chief contributors to
Fraser’s Magazine while at its best, in response to a call by the
Royal Irish Academy for productions relating to the origin and
use of the Round Towers, declared that they were erected by a
colony of Tuath-de-danaans, or Lingham worshippers from Persia,
who had left their native land because of the victories gained
over them by their rivals–the Pish de-danaans–a sect of Yoni
worshippers; in other words, the sect which recognized the female
element as the superior agency in reproduction, and who,
therefore, worshipped it as divine.  In the devastating wars
which swept over Persia and the other countries of antiquity
prior to the age of the later Zoroaster, the Pish-de danaans were
victorious, and, driving from the country the Tuath-de danaans,
or male worshippers, succeeded in re-establishing, and for a time
maintaining, the old form of worship. O’Brien claims that the
Tuath-de-danaans who were expelled from Persia emigrated to
Ireland, and there continued or preserved their favorite form of
worship, the Round Towers having been erected by them in
conformity to their peculiar religious views.  This writer
assures us that the old Irish tongue bears unmistakable evidence
of the relation existing between these countries.  In addition to
the similarity of language which is found to exist between
ancient Ireland or Iren, and Persia or Iran, the same writer
observes that in all their customs, religious observances, and
emblems, the resemblance is preserved.
Much regret has been expressed by all the writers who have dealt
with this subject that at an earlier age when Stonehenge, Abury,
and various other of the ancient monumental shrines of the
British Isles were in a better state of preservation, and before
bigotry and religious hatred had been aroused against them, more
minute observations of their character and of all the details
surrounding them could not have been made; yet, notwithstanding
the late date at which these investigations were begun, it is
believed that a fair amount of success has crowned the efforts
which have been put forth to unravel the mysteries bound up in
them.
When we remember that every detail connected with the sacred
monuments of the ancients was full of significance that their
religious ideas were all portrayed by means of symbols which
appeared in connection with their sacred edifices–the extent to
which a thorough understanding of these details would assist in
revealing the mysteries involved in the universal religious
conceptions may in a measure be realized.
The identity of the symbols used to express religious ideas, and
the extent to which the conceptions of a creative force have been
connected in all portions of the globe, are set forth in the
following from Barlow:
“A complete history of religious symbolism should embrace all the
religions of antiquity no less than the Christian, and it would
require as thorough a knowledge of their tenets as of our own to
explain satisfactorily its influence in regulating the practice
of art."[162]
[162] Symbolism, p. 10.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
