


According to the accounts in the New Testament, the wise men of
the East, meaning Persia, had foretold the coming of Christ.  The
fulfilment of the ancient Persian prophecy as applied to Jesus,
together with the reference to the “star” which the Maji saw, and
which went before them till it came and stood over where the
young child lay, furnishes a striking illustration of the manner
in which Eastern legends and ancient sacred writings are
interwoven with the doctrines relating to Christianity.
In the sacred books of the East it is prophesied that “after
three thousand and one hundred years of the Caligula are elapsed,
will appear King Saca to remove wretchedness from the world.”  We
have seen that at the birth of Christ the time had arrived for a
new solar incarnation.
Regarding the introduction of Christianity into Ireland it is
claimed by certain writers that the Irish did not receive the
“new religion” from Greek missionaries; but when at the close of
the cycle, a new solar deity, an avatar of Vishnu or Crishna was
announced, and when missionaries from the East proclaimed the
glad tidings of a risen Savior, the Irish people gladly accepted
their teachings, not, however, as a new system, but as the
fulfilment to them of the prophecy of the most ancient seers of
the East, and as part and parcel of the religion of their
forefathers.  Therefore when the devotees of the Romish faith,
probably about the close of the fifth century of the Christian
era, attempted to “convert” Ireland, they found a religion
differing from their own only in the fact that it was not subject
to Rome, and was free from the many corruptions and superstitions
which through the extreme ignorance and misapprehension of its
Western adherents had been engrafted upon it.
Concerning the form of religious worship in Great Britain, and
the fact that phallic worship prevailed there, Forlong writes:
“The generality of our countrymen have no conception of the
overruling prevalence of this faith, and the number of its
lingham gods throughout our Islands.”  These symbols were always
in the form of an obelisk or tower, thereby indicating the
worship of the male energy.  Although emblems of the female
element in the deity were present, they were less pronounced and
of far less importance than those of the male.
These monuments were erected on knolls, at crossroads and centers
of marts or villages, and were placed on platforms which were
usually raised from five to seven steps.  A few years ago the
shires of Gloucester, Wilts, and Somerset still claimed over two
hundred of these crosses, though all of them were not at that
time in a perfect state of preservation.
It would seem that in Britain and Ireland the seed of the “new"
doctrine, that which involved a recognition of the mother element
in the god-idea, had fallen on more congenial soil, for within
three centuries after the birth of Christ, the various original
monuments typifying the male principle had all been ornamented
with the symbols representing the female in the deity.  The
ancient religious structures of the Lingaites still continued as
recognized faith shrines, changed only by the emblems of the new
religion which had been engrafted upon them.
The earliest Greek and Roman missionaries knew full well the
significance of these symbols, and we are given to understand
that “a few of the more spiritual of the Christian sects made war
upon them and all their ephemeral substitutes, such as Maypoles,
holy-trees, real crosses, etc.”  It is declared also that, as
“later” Christians were unacquainted with the significance of
these emblems, “they adopted them as their own, employing them as
the mystic signs of their own faith.”
Although the earliest Greek and Roman missionaries understood the
signification of these faith shrines, the complaints against them
seem soon to have ceased, and the “fierce wars” waged over them
appear to have left little trace of their ravages, except that
the female emblems with which these monuments had been supplied
by those who had received the new faith direct from the East,
were all removed.  As the male monuments and symbols were all
permitted to remain undisturbed, this fact of itself would seem
to indicate that the “pagan abominations” against which these
pious devotees of a “spiritual religion” thundered their
denunciations, included only the female emblems.
The fact must be borne in mind that the Western Church, which was
rapidly usurping the ecclesiastical authority of Britain and
Ireland, had not itself at this time adopted the worship of the
Virgin Mary.
A set of iconoclastic monks whom the Christian world is pleased
to designate as St.  Patrick, and who probably early in the fifth
century of our era amused themselves by chiseling from the Irish
monuments many of the symbols of the female power, removed also
the figures of serpents which had for ages appeared in connection
with the emblems of woman, and by this act won the plaudits of an
admiring Christian world; chiefly, however, for the skill
manifested in “banishing snakes from Ireland.”  In addition to
this dignified amusement, we find that the same person or set of
persons ordered to be burned hundreds of volumes of the choicest
Irish literature, volumes which contained the annals of the
ancient Irish nation, and in which, it is believed, was stored
much actual information concerning the remote antiquity of the
human race.
The extent to which the worship of the male emblems of generation
prevailed in the Christian Church even as late as the 16th
century, proves that it was not the particular symbols connected
with the worship of fertility upon which the Western Christian
missionaries made war, but, on the contrary, that it was the
recognition by them of that detested female element against
which, even before the erection of the Tower of Babel, there had
been almost a constant warfare.  The rites of Potin, or Photin,
Bishop of Lyons, who was honored in Provence, Languedoc and the
Lyonais as St. Fontin, also the rites performed in many of the
Christian Churches as late as the 16th century, prove that the
devotees of the Christian system were not at this time a whit
behind their Pagan predecessors in their zeal for “heathen
abominations.”  The only difference being that the Druids, a
people who still retained a faint conception of ancient Nature
worship, had not become entirely divested of the purer ideas
which in an earlier age of the race had constituted a creative
force.
That the war of the sexes was revived, and that for many
centuries much strife was engendered over the exact importance
which should be ascribed to the female element in the Deity may
not be doubted.
An ancient homily on Trinity Sunday has the following: “At the
deth of a manne, three bells should be ronge as his kuyl in
worship of the Trinitie, and for a woman, who was the Second
Person of the Trinitie two bells should be ronge.”  Upon this
subject Hargrave Jennings remarks: “Here we have the source of
the emblematic difficulty among the master masons who constructed
the earlier cathedrals, as to the addition, and as to the precise
value of the second (or feminine) tower of the Western end or
Galilee of the Church."[148]
[148] Rosicrucians, vol. i., p. 206.
The fact that the religion of the ancient Irish, who, were
phallic worshippers, was modified but not radically changed by
the introduction of Christianity, is believed by at least one of
the Irish historians of that country.  He says:
“The church festivals themselves, in our Christian calendar, are
but the direct transfers from the Tuath-de-danaans’ ritual. 
Their very names in Irish are identically the same as those by
which they were distinguished by that early race.  If, therefore,
surprise has heretofore been excited at the conformity observable
between our church institutions and those of the East, let it in
future subside at the explicit announcement that Christianity,
with us, was the revival of a religion imported amongst us many
ages before by the Tuath-de-danaans from the East, and not from
any chimerical inundation of Greek missionaries–a revival upon
which their hearts were lovingly riveted, and which Fiech, the
Bishop of Sletty, unconsciously registers in the following
couplet, viz.:
[149] The Round Towers of Ireland, p. 493.
The conditions surrounding the ancient inhabitants of the “White
Island,” or Ireland, a remnant of which people may be observed in
the Highlanders of Scotland, furnish an example of the fact that
a much higher standard of life had been preserved among them than
is known to have prevailed either among the Jews or the Greeks. 
The comparatively advanced stage of progress which is now known
to have existed in Ireland at the beginning of the present era,
which even the bigotry and falsehood of Roman priestcraft have
not been able wholly to conceal, is seen to have been a somewhat
corrupted remnant of a civilization which followed closely on
ancient Nature worship.[150]
[150] It is thought by certain writers that when the Tuath-de-
danaans emigrated from Persia to the “White Island” they found it
inhabited by the Fir-Bolgs, a colony of Celts.  After conquering
the island they engrafted upon it the religion, laws, learning
and culture of the mother country.  In a later age the Scythians,
whose religion was similar to that of the Fir-Bolgs, united with
them and succeeded in making themselves masters of the situation.
Hence the intermingling of races and tongues among the ancient
Irish.  The Druids adopted, or appropriated, the religion and
culture of the Tuath-de-danaans, who, it is claimed, were the
real Hibernians.  The Scythians changed the name of Irin to
Scotia–the latter being retained until the 11th century. 
According to the annals of the ancient Irish, Scotland was
formerly called Scotia Minor to distinguish it from Scotia Major,
or Ireland.
Because of their isolated position, or for some cause at present
unknown, these people do not seem to have degenerated into a
nation of sensualists.  It is true they had departed a long
distance from the early conditions of mankind under which
altruism and the abstract principle of Light or Wisdom were
worshipped under the form of a Virgin Mother and her child, but
they never wholly rejected the female element in their god-idea,
nor never, so far as known, attempted to degrade womanhood. 
Women were numbered among their legislators, at the same time
that they officiated as educators and priestesses.  In fact
wherever the Druidical order prevailed women exerted a powerful
influence in all departments of human activity.  Among the
Germans, Valleda, a Druidess, was for ages worshipped as a deity.
It is recorded that St. Bridget planted a monastery for women at
Kildare and entrusted to its inmates the keeping of the sacred
fire, and that in later times the Asiatic missionaries founded
there a female monkish order.  After the establishment of Western
Christianity, however, no woman was permitted to enter into the
monasteries, and we are assured that this ridiculous affectation
of purity was extended even to the grave.  During the earlier
ages of Christianity, in many portions of Ireland there were
cemeteries for men and women distinct from each other.  “It had
been a breach of chastity for monks and nuns to be interred
within the same enclosure.  They should fly from temptations
which they could not resist.”
Although volumes have been written to prove that Christianity was
carried to Britain by Paul, and although the energies of scores
of Romish writers have been employed in attempting to prove that
Ireland was in heathen darkness prior to its conversion by the
priests of the Romish Church, yet these efforts so vigorously put
forward seem only to strengthen the evidence going to show that
the Christianity of the British Isles antedates that of either
Paul or Rome.
According to Scripture, Claudia, the wife of the Senator Pudens
of Britain, was a Christian,[151] as was also Graecina, the wife
of Plautus, who was governor of Britain in the first century. 
The latter, it is related, was accused before the Roman senate of
“practicing some foreign superstition.”  Although Lingard, in his
History and Antiquities of the Anglo-Saxon Church, has endeavored
to annul the force of the evidence which places two Christian
women from Britain in Rome during the first century of our era,
he is nevertheless constrained to use the following language: “We
are, indeed, told that history has preserved the names of two
British females, Claudia and Pomponia Graecina, both of them
Christians, and both living in the first century of our
era."[152]
[151] 2 Timothy, iv., 21.
[152] Vol. i., p. 1.
According to the Romanists, between the years 177-181 of the
Christian era, a British king named Lucius sent a messenger to
the authorities at Rome, with a request that he with his people
be admitted into the bosom of the “Holy Catholic Church.”  By
those not prejudiced in favor of the Romish hierarchy, this bit
of amusing “evidence” shows the anxiety manifested lest the facts
concerning the religious history of the British Isles become
known.  Regarding this embassy of King Lucius there is an extant
version which is far more in accordance with reason and with the
known facts concerning this people.
When we remember the advanced stage of civilization which existed
in Ireland prior to the Christian era, and when we bear in mind
the fact that, as in the case of Abarras mentioned by various
Greek writers, the people of the British Isles were wont to send
emissaries abroad for the sole purpose of gathering information
relative to foreign laws, customs, usages, manners, and modes of
instruction, we are not surprised to learn that the message to
Rome sent by Lucius, instead of containing a request for
admission to a foreign church, embodied an enquiry into the
fundamental principles underlying Roman jurisprudence; and
especially does this appear reasonable when we remember that the
remodeling of the Roman code on principles of equity and justice
had for several centuries employed the energies of the best minds
in Rome.
Concerning the planting of Christianity in Ireland, we have the
following from Ledwich:
“Thus Bishop Lawrence in Bede tells us Pope Gregory sent him and
Austin to preach the Gospel in Britain, as if it never before had
been heard, whereas the latter met seven British Bishops who
nobly opposed him.  In like manner Pope Adrian commissioned Henry
II.  to enlarge the bounds of the church, and plant the faith in
Ireland, when it had already been evangelized for eight hundred
years.  The faith to be planted was blind submission to Rome and
the annual payment of Peter’s pence."[153]
[153] Antiquities of Ireland, p. 78.
Of the exact time at which Romish and Greek missionaries first
went to Ireland we are not informed, but there is ample evidence
going to prove that a regular hierarchy had been established in
that island before the beginning of the fifth century, and that
this religion which had been brought in through the efforts of
missionaries from the East was, by the legendary writers of the
later Christian Church, ascribed to Romish monks.
The Jealousy of the Romish priests, and the means employed by
them to usurp the ecclesiastical authority of the Irish people,
is shown in the history of their councils.  The 5th canon of the
Council of Ceale-hythe requires
“that none of Irish extraction be permitted to usurp to himself
the sacred ministry in any one’s diocese, nor let it be allowed
such an one to touch anything which belongs to those of the holy
order.  .  .  .; neither must he administer the eucharist to the
people because we are not certain how or by whom he was
ordained.”
After quoting the above Ledwich queries thus: If St.  Patrick had
been a missionary of the Romish Church, would the Anglo-Saxon
clergy have abjured the spiritual children of that see? In the
year 670 Theodoret, Archbishop of Canterbury, decreed that they
who were consecrated by Irish or British Bishops should be
confirmed anew by Catholic ones.[154]
[154] Ledwich, Antiquities of Ireland, p. 81.
It is observed that as early as the fourth century A.D. there
were three hundred bishops in Ireland, and to account for so
large a number, it is declared that ignorant legendary writers
had recourse to the fable of St. Patrick.
The remarkable “conversion” of the Irish to Romish Christianity,
which it is said took place in the latter part of the fourth
century or the beginning of the fifth, is to be explained by the
fact that a number of Romish priests or monks which in later ages
came to be designated as St. Patrick, claimed all the
monasteries, bishops, and priests already there as a result of
the remarkable power and pious zeal of this miracle-working
saint.  It is claimed that St. Patrick founded over three
thousand monasteries, consecrated three hundred bishops, and
ordained three thousand priests.
According to Ledwich and other writers, this St.  Patrick was not
heard of earlier than the ninth century A.D., and the legend
concerning him “was not accepted until the twelfth century, at
which time his miracles are set forth with great gusto.”
Nothing, perhaps, which is recorded of this monk will go farther
toward proving him a myth than the miracles ascribed to his
saintship.
While yet an infant he raised the dead, brought forth fire from
ice, expelled a devil from a heifer, caused a new river to appear
from the earth, and changed water into honey.
“These were but the infant sports of this wonder-working saint. 
The miracles recorded in holy writ, even that of creation itself,
are paralleled, and, if possible, surpassed by those of our
spiritual hero."[155]
[155] Ledwich, Antiquities of Ireland.
Concerning St. Patrick, Forlong writes:
“Various Patricks followed from Britain and Armorika, but even
the Catholic priest, J. F. Shearman, writes that he is forced to
give up the idea that there ever was a real St. Patrick.  Thus
the name must be accepted only in its Fatherly sense, and with
the fall of the man Patrick all the miraculous and sudden
conversions of the kings, lords, and commons of Ireland must
vanish."[156]
[156] Rivers of Life, vol. ii., p. 417.
The Irish Church bishoprics differed from the Romish in that they
were held by hereditary succession, after the custom of ancient
nations.  All bishops were married.
Prior to the introduction of the Christian system in Ireland the
Sabian ceremonial had been succeeded by the Druidical, upon which
had been engrafted that of the Culdees, and notwithstanding the
fact that the Romish Church gradually usurped the ecclesiastical
functions in Ireland, the last named people who for ages had been
regarded as the depositaries of the ancient faith and the ancient
system of laws, were highly respected by the people for their
sanctity and learning.  Many of the Greek and Roman writers who
have dealt with this subject agree in ascribing to the Druids a
high degree of scientific knowledge and mechanical skill.  The
principles of justice set forth in their judicial system, their
love of learning, and the standard attained in the sciences and
arts, prove the early people of Ireland to have been equal if not
superior to any of the early historic nations.
In referring to the number and magnitude of the monumental
remains in Ireland, and while commenting on the mechanical skill
of the Druids, the Rev. Smedley says:
“I was present at the erection of the Luxor Obelisk in Paris, and
yet I think that I would have felt greater emotion if I had
witnessed the successful performance of the old Celtic engineer
who placed on its three pedestals of stone the enormous rock
which constitutes the Druidical altar here at Castle May.”
It is believed that this people understood the art of mining and
that they were acquainted with the use of iron.  The following is
an extract from one of Hamilton’s letters on the Antrim coast:
“About the year 1770 the miners, in pushing forward an adit
toward the bed of coal, at an unexplored part of the Ballycastle
cliff, unexpectedly broke through the rock into a narrow passage,
so much contracted and choked up with various drippings and
deposits on its sides and bottom, as rendered it impossible for
any of the workmen to force through, that they might examine it
farther.  Two lads were, therefore, made to creep in with
candles, for the purpose of exploring this subterranean avenue. 
They accordingly pressed forward for a considerable time, with
much labor and difficulty, and at length entered into an
extensive labyrinth branching off into numerous apartments, in
the mazes and windings of which they were completely bewildered
and lost.  After various vain attempts to return, their lights
were extinguished, their voices became hoarse, and, becoming
wearied and spiritless, they sat down together, in utter despair
of an escape from this miserable dungeon.  In the meanwhile, the
workmen in the adit became alarmed for their safety, fresh hands
were incessantly employed, and, in the course of twenty-four
hours, the passage was so open as to admit the most active among
the miners .  .  .  On examining this subterranean wonder, it was
found to be a complete gallery, which had been driven forward
many hundred yards to the bed of coal: that it branched off into
numerous chambers, where miners had carried on their different
works: that these chambers were dressed in a workmanlike manner:
that pillars were left at proper intervals to support the roof. 
In short it was found to be an extensive mine, wrought by people
at least as expert in the business as the present generation. 
Some remains of the tools, and even of the baskets used in the
works, were discovered, but in such a decayed state that, on
being touched, they immediately crumbled to pieces.  From the
remains which were found, there is reason to believe that the
people who wrought these collieries anciently, were acquainted
with the use of iron, some small pieces of which were found; it
appeared as if some of their instruments had been thinly shod
with that metal.”
Through various means the fact has been ascertained that although
in the sixth century the buildings in Ireland were mean and
wholly without artistic merit or skilful design, in an earlier
age they were magnificent.  Of the causes which produced the
decay of architecture, the extinction of the arts and sciences,
and the general degradation of the people of this island the
devotees of St. Paul and of the Romish Church are alike silent.
For ages after the subjection of Ireland, in open defiance of the
English, the people continued to dispense justice, and to enforce
the old Brehon laws of the country.
The lack of regard shown for English law in Ireland, even as late
as the sixteenth century, is set forth by Baron Fingles, who
wrote in the time of Henry VIII.  He says:
“It is a great abuse and reproach that the laws and statutes made
in this land are not observed nor kept after the making of them
eight days, while diverse Irishmen cloth abuse and keep such laws
and statutes which they make upon hills in this country, firm and
stable, without breaking them for any favor or reward.”
By a statute of Parliament enacted at Kilkenny, it was made high
treason to administer or observe these old Brehon laws.  The two
enactments especially obnoxious to the English were Gahail Cinne,
and Eiric.  The former of these enactments was that which in
opposition to the English law of primogeniture declared that the
estate of a parent should descend in equal proportion to all
members of the family.  There was another law, or custom, among
this people, which provided that the chief of the tribe or people
should be elected by general suffrage.
We have something more than a hint of the condition of ancient
Ireland and its people in a description given by the Greeks of
one of its inhabitants.  Abarras, who visited Greece about six
hundred years before Christ, and who was called by the Greeks a
Hyperborean, was a priest of the Sun, who went abroad for the
purpose of study and observation, and to renew by his presence
and his gifts the old friendship which had long existed between
the Celts and the Greeks.  Strabo remarks concerning Abarras that
he was much admired by the learned men of Greece.  Himerius says
of him that he came
“not clad in skins like a Scythian, but with a bow in his hand,
and a quiver on his shoulders and a plaid wrapped about his body,
a gilded belt encircled his loins, and trousers reaching from his
waist downward to the soles of his feet.  He was easy in his
address, agreeable in conversation, active in dispatch and secret
in the management of great affairs; quick in judging of present
occurrences, and ready to take his part in any sudden emergency;
provident, withal, in guarding against futurity; diligent in
quest of wisdom, fond of friendship; trusting very little to
fortune; yet having the entire confidence of others, and trusted
with everything for his prudence.  He spoke Greek with so much
fluency that you would have thought that he had been bred or
brought up in the Lyceum and had conversed all his life with the
Academy of Athens.  He had frequent intercourse with Pythagoras
whom he astonished by the variety and extent of his knowledge.”
From the descriptions given of the native country of Abarras by
the Greeks, it is evident that it could have been none other than
Ireland.
Although at this time in their history, Apollo the sun-god was
the Deity worshipped in Greece and in Ireland, still both nations
honored Latona his mother.  The same as in the mother country
(Persia, or Phoenicia), the oracles, or sybils of Ireland, had
prophesied a “Savior,” and three hundred years before Greek
emissaries visited that country, its people, through the
preaching of Eastern missionaries, had substituted for the
worship of Latona and Apollo that of the new solar
incarnation–the third son of Zarathustra, whose appearance had
been heralded by a star.
The identity of the symbols used by the early people of Ireland
who were sun worshippers, and those employed in that country for
ages after the Romish Church had usurped the ecclesiastical
authority, has been a subject for much comment.  After describing
the peculiar form of the early Christian Churches and the
attention paid to the placing of the windows which were to admit
the sun’s rays, Smedley says: “It is possible, in an age of
allegory and figures, this combination and variety expressed some
sacred meaning with which we are unacquainted at present.”
The similarity observed in the sacred festivals and religious
seasons of the ancient inhabitants of Ireland and those of the
early Christians, the extent to which large stone crosses,
lighted candles, the yule log and the various other symbols
belonging to fertility, or sun worship, were retained by
Christianity, furnish strong evidence of the fact that the latter
system is but part and parcel of the former.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
