


The profound doctrines of abstractions or emanations; of the
absorption of the individual soul into the divine ether or
essence; of the renewal of worlds and reincarnation, were
doubtless elaborated after the separation, in the human mind, of
Spirit from matter, but before mankind had lost the power to
reason abstractly.
Although Pythagoras understood and believed these doctrines, he
did not, as is well known, receive them from his degenerate
countrymen, but, on the contrary, imbibed them from private
sources among the orientals, where fragments of their remarkable
learning were still extant.  He said that religion consists in
knowing the truth and doing good, and his ideas show the grandeur
and beauty of the earlier conception of a Deity.  He declared
that there is only one God who is not, “as some are apt to
imagine, seated above the world, beyond the orb of the universe,"
but that this great power is diffused throughout Nature.  It is
“the reason, the life, and the motion of all things.”
Plato believed that human beings are possessed of two souls, the
one mortal, which perishes with the body, the other immortal,
which continues to exist either in a state of happiness or
misery; that the righteous soul, freed from the limitations of
matter, returns at death to the source whence it came, and that
the wicked, after having been detained for a while in a place
prepared for their reception, are sent back to earth to reanimate
other bodies.
Aristotle held the opinion that the souls of human beings are
sparks from the divine flame, while Zeno, the founder of the
Stoic philosophy, taught that spirit acting upon matter produced
the elements and the earth.  There is plenty of evidence going to
show that the early Fathers in the Christian church believed in
the doctrines of reincarnation and the renewal of worlds. 
Neither is there any doubt but that this philosophy came from the
East, where it originated.  It is thought that the ancient
philosophers who elaborated these doctrines were unable to
account for the existence of evil without a belief in the
immortality of the soul.  Spirit was eternal, as was also matter.
A soul, upon leaving the body, in course of time found its way
back to earth, surrounded by conditions suited to its stage of
growth.  Here it must reap all the consequences of its former
life.  It must also during its stay on earth make the conditions
for its next appearance upon an earthly plane.  So soon as
through a succession of births and deaths it had perfected
itself, it entered into a state of Nirvana.  It was absorbed into
the great Universal Soul.  Nothing is ever lost.
[60] Edwin Arnold, The light of Asia.
Regarding the opinions of the ancients on the subject of the
eternity of matter, Higgins, in his learned work on Celtic
Druids, says:
“The eternity of matter is a well known tenet of the
Pythagoreans, and whether right or wrong there can be no doubt
that it was the doctrine of the oriental school, whence
Pythagoras drew his learning.  It was a principle taken or
mistaken from, or found amongst, the debris of that mighty mass
of learning and science of a former period, of which, on looking
back as far as human ken can reach, the most learned men have
thought that they could see a faint glimmering.  Indeed, I think
I may say something more than a faint glimmering.  For all the
really valuable moral and philosophical doctrines we possess,
Dutens has shown to have existed there.”
From what is known relative to the speculations of an ancient
race, the fact is observed that creation was but a re-formation
of matter.  Wisdom, or Minerva, formed the earth and the planets;
she did not create the heavens and the earth, as did the later
Jewish God.
Of the seven principles of the universe, matter was the first,
and of the seven principles of man, the physical body was the
earliest.  Through evolutionary processes, or through cyclic
periods involving millions of years, mind was developed, and in
course of time spirit was finally manifested.
Mai, the Mother of Gotama Buddha, was simply matter, or illusion,
from which its higher manifestation, mind or spirit, was
emerging.  She was also the mother of Mercury.  A clearer
knowledge of the philosophical doctrines which were elaborated at
a time when Nature-worship was beginning to decay, reveals the
fact that the god-idea comprehended a profound knowledge of
Nature and her laws; that while this people did not pretend to
account for the existence of matter, they recognized a force
operating through it whose laws were unchanged and unchanging.
With these facts relative to the intelligence of an older race
before us, the question naturally arises: What was the degree of
civilization attained at a time when the Deity worshipped was an
abstract principle involving the actual creative processes
throughout Nature? and, notwithstanding our prejudices, we are
constrained to acknowledge that these earlier conceptions are
scarcely compatible with the barbarism which we have been taught
to regard as the condition of all the peoples which existed prior
to the first Greek Olympiad.  On the contrary, the origin of the
philosophical opinions entertained by the most ancient oriental
philosophers, and which must have arisen out of a profound
knowledge or appreciation of Nature and her operations, point to
a race far superior to any of those peoples which appear in early
historic times.  Regarding these opinions, Godfrey Higgins
remarks:
“From their philosophical truth and universal reception I am
strongly inclined to refer them to the authors of the Neros, or
to that enlightened race, supposed by Bailly to have formerly
existed, and to have been saved from a great catastrophe on the
Himalaya Mountains.  This is confirmed by an observation which
the reader will make in the sequel, that these doctrines have
been, like all the other doctrines of antiquity, gradually
corrupted–incarnated, if I may be permitted to compose a word
for the occasion.”
Of this cycle, Bailly says: “No person could have invented the
Neros who had not arrived at much greater perfection in astronomy
than we know was the state of the most ancient Assyrians,
Egyptians, and Greeks.”
Toward the close of the eighteenth century the celebrated
astronomer, Bailly, published a work entitled The History of
Ancient Astronomy, in which he endeavored to prove that a nation
possessed of profound wisdom and great genius, and of an
antiquity far superior to the Hindoos or Egyptians, “inhabited
the country to the north of India, or about fifty degrees north
latitude.”  This writer has shown that “the most celebrated
astronomical observations and inventions, from their peculiar
character, could have taken place only in these latitudes, and
that arts and improvements gradually travelled thence to the
equator.”
A colony of Brahmins settled near the Imans, and in Northern
Thibet, where in ancient times they established celebrated
colleges, particularly at Nagraent and Cashmere.  In these
institutions the treasures of Sanskrit literature were supposed
to be deposited.  The Rev. Mr. Maurice was informed that an
immemorial tradition prevailed at Benares that all the learning
of India came from a country situated in forty degrees of
northern latitude.  Other writers are of the opinion that
civilization proceeded from Arabia; that the old Cushite race
carried commerce, letters, and laws to all the nations of the
East.  Which of these theories is true, if either, may not with
certainty be proved at present; yet that in the far distant past
a race of people existed whose achievements exceeded those of any
of the historic nations may not be doubted.
That the length of the year was calculated with greater exactness
by an ancient and forgotten people than it was by early historic
nations is proved by the cycle of the Neros.  This cycle, which
was formed of 7.421 lunar revolutions of 29 days, 12 hours, 44
minutes, and 3 seconds, or 219,146 days and a half, was equal to
600 solar years of 365 days, 5 hours, 51 minutes, and 36 seconds,
which time varies less than three minutes from the present
observations of the year’s length.  The length of the year as
calculated by the Egyptians and other early historic nations was
360 days, which fact would seem to indicate that a science of
astronomy had been developed in an earlier age which by the most
ancient peoples of whom we have any historic records has been
lost or forgotten.  It has been said that if this cycle of the
Neros “were correct to the second, if on the first of January at
noon a new moon took place, it would take place again in exactly
600 years at the same moment of the day, and under all the same
circumstances."[61]
[61] Godfrey Higgins, Celtic Druids, ch. ii., sec. 14.
The Varaha Calpa has the famous cycle of 4,320,000,000 years for
its duration.  This system makes the Cali Yug begin 3098 years
B.C.  A dodecan consisted of 5 days, and 72 dodecans formed a
natural year of 360 days.  According to the earlier calculations,
360 solar diurnal revolutions constituted a natural year.  The
doctrine of the ancients concerning these cycles is thus set
forth by Godfrey Higgins:
“The sun, or rather that higher principle of which the sun was
the emblem or the shekinah, was considered to be incarnated every
six hundred years.  Whilst the sun was in Taurus, the different
incarnations, under whatever names they might go, were all
considered but as incarnations of Buddha or Taurus.  When he got
into Aries, they were in like manner considered but as
incarnations of Cristna or Aries, and even Buddha and Cristna
were originally considered the same, and had a thousand names in
common, constantly repeated in their litanies–a striking proof
of identity of origin.  Of these Zodiacal divisions the Hindoos
formed another period, which consisted of ten ages or Calpas or
Yugs, which they considered the duration of the world, at the end
of which a general renovation of all things would take place. 
They also reckoned ten Neroses to form a period, each of them
keeping a certain relative location to the other, and together to
form a cycle.  To effect this they doubled the precessional
period for one sign– viz: 2160 years–thus making 4320, which
was a tenth of 43,200, a year of the sun, analogous to the 360
natural days, and produced in the same manner, by multiplying the
day of 600 by the dodecans 72 = 43,200.  They then formed another
great year of 432,000 by again multiplying it by 10, which they
called a Cali Yug, which was measurable both by the number 2160,
the years the equinox preceded in a sign, and by the number 600. 
They then had the following scheme:
altogether 10 Ages, making a Maha Yug or Great Age.  These were
all equimultiples of the Cycle of the Neros 600, and of 2160, the
twelfth part of the equinoctial precessional Cycle, and in all
formed ten ages of 432,000 years each."[62]
[62] Anacalypsis, vol. i., p. 232.
The two great religious festivals of the ancients occurred the
one in the spring, at Easter, when all Nature was renewed, the
other in the autumn, after the earth had yielded her bounties and
the fruits were garnered in.  It was at these gatherings that the
Great Mother Earth received the devout adoration of all her
children.
It is supposed that the Neros, or cycle of 600, is closely
connected with this worship, and that it was invented to regulate
the season for these festivals.  In process of time it was
discovered that this cycle no longer answered, that the festival
which had originally fallen on the first of May now occurred on
the first of April.  This, we are told,
“led ultimately to the discovery that the equinox preceded about
2160 years in each sign or 25,920 years in the 12 signs, and this
induced them to try if they could not form a cycle of the two. 
On examination, they found that the 600 would not commensurate
the 2160 years in a sign, or any number of sums of 2160 less than
ten, but that it would with ten, or that in ten times 2160, or in
21,600 years, the two cycles would agree; yet this artificial
cycle would not be enough to include the cycle of 25,920.  They,
therefore, took two of the periods of 21,600, or 43,200; and,
multiplying both by ten–viz: 600 X 10 = 6000, and 43,200 X 10 =
432,000–they formed a period with which the 600-year period and
the 6000-year period would terminate and form a cycle.  Every
432,000 years the three periods would commence anew; thus the
three formed a year or cycle, 72 times 6000 making 432,000, and
720 times 600 making 432,000."[63]
[63] Higgins, Anacalypsis, p. 235.
To form a great year, which would include all the cyclical
motions of the sun and moon, and perhaps of the planets, they
multiplied 432,000 by ten; thus they had ten periods answering to
ten signs.  Concerning these cycles Godfrey Higgins observes:
“Persons of narrow minds will be astonished at such monstrous
cycles; but it is very certain that no period could properly be
called the great year unless it embraced in its cycle every
periodical movement or apparent aberration.  But their vulgar
wonder will perhaps cease when they are told that La Place has
proved that, if the periodical aberrations of the moon be
correctly calculated, the great year must be extended to a
greater length even than 4,320,000 years of the Maha Yug of the
Hindoos, and certainly no period can be called a year of our
planetary system which does not take in all the periodical
motions of the planetary bodies.”
It is thought that as soon as these ancient astronomers perceived
that the equinoxes preceded, they would at once attempt to
determine the rate of precession in a given time; the precession,
however, in one year was so small that they were obliged to
extend their observations over immense periods.  Jones informs us
that the Hindoos first supposed that the precession took place at
the rate of 60 years in a degree, or 1800 in a Zodiacal sign, and
of 21,600 in a revolution of the entire circle.  They afterwards
came to think that the precession was at the rate of 60 years and
a fraction of a year, and thus that the precession for a sign was
in 1824 years, and for the circle in 21,888 years.  Subsequently
they discovered, or thought they had discovered, the Soli-Lunar
period of 608 years, hence they attempted to make the two go
together.  Both, however, proved to be erroneous.
In referring to the fact that among the ancient Romans existed
the story of the twelve vultures and the twelve ages of 120 years
each, Higgins remarks:
“This arose from the following cause: They came from the East
before the supposition that the precession took place a degree in
about 60 years, and 1824 years in a sign had been discovered to
be erroneous; and as they supposed the Neros made a correct cycle
in 608 years, and believed the precessional cycle to be completed
in 21,888, they of course made their ages into twelve.  As both
numbers were erroneous, they would not long answer their intended
purpose, and their meaning was soon lost, though the sacred
periods of twelve ages and of 608 remained.”
According to Hipparchus and Ptolemy, the equinoxes preceded at
the rate of a degree in 100 years, or 36,000 hundred years in 360
degrees.  This constituted a great year, at the end of which the
regeneration of all things takes place.  This is thought to be a
remnant of the most ancient Hindoo speculations, and not the
result of observation among the Greeks.  Some time after the
arrival of the sun in Aries,
“at the vernal equinox, the Indians probably discovered their
mistake, in giving about 60 years to a degree; that they ought to
give 50” to a year, about 72 years to a degree, and about 2160
years to a sign; and that the Luni-Solar cycle, called the Neros,
did not require 608 years, but 600 years only, to complete its
period.  Hence arose the more perfect Neros.”
It is thought by various writers that the knowledge of the
ancient Hindoos regarding the movements of the sun and moon in
their cycles of nineteen and six hundred years–the Metonic
cycle, and the Neros–proves that long before the birth of
Hipparchus the length of the year was known with a degree of
exactitude which that astronomer had not the means of
determining.  It is positively asserted by astronomers that at
least twelve hundred years were required, “during which time the
observations must have been taken with the greatest care and
regularly recorded,” to arrive at the knowledge necessary for the
invention of the Neros, and that such observations would have
been impossible without the aid of the telescope.
On the subject of the great learning of an ancient race, Sir W. 
Drummond says:
“The fact, however, is certain, that at some remote period there
were mathematicians and astronomers who knew that the sun is in
the centre of the planetary system, and that the earth, itself a
planet, revolves round the central fire;–who calculated, or like
ourselves attempted to calculate, the return of comets, and who
knew that these bodies move in elliptic orbits, immensely
elongated, having the sun in one of their foci;–who indicated
the number of the solar years contained in the great cycle, by
multiplying a period (variously called in the Zend, the Sanscrit,
and the Chinese ven, van, and phen) of 180 years by another
period of 144 years;–who reckoned the sun’s distance from the
earth at 800,000,000 of Olympic stadia; and who must, therefore,
have taken the parallax of that luminary by a method, not only
much more perfect than that said to be invented by Hipparchus,
but little inferior in exactness to that now in use among the
moderns;–who could scarcely have made a mere guess when they
fixed the moon’s distance from its primary planet at fifty-nine
semi-diameters of the earth;–who had measured the circumference
of our globe with so much exactness that their calculation only
differed by a few feet from that made by our modern
geometricians; –who held that the moon and the other planets
were worlds like our own, and that the moon was diversified by
mountains and valleys and seas;–who asserted that there was yet
a planet which revolved round the sun, beyond the orbit of
Saturn;–who reckoned the planets to be sixteen in number; –and
who reckoned the length of the tropical year within three minutes
of the true time; nor, indeed, were they wrong at all, if a
tradition mentioned by Plutarch be correct."[64]
[64] Drummond, On the Zodiacs, p. 36.
Bailly, Sir W. Jones, Higgins, and Ledwich, as well as many
modern writers, agree in the conclusion that the Indians, the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Chinese were simply the
depositaries, not the inventors, of science.  The spirit of
inquiry which in later times is directing attention to the almost
buried past is revealing the fact that not merely the germs
whence our present civilization has been developed descended to
us from the dim ages of antiquity, but that a great number of the
actual benefits which go to make up our present state of material
progress have come to us from prehistoric times.  The art of
writing, of navigation (including the use of the compass), the
working of metals, astronomy, the telescope, gunpowder,
mathematics, democracy, building, weaving, dyeing, and many of
the appliances of civilized life, have been appropriated by later
ages with no acknowledgment of the source whence they were
derived.  When Pythagoras exhibited to the Greeks some beautiful
specimens of ancient architecture which he had brought from Egypt
and Babylon, they simply claimed them as their own, giving no
credit to the people who originated them; and subsequent ages,
copying their example, have refused to acknowledge that anything
of value had been achieved prior to the first Greek Olympiad.
When Philip of Macedon opened the gold mines of Thrace, a country
in which it will be remembered the worship of the Great Mother
Cybele was indigenous, he found that they had been previously
worked “at great expense and with great ingenuity by a people
well versed in mechanics, of whom no monuments whatever are
extant.”
The decorations on the breasts of some of the oldest mummies show
that the early Egyptians understood the art of making glass.  It
is now known that the lens as a magnifying instrument was in use
among them.  Attention has been drawn to the fact that the
astronomical observations of the ancients would have been
impossible without the aid of the telescope.  Diodorus Siculus
says there was an island west of the Celtae in which the Druids
brought the sun and moon near them.  An instrument has recently
been found in the sands of the Nile, the construction of which
shows plainly that 6000 years ago the Egyptians were acquainted
with our modern ideas of the science of astronomy.
William Huntington, who has travelled widely in India, Borneo,
the Malay Peninsula, and Egypt, says:
“I think, on the whole, the most interesting experience I ever
had was in an ancient city on the Nile in Egypt.  .  .  .  When I
was there a year ago, and men were digging among the ruined
temples, some curious things were brought to light, and these I
regard as the strangest things seen in all my wanderings.  In an
old tomb was found a curious iron and glass object, which on
investigation proved to be a photographic camera.  It was not
such a camera as is used now, or has been since our photography
was invented, but something analogous to it, showing that the art
which we thought we had discovered was really known 6000 years
ago.”
The same writer states that a plow constructed on the modern plan
was also found.  “It was not of steel but of iron, and it had the
same shape, the same form of point and bend of mold board as we
have now.”
It is reported that the dark continent possesses means of
communication entirely unknown to Europe.  Upon this subject a
correspondent to the New York Tribune writes:
“When Khartoum fell in 1885 I was in Egypt, and I well remember
that the Arabs settled in the neighborhood of the pyramids knew
all about it, as well as about Gen. Gordon’s death, days and
days before the news reached Cairo by telegraph from the
Soudanese frontier.  Yet Khartoum is thousands of miles distant
from Cairo and the telegraph wires from the frontier were
monopolized by the government.”
The same correspondent observes that these Arabs told him, months
previously, of the defeat of the Egyptian army under Baker Pasha
at Tokar–that they not only gave him the news, but several
particulars concerning the matter, two full days before
intelligence was received from the Red Sea coast.  In answer to
the suggestion that such information might have been conveyed by
means of signal fires, this writer says that such fires would
have attracted the attention of the English and native scouts,
and that the whole country is unpropitious to such methods;
besides, no system of signal fires, no matter how elaborate,
could have conveyed the news so quickly and in such detail.  The
whole matter is summed up as follows:
“The Arabs, therefore, have, manifestly, some other means of
rapid communication at their command.  One is inclined to the
presumption that they, like the learned Pundits of Northern
India, have a knowledge of the forces of Nature that are yet
hidden from our most eminent scientists.”
Can it be that the Arabs are acquainted with the very recently
discovered scientific principle, that it is possible to transmit
telegraphic communications without wires, and simply by means of
magnetic currents in earth and water?
Nor is this remarkable skill confined to the “barbarians of the
Old World.”  A correspondent from the far West to the New York
Press wrote that long before the news of the Custer massacre
reached Fort Abraham Lincoln the Sioux had communicated it to
their brethren.  The scouts in Crook’s column to the south knew
of it almost immediately, as did those with Gibbon farther
northwest.  The same writer says that several years ago a naval
lieutenant ran short of provisions.  He pushed on to a settlement
as rapidly as possible and upon arriving there found that the
inhabitants had provided for his coming and had a bounteous store
awaiting him.  The people in the village were of a different
tribe from those whose domain he had passed, and so far as could
be learned were not in communication with them.
The earliest accounts which we have of Egypt and Chaldea reveal
the fact that at a very remote period they were old and powerful
civilizations, that they had a settled government, a pure and
philosophical religion, and a profound knowledge of science and
art; yet, notwithstanding the great antiquity of these
civilizations, that of the people which created them must have
been infinitely more remote.
The earliest historic nations recognized the greatness of these
ancient people and the extent of their dominion.  In the oldest
geographical writings of the Sanskrit people, the ancient
Ethiopia, or land of Cush of Greek and Hebrew antiquity, is
clearly described.  Stephanus of Byzantium, who is said to
represent the opinions of the most ancient Greeks, says:
“Ethiopia was the first established country on the earth, and the
Ethiopians were the first who introduced the worship of the Gods
and who established laws."[65]
[65] Quoted by John D. Baldwin, Prehistoric Nations, p. 62.
Heeren in his researches says:
“From the remotest times to the present, the Ethiopians have been
one of the most celebrated, and yet the most mysterious of
nations.  In the earliest traditions of nearly all the more
civilized nations of antiquity, the name of this distant people
is found.  The annals of the Egyptian priests are full of them,
and the nations of inner Asia, on the Euphrates and Tigris, have
interwoven the fictions of the Ethiopians with their traditions
of the wars and conquests of their heroes; and, at a period
equally remote, they glimmer in Greek mythology.  When the Greeks
scarcely knew Italy and Sicily by name, the Ethiopians were
celebrated in the verses of their poets, and when the faint gleam
of tradition and fable gives way to the clear light of history,
the lustre of the Ethiopians is not diminished.”
Homer says of them that they were a “divided people dwelling at
the ends of the earth toward the setting and the rising Sun.” 
Although it is possible at the present time to discover very many
of the facts bearing upon the civilization of this ancient
people, it is impossible in the present condition of human
knowledge to discover when civilized life began on the earth. 
Whether the ancient Arabians or Ethiopians who belonged to the
old Cushite race, and who are believed by many to be the most
ancient people of whom we have any trace, were the first
colonizers, or whether they were preceded by a still older
civilization, history and tradition are alike silent; yet the
fact seems to be tolerably well authenticated that this
enlightened race, now nearly extinct, carried civilization to
Chaldea more than seven thousand years B.C., that it colonized
Egypt, engrafted its own institutions in India, colonized
Phoenicia, and by its maritime and commercial enterprise,
introduced civilized conditions into every quarter of the globe. 
Even in Peru, in Mexico, in Central America, and in the United
States are evidences of the old Cushite religion and enterprise.
Baldwin, commenting on the greatness of this remarkable people,
says that early in the period of its colonizing enterprise,
commercial greatness, and extensive empire, it established
colonies in the valleys of the Nile and the Euphrates, which in
later ages became Barbary, Egypt, and Chaldea.  The ancient
Cushite nation occupied Arabia and other extensive regions of
Africa, India, and Western Asia to the Mediterranean.  While
remarking upon the vastness and antiquity of this old Cushite
race, Rawlinson says that they founded most of the towns of
Western Asia.  The vast commercial system which formed a
connecting link between the various countries of the globe, was
created by this people, the great manufacturing skill and
unrivalled maritime activity of the Phoenicians which extended
down to the time of the Hellenes and the Romans having been a
result of the irgenius.  It was doubtless during the supremacy of
the ancient Cushite race that a knowledge of astronomy was
developed and that the arts of life were carried to a high degree
of perfection.  However, through the peculiar influences which
were brought to bear upon human experience, this knowledge, which
was bequeathed to their descendants or to the nations which they
had created, was subsequently lost or practically obscured, only
fragments of it having been preserved from the general ruin.
Within these fragments have been preserved in India certain
evidences of a profound knowledge of Nature, or of the at present
unknown forces in the universe, a demonstration of which, in our
own time, would probably be looked upon as a miraculous
interposition of supernatural agencies.
Regarding the refinements and luxuries of this ancient people,
Diodorus Siculus declares that they flowed in streams of gold and
silver, that “the porticoes of their temples were overlaid with
gold, and that the adornments of their buildings were in some
parts of silver and gold, and in others of ivory and precious
stones, and other things of great value.”
From various observations, it is plain that the Etrurians
represented a stage of civilization far in advance of the
Pelasgians who founded Rome –a race which, although superior in
numbers, arms, and influence, were, when compared with this more
ancient people, little better than barbarians.[66]
[66] It is thought that as early as the nineteenth century B.C. 
the Pelasgians or Pelargians went to Aenonia, or Ionia.  It was a
detachment of this people which, according to Herodotus, captured
a number of Athenian women on the coast of Africa, lived with
them as wives, and raised families by them, but, “because they
differed in manners from themselves,” they murdered them, which
act was attended by a “dreadful pestilence.”  It is the opinion
of certain writers that these women were of a different religious
faith from their captors, and that so intense and bitter was the
feeling upon the comparative importance of the sex functions in
pro-creation, that their husbands, unable to change their views,
put an end to their existence.
Nothing, perhaps, proclaims the degree of civilization attained
by the ancient Etrurians more plainly than the exquisite
perfection which is observed in the specimens of art found in
their tumuli.  Within the tombs of Etruscans buried long prior to
the foundation of Rome, or the birth of the fine arts in Greece,
have been found unmistakable evidence of the advanced condition
of this people.  The exquisite coloring and grouping of the
figures on their elegant vases, one of which, on exhibition in
the British Museum, portrays the birth of Minerva, or Wisdom,
show the delicacy of their taste, the purity of their
conceptions, and their true artistic skill.
Among their mechanical arts, a few specimens of which have been
preserved, is the potter’s wheel, an invention which, so far as
its utility is concerned, is declared to be absolutely
perfect–the most complete of all the instruments of the world. 
“It never has been improved and admits of no improvement.”  In
fact all that may be gathered concerning the ancient Etrurians, a
people who by the most able writers upon this subject is believed
to have been one of the first to leave the Asiatic hive, is in
perfect accord with the facts already set forth regarding that
mighty nation, perhaps of upper Asia, who carried the study of
astronomy to a degree of perfection never again reached until
after the discovery of the Copernican system, who invented the
Neros and the Metonic Cycle, who colonized Egypt and Chaldea, and
who carried civilization to the remotest ends of the earth.
The philosophy of the Etrurians corresponds with that of the most
ancient Hindoo system, and displays a degree of wisdom
unparalleled by any of the peoples belonging to the early
historic ages.  According to their cosmogony, the evolutionary or
creative processes involved twelve vast periods of time.  At the
end of the first period appeared the planets and the earth, in
the second the firmament was made, in the third the waters were
brought forth, in the fourth the sun, moon, and stars were placed
in the heavens, in the fifth living creatures appeared on the
earth, and in the sixth man was produced.  These six periods
comprehended one-half the duration of the cycle.  After six more
periods had elapsed, or after the lapse of the entire cycle of
twelve periods, all creation was dissolved or drawn to the source
of all life.  Subsequently a new creation was brought forth under
which the same order of events will take place.  The involution
of life, or its return to the great source whence it sprang, did
not, however, involve the destruction of matter.  The seeds of
returning life were preserved in an ark or boat–the female
principle, within which all things are contained.  This indrawing
of life constituted “the night of Brahme.”  It was represented by
Vishnu sleeping on the bottom of the sea.
From the facts adduced in relation to the Etrurians we are not
surprised to find that their religion was that of the ancient
Nature worshippers, and that a mother with her child stood for
their god-idea.  In referring to the religion of this people, and
to the great antiquity of the worship of the Virgin and Child,
Higgins remarks: “Amongst the Gauls, more than a hundred years
before the Christian era, in the district of Chartres, a festival
was celebrated in honor of the Virgin,” and in the year 1747, a
mithraic monument was found “on which is exhibited a female
nursing an infant–the Goddess of the year nursing the God day.” 
To which he adds: “The Protestant ought to recollect that his
mode of keeping Christmas Day is only a small part of the old
festival as it yet exists amongst the followers of the Romish
Church. Theirs is the remnant of the old Etruscan worship of the
virgin and child.”  As a proof of the above, Higgins cites
Gorius’s Tuscan Antiquities, where may be seen the figure of an
old Goddess with her child in her arms, the inscription being in
Etruscan characters.  “No doubt the Romish Church would have
claimed her for a Madonna, but most unluckily she has her name,
Nurtia, in Etruscan letters, on her arm, after the Etruscan
practice.”
From the monuments of Etruria the fact is observed that descent
and the rights of succession were traced in the female line, a
condition of society which indicates the high position which must
have been occupied by the women of that country.
In Oman is said to exist a fragment of the government of the old
Ethiopian or Cushite race.  If this is true, then we may be able
to perceive at the present time something of the character of the
political institutions of this ancient nation.  As no people
remains stationary, and as degeneracy has been the rule with
surrounding countries, we may not expect to find among the people
of Oman a true representation of ancient conditions, yet, as has
been observed, we may still be able to note some of the facts
relative to the organization of society and their governmental
institutions.
In a description furnished by Palgrave, Oman is termed a kingdom,
yet it is plain from the observations of this writer that the
existing form of government is that of a confederacy of nations
under a democratical system, identical with that developed during
the later status of barbarism.  This writer himself admits that
Oman is less a kingdom than an aggregation of municipalities, and
that each of these municipalities or towns has a separate
existence and is controlled by its own local chief; but that all
are joined together in one confederacy, and subjected to the
leadership of a grand chief whom the writer is pleased to term
“the crown,” but why, as is evident from the description given,
bears no resemblance to a modern monarch. The chiefs who direct
the councils of the municipalities are limited in their powers by
“the traditional immunities of the vassals,” the decision of all
criminal cases and the administration of justice being in the
hands of the local judges.  In the descriptions given of their
governmental proceedings, it is stated that the whole course of
law is considered apart from the jurisdiction of the sovereign,
who has no power to either change or annul the enactments of the
people.
Here, it is observed, exists almost the identical form of
government which was in use among the early historic nations,
before governments came to be founded on wealth, or on a
territorial basis[67]; or, in other words, before the monied and
aristocratic classes had drawn to themselves all the powers which
had formerly belonged to the people.
[67] See The Evolution of Woman, p. 238.
We must bear in mind the fact that under these earlier
democratical institutions, the term “people” included not only
men but women, and as the grand chief, the local rulers, and the
judges held their positions by virtue of their descent from, or
relationship to, some real or traditional leader of the gens, who
during all the earlier ages was a woman, we may believe that the
power of women to depose their political leaders so soon as their
conduct became obnoxious to them was absolute and unquestioned.
Doubtless, as we have seen, the government of Oman has undergone
a considerable degree of modification since the days of Cushite
splendor and supremacy; that, like all other nations which have
come in contact with the Aryan and Semitic races, the tendency
has been toward monarchial government; nevertheless, with its
practically free institutions, representing as they do, in a
measure, the political system of the grandest and oldest
civilizations of which we have any knowledge, it furnishes an
illustration of the degree of progress possible under gentile
organization, at the same time that it points to the source
whence has proceeded the fierce democratic spirit observed among
succeeding nations, notably the Greeks.
Modern writers agree in ascribing to the Touaricks, a people
inhabiting the Desert of Sahara, a considerable degree of
civilization.  We are informed that in the Sahara, which, by the
way, is far less a barren waste than we have been taught to
suppose it, “the Touaricks have towns, cities, and an excellent
condition of agriculture"; that with them fruit is cultivated
with great success and skill.  Their method of political
organization is democratic and similar in construction and
administration to the old Cushite municipalities.  Baldwin,
quoting from Richardson, says: “Ghat, like all the Touarick
countries, is a republic; all the people govern.  The woman of
the Touaricks is not the woman of the Moors and Mussulmans
generally.  She has here great liberty, and takes an active part
in the affairs and transactions of life."[68]
[68] Prehistoric Nations, p. 341.
One who is disposed to search for it, will find no lack of
evidence going to prove that in an earlier age of the world,
prior to the written records of extant history, the human race
had attained to a stage of civilization equal in all and superior
in many respects to that of the present time.
That this remarkable stage of progress, the actual extent of
which has not yet been fully realized, was attained during a
period of pure Nature-worship, or while the earth and the sun
were venerated as emblems of the great creative energy throughout
the universe, is a proposition which, when viewed by the light of
more recently acquired facts, is perfectly reasonable, and
exactly what might be expected.
That this high stage of civilization was reached while women were
the recognized heads of families and of the gentes, and at a time
when Perceptive Wisdom, or the female energy in the Deity, was
worshipped as the supreme God, is a fact which in time will be
proved beyond a doubt.  Indeed, had not the judgment of man
become warped by prejudice, and his reason clogged by
superstition and sensuality, the fact so plainly apparent in all
ancient mythologies, that in the early god-idea two principles
were contained, the female being in the ascendancy, would long
ere this have been acknowledged, and our present religious
systems, which are but outgrowths from these mythologies, would,
with the partial return of civilized conditions, have been so
modified or changed as to embrace some of the fundamental truths
which formed the basis of early religion.
Regarding the religion of the ancient race which we have been
considering, we are told that they worshipped a dual Deity, under
the appellations of Ashtaroth and Baal, and that this God
“comprehended the generative or reproductive powers in human
beings and in the sun, together with Wisdom or Light.”  In other
words, they adored the great moving force throughout Nature, a
force which they venerated as the Great Mother.
Before the Zend and Sanskrit branches of the Aryan race had
separated, their religion was doubtless that given them by their
Cushite civilizers.  The worship of the sun and the planets, with
which were inextricably interwoven the fructifying agencies in
Nature, explains their devotion to the study of the heavenly
bodies and their advanced knowledge of astronomy.  The types of
regeneration or reproduction which they venerated were symbols of
abstract principles, and, from facts connected with their
religious ceremonies as practiced by their immediate successors,
and from the pure significance attached to their emblems, we are
justified in the conclusion before referred to, that the sensuous
element, which became so prominent in later religious
developments, constituted no part of their worship.
The number of ages during which the most primitive religion,
namely, that of pure Nature-worship, prevailed among the
inhabitants of the earth may not be conjectured, and the exact
length of time during which earth and sun adoration unalloyed by
serpent and phallic faiths remained is not known.  It is
probable, however, that its duration is to be measured by that of
the supremacy of the altruistic or mother element in human
affairs, and that the gradual engrafting of the later-developed
sensuous faiths upon their earlier god-idea, marks the change
from female to male supremacy.
We have observed that whenever a remnant of the civilization of
the ancient Cushites appears, exactly as might be expected, women
hold an exalted position in human affairs, at the same time that
the female principle constitutes the essential element in the
Deity.
Of the ancient Persians who received their religion and their
civilization from this older race Malcolm observes:
“The great respect in which the female sex was held was, no
doubt, the principal cause of the progress they made in
civilization.  .  .  .  It would appear that in former days the
women of Persia had an assigned and honorable place in society;
and we must conclude that an equal rank with the male creation,
which is secured to them by the ordinances of Zoroaster, existed
long before the time of that reformer, who paid too great
attention to the habits and prejudices of his countrymen to have
made any serious alteration in so important an usage.  We are
told by Quintus Curtius, that Alexander would not sit in the
presence of Sisygambis, till told to do so by that matron,
because it is not the custom in Persia for sons to sit in the
presence of their mothers.  There can be no stronger proof than
this anecdote affords, of the great respect in which the female
sex were held in that country, at the time of this invasion."[69]
[69] See History of Persia.
No one I think can study the sacred books of the Persians without
observing the emphasis which is there placed on purity of
character and right living.  Indeed, within no extant writings is
the antithesis between good and evil more strongly marked, at the
same time that their hatred of idolatry is clearly apparent.  The
same is observed in the early writings of the Hindoos.  Within
the Vedas, although they have been corrupted by later writers,
may still be traced a purity of thought and life which is not
apparent in the writings of later ages.  Not long ago I was
informed by a learned native of India that the original writing
of the Vedas was largely the work of women.
That the early conceptions of a Deity in which women constituted
the central and supreme figure were in Egypt correlated with the
exercise of great temporal power, may not, in view of the facts
at hand, longer be doubted.  By means of records revealed on
ancient monuments, we are informed that in the age of Amunoph I. 
a considerable degree of sovereign power in Egypt was exercised
by a woman, Amesnofre-are, who had shared the throne with Ames. 
She occupied it also with Amunoph, and, notwithstanding the
statement of Herodotus, that women did not serve in the capacity
of priests, this Queen is represented as pouring out libations to
Amon, an office which was doubtless the highest connected with
the priesthood.
Less than forty years later, it is observed that another woman,
Amun-nou-het, shared the throne with Thotmes I. and II. and that
“she appears to have enjoyed far greater consideration than
either of them.”  Not alone are monuments raised in her name, but
she appears dressed as a man, and “alone presenting offerings to
the gods.”  So important a personage was she that she is believed
by many to be the princess who conquered the country, perhaps
even Semiramis herself.  Her title was the “Shining Sun."[70]
[70] Rawlinson, History of Herodotus, app., book ii., ch. viii.
As these women doubtless belonged to the old Arabian, Ethiopian,
or Cushite race, the people who had brought civilization to
Egypt, we are not surprised to find them holding positions which
were connected with the highest civil and religious offices.  The
Labyrinth, in the country of the Nile, is described by ancient
writers as containing three thousand chambers.  Strabo says of it
that the enclosure contained as many palaces as there formerly
were homes, and that there the priests and priestesses of each
department were wont to congregate to discuss difficult and
important questions of law.
According to the Greeks, the Egyptian God Osiris corresponds to
their Jupiter; and Sate, the companion of Kneph, is identical
with Juno.  It is quite evident, however, that the Greeks
understood little of the true significance of the gods which they
had borrowed, or which they had inherited from older nations.  It
would seem that as a people their conceit prevented them from
acknowledging the dignity even of their gods, hence, they endowed
them with the attributes best suited to their own depraved taste
or pleasure, and then worshipped them as beings like themselves.
It has been observed of the Egyptians that they were wont to
ridicule the Greeks for regarding their gods as actual beings,
while in reality “they were only the representations of the
attributes and principles of Nature.”  Unlike the religions which
succeeded it, Egyptian mythology, as understood by the learned,
was essentially philosophical, and dealt with abstractions and
principles rather than with personalities.
Notwithstanding the importance which in process of time came to
be claimed by males, and the consequent stimulation which was
given to the animal tendencies, it is evident, from certain
historical and undeniable proofs in connection with this subject,
that although woman’s power in Egypt, as in all other countries,
gradually became weakened, the effect of her influence on manners
and social customs was never wholly extinguished.
Regarding the existence of polygamy, it has been said that the
high position occupied in ancient Egypt by the mother of the
family, the mistress of the household, is absolutely
irreconcilable with the existence of polygamy as a general
practice, or of such an institution as the harem.  Although the
plurality of wives does not appear to have been contrary to law,
it “certainly was unusual,” and although Egyptian kings
frequently had many wives, “they followed foreign rather than
native custom."[71]
[71] Renouf, Religion of Ancient Egypt, p. 81.
Herodotus says of the women of Egypt: “They attend the markets
and trade while the men sit at home at the loom"[72]; and
Diodorus informs us that in Egypt “women control the men.”
[72] Book ii., ch. xxxv.
Were we in possession of no direct historical evidence to prove
that down to a late period in the history of Egypt women had not
lost their prestige, sufficient evidence would be found in the
fact that, notwithstanding the growing tendency of mankind in all
the nations of the globe to suppress the female instincts and to
reject, conceal, or belittle the woman element in the Deity,
still Isis, the gracious mother, retained a prominent place in
the god-idea of that country.
I am not unmindful of the remarks which a reference to a past age
of intellectual and moral greatness will call forth; indeed, I
can almost hear some devotee of the present time remark: “So we
are asked to regard as a sober fact the existence in the past of
a golden age; also to believe that man was created pure and holy,
and that he has since fallen from his high estate; in other
words, we are to have faith in the ancient tradition of the ’fall
of man.’”  If by the fall of man we are to understand that a
great and universal people, who in a remote age of the world’s
history had reached a high stage of civilization, gradually
passed out of human existence, and that a lower race, which was
incapable of attaining to their estate, and which, by the over-
stimulation of the lower propensities, sank into a state of
barbarism, in which the original sublime conceptions of a Deity
were obscured and the great learning of the past was lost, I can
see no reason to disbelieve it, especially as all the facts, both
of tradition and history, bearing upon this subject unite in
proclaiming its truth.
After stating that in Chaldea has been found rather the debris of
science than the elements of it, Bailly asks:
“When you see a house built of old capitals, columns, and other
fragments of beautiful architecture, do you not conclude that a
fine building has once existed? .  .  .  If the human mind can
ever flatter itself with having been successful in discovering
the truth, it is when many facts, and these facts of different
kinds, unite in producing the same results.”
That the descendants of a once mighty nation lapsed into
barbarism, forgetting the profound knowledge of the sciences
possessed by their ancestors, is a fact too well attested at the
present time to be doubted by those who have taken the pains to
acquaint themselves with the evidence at hand.
Regarding the manner in which this ancient civilization was
reached, or concerning the way in which it was achieved, history
and tradition are alike silent, although it is believed that the
present methods of investigation will, at least in a measure,
unravel the mystery.  At present we only know that, as far in the
remote past as human ken can reach, evidences of a high stage of
civilization exist which it must have required thousands upon
thousands of years to accomplish.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
