


“When we inquire into the worship of nations in the earliest
periods to which we have access by writing or tradition, we find
that the adoration of one God, without temples or images,
universally prevailed."[23]
[23] Godfrey Higgins, Celtic Druids.
Underlying all the ancient religions of which we have any
account, may be observed the great energizing force throughout
Nature recognized and reverenced as the Deity.  This force
embraces not only the creative energies in human beings, in
animals, and in plants, but in the earlier ages of human history
it included also Wisdom, or Law–that “power by which all things
are discriminated or defined and held in their proper places.” 
The most renowned writers who have dealt with this subject agree
in the conclusion that, during thousands of years among all the
nations of the earth, only one God was worshipped.  This God was
Light and Life, both of which proceeded from the sun, or more
properly speaking were symbolized by the sun.
In Egyptian hymns the Creator is invoked as the being who “dwells
concealed in the sun"; and Greek writers speak of this luminary
as the “generator and nourisher of all things, the ruler of the
world.”  It is thought, however, that neither of these nations
worshipped the corporeal sun.  It was the “centre or body from
which the pervading spirit, the original producer of order,
fertility, and organization, continued to emanate to preserve the
mighty structure which it had formed.”
It is evident that at an early age, both in Egypt and in India,
spiritualized conceptions of sun-worship had already been formed.
We have seen that Netpe, the Goddess of Light, or Heavenly
Wisdom, conferred spiritual life on all who would accept it.  The
Great Mother of the Gods in India was not only the source whence
all blessings flow, but she was the Beginning and the End of all
things.
Of “Aditi, the boundless, the yonder, the beyond all and
everything,” Max Muller says that in later times she “may have
become identified with the sky, also with the earth, but
originally she was far beyond the sky and the earth."[24] The
same writer quotes the following, also from a hymn of the
Rig-Veda:
[24] Origin and Growth of Religion, p. 221.
“O Mitra and Varuna, you mount your chariot which, at the dawning
of the dawn is golden-colored and has iron poles at the setting
of the sun; from thence you see Aditi and Diti–that is, what is
yonder and what is here, what is infinite and what is finite,
what is mortal and what is immortal."[25]
[25] Ibid.
Aditi is the Great She that Is, the Everlasting.  Muller refers
to the fact that another Hindoo poet “speaks of the dawn as the
face of Aditi; thus indicating that Aditi is here not the dawn
itself, but something beyond the dawn.”  This Goddess, who is
designated as the “Oldest,” is implored “not only to drive away
darkness and enemies that lurk in the dark, but likewise to
deliver man from any sin which he may have committed.”  “May
Aditi by day protect our cattle, may she, who never deceives,
protect us from evil.”
In the Egyptian as in the Indian and Hebrew religions, the two
generating principles throughout Nature represent the Infinite,
the Holy of Holies, the Elohim or Aleim–the Ieue.  Within the
records of the earliest religions of Ethiopia or Arabia, Chaldea,
Assyria, and Babylonia, is revealed the same monad principle in
the Deity.  This monad conception, or dual unity, this God of
Light and Life, or of Wisdom and generative force, is the same
source whence all mythologies have sprung, and, as has been
stated, among all peoples the fact is observed that the religious
idea has followed substantially the same course of development,
or growth.  Within the sacred writings of the Hindoos there is
but one Almighty Power, usually denominated as Brahm or Brahme–
Om or Aum.  This word in India was regarded with the same degree
of veneration as was the sacred Ieue of the Jews.  In later ages,
the fact is being proved that this God, into whom all the deities
worshipped at a certain period in human history resolve
themselves, is the sun, or if not the actual corporeal sun, then
the supreme agency within it which was acknowledged as the great
creative or life-force– that dual principle which by the early
races was recognized as Elohim, Om, Ormuzd, etc., and from which
the productive power in human beings, in plants, and in animals
was thought to emanate.
Prior to the development of either tree or phallic worship, the
sun as an emblem of the Deity had doubtless become the principal
object of veneration.  Ages would probably elapse before
primitive man would observe that all life is dependent on the
warmth of the sun’s rays, or before from experience he would
perceive the fact that to its agency as well as to that of the
earth he was indebted both for food and the power of motion. 
However, as soon as this knowledge had been gained, the great orb
of day would assume the most prominent place among the objects of
his regard and adoration.  That such has been the case, that the
sun, either as the actual Creator, or as an emblem of the great
energizing force in Nature, has been worshipped by every nation
of the globe, there is no lack of evidence to prove; neither do
we lack proof to establish the fact that, since the adoption of
the sun as a divine object, or perhaps I should say as the emblem
of Wisdom and creative power, it has never been wholly eliminated
from the god-idea of mankind.
Bryant produces numberless etymological proofs to establish the
fact that all the early names of the Deity were derived or
compounded from some word which originally meant the sun.
Max Muller says that Surya was the sun as shining in the sky. 
Savitri was the sun as bringing light and life.  Vishnu was the
sun as striding with three steps across the sky, etc.
Inman, whose etymological researches have given him considerable
prominence as a Sanskrit and Hebrew scholar, says that Ra, Ilos,
Helos, Bil, Baal, Al, Allah, and Elohim were names given to the
sun as representative of the Creator.
We are assured by Godfrey Higgins that Brahme is the sun the same
as Surya.  Brahma sprang from the navel of Brahme.  Faber in his
Pagan Idolatry says that all the gods of the ancients “melt
insensibly into one, they are all equally the sun.”  The word
Apollo signifies the author or generator of Light.  In the Rig
Veda, Surya, the sun, is called Aditya.  “Truly, Surya, thou art
great; truly Aditya, thou art great.”
Selden observes that whether the gods be called Osiris, or
Omphis, or Nilus, or any other name, they all center in the sun.
According to Diodorus Siculus, it was the belief of the ancients
that Dionysos, Osiris, Serapis, Pan, Jupiter and Pluto were all
one.  They were, the sun.
Max Muller says that a very low race in India named the Santhals
call the sun Chandro, which means “bright.”  These people
declared to the missionaries who settled among them, that Chandro
had created the world; and when told that it would be absurd to
say that the sun had created the world, they replied: “We do not
mean the visible Chandro, but an invisible one.”
Not only did Dionysos, and all the rest of the gods who in later
ages came to be regarded as men, represent the sun, but after the
separation of the male and female elements in the originally
indivisible God, Maut or Minerva, Demeter, Ceres, Isis, Juno, and
others less important in the pagan world were also the sun, or,
in other words, they represented the female power throughout the
universe which was supposed to reside in the sun.
In most groups of Babylonian and Assyrian divine emblems, there
occur two distinct representations of the sun, “one being figured
with four rays or divisions within the orb, and the other, with
eight.”  According to George Rawlinson, these figures represent a
distinction between the male and female powers residing within
the sun, the quartered disk signifying the male energy, and the
eight-rayed orb appearing as the emblem of the female![26]
[26] Essay x.
During an earlier age of human history, prior to the dissensions
which arose over the relative importance of the sexes in
reproduction, and at a time when a mother and her child
represented the Deity, the sun was worshiped as the female Jove. 
Everything in the universe was a part of this great God.  At that
time there had been no division in the god-idea.  The Creator
constituted a dual but indivisible unity.  Dionysos formerly
represented this God, as did also Om, Jove, Mithras, and others. 
Jove was the “Great Virgin” whence everything proceeds.
In a former work the fact has been mentioned that the first clue
obtained by Herr Bachofen, author of Das Mutterrecht, to a former
condition of society under which gynaecocracy, or the social and
political pre-eminence of women, prevailed, was the importance
attached to the female principle in the Deity in all ancient
mythologies.
According to the testimony of various writers, Om, although
comprehending both elements of the Deity, was nevertheless female
in signification.  Sir William Jones observes that Om means
oracle–matrix or womb.[27] Upon this subject Godfrey Higgins,
quoting from Drummond, remarks:
[27] See Anacalypsis, book iii., ch. ii.
“The word Om or Am in the Hebrew not only signifies might,
strength, power, firmness, solidity, truth, but it means also
Mother, as in Genesis ii., 24, and Love, whence the Latin Amo,
Mamma.  If the word be taken to mean strength, then Amon will
mean (the first syllable being in regimine) the temple of the
strength of the generative or creative power, or the temple of
the mighty procreative power.  If the word Am means Mother, then
a still more recondite idea will be implied, viz.: the mother
generative power, or the maternal generative power: perhaps the
Urania of Persia or the Venus Aphrodite of Crete and Greece, or
the Jupiter Genetrix of the masculine and feminine gender, or the
Brahme Mai of India, or the Alma Venus of Lucretius.  And the
City of On or Heliopolis will be the City of the sun, or City of
the procreative powers of nature of which the sun was always an
emblem.”
According to Prof. W. R. Smith, Om means uniting or binding, a
fact which is explained by the early significance of the mother
element in early society.  The name of the great Deity Om or Aum
scarcely passes the lips of its worshippers, and when it is
pronounced is always reverently whispered.  Regarding the mystic
word Om, we are told that it is the name given to Delphi, and
that “Delphi has the meaning of the female organs of generation
called in India the Os Minxoe.”
Although the great God of India was female and male, yet we are
assured by Forlong that the female energy Maya, Queen of Heaven,
even at the present time is more heard of than the male
principle.
According to Bryant, the worship of Ham is the most ancient as
well as the most universal of any in the world.  This writer
remarks that Ham, instead of representing an individual, is but a
Greek corruption of Om or Aum, the great androgynous God of
India, a God which is identical in significance with Aleim,
Vesta, and all the other representatives of the early dual,
universal power.  “In the old language God was called Al, Ale,
Alue, and Aleim, more frequently Aleim than any other name.” 
According to the testimony of Higgins, Aleim denotes the feminine
plural.  The heathen divinities Ashtaroth and Beelzebub were both
called Aleim, Ashtaroth being simply Astarte adorned with the
horns of a ram.  Ishtar not unfrequently appears with the horns
of a cow.  We are informed by Inman that whenever a goddess is
observed with horns–emblems which by the way always indicate
masculine power–it is to denote the fact that she is
androgynous, or that within her is embodied the complete
Deity–the dual reproductive energy throughout Nature.  The
“figure becomes the emblem of divinity and power."[28]
[28] Ancient Faiths Embodied in Ancient Names, vol. i., p. 311.
Mithras–the Savior, the great Persian Deity which was worshipped
as the “Preserver,” was both female and male.  Among the
representations of this divinity which appear in the Townley
collection in the British Museum, is one in which it is figured
in its female character, in the act of killing the bull.  The
Divinity Baal was both female and male.  The God of the Jews in
an early stage of their career was called Baal.  The oriental
Ormuzd was also dual or androgynous.
Orpheus teaches that the divine nature is both female and male. 
According to Proclus, Jupiter was an immortal maid, “the Queen of
Heaven, and Mother of the Gods.”  All things were contained
within the womb of Jupiter.  This Virgin within whom was embodied
the male principle “gave light and life to Eve.”  She was the
life-giving, energizing power in Nature, and was identical with
Aleim, Om, Astarte, and others.  The Goddess Esta, or Vesta, or
Hestia, whom Plato calls the “soul of the body of the universe,"
is believed by Beverly and others to be the Self-Existent, the
Great “She that Is” of the Hindoos, whose significance is
identical with the Cushite or Phoenician Deity, Aleim.
According to Marco Polo, the Chinese had but one supreme God of
whom they had no image, and to whom they prayed for only two
things–"a sound mind in a sound body.”  They had, however, a
lesser god–probably the same as the “Lord” (masculine) of the
Jews, to whom they petitioned for rain, fair weather, and all the
minor accessories of existence.  Upon the walls of the houses of
the Chinese is a tablet to which they pay their devotion.  On
this tablet is the name of the “high, celestial, and supreme
God.”  The principal word which this tablet contains is “Tien.” 
Of this Chinese Deity Barlow says: “The Chinese recognize in
Tienhow, the Queen of Heaven nursing her infant son.  Connected
with this figure is a lotus bud, symbol of the new birth.
Originally in Chaldea and in Egypt, only one supreme God was
worshipped.  This Deity was figured by a mother and her child, as
was the great Chinese God.  It comprehended the universe and all
the attributes of the Deity.  It was worshipped thousands of
years prior to the birth of Mary, the Mother of Christ, and
representations of it are still extant, not only in oriental
lands, but in many countries of Europe.  Within the oldest
temples of Egypt are still to be observed sacred apartments which
contain the “Holy of Holies,” and to which, in past ages, none
might gain access but priests and priestesses of the highest
order.  Within these apartments are pictured the mysteries of
birth, together with the symbols of generation emblems of
procreation.
On the banks of the river Nile are observed the ruins of the
temple of Philae, which structure, it is said, represents the
most ancient style of architecture.  Within these ruins is to be
seen an inner chamber in which are depicted the birth scenes of
the child god Horus, and, indeed, everywhere among the monuments
and ruins of Egypt, is plainly visible the fact that the creative
power and functions in human beings, in animals, and in vegetable
life, together with Wisdom, once constituted the god-idea.
Between the ruins of the palace of Amunoph III. and the Nile are
two colossal statues, each hewn from a single block of stone. 
These figures, although in a sitting posture, are sixty feet
high.  It is thought that they once formed the entrance to an
avenue of similar figures leading up to the palace.  It has been
supposed that the most northern statue represents Ammon, and that
its companion piece is his Mother.  It is now believed by many
writers, however, that these figures do not represent two persons
at all, but that in a remote age of the world’s history they were
worshipped as the two great principles, female and male, which
animate Nature.  The fact has been observed that Am or Om was
originally a female Deity, within whom was contained the male
principle; when, however, through the changes wrought in the
relative positions of the sexes, the male element in the Divinity
adored came to be represented as a man instead of as a child, he
was Ammon.  He was the sun, yet notwithstanding the fact that he
had drawn to himself the powers of the sun, he was still,
himself, only a production of or emanation from the female Deity
Om, Mother of the Gods and Queen of Heaven.  She it was who had
created or brought forth the sun.
There is a tradition which asserts that every morning a melodious
sound is emitted from the first named of these two colossal
figures as he salutes his rosy-fingered Mother whom he
acknowledges as the source of all Light and Wisdom.  The bodies
are described as being “without motion, the faces without
expression, the eyes looking straight forward, yet a certain
grand simplicity occasions them to be universally admired.”
The Goddess Disa or Isa of the North, as delineated on the sacred
drums of the Laplanders, was accompanied by a child similar to
the Horus of the Egyptians.[29] It is observed also that the
ancient Muscovites worshipped a sacred group composed of a mother
and her children, probably a representation of the Egyptian Isis
and her offspring, or at least of the once universal idea of the
Deity.
[29] Jennings, Phallicism.
The following is from Payne Knight:
“A female Pantheitic figure in silver, with the borders of the
drapery plated with gold, and the whole finished in a manner
surpassing almost anything extant, was among the things found at
Macon on the Saone, in the year 1764, and published by Caylus. 
It represents Cybele, the universal mother, with the mural crown
on her head, and the wings of pervasion growing from her
shoulders, mixing the productive elements of heat and moisture by
making a libation upon the flames of an altar.  On each side of
her head is one of the Discouri, signifying the alternate
influence of the diurnal and nocturnal Sun; and, upon a crescent
supported by the tips of her wings, are the seven planets, each
signified by a bust of its presiding deity resting upon a globe,
and placed in the order of the days of the week named after them.
In her left hand she holds two cornucopiae, to signify the result
of her operation on the two hemispheres of the Earth; and upon
them are the busts of Apollo and Diana, the presiding deities of
these hemispheres, with a golden disk, intersected by two
transverse lines, such as is observed on other pieces of ancient
art, and such as the barbarians of the North employed to
represent the solar year, divided into four parts, at the back of
each."[30]
[30] Symbolism of Ancient Art.
It was doubtless at a time when woman constituted the head of the
gens, and when the feminine element in the sun, in human beings,
and in Nature generally was regarded as the more important, that
Latona and her son Apollo were worshipped together.  Latona,
Apollo, and Diana constituted the triune God.  The last two were
the female and male energies, the former being the source whence
they sprang.  As soon as one is divested of a belief in the
popular but erroneous opinion that the gods of the early
Egyptians and Greeks were deified heroes of former ages, he is
prepared to perceive the fact that, although to the uninitiated
these gods appear numberless, in reality they all represent the
same idea, namely: the dual, moving force in Nature, together
with Light or Wisdom.
We have seen that when among the nations of antiquity
civilization had reached its height, the god-idea was represented
by the figure of a woman with her child; subsequently, however,
as these nations began to decline, the creative energy
comprehended simply physical life, or the power to reproduce, and
was represented by various emblems which will be noticed farther
on in this work.  In still later ages, after male reproductive
power had become God, and when, through superstition and
sensuality, the masses of the people had descended to the rank of
slaves, monarchs, representing themselves to their ignorant
subjects as the source of all blessings, even of life itself,
appropriated the titles of the sun, and claimed for themselves
the adoration which had formerly belonged to it.  From this fact
has doubtless arisen the opinion so tenaciously upheld in recent
times, that the gods of the ancients were only deified heroes of
former times.
If, during the earlier ages of human existence, all the gods
resolved themselves into the sun, and if Light and Life, or
Wisdom and the power to reproduce and sustain life, constituted
the Deity, then of course God or the sun would be female or male,
or both, according to the prevailing belief in the comparative
creative and sustaining forces of the sexes.
From what appears in the foregoing pages the fact has doubtless
been perceived that the worship of a Virgin and Child does not,
as is usually supposed, belong exclusively to the Romish
Christian Church, but, on the contrary, that it constitutes the
most remote idea of a Creator extant.  As has been hinted, there
is little doubt that the earliest worship of the woman and child
was much simpler than was that which came to prevail in later
ages, at a time when every religious conception was closely
veiled beneath a mixture of astrology and mythology.  After the
planets came to be regarded as active agencies in reproduction,
and powerful in directing all mundane affairs, the Virgin of the
Sphere while she represented Nature was also the constellation
which appeared above the horizon at the winter solstice, or at
the time when the sun had reached its lowest point and had begun
to return.  At this time, the 25th of December, and just as the
days began to lengthen, this Virgin gave birth to the Sun-God. 
It is said that he issued forth from her side, hence the legend
that Gotama Buddha was produced from the side of Maya, and also
the story believed by the Gnostics and other Christian sects that
Jesus was taken from the side of Mary.[31]
[31] The fact will doubtless be remembered that a similar belief
was entertained concerning the birth of Julius Caesar.
Within the churches and in the streets of many cities of Germany
are to be observed figures of this traditional Virgin.  She is
standing, one foot upon a crescent and the other on a serpent’s
head, in the mouth of which is the sprig of an apple tree on
which is an apple.  The tail of the serpent is wound about a
globe which is partially enveloped in clouds.  On one arm of the
Virgin is the Child, and in the hand of the other arm she carries
the sacred lotus.  Her head is encircled with a halo of light
similar to the rays of the sun.
One is frequently disposed to query: Do the initiated in the
Romish Church regard these images as legitimate representations
of Mary, the wife of Joseph and Mother of Christ, or are they
aware of their true significance?  Certainly the various
accessories attached to this figure betray its ancient origin and
reveal its identity with the Egyptian, Chaldean, and Phoenician
Virgin of the Sphere.
The fact has already been observed that in the original
representation of the “Temptation” in the cave temple of India,
it is not the woman but the man who is the tempter, and a
singular peculiarity observed in connection with this ancient
female Deity is that it is SHE and NOT HER SEED who is trampling
on the serpent, thus proving that originally woman and not man
was worshipped as the Savior.  Another significant feature
noticed in connection with this subject is that the oldest
figures which represent this Goddess are black, thus proving that
she must have belonged to a dark skinned race.
This image, although black, or dark skinned, had long hair, hence
not a negress.  The most ancient statue of Ceres was black, and
Pausanias says that at a place called Melangea in Arcadia there
was a black Venus.  In the Netherlands only a few years ago, was
a church dedicated to a black goddess.  The Virgin of the Sphere
who treads on the head of the serpent represents universal
womanhood.  She is the Virgin of the first book of Genesis and
mother of all the Earth.  She represents not only creative power
but Perceptive Wisdom.  Although this Goddess is usually seen
with the lotus in her hand, she sometimes carries ripe corn or
wheat.
The mother of Gotama Buddha was called Mai or Maya, after the
month in which the Earth is arrayed in her most beautiful attire.
Maya is the parent of universal Nature.  According to Davis, the
mother of Mercury “is the universal genius of Nature which
discriminated all things according to their various kinds of
species,” the same as was Muth of Egypt.  Mai is said to mean
“one who begins to illuminate.”  She was in fact the mother of
the sun whence everything proceeds.  She was matter, within which
was concealed spirit.
In the representations of Montfaucon appears the Goddess Isis
sitting on the lotus.  Her head, upon which is a globe, is
surrounded by a radiant circle which evidently represents the
sun.  On the reverse side is Ieu, the word “which is the usual
way of the ecclesiastical authors reading the Hebrew word
Jehovah.”  Referring to this from Montfaucon, Godfrey Higgins
observes: “Here Isis, whose veil no mortal shall ever draw aside,
the celestial Virgin of the Sphere, is seated on the
self-generating sacred lotus and is called Ieu or Jove."[32] She
has also the mystic number 608 which stands for the Deity.  Her
breasts show plainly that it is a female representation, although
connected with the figure appears the male emblem to indicate
that within her are contained both elements, or that the universe
is embodied within the female.
[32] Anacalypsis, book v., ch. iv.
Higgins thinks there is no subject on which more mistakes have
been made than on that of the Goddess Isis, both by ancients and
moderns.  He calls attention to the inconsistency of calling her
the moon when in many countries the moon is masculine.  He is
quite positive that if Isis is the moon, Ceres, Proserpine,
Venus, and all the other female gods were the same, which in view
of the facts everywhere at hand cannot be true.  It is true,
however, that “the planet called the moon was dedicated to her in
judicial astrology, the same as a planet was dedicated to Venus
or Mars.  But Venus and Mars were not these planets themselves,
though these planets were sacred to them."[33] Higgins then calls
attention to her temple at Sais in Egypt, and to the inscription
which declares that “she comprehends all that is and was and is
to be,” that she is “parent of the sun,” and he justly concludes
that Isis can not be the moon.
[33] Anacalypsis, book vi., ch. ii.
Apuleius makes Isis say:
“I am the parent of all things, the sovereign of the elements,
the primary progeny of time, the most exalted of the deities, the
first of the heavenly gods and goddesses, whose single deity the
whole world venerates in many forms, with various rites and
various names.  The Egyptians worship me with proper ceremonies
and call me by my true name, Queen Isis.”
Isis, we are told, is called Myrionymus, or goddess with 10,000
names.  She is the Persian Mithra, which is the same as Buddha,
Minerva, Venus, and all the rest.
Faber admits that the female principle was formerly regarded as
the Soul of the World.  He says:
“Isis was the same as Neith or Minerva; hence the inscription at
Sais was likewise applied to that goddess.  Athenagoras informs
us that Neith or the Athene of the Greeks was supposed to be
Wisdom passing and diffusing itself through all things.  Hence it
is manifest that she was thought to be the Soul of the World; for
such is precisely the character sustained by that mythological
personage."[34]
[34] Pagan Idolatry, book i., p. 170.
The same writer says further:
“Ovid gives a similar character to Venus.  He represents her as
moderating the whole world; as giving laws to Heaven, Earth, and
Ocean, as the common parent both of gods and men, and as the
productive cause both of corn and trees.  She is celebrated in
the same manner by Lucretius, who ascribes to her that identical
attribute of universality which the Hindoos give to their Goddess
Isi or Devi."[35]
[35] Ibid.
It seems to be the general belief of all writers whose object is
to disclose rather than conceal the ancient mysteries, that until
a comparatively recent time the moon was never worshipped as
Isis.  Until the origin and meaning of the ancient religion had
been forgotten, and the ideas underlying the worship of Nature
had been lost, the moon was never regarded as representing the
female principle.
When man began to regard himself as the only important factor in
procreation, and when the sun became masculine and heat or
passion constituted the god-idea, the moon was called Isis.  The
moon represented the absence of heat, it therefore contained
little of the recognized god-element.  It was, perhaps, under the
circumstances, a fitting emblem for woman.
In the sacred writings of the Hindoos there is an account of the
moon, Soma, having been changed into a female called Chandra,
“the white or silvery one.”
While speaking of the moon, Kalisch says: “The whole ritual of
the Phoenician Goddess Astarte with whom that Queen of Heaven is
identical, and who was the goddess of fertility seems to have
been transferred to her."[36]
[36] Historical and Critical Commentary of the Old Testament.
To such an extent, in the earlier ages of the world had the
female been regarded as the Creator, that in many countries where
her worship subsequently became identified with that of the moon,
Luna was adored as the producer of the sun.  According to the
Babylonian creation tablets, the moon was the most important
heavenly body.  In later ages, the gender of the sun and the moon
seems to be exceedingly variable.  The Achts of Vancouver’s
Island worship sun and moon–the sun as female, the moon as
male.[37] In some of the countries of Africa the moon is adored
as female and sun-worship is unknown.  Among various peoples the
sun and the moon are regarded as husband and wife, and among
others as brother and sister.  In some countries, both are
female.  I can find no instance in which both are male.  Hindoos
and Aztecs alike, at one time, said that Luna was male and often
that the sun was female.
[37] Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. ii., p. 272.
The fact that among the Persians the moon as well as the sun was
at a certain period regarded as a source of procreative energy
and as influencing the generative processes, is shown by various
passages in the Avestas.  In the Khordah Avesta, praise is
offered to “the Moon which contains the seed of cattle, to the
only begotten Bull, to the Bull of many kinds.”
Perhaps the most widely diffused and universally adored
representation of the ancient female Deity in Egypt was the
Virgin Neit or Neith, the Athene of the Greeks and the Minerva of
the Romans.  Her name signifies “I came from myself.”  This Deity
represents not only creative power, but abstract intelligence,
Wisdom or Light.  Her temple at Sais was the largest in Egypt. 
It was open at the top and bore the following inscription: “I am
all that was and is and is to be; no mortal has lifted up my
veil, and the fruit which I brought forth was the sun.”  She was
called also Muth, the universal mother.  Kings were especially
honored in the title “Son of Neith.”
To express the idea that the female energy in the Deity
comprehended not alone the power to bring forth, but that it
involved all the natural powers, attributes, and possibilities of
human nature, it was portrayed by a pure Virgin who was also a
mother.  According to Herodotus, the worship of Minerva was
indigenous in Lybia, whence it travelled to Egypt and was carried
from thence to Greece.  Among the remnants of Egyptian mythology,
the figure of a mother and child is everywhere observed.  It is
thought by various writers that the worship of the black virgin
and child found its way to Italy from Egypt.
The change noted in the growth of the religious idea by which the
male principle assumes the more important position in the Deity
may, by a close investigation of the facts at hand, be easily
traced, and, as has before been expressed, this change will be
found to correspond with that which in an earlier age of the
world took place in the relative positions of the sexes.  In all
the earliest representations of the Deity, the fact is observed
that within the mother element is contained the divinity adored,
while the male appears as a child and dependent on the
ministrations of the female for existence and support. 
Gradually, however, as the importance of man begins to be
recognized in human affairs, we find that the male energy in the
Deity, instead of appearing as a child in the arms of its mother,
is represented as a man, and that he is of equal importance with
the woman; later he is identical with the sun, the woman,
although still a necessary factor in the god-idea, being
concealed or absorbed within the male.  It is no longer woman who
is to bruise the serpent’s head, but the seed of the woman, or
the son.  He is Bacchus in Greece, Adonis in Syria, Christna in
India.  He is indeed the new sun which is born on the 25th of
December, or at the time when the solar orb has reached its
lowest position and begins to ascend.  It is not perhaps
necessary to add that he is also the Christ of Bethlehem, the son
of the Virgin.
Nowhere, perhaps, is the growing importance of the male in the
god-idea more clearly traced than in the history of the Arabians. 
Among this people are still to be found certain remnants of the
matriarchal age–an age in which women were the recognized heads
of families and the eponymous leaders of the gentes or clans. 
Concerning the worship of a man and woman as god by the early
Arabians, Prof. Robertson Smith remarks:
“Except the comparatively modern Isaf and Naila in the sanctuary
at Mecca where there are traditions of Syrian influence, I am not
aware that the Arabs had pairs of gods represented as man and
wife.  In the time of Mohammed the female deities, such as
Al-lat, were regarded as daughters of the supreme male God.  But
the older conception as we see from a Nabataean inscription in De
Vogue, page 119, is that Al-lat is mother of the gods.  At Petra
the mother-goddess and her son were worshipped together, and
there are sufficient traces of the same thing elsewhere to lead
us to regard this as having been the general rule when a god and
goddess were worshipped in one sanctuary."[38]
[38] Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia, ch. vi., p. 179.
As the worship of the black virgin and child is connected with
the earliest religion of which we may catch a glimpse, the exact
locality in which it first appeared must be somewhat a matter of
conjecture, but that this idea constituted the Deity among the
Ethiopian or early Cushite race, the people who doubtless carried
civilization to Egypt, India, and Chaldea, is quite probable.
If we bear in mind the fact that the gods of the ancients
represented principles and powers, we shall not be surprised to
find that Muth, Neith, or Isis, who was creator of the sun, was
also the first emanation from the sun.  Minerva is Wisdom–the
Logos, the Word.  She is Perception, Light, etc.  At a later
stage in the history of religion, all emanations from the Deity
are males who are “Saviors.”
That the office of the male as a creative agency is dependent on
the female, is a fact so patent that for ages the mother
principle could not be eliminated from the conception of a Deity,
and the homage paid to Athene or Minerva, even after women had
become only sexual slaves and household tools, shows the extent
to which the idea of female supremacy in Nature and in the Deity
had taken root.
Notwithstanding the efforts which during numberless ages were
made to dethrone the female principle in the god-idea, the Great
Mother, under some one of her various appellations, continued,
down to a late period in the history of the human race, to claim
the homage and adoration of a large portion of the inhabitants of
the globe.  And so difficult was it, even after the male element
had declared itself supreme, to conceive of a creative force
independently of the female principle, that oftentimes, during
the earlier ages of their attempted separation, great confusion
and obscurity are observed in determining the positions of male
deities.  Zeus who in later times came to be worshipped as male
was formerly represented as “the great dyke, the terrible virgin
who breathes out on crime, anger, and death.”  Grote refers to
numerous writers as authority for the statement that Dionysos,
who usually appears in Greece as masculine, and who was doubtless
the Jehovah of the Jews, was indigenous in Thrace, Phrygia, and
Lydia as the Great Mother Cybele.  He was identical with Bacchus,
who although represented on various coins as a “bearded venerable
figure” appears with the limbs, features, and character of a
beautiful young woman.  Sometimes this Deity is portrayed with
sprouting horns, and again with a crown of ivy.  The Phrygian
Attis and the Syrian Adonis, as represented in monuments of
ancient art, are androgynous personifications of the same
attributes.  According to the testimony of the geographer
Dionysius, the worship of Bacchus was formerly carried on in the
British Islands in exactly the same manner as it had been in an
earlier age in Thrace and on the banks of the Ganges.
In referring to the Idean Zeus in Crete, to Demeter at Eleusis,
to the Cabairi in Samothrace, and Dionysos at Delphi and Thebes,
Grote observes: “That they were all to a great degree analogous,
is shown by the way in which they necessarily run together and
become confused in the minds of various authors.”
Concerning Sadi, Sadim, or Shaddai, Higgins remarks:
“Parkhurst tells us it means all-bountiful–the pourer forth of
blessings; among the Heathen, the Dea Multimammia; in fact the
Diana of Ephesus, the Urania of Persia, the Jove of Greece,
called by Orpheus the Mother of the Gods, each male as well as
female–the Venus Aphrodite; in short, the genial powers of
Nature.”
To which Higgins adds: “And I maintain that it means the figure
which is often found in collections of ancient statues, most
beautifully executed, and called the Hermaphrodite.”
As in the old language there was no neuter gender, the gods must
always appear either as female or male.  For apparent reasons, in
all the translations, through the pronouns and adjectives used,
the more important ancient deities have all been made to appear
as males.
By at least two ancient writers Jupiter is called the Mother of
the Gods.  In reference to a certain Greek appellation, Bryant
observes that it is a masculine name for a feminine deity–a name
which is said to be a corruption of Mai, the Hindoo Queen of
Heaven.
In process of time, as the world became more and more
masculinized, so important did it become that the male should
occupy the more exalted place in the Deity, that even the Great
Mother of the Gods, as we have seen, is represented as male.
The androgynous or plural form of the ancient Phoenician God
Aleim, the Creator referred to in the opening chapter of Genesis,
is clearly apparent.  This God, speaking to his counterpart,
Wisdom, the female energy, says: “Let us make man in our own
image, in our own likeness,” and accordingly males and females
are produced.  By those whose duty it has been in the past to
prove that the Deity here represented is composed only of the
masculine attributes, we are given to understand that God was
really “speaking to himself,” and that in his divine cogitations
excessive modesty dictated the “polite form of speech"; he did
not, therefore, say exactly what he meant, or at least did not
mean precisely what he said.  We have to bear in mind, however,
that as man had not at that time been created, if there were no
female element present, this excess of politeness on the part of
the “Lord” was wholly lost.  Surely, in a matter involving such
an enormous stretch of power as the creation of man independently
of the female energy, we would scarcely expect to find the high
and mighty male potentate which was subsequently worshipped as
the Lord of the Israelites laying aside his usual “I the Lord,"
simply out of deference to the animals.
In Christian countries, during the past eighteen hundred years,
the greatest care has been exercised to conceal the fact that
sun-worship underlies all forms of religion, and under Protestant
Christianity no pains has been spared in eliminating the female
element from the god-idea; hence the ignorance which prevails at
the present time in relation to the fact that the Creator once
comprehended the forces of Nature, which by an older race were
worshipped as female.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
