


After the decline of Nature-worship, and when through the
constantly increasing power gained by the ruder elements in human
society a knowledge of the scientific principles underlying
ancient religion had been partially lost or forgotten, it became
necessary for philosophers to conceal the original conception of
the Deity and to clothe their sacred writings in allegory.  Hence
it is observed that every ancient form of religion has a cabala
containing its secret doctrines–doctrines the inner meaning of
which was known only to the few.  In order that these truths
might be preserved, they were inscribed on the leaves of trees in
characters or symbols understood only by the initiated.  The
allegories beneath which these higher truths were concealed were
handed down as traditions to succeeding generations–traditions
in which history, astrology, and mythology are strangely
combined.
After long periods, through war, conquest, and the various
changes incidental to shifting environment, these traditions were
in the main forgotten.  Fragments of them, however, were from
time to time gathered together, and, intermingled with later
doctrines, were used by the priests as a means of increased
self-aggrandizement and power.
It is now thought that the Iliad (Rhapsodies) of Homer is only a
number of “detached songs” which perhaps for centuries were
delivered orally, and that they contain the secret doctrines of
the priests.  Porphyry says that “we ought not to doubt that
Homer has secretly represented the images of divine things under
the concealment of fable.”  It has been said of Plato that he
banished the poems of Homer from his imaginary republic for the
reason that the people might not be able to distinguish what is
from what is not allegorical.  Hippolytus informs us that the
Simonists declared that in Helen resided the principle of
intelligence; “and thus, when all the powers were for claiming
her for themselves, sedition and war arose, during which this
chief power was manifested to nations.”  These songs which were
gathered together by Pisistratus and revised by Aristotle for the
use of Alexander, have generally been regarded merely as a bit of
history recounting a severe and protracted struggle between the
Greeks and Trojans.
Within the earliest historical accounts which we have of the
Egyptians, we observe that their ceremonies and symbols have
already become multitudinous, the true meaning of the latter
being concealed.  The masses of the people, who had grown too
sensualized and ignorant to receive the higher divine
“mysteries,” and too gross to be entrusted with their true
significance, had become idolaters.
Not only the Egyptian and Chaldean priests, but Moses and the
Jewish doctors were well versed in religious symbolism.  The fact
is observed, also, that as late as medieval Christianity, the
fathers in the Church, the Christian painters, sculptors, and
architects, still employed signs and symbols to set forth their
religious doctrines.  Even at the present time, many of the
emblems representing certain ideas connected with the creative
principles, and which were part and parcel of the pagan worship,
are still in use.  The masses of the people, however, are without
a knowledge of their origin or early significance.
Everywhere, throughout the early historic nations, were
worshipped symbols of the attributes or functions of the dual or
triune God.  Each symbol represented a distinctive female or male
quality.  Animals, trees, the sea, plants, the moon, and the
heavens were, at a certain stage of religious development,
symbolized as parts of the Deity and worshipped as possessing
certain female or male characteristics or attributes.
It is plain that, with the decline of female power, and the
consequent stimulation of the animal instincts in man, the pure
creative principles involved in Nature-worship gradually became
unsuited to the sensualized capacities and tastes of the masses;
but in addition to this were other reasons why the female
principle in the Deity should be concealed.  Women were already
deposed from their former exalted position as heads of families
and as leaders of consanguine communities.  All their rightful
prerogatives had been usurped.  The highest development in Nature
had become the slave of man’s appetites, and motherhood, which
had hitherto been accepted as the most exalted function either in
heaven or on the earth, trailed in the dust.
Under these conditions it is not perhaps singular that the
capacity to bring forth, and the qualities and attributes of
women which are correlated with it, namely, sympathy–a desire
for the welfare of others outside of self, or altruism,–should
no longer have been worshipped as divine, or that in their place
should have been substituted the leading characters developed in
man.  From the facts at hand it is plain that at a certain stage
of human growth physical might and male reproductive energy, or
virility, became the recognized God.  With passion as the highest
ideal of a Creator, the female element appeared only in a
sensualized form and simply as an appendage to the god which was
dependent upon her ministrations.  Under the above conditions it
is not in the least remarkable that by the priests it should have
been deemed necessary to conceal from women the facts bound up in
their nature.  Woman’s importance as a creative agency and as a
prime and most essential factor in the universe must be
concealed.  “Isis must be veiled.”
Through the appropriation of the titles of the original dual God
by reigning monarchs, is perceived at least one of the processes
by which the great universal female Deity of the ancients has
been transformed into a male god.  We are assured that the
“redundant nomenclature of the deities of Babylon renders an
interpretation of them impossible.  Each divinity has many
distinct names, by which he is indifferently designated.”  It is
observed that each
Deity has as many as forty or fifty titles, each of which
represents a certain attribute.
Since the invention of the cuneiform alphabet, by which pictures
have been reduced to phonetic signs, the attempt has been made to
arrange or classify these gods according to their proper order in
the Pantheon, but thus far much obscurity and doubt seem to
pervade their history.
In Assyrian, Babylonian, and Egyptian mythologies are observed
much confusion and no small degree of mystery surrounding the
positions occupied by certain gods.  “Children not unfrequently
change positions with parents,” but more frequently, we are told,
“women change places with men,” or, more properly speaking, the
titles, attributes, and qualities ascribed to the Great Universal
female God are now transferred to the reigning monarch. Thus not
unfrequently a deity is observed which is composed of a male
triad, the central figure of which is the king or military
chieftain, and to which is usually appended a straggling fourth
member, a female, who, shorn of her power, and with a doubtful
and mysterious title, appears as wife or mistress to his
greatness, while upon her is reflected, through him, a slight
hint of that dignity and honor which was originally recognized as
belonging exclusively to the recognized Deity.
The Goddess Vishnu, from whose navel as she slept on the bottom
of the sea sprang all creation, after her transformation into a
male God, is supplemented by a wife–Lacksmir.  Lacksmir means
wisdom; but she has become only an appendage to her “lord,” upon
whom is reflected all her former glory.
So greedy did rulers become for the splendid titles belonging to
the female divinities that we are told that “the name of the
Great Goddess Astarte not unfrequently appears as that of a man.”
Although man had usurped the titles of the female God and had
denied her recognition as an active creative agency, still, as
nothing could be created without her, she was permitted, as we
have seen, to remain as wife or mistress to the reigning monarch,
in whom had come to reside infinite wisdom and power.  Her symbol
was an ark, chest, boat, box, or cave.  This woman, although
dignified by the title “Mother of the Gods,” and even by that of
“Queen of Heaven,” is utterly without power.
Not only is it plain that the titles and attributes of female
gods have been appropriated by males, but it is also true that
the more ancient deities, which are now known to have been
female, have by later investigators been represented as male.
The interpretations which have hitherto been put upon the
Babylonian and Assyrian deities by many of those who have
attempted to unravel the mysteries of an earlier stage of
religious worship, is doubtless due to the fact that since the
so-called historic period began, the qualities which have been
considered godlike have all been masculine; it has therefore
never occurred to the minds of these writers that the ancients
may have entertained quite different notions from their own
regarding the attributes of a Deity; hence, whenever the sex of a
god has appeared doubtful, especially if it be in the least
degree powerful or important, it has at once been denominated as
masculine, and this, too, notwithstanding the fact that such
rendering has oftentimes involved inconsistencies,
contradictions, and absurdities which it is impossible to
reconcile either with established facts or with common sense.
Unless the symbols representing religious belief and worship are
viewed in the light of later developed facts in mythology,
archaeology, and philology, there occur many seeming absurdities
and numberless facts which it is found difficult to reconcile
with each other; especially is this true in regard to some of the
symbols used to express the distinctive female and male
qualities.  The serpent, for instance, although a male symbol, in
certain ages of the world’s history appears as a beautiful woman.
This is accounted for by the fact that a woman and a serpent once
stood for the god-idea.  Together they constituted an indivisible
entity–the creating power in the universe.  They therefore
became interchangeable terms.  The woman when appearing alone
represented both, as did also the serpent.
“In most ancient languages, probably all, the name for the
serpent signifies Life, and the roots of these words generally
also signify the male and female organs, and sometimes these
conjoined.  In low French the words for Phallus and life have the
same sound, though, as is sometimes the case, the spelling and
gender differ"; but this fact is thought to be of no material
importance, as “Jove, Jehova, sun, and moon have all been male
and female by turn.”
No doubt many of the inconsistencies hitherto observed in the
religion of the ancients will disappear so soon as we obtain a
clearer knowledge of their chronology; and events which now seem
contradictory will be satisfactorily explained when placed in
their proper order with regard to date.  Religion, like
everything else, is constantly shifting its position to
accommodate itself to the changed mental conditions of its
adherents; hence, ideas which at any given time in the past were
perfectly suited to a people, would, in the course of five
hundred or one thousand years, have become changed or greatly
modified.
During a certain stage in human history “all great women and
mythical ladies were serpents"; but when monumentally or
pictorially represented, they appeared “with the head of a woman,
while the body was that of a reptile.”  This figure represented
Wisdom and Passion, or the spiritual and material planes of human
existence.  The mythical woman whom Hercules met in Scythia, and
who was doubtless the original eponymous leader of the Scythian
people, had the head of a woman and the body of a serpent.[73]
Even the Mexicans declare that “he, the serpent, is the sun,
Tonakatl-Koatl, who ever accompanies their first woman.”  Their
primitive mother, they said, was Kihua-Kohuatl, which signifies a
serpent.  In referring to this Mexican tradition, Forlong
remarks: “So that the serpent here was represented as both Adam
and Adama; and their Eden, as in Jewish story, was a garden of
love and pleasure."[74]
[73] Herodotus, book iv., 9.
[74] Rivers of Life, vol. i., p. 143.
The traditions extant among all peoples seem to connect the
introduction of the serpent into religious symbolism, with a time
in the history of mankind when they first began to recognize the
fact, that through the abuse of the reproductive functions, evil,
or human wretchedness, had gained the ascendency over the higher
forces.  The Deity represented by a woman and a serpent involved
the idea not alone of good, but of good and evil combined. 
Together they prefigured not only Wisdom and generative power,
but evil as well.  Mythologically they represented the cold of
winter and the heat of the sun’s rays, both of which were
necessary reproduction.  From this conception sprang the Ormuzd
and Ahryman of the Persians, the story of Adam, Eve, and the
serpent in Genesis, and the legend of Kihua-Kohuatl and
Tonakatl-Koatl in Mexico.
“The serpent remained in the memory and affections of most early
people as wisdom, life, goodness, and the source of knowledge and
science, under various names such as Toth, Hermes, Themis, the
Kneph or Sophia of Egyptians and Gnostics, and Set, Shet, or Shem
of the Jews."[75]
[75] Forlong, Rivers of Life, etc., vol. i., p. 143.
The Serpent Goddess, although embracing evil as well as good, was
still the “Giver of Life” and the “Teacher of Mankind.”  These
were the titles which in later ages began to be coveted by
monarchs, and then it was that the attributes belonging to this
Deity began to appear in connection with royalty.
There is no ancient divinity about which there seems to be
connected so much mystery as the Assyrian Hea.  When referring to
the “great obscurity” which surrounds this God we are assured
that there is at present “no means of determining the precise
meaning of the cuneiform Hea, which is Babylonian rather than
Assyrian,” but that it is doubtless connected with the Arabic
Hya, which is said to mean “life,” or the female principle in
creation.  This Deity is the God of “glory” and of “giving,"
titles which during the earlier ages of human existence belonged
to the Queen of Heaven, the Celestial Mother.
The representation of the god Amun or Amun-ra, which superseded
the triune Deity, Kneph, Sate, and Anouk at Thebes, and from
which in Assyria doubtless proceeded the trinity, Amun,
Bel-Nimrod, and Hea, is supposed to be identical with the Greek
Zeus, which means the sun.  This God is represented by a female
figure seated on a throne.  It is crowned with two long feathers,
and in the right hand is observed the cross, the emblem of life. 
Manetho, the celebrated Egyptian historian, declares that the
name of this God signifies “concealed.”
There can be little doubt that the titles of the ancient
Deity–the Destroyer or Regenerator, or, in other words, those of
the God of life which embraced the idea of the moving force
throughout Nature, were, in course of time, appropriated by the
rulers of the people.  It is stated that the name of a certain
Egyptian God appears first in connection with royalty, that “his
name was substituted for some earlier divinity whose
hieroglyphics were chiselled out of the monuments to make place
for his.”
According to the testimony of Rawlinson, the God Hea is
represented by the great serpent, which occupies a conspicuous
position among the symbols of the gods on the black stones
recording Babylonian benefactions.  Now these flat black stones
are themselves said to symbolize the female element in the Deity,
in contradistinction to the obelisks, which prefigure the male,
while the serpent, for reasons which have already been explained,
appeared for ages in connection with the figure of a woman.  In
later inscriptions “king” is everywhere attached to the name of
the God Hea, which fact shows that the titles ascribed to her
were those particularly coveted by royalty.  Hence we are not
surprised to find that in an inscription of Sardanapalus, in the
British Museum, there “occurs a remarkable phrase in which the
king takes the titles of Hea.”
Among the Assyrian inscriptions appear Bel-Nimrod, Hea, and Nin
or Bar.  In view of the facts which have come to light regarding
Hea, it is altogether probable that the triad Bel-Nimrod, Hea,
and Nin represent the trinity as figured by the father, mother,
and child.  That Nin was the son or the child of Bel-Nimrod “is
constantly asserted in the inscriptions.”  He appears also as the
son of Hea, yet the fact that Hea should be represented as a
woman, or as the mother of Nin, and the central figure in the
trinity, seems not to have been observed by those who thus far
have been engaged in deciphering these inscriptions.  By
representing Hea as male, Nin is made to appear as the offspring
of two fathers while he is left absolutely motherless.  To
obviate this difficulty an ingenious attempt has been made to
account for his existence by substituting his own wife as the
author of his being.  Although in the numerous accounts which I
had read of Hea, in my search for information concerning her, she
had always been designated as male, still I was satisfied from
the descriptions given that originally this Deity was female. 
Therefore upon receiving a copy of Forlong’s Rivers of Life and
Faiths of Man in All Lands, I was not surprised to find the
following:
“Hoa or Hea, the Hu of our Keltic ancestors, whose symbol was the
shield and the serpent, was worshipped near rivers and lakes, and
if possible on the sea-shore, where were offered to her such
emblems as a golden vessel, boat, coffer, or fish, and she was
then named Belat Ili (the mistress of the Gods)."[76]
[76] Vol. ii., p. 94.
She was the Goddess of Water.  Of this Forlong says: “Water,
perhaps more than fire, has always been used as a purifier.  .  . .
Christians have but imitated the ancients, in the use of
Lustral water–now-a-days called Holy Water, and into which salt
should be freely put.”
According to Francis Vasques, the Cibola tribes of New Mexico pay
no adoration to anything but water, believing it to be the chief
support of all life.  The Hindoo faith and the Greek Christian
Church prescribe “adorations, sacrifices, and other water rites,
and hence we find all orthodox clergy and devotees have much to
do with rivers, seas, and wells, especially at certain annual
solar periods.”
The extent to which these ancient rites are still practiced as
part and parcel of modern religious observances is not realized
by those who have given no special attention to the subject.  As
spring advances, all ranks of Russians from the Czar to the
humblest peasant proceed with their clergy to the Neva, where
with solemn pomp the ice is broken and the water, which is held
to be of virgin purity, is sprinkled upon the heads of Czar,
nobles, and other dignitaries.  The following is an account given
of the worship of Hea not many years ago in the public press:
“An Imperial and Arch-episcopal procession was formed, consisting
of, first, the High Priest of the empire in all his most gorgeous
robes, the two masters of ceremonies walking backwards (probably
because not of a holy enough order), long double files of white-
and gold-robed bearers of sacred flambeaux or candles, for Fire
must enter into every ceremony, whether it is the male or female
energy which is being worshipped.  Following these Religieux came
all the sacred relics and fetishes of the Church, as Maya’s holy
cup for water, all holy books, crosses, banners, with sacred
emblems in their order, and finally the Czar, humbly, and, like
all his people, on foot, followed by courtly throngs.  These all
proceeded to a handsome pavilion or kiosk, erected close to the
edge of the water, when the Metropolitan of the Church reverently
made an incision in the ice, and took out a little water in a
sacred golden cup bearing strange devices.  The firing of guns
accompanied these solemn acts in all their stages, and wherever
the grave procession moved, it always did so with measured tread,
chanting sacred verses to the old, old Deity of our race, and
surrounded with all the pomp of war; whilst at intervals, peals
of Christian bells and the booming of near and distant guns added
to the solemnity of this water pageant.  After the filling of the
golden cup, which, of course, represents the earth and its
fulness, and, at this season, the now expected increase, the High
Priest placed a golden crucifix on the virgin water and blessed
its return from wintry death, invoking the precious fluid to
vernal life and productiveness, when lo! a holy child suddenly
appears upon the scene, reminding us that this is everywhere the
outcome of the ’wafers of life’ in all animal as well as
vegetable production.  Boodha in the garden of Loobim through
which flowed a holy stream, and Christ by the brook at Bethlehem,
nay, the first pair in the garden of the four rivers, are all the
same idea–fertility and creation.  The high Russian Pontiff now
slowly and solemnly stooped, and taking up some of the holy
water, proceeded to sprinkle the vernal child–Jesus, whispered
these crowds, but the ancients said Horus.  The sacred fluid was
then sprinkled on the clergy, the Czar, and all dignitaries, and
finally on the sacred emblems, banners, guns, etc.  Men and
women, aye, wise as well as foolish, of every rank, now crowded
forward, and on bended knee besought their Patriarch to sprinkle
and to bless them.  Finally, the great Czar put the cup to his
lips, humbly and reverently, and then filled it to overflowing
with a wealth of golden pieces, for it is the still living
representative in the nineteenth century A.C. of ’the golden
boat’ of Hea of the nineteenth century B.C.’[77]
[77] Forlong, Rivers of Life, vol. ii., p. 95.
The symbol of Neith or Muth, Athene or Minerva, the great
universal female principle of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans,
was the shield and serpent.  In Celtic Druids I find that Nath,
the Egyptian Neith, the “goddess of wisdom and science whose
symbol was the shield and serpent, was worshipped among the
ancient Irish.”  The male God associated with her was Naith, and
according to Higgins represented “the opposite of Neith.”
In Rivers of Life is observed a reference to the Assyrian Goddess
Hea by Lucian.  In a note Forlong says that no doubt Hea is the
same as Haiya or Haya.  In other words she represents the
universal hermaphrodite–the creative principle throughout
Nature, which was originally worshipped as female.  The actual
signification of the word Haya is “life.”  In ancient Arabia it
was applied to a group of kinsmen.
The Rev. Mr. Davis is of the opinion that Noe or Noah was the
same as Deon and that both were Hu or Hea the mighty, whose
chariot was drawn by solar rays.  This God was in fact the same
as Zeus, Bacchus, and all the rest of the sun and water Deities. 
It has been observed that, according to the ancient cosmogonies,
within water was contained the life principle, and as a woman
presided over it, or was the only being or entity present, she
must have been the self-existent Creator.  From this woman sprang
all creation.  According to the account in Genesis, the Spirit of
God moved on the face of the deep and creation began.
By all nations water has been employed as a symbol of
regeneration, and as it contained the beginning of things it was
female.  The Hindoos regard it as sacred, and in one of their
most solemn prayers it is thus invoked:  Waters, mothers of
worlds, purify us![78]
[78] Quoted by Inman from Colbrook, vol. i., p. 85.
Doubtless it was from these ancient speculations regarding the
beginnings of things that Thales, the Milesian philosopher,
received his doctrine that water is the original principle.  The
ancient Egyptians and the Jewish people to this day have the
custom of pouring out all the water contained in any vessel in a
house where a death has taken place, because of the idea that as
the living being comes from water, so does it make its exit
through water.  Hence “to drink or to use in any way a fluid
which contains the life of human beings would be a foul offense.”
The fact is noted by Inman that in all Assyrian mythology the
water God Hea is associated with life and with a serpent. 
Although Rawlinson declares that Hea is Babylonian rather than
Assyrian, may she not, in view of the facts concerning her, be
not only Babylonian, but Egyptian, Indian, Phrygian, Mexican, and
all the rest?
It would seem that in this Deity, who is figured in connection
with a shield and serpent, as is Minerva, and who is worshipped
near water– an emblem which is sacred to her,–and whose titles
correspond exactly to those of Neith or Cybele, might be traced
the remnants of a once universal worship–a worship in which the
female energy constituted the Creator.
Although it is declared that “great obscurity surrounds the God
Hea,” no one, I think, whose mind is free from prejudice, and who
understands the significance of the early god-idea, and the true
meaning of the symbols used in later ages to express it, can
study the myths connected with this Deity without at once
recognizing her identity with the great female God of Nature who
was once worshipped by every people on the globe, but whose
worship had become sensualized to satisfy the corrupted taste of
a more depraved age–an age in which passion constituted the
highest idea of a God.
Although the serpent Deity was originally portrayed with the head
of a woman and the body of a serpent or fish, after the change of
sex in the god-idea which has been noted in the foregoing pages
had been completed, it is observed that this figure is
represented by the head of a man and the body of a serpent.  Hea,
the great goddess to whom water, the original principle, is
sacred, and who is suspiciously connected with Noah, the
life-principle which appears at the close of a cycle, has changed
her sex.  This god is now the “Ruler of the Seas,” “Master of the
Life-Boat” (the ark), and “Lord of the Earth.”  The earth is his
and the fulness thereof.  He is the “Life Giver,” the “Lord of
Hosts,” who subsequently becomes the maker of heaven and earth.
Minerva, who had been the first emanation from the Deity and the
daughter of the Great Mother of the Gods, now has a father but no
mother.  Jove, who in course of time came to be represented as a
male Creator, brought her forth from his head.  Later, woman is
produced from the side of man.  The male principle, symbolized by
a serpent, has become “the one only and true God.”  It is Passion
–the “Healer of Nations"–the great “I Am.”
No unprejudiced individual who carefully follows the results of
later investigation, and who attempts to unravel the mysteries
surrounding the ancient gods and the significance of the symbols
of worship belonging to the earliest historic times, will fail to
note the attempt which has been made in later ages to conceal the
fact that the Deity worshipped in very ancient times was female. 
Neither will he fail to observe the modus operandi by which the
attributes and prerogatives of this Deity have been shifted upon
males–usually deified monarchs.  After priestcraft and its
counterpart, monarchial rule, had robbed the people of all their
natural rights, kings assumed not alone the governing functions,
but arrogated to themselves the symbols, titles, and attributes
of the dual Deity.  The reigning monarch became not only the
temporal ruler and priest, but was actually God himself, the
female principle being concealed under convenient symbols.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
