


Although the sun was formerly worshipped as the source of all
good, at a certain stage in the human career it came to be
regarded as the cause of all evil.  When Typhon Seth comprehended
the powers of Nature, as the Destroyer and Regenerator she was
the author of all good; but later, after the truths underlying
Nature worship were lost, Typhon, the hot wind of the desert, was
feared rather than worshipped.
In the history of an earlier age of existence, there is not to be
found the slightest trace of human sacrifice to atone for the
sins of the people, or to appease the wrath of an offended God. 
On the contrary, throughout the traditions and monumental records
of the most ancient nations, sacrifices to the Deity– the God of
Nature–consisted simply in the acknowledgment of earth’s
benefits by means of a free-will offering of the bounties which
she had brought forth.
That the sacrifice either of human beings or of animals was not
offered in an earlier age of religious faith is confidently
asserted and, I think, proved by various writers.  Of this
Higgins says: “I think a time may be perceived when it did not
exist even among the Western nations.”  This writer states also
that it was not always practiced at Delphi.  Mention is made of
the fact that among the Buddhists, to whom belongs the first book
of Genesis, no bloody sacrifices were ever offered.
It was doubtless under the worship of Muth, Neith, or Minerva,
the first emanation from the deity and the original Buddha, that
the first book of Genesis or Wisdom was written.  In this book
may be observed the fact that the slaughter of animals is
forbidden.  It is thought that with Crishna, Hercules, and the
worshippers of the sun in Aries, the sacrifice of human beings
and animals began.  In the second book of Genesis, which is said
to be a Brahmin work, animals are first used for sacrifice, and
in the third book, or the book of Generations or Re-generations
of the race of man or the Adam, which was written after the pure
doctrines connected with the worship of Wisdom had been
corrupted, they are first allowed to be eaten as food.
It is supposed that the practice of sacrificing human beings and
animals took its rise in the western parts of the world after the
sun entered Aries, and that it subsequently extended even to the
followers of the Tauric worship, among whom it was carried to a
frightful extent.  It is also thought that the history of Cain
and Abel is an allegory of the followers of Crishna to justify
their sacrifice of the yajna or lamb “in opposition to the
Buddhist offering of bread and wine, or water, made by Cain and
practiced by Melchizedek."[163]
[163] Anacalypsis, vol. i., p. 101.
It is now positively known that all over the world, during a
certain stage of religious belief, either human beings or animals
were, at stated seasons, sacrificed to the Deity.  Of the
universality of this practice Faber says:
“Throughout the whole world we find a notion prevalent that the
gods could be appeased only by bloody sacrifices.  Now this idea
is so thoroughly arbitrary, there being no obvious and necessary
connection, in the way of cause and effect, between slaughtering
a man or a beast, and recovering of the divine favor by the
slaughterers, that its very universality involves the necessity
of concluding that all nations have borrowed it from some common
source."[164]
[164] The Origin of Pagan Idolatry, vol. i., book 2, p. 465.
Dr. Shuckford is constrained to admit that the sacrifices and
ceremonies of purification practiced by Abraham and his
descendants and those of surrounding peoples, were identical,
with only “such trifling changes as distance of countries and
length of time might be expected to produce.”  The substitution
of a lamb in the place of Isaac would seem to indicate a change
from child-slaughter to that of animals.
Sacrifices were offerings to the god of pro- creation.  Certain
representatives of the life which he had bestowed must be
returned to him as a free-will gift.  In many countries, the
victims offered to the deity were captives taken in war; but, as
prisoners of war and slaves were not permitted to join in the
battles of their captors, their lives were of little value;
hence, later, it is observed that the sacrificial victim must be
a prince or an individual whose life was of great importance to
the tribe.
As in all hot countries the heat of the sun is the most
destructive agency against which mankind have to contend, it is
not perhaps singular, at a time when superstition had usurped the
functions of the reasoning powers, that the sun-god should have
been invested with the attributes inspired by terror, and that so
far as possible, mankind should have deemed it necessary to
propitiate its wrath, and, by rendering to it suitable offerings
and sacrifices, they should have hoped to avert the calamities
incident to its displeasure.  Neither is it remarkable when we
remember the peculiar circumstances surrounding the Jews, and the
fact that the offerings demanded by their god was the life which
he had bestowed, that the sacrifices offered to Moloch, the fire
god, should have been the members of their own household–namely,
their children.
We must not forget that the reward promised this people by
prophet, priest, and diviner for godliness was extreme
fruitfulness of body.  We have seen that to obtain this mark of
godly favor, or, under pretense of serving their god, the form of
worship prescribed by their priests, and adopted both in their
households and in their temples was pre-eminently sensual, and
calculated to stimulate and encourage to the highest extent their
lower or animal nature.
As the size of a man’s family, or his power to reproduce, was an
index to his favor with the Almighty the pleasure of the “Lord"
in this matter being but the reflection of his own desires, the
result as might reasonably be expected was overpopulation to such
an extent that the means of subsistence within the small boundary
of Judea was inadequate to supply the demands of the swarming
masses of “God’s children"–children which had been created for
his honor and glory.  Surely some plan must be devised whereby
these difficulties might be adjusted, and that, too, to use a
modern expression, without flying in the face of Providence.  As
the Lord had been honored and man blessed in the mere bringing
forth of offspring, what better scheme, so soon as such blessings
became too numerous, than to return a certain number of them to
the giver, the god of Moloch? It is true that by this process
children were born only to be delivered over to the ravages of
the fire- god, but by it, was not their deity both served and
appeased at the same time that population was kept within the
bounds of subsistence? That great numbers were thus sacrificed is
only too apparent from the accounts in the Jewish
scriptures–Abraham’s acts and those of Jephtha being examples of
the manner in which this god was propitiated.
In Micah, vi. chap., 7th verse, occurs an interrogation which
furnishes something more than a hint of the practice among the
Jews of child sacrifice.  “Shall I give my first born for my
transgressions, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?”
Although there is sufficient evidence to prove the enormous
extent to which the practice of child sacrifice prevailed among
the Jews, it is believed that much more proof would be found, had
it not, in later times, with a view to concealing the extent of
this practice, been expunged from their sacred writings.  Moloch
was to the Jews what Siva came to be to the Hindoos, namely, the
Terrible.  It is plain, however, that Siva was not formerly
feared in India, but next to Vishnu was the best beloved of all
their gods.  Siva was originally the androgyne god who was not
only the Destroyer, but the beneficent Regenerator and purifier. 
It was the cold of winter and the heat of the sun.  It was a
conception which was a direct outgrowth of Nature worship or of
that religious idea which was portrayed by a mother and her
child.
The conception involved in sacrifice seems to be that of a
payment for services rendered, or desired.  The Amazulus, when
going to battle, sacrifice to the manes of their ancestors, who,
as older branches of the tree of life, appear to constitute their
god-idea.  This is done that their gods “may have no cause of
complaint, because they have made amends to them and made them
bright.”  On appearing before the enemy they say: “Can it be,
since we have made amends to the Amadhlozi, that they will say we
have wronged them by anything?"[165]
[165] Viscount Amberley, Analysis of Religious Belief, vol. i.,
p. 32.
At a certain stage in human history the various peoples of the
globe depended upon excessive numbers for their prosperity, hence
the most precious offering to the god of pro-creation was that of
human victims.
In India, when a new colony or city was founded, in order to
insure its prosperity, large numbers of children were delivered
over as a bribe or offering of reconciliation to the god of
virility.  The enormous extent to which human sacrifice has
prevailed in India, in Egypt, in Mexico, among the Carthaginians,
the Jews, the Druids, and even among the Greeks and Romans, is
well attested.
From the records of extant history, it would seem that human
sacrifice usually accompanies a certain stage of sun-worship.
Among the Aztecs in Mexico, a country in which the sun was a
universal object of reverence and in which one of the prescribed
duties of the boys trained in the temple was that of keeping
alive the sacred fires, the immolation of victims became the most
prominent feature of their public worship. We are distinctly
told, however, that human sacrifice was not formerly practiced in
Mexico, but that finally here as elsewhere, the idea became
prevalent that by sacrificing human victims to the god of
Destruction, his wrath might be appeased and the people saved
from his vengeance.  It is stated that human sacrifices were
adopted by the Aztecs early in the fourteenth century, about two
hundred years before the conquest.  “Rare at first, they became
more frequent with the wider extent of their empire; till, at
length, almost every festival was closed with this cruel
abomination.”
Notwithstanding these atrocities, in their conceptions of a
future state of existence, and especially in their disposition of
the unregenerate after death, are to be observed certain traces
of human feeling and refined sensibility which are difficult to
reconcile with the cruelty practiced in their religious rites,
and which bear a striking contrast to the physical torture, to
which after death the wicked are subjected not only in Mexico,
but in countries professing a high stage of civilization and
culture.
Of their religious observances, those which had doubtless been
inherited from an older civilization, Prescott, quoting from
Torquemada and Sahagun, says:
“Many of their ceremonies were of a light and cheerful
complexion, consisting of the national songs and dances, in which
both sexes joined.  Processions were made of women and children
crowned with garlands and bearing offerings of fruits, the
ripened maize, or the sweet incense of copal and other
odoriferous gums, while the altars of the deity were stained with
no blood save that of animals.  These were the peaceful rites
derived from their Toltec predecessors."[166]
[166] See Conquest of Mexico, book I, chap. iii., p. 74.
Prior to the days of Montezuma, the Aztec priests had engrafted
upon these simple ceremonies not only a burdensome ceremonial,
and a polytheism similar to that of Eastern nations, but, as we
have seen, human sacrifices and even cannibalism had become
prominent features in religious worship. Throughout the entire
ceremonial and religious conceptions of the Aztecs may be
observed a display of the savage and brutal elements in human
nature, in close connection with unmistakable evidence of a once
higher stage of culture and refinement.
In the later ages of Aztec history their most exalted deity was
Huitzilopotchi, the Mexican Moses, the god of war.  His temples
were the most costly and magnificent among the public edifices in
the country, and his image bedecked with ornaments was an
universal object of adoration.  At the dedication of his temple
in the year 1486 more than seventy thousand captives are said to
have perished.[167]
[167] Torquemada.
A Deity which occupied a conspicuous place in the mythology, and
which was probably an inheritance from more ancient times, was
Quetzalcoatl, doubtless the same as the Eastern Goddess of
Nature, or Wisdom.  She was the “grain goddess,” and “received
offerings of fruit and flowers at her two great festivals.  She
also took care of the growth of corn.  She was doubtless the same
as the Earth Mother of the Finns and Esths, she who “undertakes
the task of bringing forth the fruits.”  She is evidently the
Demeter of the Greeks, the Ceres of the Romans, etc.  She is also
the goddess of Wisdom, for she had “instructed the nations in the
use of metals, in agriculture, and in the art of government.” 
Under this Deity the
“Earth had teemed with fruits and flowers without the pains of
culture.  An ear of Indian corn was as much as a single man could
carry.  The cotton, as it grew, took, of its own accord, the rich
dies of human art.  The air was filled with intoxicating perfumes
and the sweet melody of birds.  In short, these were the halcyon
days, which find a place in the mythic systems of so many nations
throughout the world.  It was the golden age of Anuhuac.”
We are given to understand that for some cause not explained the
beneficent god Quetzalcoatl was banished, that he (or she) was
deposed through the influence of some deity which had become more
popular, or, at least, more powerful; but that when Quetzalcoatl
departed from the country “in a winged skiff made of serpent
skins,” it was with a promise to return to the faithful, which
promise was sacredly cherished down to the time of the Spanish
invasion.
The Mexican Mars, Huitzilopotchi, was born of a virgin.  His
mother, a devout person, while at her devotions in the temple saw
floating before her a bright colored feather ball, which she
seized and placed in her bosom.  She soon became pregnant, her
offspring being a god, who like Minerva appeared full armed with
spear and helmet.
Although the exact manner in which the Mexicans sacrificed to
their Deity to atone for the sins of the people differs somewhat
from the modus operandi employed in the Christian vicarious
atonement, still the likeness existing between them is sufficient
to indicate the fact of their common origin and the similar
manner of their development.
The Mexicans were wont to select a young and handsome man from
their midst, whom they invested with the dignity of a god.  After
having surrounded him with every luxury, and when they had
showered upon him every attention, crowning him with flowers and
worshipping him for a year or more as a Savior, they killed him,
offering him as an atonement or sacrifice, in order that the rest
of the people might escape the vengeance of their great Deity,
who, it was claimed, is pleased with such offerings, and who
demands sacrifices of this kind at the hands of his children. 
Within blood was contained life, hence the offering of a bloody
victim was but the returning to their god, as a free-will gift
that which he had bestowed, such sacrifice being regarded as the
only acceptable means of grace or reconciliation.
That the offering of a victim to the Jewish God was deemed
necessary to the fulfilment of Christian doctrine is a fact which
is clearly shown by numerous passages in the New Testament.  “We
are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all.”  “By one offering he hath perfected forever them
that are sanctified."[168] “Christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many."[169]
[168] Hebrews, x., 10, 14.
[169] Ibid., ix., 28.
That the Jewish Paschal feasts and the Eucharistic rites of
Christians had their counterpart among the Mexicans is observed
in the fact that shortly after the death of their god, cakes
which had been prepared and blessed by the priests were offered
by them to the people to be eaten as the veritable body of their
sacrificed lord.
The source whence the doctrine of an atonement –a bloody
sacrifice which lies at the foundation of Christian theology–has
proceeded is not at the present time difficult to determine, for
we shall presently see that it, like all the leading doctrines
contained in this later system, and which are regarded as
exclusively Christian, had its origin in the religion of past
ages, a religion which although originally pure, in course of
time degenerated into the grossest phallicism and even into human
sacrifice and cannibalism.
Although among the Mexicans as among the Jews, human sacrifices
were offered to the Deity, no hint of gross and sensual rites
practiced in the temples of the latter is recorded.  Hence, as
the Mexicans had not arrived at that stage of religious progress
(?) at which sensuality inculcated as a sacred duty, and at which
moral and physical debasement was encouraged both in public and
private life, we may reasonably conclude that their faith
represents a somewhat earlier stage of development than does that
of either Jew or Greek.  In point of morality, as judged by the
most ancient standards, or by the more modern, the Mexicans
compare favorably with either of these nationalities.  Indeed
when we compare the social, religious, and civil conditions of
Mexico as we find them under Montezuma with those of the Jews
under David or Solomon, or with those of the Greeks under Solon,
or even with those of the Christians during the Spanish
Inquisition when thousands upon thousands, not of captives taken
in war, but of the noblest and best of the land, were yearly
slaughtered for “the glory of God,” there is quite as much to
meet the approval of an enlightened conscience under the first
named system as under that of any one of the other three.
By priests the fact has long been understood that effects may be
produced through appeals to the religious or emotional nature
which under other circumstances would be impossible; and as, for
thousands of years, it has been the special business of this
class to formulate creeds for the ignorant masses, religious
belief and the ceremonies connected with “sacred” worship, during
certain periods of the world’s history, have assumed a
grotesqueness in design unsurpassed by the most fanciful fairy
tales which the imagination has ever been able to create, at the
same time that they have portrayed a depth of sensual degradation
capable of being reached only by that order of creation which
alone has been able to develop a religion.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
