


From the facts recorded in the foregoing pages, we have seen that
true Christianity was but a continuation of that great movement
which was begun in Persia seven or eight centuries before, and
whose gathering strength had been emphasized by the humane
doctrines set forth in the various schools of Greek philosophy.
In the first century of the Christian era may be observed among
various sects, notably the Gnostics, a desire to popularize the
teachings of an ancient race, and to accentuate those principles
which had been taught by Buddha, Pythagoras, the Stoic
philosophers, the Roman jurisconsults and others.  In other words
the object of the new religion was to stimulate the altruistic
characters which had been developed during the evolutionary
processes, and to strengthen and encourage the almost forgotten
principles of justice and personal liberty upon which early
society was founded, but which through ages of sensuality and
selfishness had been denied expression.
When we remember the tenacity with which the human mind clings to
established beliefs and forms, it is not perhaps singular that in
a comparatively short time these principles were lost sight of,
and that the entire system of corrupt paganism, with Christ as
the New Solar Deity, was reinstated; neither is it remarkable,
when we reflect upon the length of time required to bring about
any appreciable change in human thought and action, that the
principles which this Great Teacher enunciated are at the present
time only just beginning to be understood.
To one who carefully studies the history of Christianity by the
light of recently developed truths, the fact will doubtless be
discovered that the fundamental difference existing between
Catholic and Protestant sects is grounded in the old feud arising
out of the relative importance of the sex-principles.  From the
days of Zoroaster to the final establishment of Christianity by
Paul, the tendency–although slight–had been toward the
elevation of woman, and consequently toward a greater
acknowledgment of the female element in the god-idea. 
Considerable impetus was given to the cause of woman’s
advancement through the doctrines of the various schools of
philosophy in Greece, and subsequently by the efforts put forth
by the Roman lawyers to establish their equality with men before
the law; hence, during the first hundred years of the Christian
era the “new religion” seems to have contained much of the spirit
of the ancient philosophy.
By several of the early Christian sects, the second person in the
trinity was female, as was also the Holy Ghost.
In a “fragment of a gospel preserved by St. Jerome, and believed
to have been from the original Aramaean Gospel of St. Matthew,
with additions, the Holy Ghost (ruach), which in Hebrew is
feminine, is called by the infant Savior, ’My Mother, the Holy
Ghost.’ “[142]
[142] Barlow, Essays on Symbolism, p. 135.
The mission of Christ was that of a Regenerator of mankind, an
office which had been symbolized by the powers of the sun.  He
was to restore that which was lost.  He attempted to teach to the
masses of the people the long neglected principles of purity and
peace.  He did not condemn woman.  He was baptized by John (Ion
or Yon) in water, the original symbol for the female element, and
while in the water; the Holy Ghost in form of a dove (female)
descended upon him.  To those who have given attention to the
symbolism of the pagan worship these facts are not without
signification.
Because of the peculiar tendency of Christ’s teachings women soon
became active factors in their promulgation.  If there were no
other evidence to show that they publicly taught the new
doctrines, the injunction of St. Paul, “I suffer not a woman to
teach,” would seem to imply that they were not silent.
The doctrines of the Gnostics were particularly favorable to
women.  Marcellina, who belonged to this order, was the founder
of a sect called Marcelliens.  Of her works Waite observes: “It
would scarcely be expected that the heretical writings of a woman
would be preserved amid such wholesale slaughter of the obnoxious
works of the opposite sex.  The writings of Marcellina have
perished."[143] Not only did women teach publicly, and write, but
according to Bunsen they claimed the privilege of baptizing their
own sex.  The reason for this is evident.  Before baptism it was
customary for the newly-made converts to strip and be anointed
with oil.  After the establishment of Paul’s doctrines, however,
“the bishops and presbyters did not care to be relieved from the
pleasant duty of baptizing the female converts."[144]
[143] History of the Christian Religion, p. 405.
[144] Ibid., p. 23.
Although the utmost care has been exercised to conceal the fact
that women equally with men, performed the offices connected with
the early church, yet by those who have paid attention to the
true history of this movement, there can be no doubt about the
matter.  Notwithstanding the early tendencies of the “new
religion” toward the recognition of women, and toward the
restoration of the female principle in the Deity, the policy to
be pursued by the church was soon apparent, for Paul, the real
founder of the system calling itself Christian, and a man imbued
with Asiatic prejudices concerning women, arrogantly declared
that “man is the head of woman as Christ is the head of the
Church.”  Women were commanded to be under obedience.  Neither
was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man;
thus was re-established and emphasized the absurd doctrine of the
Lingaites, that the male is an independent entity, that he is
spirit and superior to the female which is matter.  After this
indication of the policy to be pursued under the new regime, it
would scarcely be expected that theefforts put forth by the
various sects among the Gnostics toreinstate the female element
either on the earth or in heavenwould be successful, and as might
be anticipated from the factsalready adduced, as early as the
year 325, at the council of Nice, a male trinity was formally
established, and soon thereafter, the Collylidians, a sect which
rigorously persisted in the adoration of the female principle,
were condemned.  At the council of Laodicea, A.D. 365, the 11th
canon forbade the ordination of women for the ministry and the
44th canon prohibited them from entering the altar.
The devotees of female worship, although for a time silenced,
were evidently not convinced, and to force their understanding
into conformity with the newly established order, the Nestorians,
in the year 430 A. D., reopened the old dispute, and formally
denied to Mary the title of Mother of God.  Their efforts,
however, were of little avail, for in the year 451, at the
council of Ephesus, the third general council, the decision of
the Nestorians was reversed and the Virgin Mother reinstated. 
Upon this subject Barlow remarks: “Well might those who made this
symbolical doctrine what it now is, at length desire to do tardy
justice to the female element, by promoting the mother to the
place once occupied by the Egyptian Neith, and crowning her Queen
of Heaven."[145] The fact will doubtless be observed, however,
that by the Romish Church the idea of the god-mother differs
widely from the Queen of Heaven–the original God of the
ancients.  Mary the Mother of Jesus is not a Creator, but simply
a mediator between her Son and His earthly devotees–a doctrine
only a trifle less masculine in texture than that of an Almighty
Father and his victimized son.  The worship of Mary was adopted
by the so-called Christians in response to a craving in the human
heart for a recognition of those characters developed in mankind
which may be said to contain the germ of the divine.  The
masculine god of the Jews was feared not loved, and his son had
already been invested with his attributes.  He was all powerful,
hence a mediator, a mother, was necessary to intercede in behalf
of fallen man, and this, too, notwithstanding the fact that woman
had become the “cause of evil in the world.”
[145] Essays on Symbolism, p. 134.
The Great Goddess of the ancients, Perceptive Wisdom, the Deity
of giving, she who represented the purely altruistic characters
developed in mankind, and whose worship involved a scientific
knowledge of the processes of Nature, when engrafted upon the
so-called Christian system, although indicating an important step
toward the recognition of the genuine creative principles, was
not understood.  Although her effigies were brought from the East
and made to do duty as representations of Mary, the Mother of
Christ, a knowledge of her true significance lay hurled beneath
ages of sensuality and selfishness.
By those who have made it their business to investigate this
subject, it is observed that there is scarcely an old church in
Italy in which there is not to be found a remnant of a black
virgin and child.  In very many instances these black virgins
have been replaced by white ones, the older figures having been
retired to some secluded niche in the church where they are held
especially sacred by the ignorant devotees who know absolutely
nothing of their original significance.  We are assured that many
of these images have been painted over, ostensibly in imitation
of bronze, but the whites of the eyes, the teeth, and colored
lips reveal the fact that they are really not intended to
represent bronze, but figures of a black virgin goddess and child
whose worship has been imported into Europe from the East.  I had
been told that one of the oldest of these images extant was to be
found in Augsburg; a thorough search, however, in all the
churches and cathedrals of that city failed to reveal it, but in
the museum at Munich such a figure is to be seen.  It is in a
state of decay, one arm of the mother and a portion of the
child’s figure being worn away.  Upon this subject Godfrey
Higgins remarks:
“If the author had wished to invent a circumstance to corroborate
the assertion that the Romish Christ of Europe is the Crishna of
India, how could he have desired anything more striking than the
fact of the black virgin and child being so common in the Romish
countries of Europe?  A black virgin and child among the white
Germans, Swiss, French, and Italians!!!"[146]
[146] Anacalypsis, book iv., ch. i., p. 175.
We have observed that during an earlier age in the history of
religious worship, as the female was supposed to comprehend both
the female and male elements in creation, a belief in the
possible creative power of the female independently of the male
was everywhere entertained, and that after the schismatic faction
arose which endeavored to exalt the male, the production of a son
by a woman unaided by man, was among the Yonigas to be the sign
which would forever settle the question of the superior
importance of the female functions in the processes of
reproduction, and consequently, also, her claim to the greater
importance in the deity.
The sacred books of India show that from a former belief in one
or the other of the two creative principles throughout Nature as
God, the people had come to accept both female and male as
necessary elements in reproduction, the latter being the more
important.  In course of time this change seems to have been
universal and to have extended to all the countries of the globe.
As the male could not create independently of the female, or, as
spirit was dependent on matter for its manifestations, there
arose a necessity for a Savior to redeem man from the evil
effects arising from his relations with woman who was regarded as
matter, and who in course of time became the cause of evil.
Concerning the doctrines which prevailed in the earlier ages of
Christianity relative to the ancient dual principle in creation,
and regarding the offices which were performed by the two
elements, male and female, in the deity, we have the following
from Justinus, who is said to have been contemporary with Peter
and Paul:
“When Elohim had prepared and created the world as a result from
joint pleasure, He wished to ascend up to the elevated parts of
heaven, and to see that not anything of what pertained to the
creation laboured under deficiency.  And He took His Own angels
with Him, for His nature was to mount aloft, leaving Edem below;
for inasmuch as she was earth, she was not disposed to follow
upward her spouse.  Elohim, then, coming to the highest part of
heaven above and beholding a light superior to that which He
himself had created, exclaimed: ’Open me the gates, that entering
in I may acknowledge the Lord.’ “
As he enters the Good One addresses him in the following manner:
“Sit thou on my right hand.”  Then the soaring male principle
says to the Good One “permit me Lord to overturn the world which
I have made, for my spirit is bound to men.”  To which the Good
One replies: “No evil canst thou do while thou art with me, for
both thou and Edem made the world as a result of conjugal joy. 
Permit Edem then, to hold possession of the world as long as she
wishes; but you remain with me.”  While the father is drawn away
from earth to Heaven, Edem, in the meantime is bringing woes
innumerable upon man.  Naas, who has received his evil nature
from her, and who is a child of the Devil, has debauched Eve,
“Henceforward vice and virtue are prevalent among men.”  The
Father seeing these things dispatches Baruch his third angel to
Moses, and through him spake to the children of Israel, that they
might be converted unto the Good One.  But the third angel, Naas,
by the soul of which came from Edem upon Moses, as also upon all
men, observed the precepts of Baruch, and caused his own peculiar
injunctions to be hearkened unto.
Again, after these occurrences Baruch, the angel of the Good One,
was sent to the prophets to warn them against the wiles of Edem,
but in the same manner Nass, the Devil, enticed them away, they
being allured by him to their own destruction.  Again Elohim
selected Hercules, an uncircumcised prophet, and sent him to
quell the disturbance caused by Naas or Edem and to release the
Father from their power.
“These are the twelve conflicts of Hercules which He underwent,
in order, from first to last, viz.:  Lion, and Hydra, and Boar,
and the others successively.  For they say that these are the
names of them among the Gentiles, and they have been derived,
with altered denomination, from the energy of the maternal
angels.  When he seemed to have vanquished his antagonists,
Omphale (now she is Venus) clings to him and entices away
Hercules, and divests him of his power, viz.:  the commands of
Baruch which Elohim issued.  And in place of this power Babel, or
Venus, envelops him in her own peculiar robe, that is, in the
power of Edem, who is the power below; and in this way the
prophecy of Hercules remained unfulfilled and his work.”
As men were still bound by the power of Edem, or the Devil, in
the days of Herod the king, Baruch was again dispatched by
Elohim, and coming to Nazareth delivered his message to Jesus,
son of Joseph and Mary.  Nass, who, as we have seen, was the evil
spirit in Edem, wished to entice away Jesus also.  He was not,
however, disposed to listen but remained faithful to Baruch.
Naas, overcome by anger at not being able to seduce him, caused
him to be crucified.
“He, leaving the body of Edem on the accursed tree, ascended to
the Good One; saying to Edem, ’Woman, thou retainest thy Son,’
that is, the natural and the earthly man.  But Jesus himself
commending his spirit into the hands of the Father, ascended to
the Good One.  Now the Good One is Priapus, and he it is who
antecedently caused the production of everything that exists.  On
this account he is styled Priapus, because he previously
fashioned all things according to his design.  For this reason,
he says, in every temple is preserved his statue, which is
revered by every creature; and there are images of him in the
highways carrying over his head ripened fruits, that is, the
produce of the creation, of which he is the cause, having in the
first instance formed, according to his design, the creation,
when as yet it had no existence."[147]
[147] Hippolytus, Refutation of All Heresies, book v., p. 188.
Thus the fact is observed not only that in the time of Paul,
phallic worship still existed, but by the writings of Justinus
and others is shown the manner in which the doctrine that woman
is the cause of evil in the world became formulated and adopted
as part and parcel of the Christian belief.
Staniland Wake, director of the anthropological society of
London, when commenting on the obscene myths upon which the
Christian religion rests, remarks:
“The fundamental basis of Christianity is more purely phallic
than that of any other religion now existing, and its emotional
nature .  .  .  shows how intimately it was related to the older
faiths which had a phallic basis.”
After stating that the myth of creation and that of the flood
have their exact counterpart in India, the Rev. Mr. Faber
remarks that “there is no rite or ceremony directed in the
Pentateuch of which there is not an exact copy in the rites of
the pagans.”
The Christian doctrines as established by Paul, and afterwards
formulated into a system by the Romish Church, were adopted by
the ignorant multitude who, being incapable of understanding the
higher principles involved, accepted the allegories beneath which
were veiled the ancient mysteries literally, and as the highest
expression of divine wisdom.  Hence the comparatively recent
observation that the “new religion was eventually but the
gathering in of the superstitions of paganism” is a matter of
little surprise to those who have carefully examined the facts
connected with the growth of religious faith.
Under the new regime Christ became the New Solar Deity and round
him were finally ranged all the myths of Solo-phallic worship
which had prevailed under the adoration of Crishna at a time when
the higher truths underlying pure Nature-worship had been
forgotten.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
