


[92] Hesiod, The Theogony.
So long as human beings worshipped the abstract principle of
creation, the manifestations of which proceed from the earth and
sun, they doubtless reasoned little on the nature of its hitherto
inseparable parts.  They had not at that early period begun to
look outside of Nature for their god-idea, but when through the
peculiar course of development which had been entered upon, the
simple conception of a creative agency originally entertained
became obscured, mankind began to speculate on the nature and
attributes of the two principles by which everything is produced,
and to dispute over their relative importance in the office of
reproduction.  Much light has been thrown upon these speculations
by the Kosmogonies which have come down to us from the
Phoenicians, Babylonians, and other peoples of past ages.  In the
Phoenician Kosmogony, according to the Mokh doctrine as recorded
by Philo, out of the kosmic egg Toleeleth (female) “sprang all
the impregnation of creation and the beginning of the universe.” 
In this exposition of the beginnings of things, it is distinctly
stated that the spirit which in after ages came to be regarded as
something outside or above Nature, “had no consciousness of its
own creation.”  Commenting on the above, Bunsen is constrained to
admit that it is usually understood as being “decidedly
pantheistic.”  He suggests, however, that the writer may HAVE
INTENDED TO SAY (the italics are mine) that “the spirit who was
heretofore the Creator was the unconscious spirit.”
Berosus, the scholar of Babylon, who, until a comparatively
recent time has furnished all the information extant concerning
Babylonian antiquities, in his account of the creation of man and
of the universe, says that in the beginning all was water and
darkness; that in the water were the beginnings of life; but as
yet there was no order.  Men were there with the wings of birds
and even with the feet of beasts.  There were also quadrupeds and
men with fishes’ tails, all of which had been produced by a
twofold principle.  Over this incongruous mass a woman presided. 
This woman is called Omoroka by the Babylonians and by the
Chaldeans Thalatth.  The  latter name, signifies, “bearing” or
“egg producing.”
In the Babylonian Kosmogony, according to Endemus, the pupil of
Aristotle, the beginning of the universe was called Tauthe, which
being interpreted means “Mother of the Gods.”  Associated with
her sometimes appears the male principle–Apason.  In the history
of Berosus, there is given an account of Oaunes–a mythical
teacher of Babylon, who appeared with the head of a human being
and the body of a fish or serpent.  This personage brought to the
Babylonians all the knowledge which they possessed.  Oaunes wrote
“concerning the generation of mankind, of their different ways of
life, and of their civil polity.”  He it was who gave the above
account of creation.  He says that finally Omoroka, or Thalatth,
the woman who existed before the creation, was divided, one half
of her forming the heavens, “the other half the earth.”  “All
this,” Berosus declares, “was an allegorical description of
Nature."[93]
[93] Prof. Smith, Chaldean Account of Genesis, pp. 34, 35.
In the following legend will be observed the groundwork for the
story of the flood.  Xisuthrus was a king of Chaldea.  To him the
deity, Kronos, appeared in a vision and warned him that upon the
fifteenth day of the month Daesius there would be a flood, by
which mankind would be destroyed.  He therefore enjoined him to
write a history of the beginning, progress, and conclusion of all
things down to the present time, and to bury it in Sippara, the
City of the Sun.  He was commanded also to build a vessel, and
take with him into it his friends and relations, and to convey on
board everything necessary to sustain life, together with all the
different animals, both birds and quadrupeds, and trust himself
fearlessly to the deep. Having asked the deity whither he was to
sail, he was answered: “To the gods"; upon which he offered up a
prayer for the good of mankind.  He then obeyed the divine
admonition, and built a vessel five stadia in length and two in
breadth.  Into this he put everything which he had prepared, and
last of all conveyed into it his wife, his children, and his
friends.
“After the flood had been upon the earth, and was in time abated,
Xisuthrus sent out birds from the vessel, which not finding any
food, nor any place whereupon they might rest their feet,
returned to him again.  After an interval of some days, he sent
them forth a second time; and they now returned with their feet
tinged with mud.  He made a trial a third time with these birds;
but they returned to him no more: from which he judged that the
surface of the earth had appeared above the waters.  He therefore
made an opening in the vessel, end upon looking out found that it
was stranded upon the side of some mountain, upon which he
immediately quitted it with his wife, his daughter, and the
pilot.  Xisuthrus then paid his adoration to the earth: and,
having constructed an altar, offered sacrifices to the gods, and,
with those who had come out of the vessel with him, disappeared. 
Him they saw no more, but they could distinguish his voice in the
air, and could hear him admonish them to pay due regard to the
gods.  He informed them that it was on account of his piety that
he had been taken away to live with the gods, and that his wife
and daughter had obtained the same honor.”
It is more than likely that this story, which as we have seen has
extended to the remotest corners of the earth, has an esoteric
meaning, and that it embodies the doctrines of the ancients
relative to re- incarnation and the renewal of worlds.  Doubtless
it portrays not only the end of a cycle, but that by it is
prefigured the fortunes of a human soul, which in its ascent, is
from time to time forced into a human body.
All the early Kosmogonies are intermingled with the history of a
great flood, from the ravages of which an ark which contained a
man was saved.  The Gothic story of creation indicates that the
Scythians belonged to the same race as the Chaldeans.  At the
beginning of time when nothing had been formed, and before the
earth, the sea, or the heavens appeared, Muspelsheim existed.  A
breath of heat passing over the vapors, melted them into water,
and from this water was formed a cow named Aedumla, who was the
progenitor of Odin, Vile, and Ve, the Trinity of the Gothic
nation.
There is also another tradition, probably a later, which asserts
that from the drops of water produced by the primeval breath of
heat, a man, Ymer, was brought forth.  The son of Ymer was
preserved in a storm-tossed bark, his father being dragged into
the middle of the abyss, where, from his body the earth was
produced.  The sea was made of his blood, the mountains of his
bones, and the rocks of his teeth.  As three of his descendants
were walking on the shore one day, they found two pieces of wood
which had been washed up by the waves.  Of these they made a man
and a woman.  The man they named Aske and the woman Emla.  From
this pair has descended the human race.
The marked resemblance between the characters of the Gothic Ymer
and the Chaldean Omoroka, from each of whose bodies the universe
is created, has been observed by various writers.  After
referring to Mallet’s conclusions upon this subject, Faber
remarks:
“They are indeed evidently the same person, not only in point of
character, but, if I mistake not, in appellation: for Ymer or
Umer is Omer-Oca expressed in a more simple form.  The difference
of sex does by no means invalidate this opinion, which rests upon
the perfect identity of their characters: for the Great Mother,
like the Great Father, was an hermaphrodite; or, rather, that
person from whom all things were supposed to be produced, was the
Great Father and the Great Mother united together in one compound
being.  Ymer and Omoroca are each the same as that hermaphrodite
Jupiter of the Orphic theology.”
We have observed, however, that in all the older traditions this
hermaphrodite conception is accounted as female, it is the Great
Mother within whom is contained the male; in later ages, however,
it is represented as male, the female being concealed beneath
convenient symbols.
The Trinity of the Goths was male; yet as Odin could not create
independently of the female energy he is provided with a wife,
Frigga, to whom “all fair things belonged, and who had
priestesses among the early German tribes.”  Frigga when
worshipped alone was both female and male.  According to one
German tradition, Tiw (Zeus), which in its earliest conception
was female, was the parent of the first man.  This man begat
three sons who became the fathers of the three Deutsch tribes. 
Ish (or Ash) was the parent of the Franks and Allemans; Ing was
the progenitor of the Swedes, Angles, and Saxons; and Er, or
Erman, was the eponymous leader of the tribes called by the
Romans Hermiones.
The Kosmogony of the Chinese is similar in all respects to that
of other countries.  The first man, Puoncu, was born from an egg.
The Chinese say that this egg-born Puoncu, who is identical with
Brahm, Noah, and Adam, is not the great Creator or God, but only
the first man.  Their great God or Tien is a Unity which
comprehends three, and their human triad–a triplicated being who
is the parent of the human race–is a lower expression of the
same power, and to him has finally been ascribed the office of
Creator.
The Kosmogony of the Japanese begins with the opening of the
sacred egg from which all things were produced.  This egg is
identical with the ark, and from it the diluvian patriarch was
born.  He was “Baal-Peor or the lord of opening; and, from an
idea that the Ark was an universal mother, he was considered as
the masculine principle of generation, and was adored by his
apostate descendants with all the abominations of phallic
worship.”
In the Theogony of Hesiod, Uranus is represented as being the
parent of three sons, and the same legend repeated in the story
of Cronus portrays him also as a triplicated deity.  According to
the Peruvian Kosmogony all things sprang from Viracocha who is
said to be identical with the Greek Aphrodite.  Besides this
superior God they venerated a triad which was closely connected
with the sun.  These gods were called Chuquilla, Catuilla, and
Intyllapa.  They say that as their ancestors journeyed from a
remote country to the Northwest they bore the image of their god
in a coifer or box made of reeds.  To the four priests who had
charge of this box or ark he communicated his oracles and
directions.  He not only gave them laws but taught them the
ceremonies and sacrifices which they were to observe.  “And even
as the pillar of cloud and fire conducted the Israelites in their
passage through the wilderness, so this Spanish devil gave them
notice when to advance forward, and when to stay."[94]
[94] Faber, Pagan Idolatry, book i., ch. v.
According to Marsden, the New Zealanders believe that three gods
created the first man, and that the first woman was made from one
of his ribs.
Among the Otaheitans and various tribes of Indians, the belief
prevails that all created things have proceeded from a
triplicated deity who was saved from the ravages of a flood in an
ark or ship.
The fact is observed that the Theogonies and Kosmogonies of all
peoples have reference to a flood or to the renewal of life after
the destruction of the world, and that the Great Father who is
preserved, and who comes forth from an ark or ship with the seeds
of a former world, represents the beginning of a new era.  Adam
with his three sons, Cain, Abel, and Seth, Noah with his triad,
Shem, Ham, and Japheth, Menu and his triple offspring, and so on,
all mean exactly the same thing, namely, the renewal of life at
the close of a cycle, or manwantara.
From the traditions extant in nearly every quarter of the globe,
it would seem that, prior to the so- called flood in the time of
Noah, man, as a Creator, had not to any extent been worshipped,
but, on the contrary, that the great universal dual principle
which pervades Nature and which is back of matter and force, for
instance Tien among the Chinese, Iav among the Hebrews, and Aum
among the Hindoos, had been the Deity adored; but with the
decline of virtue and knowledge, this God was gradually abandoned
for a lesser one, a deity better suited to the comprehension of
“fallen” man.
In the Elohistic narrative of creation which appears in the first
chapter of Genesis, a dual or triune God, female and male, says,
Let us make man in our own image, and accordingly a male and a
female are created.  In the Jehovistic account, however, in the
second chapter of the same book, a document of much later date,
man is made first and afterward woman.  In fact, in the latter
narrative she appears as an afterthought and is created simply
for his use; she is taken from his side and is wholly dependent
upon him for existence.  This fact is recognized by Bishop
Colenso in the following words:
“Thus in the second account of creation, the man is APPARENTLY
created first, and the woman is CERTAINLY created the last, of
all living creatures; whereas, in the older story the man and
woman are created last of all, as the crowning work of Elohim,
and are created together–’and Elohim created man in His own
image, in the image of Elohim created He him; male and female
created He them.’ This ancient Elohistic narrative, then, the
Jehovist had before him; and he enlarged and enlivened it by
introducing a number of passages recording additional incidents
in the lives of the patriarchs before and after the flood, and
especially by inserting the second account of the creation, ii.,
4-25.”
Colenso observes that verse four of chapter second belongs to the
Elohist, and that it was removed from its original position at
the beginning of Gen. i., in order to form the commencement of
the Jehovistic account of the creation.[95]
[95] Lectures on the Pentateuch, p. 32.
Quoting from Bishop Browne in the New Bible Commentary, the same
writer remarks that in the Elohistic account of the creation “we
have that which was probably the ancient primeval record of the
formation of the world."[96]
[96] Ibid. p. 16.
The oldest or Elohistic portion of Genesis is, at the present
time, seen to conceal great wisdom and a knowledge of Nature far
surpassing that of later times.
According to Higgins, the first verse of the first chapter of
Genesis, if properly translated, would not declare that in the
beginning God created the heavens and the earth, but that Wisdom
“formed” the earth and the planets.  In none of the ancient
Kosmogonies can there be a word found regarding the creation of
matter.  From the facts which have come down to us respecting the
speculations of the ancients, it is plain that the original
conception was, that within the primeval beginnings described in
their Kosmogonies, in chaos or unorganized matter, was contained
primeval force; no attempt, however, was made by them to account
for the creation of either motion or matter.
As soon as human beings began to speculate on the attributes of
their Deity; when the two principles composing it began to
separate, and the idea was gaining ground that the male was the
only important factor in reproduction, the sun became male, the
earth and sea female.  Still, even then the doctrine seems not to
have been questioned, that the creative agency had proceeded from
matter, or that it was developed in and through it.  The belief
that something can be made from nothing was reserved for a later
age.
In the oldest Semitic Kosmogonies, we are assured that the
self-conscious God who is manifested in the order of the
universe, proceeded out of the great abyss, and out of
unorganized, dark, primeval matter.  During the earlier historic
period, however, by both Jew and Gentile, the belief was
entertained that spirit is material.  It is the essence of
fire–a substance akin to the galvanic or electric fluid.  This
masculine element, the manifestation of which is desire, or heat,
and which was finally set up as an eternal, self-existent,
creative force, or God, was originally regarded as a
manifestation of matter, and as having no independent existence. 
In an earlier age, this so-called creative agency is associated
with a force far superior to itself, namely, Light or Wisdom. 
Minerva, who is the first emanation from the Deity, “formed” all
things.  She it is who discriminates all things and gives laws to
the universe.  “She represented to the Greeks that spiritual
element which lifts knowledge into wisdom, and talent into
genius."[97] But with the importance which began to be assumed by
man when he began to regard himself as a creator, and when
through ignorance and sensuality the principles of a more
enlightened race were forgotten, desire, or heat, was separated
from matter and came to be regarded as an independent entity,
which itself had created matter out of nothing.  Thus is noticed
the extent to which the god-idea has been developed in
accordance with the relative positions of the sexes.
[97] L. T. Ives, Art Words.
According to the Grecian mythology, much of which was a
comparatively late development, mortal woman was the handiwork of
Vulcan the Firegod, who, being commissioned by Jove to execute “a
snare for gods and man,” moulded the beauteous form of woman. 
This is a worthy example of the contempt and scorn shown by the
Greeks for women during the later period of their career as a
nation.  That such contempt was a later development is shown in
the fact that woman was originally the gift of Pallas Athene, or
Wisdom.  When she first appeared on the scene she was crowned by
the gods, in fact she was the first object honored with a crown. 
Concerning the conceptions regarding women as held at an earlier
age, and those which came to prevail after she had become “the
cause of evil in the world,” we have the following from
Tertullian:
“If there was a Pandora, whom Hesiod mentions as the first woman,
hers was the first head the Graces crowned, for she received
gifts from all the gods, whence she got her name Pandora.  But
Moses, a prophet, not a poet-shepherd, shows us the first woman
Eve having her loins more naturally girt about with leaves than
her temples with flowers.  Pandora then is a myth."[98]
[98] Tertullian, vol. i., p. 341.
Woman, who was originally the gift of Wisdom, or Minerva, and who
when created was garlanded with flowers as the crown of creation,
became, in course of time, an accursed and wicked thing who must
henceforth cover herself with leaves to hide her shame. 
Tertullian, who, with the rest of the early fathers in the
Christian church, had imbibed the latter doctrine concerning her,
could not believe the tradition set forth by Hesiod; therefore
Pandora was a myth, while the corrupted fable, that of Eve as the
tempter, was accepted as a natural representation of womanhood.
When woman was created, “all the gods conferred a gifted grace.”
[99] Hesiod, Works and Days.
Later, however, Pandora herself becomes the pourer forth of ills
on the head of defenceless man.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
