


Not only were religious doctrines veiled beneath allegories and
convenient symbols, but names also had a religious significance.
We are given to understand that in Chaldea and Assyria every
child was named by the oracle or priest, and that no one thought
of changing the appellation which had come to him through this
heavenly source.[79]
[79] Inman, Ancient Faiths, vol. i., p. 3.
Inman, in his Ancient Faiths, calls attention to the fact that in
the Old Testament kings, priests, captains, and other great men
have had names bestowed upon them, each of which has some
religious signification; that this name was given the individual
“at circumcision, or soon after birth.”
In the ancient names of what are designated as the Shemitic
races, children were called after the god alone, and sometimes in
connection with an attribute.  Especially were these names
applied to royalty or to persons of distinction; for instance,
names were given signifying, God the good, God the just or the
merciful, God the strong, The Warrior God, etc.
As the higher conception of a Creator was forgotten, and as human
beings, or perhaps I should say their power to control
circumstances coupled with the ability to reproduce or create,
had become god, they assumed the titles or names of the Deity;
hence, it is not perhaps singular that in later times kings and
heroes were invested with all the attributes of the gods.
We have seen that according to various writers Om or Amm was the
holy one whose name in India it was sacrilege to pronounce.  It
was the eternal sun, or the Great Mother.  As this word stands
also for “tribe or people,” it seems to mean, too, that which
binds, holds, or endures.
As Om or Amm signifies the Great Mother, so An or On means the
Great Father.  Concerning the word Am-mon, Inman writes as
follows:
“The association of the words signifying mother and father
indicates that it is to such conjunction we must refer creative
power.  With such an androgyne element the sun was associated by
ancient mythologists.  Jupiter was himself sometimes represented
as being female; and the word hermaphrodite is in itself a union
between Hermes and Aphrodite, the male and female creative
powers.  We may fairly conclude, from the existence of names like
the above, that there was at one time in Western as there was in
Eastern Asia a strong feud between the adorers of On and Am, the
Lingacitas and the Yonijas, and that they were at length
partially united under Ammon, as they were elsewhere under Nebo
or the Nabhi of Vishnu."[80]
[80] Ancient Faiths Embodied in Ancient Names, vol. i., p. 237.
Inman relates that once when a friend of his was conversing with
a very high-caste Hindoo he casually uttered this word Amm or Om,
whereupon the man was so awe struck that he could scarcely speak,
and, in a voice almost of terror, asked where his friend had
learned the word.  Of this word Inman says:
“To the Hindoos it was that incommunicable name of the Almighty,
which no one ventured to pronounce except under the most
religious solemnity.  And here let me pause to remark that the
Jews were equally reverent with the name belonging to the Most
High; and that the third commandment was very literal in its
signification.”
The same writer remarks that in Thibet, too, where a worship very
nearly identical in ceremony and doctrine with that of the Roman
papists exists amongst the Lamas, the name of Om is still sacred.
The Iav of the Jews was equally revered, but in the later ages of
their career they seem to have lost sight of its true meaning.
According to Inman’s testimony and that of other etymological
students, the true signification of the cognomen Jacob is the
female principle.
It is believed by various writers that the story of Jacob and
Esau as related in Genesis has an esoteric as well as an exoteric
meaning–that Jacob has reference to the female creative energy
throughout Nature, or, rather, to the great mass of people who in
an early age of the human race believed in the superior
importance of the female in the office of reproduction, and that
Esau signifies the male.  Attention is called to the fact that
Esau is represented as a “hairy” man, rough-voiced and easily
beguiled, while Jacob, on the other hand, is smooth-faced,
soft-voiced, and the favorite of his mother.
There is indeed much in this myth which seems to indicate that it
is an allegory beneath which are veiled certain facts connected
with the struggle between two early contending sects regarding
the relative importance of the sexes in reproduction.  Of this
Inman says:
“My own impression is that Esau, or Edom, and Jacob are mystic
names for a man and a woman, and that round these, historians
wove a web of fancy; that ultimately the cognomen Jacob was
recognized, and that to allow the Jewish people to trace their
descent from a male rather than a female, the appellation of
Israel was substituted in later productions."[81]
[81] Ancient Faiths, vol. i., p. 607.
As most of the myths or allegories in Genesis are now traced to a
source far more remote than the beginning of legitimate Jewish
history, it is not unreasonable to suppose that this story, too,
was copied by the Jews from the traditions of earlier races; nor,
when we remember the true meaning of the cognomen Jacob, that the
entire story should be regarded as an attempt to set forth
certain facts connected with the great physiological or religious
conflict between the sexes.
The significance of the idols worshipped by Jacob and his family
is not for a certainty known, but it is believed by certain
writers that the Seraphim and Teraphim were the usual images
which were used to represent the male and female energies.  “Then
Jacob said unto his household and to all that were with him:  Put
away the strange gods that are among you.”  In referring to this
passage, Inman, in a note, says:
“The critic might fairly say, looking at Genesis xxxv., 2, ’Put
away the strange gods that are among you,’ that there were images
of God which were not strange, and that in these early times
there were orthodoxy and heterodoxy in images as there are now. 
In ancient times the emblem of life-giving energy was an orthodox
emblem; it is now a horror and its place is taken by an image of
death.  We infer from the context that Laban’s gods were
orthodox.”
So, also, must have been the stone pillar set up by Jacob at
Bethel (place of the sun).  From a study of similar stones,
examples of which are to be found in nearly every country of the
globe, it is known that they represent the male energy, and from
all the facts connected with the story of Laban’s gods it is
probable that they were emblems of this power.  We may suppose
then that the “strange gods,” the unorthodox gods, which Jacob
ordered put away, were those representing the female energy.
It seems strange that any person can study the history of the
Israelitish Exodus by the light of later developments in biblical
research without recognizing the fact that the “Lord” which
brought the children of Israel out from the bondage of Egypt was
the male power, which by a certain sect had been proclaimed the
only actual creative agency, and therefore the “only one and true
God.”
Although, at the time at which Abraham is said to have lived, the
knowledge of an abstract dual or triune God still remained, yet,
during the five hundred years which elapsed until the time of
Moses, the grossest idolatry had come to prevail. 
Notwithstanding the fact that Moses had learned much from the
Egyptians, he seems not to have risen above a very gross
conception of a deity.  His god was by turns angry, jealous,
revengeful, vacillating, and weak.  He was in fact the embodiment
of human passions and desires.  We have seen that the third
person in the ancient Trinity had, in Egypt, India, and Persia,
come to be recognized in place of the three principles originally
worshipped–that, as it really embodied the essence of the other
two, little was heard of the Creator and Preserver.  Doubtless
this God was the one which Moses intended the Israelites to
worship, but as they were unable to conceive of an abstract
principle he invested it with a personality which, as we have
seen, was burdened with the frailties and weaknesses common to
themselves.
As the Regenerator or Destroyer represented the processes of
Nature,–the dying away of the sun’s rays at night only to
reappear on the following day, and the withdrawal of its warmth
in winter only to be renewed in the spring,–so this God
portrayed also the beneficent Creator and Preserver of all
things, at the same time that it was the Destroyer.  It embodied
the fundamental idea in all religions, namely, life and
fertility.  So also did the “Lord” of the Israelites represent
reproductive energy, but as man being spirit had come to be a
Creator of offspring, while woman being only matter furnished the
body, this “Lord” was male.  Connected with it was no hint of the
female nature or principle, except the ark or chest in which it
was carried about.  To those who have acquainted themselves with
the significance of ancient religious symbols, the fact is plain
that the “Lord” of the Israelites, which in their journeyings
toward Canaan they carried in an ark or chest, and which was
symbolized by an upright stone, was none other than a
“Life-giver” in the most practical sense.  It was the emblem of
virility, and from the facts at hand, at the present time, there
is little doubt but that all the spirituality with which we find
this “Lord” invested was an after-thought and comprehended no
part of the belief of the Jews until after their contact with the
Persians during the Babylonian captivity.
Doubtless the story in which their journeyings toward Canaan are
set forth contains an esoteric as well as an exoteric
significance for ages known only to the priests, and that within
it is embodied not alone something of the true history of this
people, but an account also of their struggle against an older
religion.  At this time the Israelites had practically commenced
the elimination of the female principle from their god-idea, and
had begun the worship of the male element, the female being
represented by an ark, chest, or box.  This ark, as the
receptacle of the god, was still a holy thing.
Not only among the Israelites, but among other nations of the
East, we find the devotees of the male god beginning to assume a
position quite independent of the beliefs of their fathers.  At
this time great towers or pillars begin to be erected in honor of
this deity, which is figured as the “God of Life,” or as the
“Lord of Hosts.”  Notwithstanding the fact that the story of the
Exodus contains much historical truth, it is altogether probable
that the priests have used it, as they did that of the flood, to
conceal their religious doctrines.
At the time of the Exodus, the Israelites were ignorant tribes
without laws or letters, and while in Egypt were menials of the
lowest order.  Hence, the laws written on the two tables of
stone, and which it is claimed were elaborated during their
wanderings in the wilderness of Sinai for the guidance of these
unlettered slaves, show the desire of the priests of later times
to invest the “chosen people” with the insignia of enlightenment.
Regarding the character of the god which they worshipped, we have
ample proof in the Old Testament.  It is plain that at the time
of their bondage in Egypt the Jews had become the grossest
phallic worshippers, adoring the emblems of generation, with no
thought of their earlier significance as pure symbols of creative
force in mortals.
The fact will doubtless be remembered that, among the Jews, to be
barren was the greatest curse, and that the principal reward
promised to the faithful was fruitfulness of body.  The essence
of this deity was heat or passion, and his emblem was the serpent
or an upright stone.  It has been observed that when this “Lord"
was invested with personality he was subject to all the frailties
of his followers.  His chief and most emphatic characteristic,
however, was jealousy of other gods, and most of the imprecations
thundered against the chosen people were directed against the
worship of the gods of surrounding nations, those which the
Israelites had originally worshipped.
That portion of the Decalogue relating to a jealous god is seen
to belong wholly to the Jews, or to the Israelites, who were
descendants of Jacob.  The older nations, among which was the
ancient family of the Hebrews, knew nothing of a jealous god. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the God of the Jews appeared and
talked face to face with Moses, that he exhibited portions of his
body to him, and that he thundered his law to this people from
Mt.  Sinai, still they were constantly lapsing into the worship
of Baal and Ashtaroth, which fact shows how deeply rooted was the
belief in a dual or triune God.  It is plain that this “Lord,"
the fierce anger of whom was kindled because of their
digressions, was none other than the jealous male god which had
but recently been elevated to the dignity of a supreme Creator.
Although the angel of the Lord when he came down from Gilgal
commanded his followers to “throw down the altars of the people
of Bochim,” they nevertheless continued to do evil in the sight
of the Lord, and
“followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round
about them, and bound themselves unto them and provoked the Lord
to anger.
“And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.  And
the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel."[82]
[82] Judges ii., 12, 13.
“And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the
strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you and prepare your hearts
unto the Lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of
the hand of the Philistines.
“Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth
and served the Lord only."[83]
[83] I Samuel vii., 3,4.
The extreme hatred of the schismatic faction for the opposite
worship, and the punishments which were meted out to those who
should dare to rebel against the chosen faith, are indicated by
the language which throughout the Old Testament is put into the
mouth of their Lord–a Deity which rejoices in the title of a
jealous God.
“If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as
thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve
other gods, which thou hast not known thou nor thy fathers:
“Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you,
nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the
earth even unto the other end of the earth;
“Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither
shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt
thou conceal him:
“But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon
him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the
people.
“And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
“And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you."[84]
[84] Deuteronomy xiii.
The constantly recurring faithlessness of the Jews, their
restlessness and proneness to wander from their one-principled
deity which had been set up by their priests for them to worship,
was doubtless an unconscious effort on the part of the people to
mitigate the outrage which had been committed against their
Creator.  It was but a reaching out for that lost or unrecognized
element which comprehends the more essential force both in human
beings and in the conception of a deity.  In other words, it was
an attempt at recognition, in the objects worshipped, of that
missing female element which had always been worshipped, and
without which a Creator becomes a misnomer–a meaningless,
unexplained, and unexplainable monstrosity.
When the Jews first make their appearance in history, they are
sun worshippers, as are all the nations by which they are
surrounded.  They are worshippers of Seth the Destroyer and
Regenerator; but when the philosophical truths underlying the
ancient universal religion were forgotten, or when through
ignorance the language setting forth these mysteries was taken
literally, Seth became identified with the Destroyer, or the Evil
Principle.  In the meantime man had come to believe himself the
sole creator of offspring.  He is spirit, which is eternal; woman
is matter, which is not only destructible but altogether evil. 
He is heat or passion–the principle through which life is
produced.  She represents the absence of heat.  She is the simoom
of the desert and the chilly blast which destroys.
That it was no part of their plan to change their original form
of worship for a spiritual conception of a Creator is apparent
from their history.  On the contrary, it is plain that they
desired simply to eliminate from the hitherto dual conception of
a deity the female principle, which, in their arrogance, and
because of the change which had been wrought in the relations of
the sexes, they no longer acknowledged as important in the office
of reproduction.
It is quite true they would worship only one god–the
“Lord,"–but that lord was, as we have seen, a deity of physical
strength and virile might, a “Lord of Hosts,” a god which was to
be worshipped under the symbol of an upright stone–an object
which by every nation of the globe down to a comparatively recent
time has typified male pro-creative energy.  That the masses of
the people, even as late as the time of Jeremiah, had no higher
conception of a God than that indicated by an upright stone, is
shown by that prophet when he accuses the entire house of Israel,
“their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their
prophets,” of “saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a
stone, Thou hast brought me forth.”
That the people could not, or would not, be prevailed upon to
renounce the Queen of Heaven, the Celestial Mother, is seen in
Jer. vii., 17, 18:
“Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem?  The children gather wood, and the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes
to the queen of heaven and to pour out drink offerings unto other
gods.”
Also in Jeremiah xliv:
“Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense
unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great
multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt,
in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, As for the word that thou
hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken
unto thee.
“But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our
own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven and to pour
out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our
fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and
in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals,
and were well, and saw no evil.
“But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven and
to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things,
and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.
“And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured
out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship
her and pour out drink offerings unto her without our men?”
That the above represents a quarrel in which the women of Judah
openly rebelled against the worship of the “Lord,” at the same
time declaring their allegiance to the female Deity, the
Celestial Mother, Queen of Heaven, is only too evident, the curse
pronounced upon them by Jeremiah, in the name of the lord, having
little effect upon them to change their purpose.
“Therefore, hear ye the word of the Lord, all Judah that dwell in
the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith
the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any
man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord God
liveth.
“Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and
all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be
consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of
them.”
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
