


Although the God of the most ancient people was a dual Unity, in
later ages it came to be worshipped as a Trinity.  When mankind
began to speculate on the origin of the life principle, they came
to worship their Deity in its three capacities as Creator,
Preserver, and Destroyer or Regenerator, each of which was female
and male.  We have observed that, according to Higgins, when this
Trinity was spoken of collectively, it was called after the
feminine plural.
By the various writers who have dealt with this subject during
the last century, much surprise has been manifested over the fact
that for untold ages the people of the earth have worshipped a
Trinity.  Forster, in his Sketches of Hindoo Mythology, says:
“One circumstance which forcibly struck my attention was the
Hindoo belief of a Trinity.”
Maurice, in his Indian Antiquities, observes that the idea of
three persons in the Deity was diffused amongst all the nations
of the earth, in regions as distant as Japan and Peru, that it
was memorially acknowledged throughout the whole extent of Egypt
and India, “flourishing with equal vigor amidst the snowy
mountains of Thibet, and the vast deserts of Siberia.”  The idea
of a Trinity is supposed to have been first elaborated on the
banks of the Indus, whence it was carried to the Greek and Latin
nations.  Astrologically the triune Deity of the ancients
portrayed the processes of Nature.
This recondite doctrine as understood by the very ancient people
which originated it, involved a knowledge of Nature far too deep
to be appreciated or understood by their degenerate descendants,
except perhaps by a few philosophers and scholars who imbibed it
in a modified form from original sources in the far East.
After the establishment of the Trinity, the creative energy,
which had formerly been represented by a mother and child, came
to be figured by the mother, father, and the life derived
therefrom.  Sometimes the Trinity took the form of the two
creative forces, female and male, and the Great Mother.
Whenever the two creative principles were considered separately,
there always appeared stationed over or above them, as their
Creator, an indivisible unity.  This Creator was the “Beyond,"
the “most High God"–Om or Aleim.  It was the Mother of the Gods
in whom were contained all the elements of the Deity.  Among the
representations of the god-idea which are to be observed on the
monuments and in the temples of Egypt appear triads, each of
which is composed of a woman stationed between a male figure and
that of a child.  She is depicted as the Light of the sun, or
Wisdom, while the male is manifested as the Heat of the orb of
day.  She is crowned and always bears the male symbol of life–
the crux-ansata.
Later, it is observed that the worship of Light has in a measure
given place to the adoration of Heat, in other words Light is no
longer adored as essence of the Deity, Heat or Passion having
become the most important element in creative power.
After the ancient worship of the Virgin and Child had become
somewhat changed or modified so as to better accommodate itself
to the growing importance of the male, the most exalted
conception of the Deity in Egypt seems to have been that of a
trinity composed of Mout the Mother, Ammon the Father, and Chons
the Infant Life derived from the other two.  Mout is identical
with Neith, but she has become the wife as well as the mother of
Ammon.  Directly below this conception of the Deity is a triad
representing less exalted attributes, or lower degrees of wisdom,
under the appellations of Sate, Kneph, and the child Anouk; and
thus downward, through the varying spheres of celestial light and
life involved in their theogony are observed the divine creative
energies represented under the figures of Mother, Father, and the
Life proceeding therefrom, until, finally, when the earth is
reached, Isis, Osiris, and Horus appear as the representation of
the creative forces in human beings, and therefore as the
embodiment of the divine in the human.
The Deity invoked in all the earlier inscriptions is a triad, and
we are assured that in Babylonia, where Beltis is associated with
Belus, “no god appears without a goddess.”
The supreme Deity of Assyria was Asshur, who was worshipped
sometimes as female, sometimes as male.  This God doubtless
represents the dual or triple creative principle observed in all
the earlier forms of worship.  Asshur had no distinct temple, but
as her position was at the head of the Pantheon, all the shrines
throughout Assyria were supposed to have been open to her
worship.
According to Bunsen, in the Sidonian Tyrian district, there were
originally three great gods, at the head of which appears
Astarte–a woman who represents pure reason or intelligence; then
follows Zeus, Demarius, and Adorus.  Without doubt this triad
represents a monad Deity similar in character to the one observed
in Egypt and other countries.
In the minds of all well-informed persons, there is no longer any
doubt that in Abraham’s time the Canaanites worshipped the same
gods as did the Persians and all the other nations about them–
namely, Elohim, the dual or triune creative force in Nature.  As
the Sun was the source whence proceeded all light and life as
well as reproductive or generative power, it had become the
object of adoration, and as the emblem of the Deity, it was
worshipped by all the nations of the earth in its three
capacities as Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer or Regenerator
each female and male.
Melchizedek, who was a priest of the most high God, blessed
Abraham, who was a worshipper of the same Deity.  On this subject
Dr. Shuckford says:
“It is evident that Abraham and his descendants worshipped not
only the true and living God, but they invoked him in the name of
the Lord, and they worshipped the Lord whose name they invoked,
so that two persons were the object of their worship, God and
this Lord: and the Scriptures have distinguished these two
persons from one another by this circumstance, that God no man
hath seen at any time nor can see but the Lord whom Abraham and
his descendants worshipped was the person who appeared to them.”
We are told that when chap. xxi., verse 33, of Genesis is
correctly translated, Abraham is represented as having invoked
Jehovah, the everlasting God.
In the Hebrew name Yod-He-Vau (Jehovah), was set forth the triune
character of the Creator; in other words, this name “comprehended
the essential perfections of the great God,” and was used in
their Scriptures as a “kind of summary or revelation of the
attributes of the Deity.”
Although Abraham, while in Egypt, was the worshipper of idols, we
are assured that “the peculiar privilege vouchsafed to him lay in
the revelation of God’s holy name, Yod-He-Vau.  There is indeed
much evidence going to prove that the people represented by
Abraham understood the earlier conception of a Deity, and that
while the great universal principle whose name it was sacrilege
to pronounce was still acknowledged, there was another God (the
Lord), the same as in China, whose worship they were beginning to
adopt.  “And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me,
and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on,
So that I come again to my Father’s house in peace; then shall
the Lord be my God.”
He then declared that the pillar or stone which he had set up,
and which was the emblem of male procreative energy, should be
God’s house.
As at the time represented by Jacob there was evidently little or
no spirituality among the Israelites, this Lord whom they
worshipped was simply a life-giver in the most material or
practical sense.
The reproductive energy in man had become deified.  It had, in
other words, come to possess all the attributes of a god, or of a
powerful man, which in reality was the same thing.  It is this
god personified which is represented as appearing to Abraham and
talking with him face to face.  With this same god Jacob
wrestled, while the real God–the dual or triune principle, the
Jehovah or Iav, no man could behold and live.
To conceal the fact that the God of Abraham originally consisted
of a dual or triple unity, and that the Deity was identical in
significance with that of contemporary peoples, the priests have,
as usual, had recourse to a trick to deceive the ignorant or
uninitiated.  In reference to this subject Godfrey Higgins says:
“In the second book of Genesis the creation is described not to
have been made by Aleim, or the Aleim, but by a God of a double
name Ieue Aleim; which the priests have translated Lord God.  By
using the word Lord, their object evidently is to conceal from
their readers several difficulties which afterward arise
respecting the names of God and this word, and which show clearly
that the books of the Pentateuch are the writings of different
persons."[39]
[39] Anacalypsis, book ii., ch, i.
Upon this subject Bishop Colenso observes:
“And it is especially to be noted that when the Elohistic
passages are all extracted and copied one after another, they
form a complete, connected narrative; from which we infer that
these must have composed the original story, and that the other
passages were afterwards inserted by another writer, who wished
to enlarge or supplement the primary record.  And he seems to
have used the compound Jehovah Aleim in the first portion of his
work in order to impress upon the reader that Jehovah, of whom he
goes on to speak in the later portions, is the same Great Being
who is called simply Elohim by the older writer, and notably in
the first account of the creation."[40]
[40] Lectures on the Pentateuch and the Moabite Stone, p. 7.
We are informed by Bunsen that El, or Elohim, comprehends the
true significance of the Deity among all the Aramaic or
Canaanitish races, El representing the abstract principle taken
collectively, Elohim pertaining to the separate elements as
Creator, Preserver, and Regenerator.  Each of these Canaanitish
races had inherited these ideas from their fathers, and, although
they had become grossly idolatrous, “Moses knew, and educated
Israelites remained a long time conscious, that they used them
not merely in their real but in their most ancient sense."[41]
Maurice and other writers call attention to the fact that Moses
himself uses this word Elohim with verbs and adjectives in the
plural.  That the God worshipped by the more ancient peoples,
namely Aleim, or Elohim, the same who said, “Let us make man in
our image,” was not the Lord adored at a later age by the Jews,
is a fact which at the present time seems to be clearly proven;
that it constituted, however, the dual or triune unity venerated
by all the nations on the globe of which we have any record,
appears to be well established.
[41] Bunsen, History of Egypt, vol. iv., p. 421.
We have seen that although the two sex-principles which underlie
Nature constituted the Creator, the ancients thought of it only
as one and indivisible.  This indivisible aspect was the sacred
Iav, the Holy of Holies.  When it was contemplated in its
individual aspect it was Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer, each
of which was female and male.
The difficulty of the ancients in establishing a First Cause
seems to have been exactly the same as is ours at the present
time.  When we say there must have been a God who created all
things, the question at once arises, Who created God? According
to their theories, nothing could be brought forth without the
interaction of two creative principles, female and male; yet
everything, even these principles, must proceed from an
indivisible energy–an energy which, as the idea of the sex
functions became more and more clearly defined, could not be
contemplated except in its dual aspect.  So soon, therefore, as
the Great First Cause was separated into its elements, a still
higher power was immediately stationed above it as its Creator. 
This Creator was designated as female.  It was the Mother idea
Even gods could not be produced without a mother.
In referring to the doctrines contained in the Geeta, one of the
sacred writings of the Hindoos, Faber observes:
“In the single character of Brahm, all the three offices of
Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are united.  He is at once the Creator,
the Preserver, and the Destroyer.  He is the primeval
Hermaphrodite, or the Great Father and the Great Mother blended
together in one person.”
The fact that a trinity in unity, representing the female and
male energies symbolized by the organs of generation, formerly
constituted the Deity throughout Asia is acknowledged by all
those who have examined either the literature or monumental
records of oriental countries.  The Rev. Mr. Maurice bears
testimony to the character of Eastern religious ideas in the
following language:
“Whoever will read the Geeta with attention, will perceive in
that small tract the outlines of all the various systems of
theology in Asia.  The curious and ancient doctrine of the
Creator being both male and female, mentioned on a preceding
page, to be designated in Indian temples by a very indecent
exhibition of the masculine and feminine organs of generation in
union, occurs in the following passage: ’I am the Father and
Mother of this world; I plant myself upon my own nature and
create again and again this assemblage of beings; I am generation
and dissolution, the place where all things are deposited, and
the inexhaustible seed of all Nature.  I am the beginning, the
middle, and the end of all things.’ “[42]
[42] Maurice, Indian Antiquities, vol. iv., p. 705.
According to Sir W. Jones, the Brahme, Vishnu, and Siva coalesce
to form the mystic Om, which means the essence of life or divine
fire.  In the Bhagavat Geeta the supreme God speaks thus
concerning itself: “I am the holy one worthy to be known"; and
immediately adds: “I am the mystic [trilateral] figure Om; the
Reig, the Yagush, and the Saman Vedas.”  It is a unity and still
a trinity.  This Om or Aum stands for the Creator, Preserver, and
Destroyer or Regenerator, and represents the threefold aspect of
the force within the sun.  The doctrine maintained throughout the
Geeta is not only that the great life-force represents a trinity
in unity, but that it is both female and male.  On this subject
Maurice, in his Indian Antiquities, says:
“This notion of three persons in the Deity was diffused amongst
all the nations of the earth, established at once in regions so
distant as Japan and Peru, immemorially acknowledged throughout
the whole extent of Egypt and India, and flourishing with equal
vigor amidst the snowy mountains of Thibet, and the vast deserts
of Siberia.”
We have observed that the idea of a trinity as conceived by the
so-called ancients, although at all times founded on the same
conception, viz., that of the reproductive powers of Nature and
especially of mankind, differed in expression according to its
application.  Although in human beings this triune creative idea
was expressed by the mother, father, and child, as set forth in
the temples and on the monuments of Egypt, when applied directly
to the sun and the planets, it appears as the Creator, Preserver,
and Regenerator or Destroyer.
Destruction, or the absence of the sun’s heat, represented by
winter, was necessary to life, and therefore the Destroyer was
also the Regenerator and equally with the Creator and Preserver
constituted a beneficent factor in the god-idea.  In fact as this
third element really embodied the substance of the other two, it
finally became the supreme God, little afterward being heard
about the Creator and Preserver.  The Regenerator or Destroyer
was of course the sun, which in winter died away and rose again
in the spring-time as a beneficent Savior or renewer of life. 
The principle involved in these processes represented Fertility,
Life, reproductive energy.  As applied to mortals, it
comprehended the power to create combined with perceptive Wisdom
or Knowledge.
This idea, portrayed as it was by a mother and her child, linked
woman with the stars.  It produced the “Virgin of the Sphere,"
Queen of Heaven, “Isiac Controller of the Zodiac,” at the same
time that it made her the mother of all mankind.
Every year this Virgin of the Sphere as she appeared above the
horizon at the winter solstice gave birth to the sun. 
Astronomically this new sun was the Regenerator, by which all
Nature was renewed.  Mythologically, after the higher truths
contained in these doctrines were lost, it came to be the Savior,
the Son of the Virgin, the seed of the woman, which was to bruise
the serpent’s head.
That the religion of an ancient race comprehended a knowledge of
the evolutionary processes of Nature may not be doubted.  The
myths still extant, and even the oldest Assyrian inscriptions
which have been deciphered, reveal the fact that the seeds of the
visible universe were hidden in the “great deep"–that animal
creation sprang from the earth and the sea through the influence
of the sun’s rays.
It is now known that the philosophy of an older race involved a
belief in the Eternity of Matter.  The abstruse doctrine of
Reincarnation and the Renewal of Worlds seems to have formed the
basis of their philosophy.  According to these speculations, a
portion of the earth was destroyed or resolved into its primary
elements every six hundred years, while at the end of each
Kalpia, or great Cycle of several thousand years, the entire
earth was renovated or absorbed into the two fecundating
principles of the universe.  These two indivisible forces
represented by Vishnu rested in the water, or brooded on the face
of the deep. When stirred by love for each other they again
became active, and from the germs of a former world, which had
been absorbed by themselves, created again the earth and
everything upon it.  In other words, “the earth sprang from the
navel of Vishnu or Brahme.”  According to the Buddhists of
Ceylon, the universe has perished ten different times, and each
time has been renewed by the operations of Nature, or by the
preservation of germs from a former world.  In their mythology
these germs are represented by a parent and a triplicated
offspring.  It is perhaps unnecessary to add that this monad
trinity is the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer with their great
parent, the Mother of the Gods, which in process of time came to
be regarded as male.  According to Wilford, Hindoo chronology
presents fourteen different periods, six of which have already
elapsed; we are in the seventh, which began with the flood.  Each
of these periods is called a Manwantara, the presiding genius or
Deity of which is a Menu.  At the close of each dynasty a total
destruction of the world takes place, everything being destroyed
except the ruler, or Menu, who “escapes in a boat.”  Each new
world is an exact counterpart of the one destroyed, and each Menu
is a representation of all preceding ones.  Thus the history of
one dynasty serves for all the rest.  This doctrine of a
triplicated Deity appearing at the beginning of a new creation
may be traced in nearly every country of the globe.  Among the
Buddhists of China, Fo is mysteriously multiplied into three
persons in the same manner as is Fo-hi, who is evidently Noah. 
Among the Hindoos is observed the triad Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva
springing from the monad Brahm or Brahme.  This triad appears on
the earth at the beginning of each Manwantara in the human form
of Menu and his three sons.  We are assured that among the
Tartars evident traces are found of a similar God, who is seated
on the lotus.  It is also figured on a Siberian medal in the
imperial collection at St. Petersburg.  The Jakuthi Tartars, who
are said to be the most numerous people of Siberia, worship a
triplicated Deity under the three denominations of Artugon and
Schugo-tangon and Tangara.  Faber tells us that this Tartar God
is the same even in appellation with the Tanga-tanga of the
Peruvians, who, like other tribes of America, seem plainly to
have crossed over from the North-eastern extremity of Siberia. 
Upon this subject the same writer remarks thus:
“Agreeably to the mystical notion so familiar to the Hindoos,
that the self-triplicated Great Father yet remained but one in
essence, the Peruvians supposed their Tanga-tanga to be one in
three, and three in one: and in consequence of the union of hero
worship with the astronomical and material systems of idolatry
they venerated the sun and the air, each under three images and
three names.  The same opinions equally prevailed throughout the
nations which lie to the west of Hindostan.  Thus the Persians
had their Ormuzd, Mithras, and Ahriman: or, as the matter was
sometimes represented, their self-triplicating Mithras.  The
Syrians had their Monimus, Aziz, and Ares.  The Egyptians had
their Emeph, Eicton, and Phtha.  The Greeks and Romans had their
Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto; three in number, though one in
essence, and all springing from Cronus, a fourth, yet older God. 
The Canaanites had their Baal-Spalisha or self-triplicated Baal. 
The Goths had their Odin, Vile, and Ve, who are described as the
three sons of Bura, the offspring of the mysterious cow, and the
Celts had their three bulls, venerated as the living symbols of
the triple Hu or Menu.  To the same class we must ascribe the
triads of the Orphic and Pythagorean and Platonic schools; each
of which must again be identified with the imperial triad of the
old Chaldaic or Babylonian philosophy."[43]
[43] Faber, Pagan Idolatry, book vi., ch. ii., p. 470.
The history of the catastrophe known as the deluge, which, it is
claimed, took place either in Armenia, at Cashgar, or at some
other place in the East, is observed, in later ages, to furnish a
covering beneath which have been veiled the mythical doctrines of
the priests.  Of the catastrophes which from time to time have
visited our planet, and of the belief which has come to be
entertained by ecclesiastics that the earth will be destroyed by
fire, Celsus writes:
“The belief has spread among them, from a misunderstanding of the
accounts of these occurrences, that after lengthened cycles of
time, and the returns and conjunctions of planets,
conflagrations, and floods are wont to happen, and because after
the last flood, which took place in the time of Deucalion, the
lapse of time, agreeably to the vicissitude of all things,
requires a conflagration; and this made them give utterance to
the erroneous opinion that God will descend, bringing fire like a
torturer."[44]
[44] Origen against Celsus, book iv., ch. xi.
The mythologies of all nations are largely founded upon the
“religious history” of a flood.  The doctrine of a triplicated
God saved from destruction by a storm-tossed ark which rested on
some local mountain answering to Ararat, and which was filled
with the natural elements of reproduction, is found amongst the
traditions of every country of the globe.  In Egypt, the
destructive agency drives the God into the ark–or into the
fish’s belly, where he is obliged to remain until the flood
subsides.  In other words, at the time of the destruction of the
world, the creative agency is forced within the womb of Nature,
there to remain until it again comes forth to recreate the world;
nor does the symbolism end here, for this God–the sun, or the
reproductive power within it, which every year is put to death by
the cold of winter, must for a season remain lifeless, but, at
the proper time, will come forth with healing in his wings.  This
God must issue forth to life through female Nature.
The god-man, Noah, who appears under one appellation or another
in all extant mythologies, was slain, or shut up in a box, ark,
or chest in which he or his seed was preserved from the ravages
of a mighty flood, or from destruction by the calamity which had
befallen the rest of mankind.  In one sense he represents a
Savior, in another sense he is the saved, for he is the seed of a
former world and is born again from a boat, a symbol which always
represents the female energy.  Sometimes he is shut up in a
wooden cow, from which he issues forth to new life.  Again this
storm tossed mariner is born from a cave, or the door of a rocky
cavern, within which he had been preserved from some terrible
catastrophe, caused either by water or fire.
Sir W. Jones, Faber, Higgins, and many others who have
investigated this subject are confident that the Noah of Genesis
is identical with Menu, the law-giver of India, and that both are
Adam, a man who appears with his three sons at the end of each
cycle, or six hundred years, to renovate the world.  In the six
hundred and first year of Noah’s life, in the first month, on the
first day of the month, the waters were dried up from the earth. 
The drying of the waters, and the beginning anew just at the
close of the six hundred years, are thought to refer to the end
of the cycle of the Neros.  A year of Menu or Buddha had expired
and a new dynasty or Mamwantara was to begin.
Regarding this trinity, Faber remarks:
“Brahm then at the head of the Indian triad is Menu at the head
of his three sons.  But that by the first Menu we are to
understand Adam, is evident, both from the remarkable
circumstance of himself and his consort bearing the titles of
Adima and Iva, and from the no less remarkable tradition that one
of his three sons was murdered by his brother at a sacrifice. 
Hence it will follow, that Brahm at the head of the Indian triad
is Adam at the head of his three sons, Cain, Abel, and Seth. 
Each Menu with his triple offspring is only the reappearance of a
former Menu with his triple offspring; for, in every such
manifestation at the commencement of each Mamwantara, the Hindoo
Trimurti, or triad, becomes incarnate, by transmigrating from the
human bodies occupied during a former incarnation; Brahm or the
Unity appearing as the paternal Menu of a new age, while the
triad, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, is exhibited in the person of
his three sons.  .  .  .  But the ark-preserved Menu–Satyavrata
and his three sons are certainly Noah and his three sons, Shem,
Ham, and Japhet.”
Hesiod teaches that, after the flood, Chaos, Night, and black
Erebus first appeared.[45] At this time, when there was no Earth,
no Heaven, and no Air, an egg floated on the face of the deep,
which, being parted, brought forth Love, or Cupid.  Out of Chaos
this God created or formed all things.  Now Cupid is the same as
the Greek Phanes, and Phanes is Noah, the egg being the ark or
female principle from which he was produced.  The Greek God
Phanes is the same as the Egyptian Osiris, who was driven into
the ark by the “wind that blasts,” or by the evil principle.
[45] The Theogony.
“As Cupid is indifferently said to have been produced from an egg
at a time when the whole world was in disorder, and from the womb
of the marine goddess Venus, the egg and the womb of that goddess
must denote the same thing.  Accordingly we shall find that, on
the one hand, Venus is immediately connected with the symbolical
egg; and, on the other hand, that she is identical with Derceto
and Isis, and is declared to be that general receptacle out of
which all the hero-gods were produced.  Now there can be little
doubt in what sense we are to understand this expression, when we
are told that the peculiar symbol of Isis was a ship; and when we
learn that the form assumed at the period of the deluge, by the
Indian Isi or Bhavani, who is clearly the same as the Egyptian
Isis, was the ship Argha, in which her consort Siva floated
securely on the surface of the ocean.  Venus, therefore, or the
Great Mother, the parent of Cupid from whom all mankind
descended, must be the Ark: consequently, the egg, with which she
is connected, must be the Ark also.  Aristophanes informs us that
the egg out of which Love was born, was produced by Night in the
bosom of Erebus.  But the Goddess Night, as we learn from the
Orphic poet, was the very same person as Venus; and he celebrates
her as the parent of the Universe, and as the general mother both
of the hero-gods and of man.  The egg therefore produced by Night
was produced by Venus: but Venus and the egg meant the same
thing: even that vast floating machine, which was esteemed an
epitome of the world, and from which was born that Deity who is
also literally said to have been set afloat in an ark.  Sometimes
the order of production was inverted; and, instead of the egg
being produced by Night or Venus, Venus herself was fabled to
have been produced from the egg.  There is a remarkable legend of
this sort which ascribes Venus and her egg to the age of Typhon
and Osiris, in other words, to the age in which Noah was
compelled by the deluge to enter into the ark."[46]
[46] Origin of Pagan Idolatry, book i., ch. iv.
The Preserver of the Persians, who is seated on a rainbow in
front of their rock temples, is Mithras, who is identical with
Noah.  Sometimes this ancient mariner is represented as riding on
the back of a fish, and again as floating in a boat.  The God of
Hindostan, like the classical Dionysos, was enclosed in an ark
and driven into the sea.  According to the Gothic traditions as
recorded in the Eddas, there once existed a beautiful world,
which was destroyed by fire.  Another was created, which, with
all its inhabitants save a giant and his three sons, who were
saved in a ship, were destroyed by water.  With this triad, which
originally sprang from a mysterious cow, the new world began. 
This new world, which represents the present system, will in time
be devoured by flames; but another earth will arise from the
ocean,–an earth far more beautiful than this, upon which all
kinds of grain and delicious fruits will grow without
cultivation.  Veda and Vile will be there, for the conflagration
will have been powerless to destroy them.  While the flames are
devouring all things, two human beings, a female and a male, will
be concealed under a hill, where they will feed upon dew, and
will propagate so abundantly that the earth will soon be peopled
with a new race of beings.  During the catastrophe, the sun will
be devoured by a wolf, but before her death she will give birth
to a daughter as resplendent as herself, who will go in the same
path formerly trodden by her mother.
The doctrines of the Gothic philosophers, as they appear in the
Eddas, concerning the eternity of matter, the renewal or
succession of worlds, and reincarnation are the same as those
taught by Pythagoras, the Stoics, and other Greek schools of
thought.
Brahme or Vishnu, resting on the bottom of the sea–a goddess
who was symbolized by the self-generating lotus–was in later
ages the mysterious Cow of the Goths.
After the natural truths concealed beneath their religious
symbolism were wholly forgotten, and human nature through the
over-stimulation of the animal instincts had become corrupted,
Adam and Eve, names which doubtless for ages represented the two
fecundating principles throughout Nature, with their sons, Cain,
Abel, and Seth, comprehended the god-idea.  The fact has been
observed that just six hundred years from the creation of Adam,
or at the close of the cycle, Noah appears with his three sons to
save or perpetuate the race.
It is now believed that this account of Noah and his three sons
is an allegory beneath which are concealed the religious
doctrines, or perhaps I should say, the philosophical
speculations of an older race.  The God of the ancients was
identified with the life of man individually and with that of
mankind collectively.  As men die each day, and as every day men
are born, this Deity is said to die and to be renewed each day;
and as he is the sun, or the incarnation of the sun, the rising
and setting of this luminary depict the constantly dying and
regenerating God of Nature, the same as do the changing seasons. 
A similar idea reappears in their system of the renewal of worlds
and reincarnation.
Regarding the doctrine of the eternity of matter held by the
ancients, Origen mentions a belief of the Egyptians that the
“world or its substance was never produced, but that it has
existed from all eternity.  Neither is there any such thing as
death.  Those who perish about us every day are simply changed,
either they take on other forms or are removed to some other
place.  God cannot be destroyed, and as all things are parts of
the Deity everything lives and has always lived, seeming death
being simply change.  Remnants of these doctrines are found in
every portion of the globe; among the Mexicans of the west as
well as among the rude mountaineers of the Burman Empire.”
While contemplating the philosophical speculations of an ancient
race Bailly gave expression to the belief, that a “profoundly
learned race of people existed previous to the formation of any
of our systems.”  The wiser among the Greek philosophers, those
who, it is believed, borrowed their philosophical doctrines from
the East, declare that “there is no production of anything which
was not before; no new substance made which did not really
pre-exist.”  Equally with matter was spirit indestructible.  “Our
soul,” says Plato, “was somewhere, before it came to exist in
this present form; whence it appears to be immortal.  .  .  . 
Who knows whether that which is demonstrated living, be not
indeed rather dying, and whether that which is styled dying be
not rather living?”
To one who has given attention to the various legends relative to
the destruction of the world by a flood, and a storm-tossed
mariner saved in an ark or boat, it is plain that they all have
the same significance, all are but different versions of the same
myth, which in an early age was used to conceal the philosophical
doctrines of an ancient people.
That the early historic nations understood little concerning the
origin and true meaning of the legends which they had inherited
from an older race is quite evident.  The ignorance of the Greeks
regarding the significance of these legends is shown by the
following: When Solon, wishing to acquaint himself with the
history of the oldest times, inquired of an Egyptian priest
concerning the time of the flood, and the age of Deucalion or
Phroneous or Noah, this functionary replied:
“O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are always children, nor is there an
old man among you!  Having no ancient traditions nor any
acquaintance with chronology, you are as yet in a state of
intellectual infancy.  The true origin of such mutilated fables
as you possess is this.  There have been and shall again be in
the course of many revolving ages, numerous destructions of the
human race; the greatest of them by fire and water, but others in
an almost endless succession of shorter intervals."[47]
[47] Quoted by Plato; also by Clement of Alexandria.
We have observed that the symbol of the universe was an egg.  The
egg was also the symbol of the earth and of the ark, which meant
universal womanhood.  From the mundane egg the triplicated Deity
sprang.  There can be little doubt at the present time that Adam,
Noah, Menu, Osiris, and Dionysos all represent the fructifying
power of the sun.  In process of time they each came to figure as
male reproductive energy, and during certain periods of the
earth’s history they have each in turn been worshipped as the
Deity.  That not only the ark was female, but that the god
element or reproductive principle within the ark was both female
and male, is a fact which has been lost sight of during the
historic period, or during those ages of the world in which the
attempt has been made to prove Nature motherless.
All the germs and living creatures which were within the ark, and
which were to reanimate the earth, were in pairs, females and
males; and, besides, the Dove (female), the emblem of peace, was
also present.  Even Noah himself was produced from an egg, which,
as we have seen, is the symbol of Venus, or universal womanhood. 
In after ages the female principle was not mentioned, but, on the
contrary, was concealed beneath convenient symbols; and as the
philosophical ideas underlying natural religion were lost or
forgotten, and mankind had become too ignorant to perceive that a
dual force, female and male which was also a Trinity, pervades
Nature, the notion came gradually to prevail that the creative
agency, which is spirit, is altogether male.  Hence the
formulation of the inconceivable doctrine of a Trinity composed
of a Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Continue...

This full text of The God-Idea of the Ancients (or Sex in Religion) by Eliza Burt Gamble
is public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on October 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The God-Idea of the Ancients or Sex in ReligionBy Eliza Burt GambleAt Amazon
