


 How Little Margery obtained the Name of        Goody Two-Shoes, and what happened in the Parish.
As soon as Little Margery got up in the Morning, which was very
early, she ran all round the Village, crying for her Brother; and
after some Time returned greatly distressed. However, at this Instant,
the Shoemaker very opportunely came in with the new Shoes, for which
she had been measured by the Gentleman’s Order.
Nothing could have supported Little Margery under the
Affliction she was in for the Loss of her Brother, but the Pleasure
she took in her two Shoes. She ran out to Mrs. Smith as
soon as they were put on, and stroking down her ragged Apron thus,
cried out, Two Shoes, Mame, see two Shoes. And so she behaved
to all the People she met, and by that Means obtained the Name of
Goody Two-Shoes, though her Playmates called her Old Goody
Two-Shoes.
Little Margery was very happy in being with Mr. and Mrs.
Smith, who were very charitable and good to her, and had agreed
to breed her up with their Family; but as soon as that Tyrant of the
Parish, that Graspall, heard of her being there, he applied
first to Mr. Smith, and threatened to reduce his Tythes if he
kept her; and after that he spoke to Sir Timothy, who sent Mr.
Smith a peremptory Message by his Servant, that he should
send back Meanwell’s Girl to be kept by her Relations, and not
harbour her in the Parish. This so distressed Mr. Smiththat he shed Tears, and cried, Lord have Mercy on the Poor!
The Prayers of the Righteous fly upwards, and reach unto the Throne of
Heaven, as will be seen in the Sequel.
Mrs. Smith was also greatly concerned at being thus obliged to
discard poor Little Margery. She kissed her and cried; as also
did Mr. Smith, but they were obliged to send her away; for the
People who had ruined her Father could at any Time have ruined them.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
