


                       The GOLDEN DREAM; or,
                      the INGENUOUS CONFESSION.
To shew the Depravity of human Nature, and how apt the Mind is to be
misled by Trinkets and false Appearances, Mrs. Two-Shoes does
acknowledge, that after she became rich, she had like to have been too
fond of Money; for on seeing her Husband receive a very large Sum, her
Heart went pit pat, pit pat, all the Evening, and she began to think
that Guineas were pretty Things. To suppress this Turbulence of Mind,
which was a Symptom of approaching Avarice, she said her Prayers earlier
than usual, and at Night had the following Dream; which I shall relate
in her own Words.
“Methought, as I slept, a Genii stept up to me with a FrenchCommode, which having placed on my Head, he said, now go and be happy;
for from henceforth every Thing you touch shall turn to Gold. Willing
to try the Experiment, I gently touched the Bed-post and Furniture,
which immediately became massy Gold burnished, and of surprizing
Brightness. I then touched the Walls of the House, which assumed the
same Appearance, and looked amazingly magnificent. Elated with this
wonderful Gift, I rang hastily for my Maid to carry the joyful News to
her Master, who, as I thought, was then walking in the Garden.
Sukey came, but in the Extacy I was in, happening to touch her
Hand, she became instantly an immovable Statue. Go, said I, and call
your Master; but she made no reply, nor could she stir. Upon this I
shrieked, and in came my dear Husband, whom I ran to embrace; when no
sooner had I touched him, but he became good for nothing; that is,
good for nothing but his Weight in Gold; and that you know could be
nothing, where Gold was so plenty. At this instant up came another
Servant with a Glass of Water, thinking me ill; this I attempted to
swallow, but no sooner did it touch my Mouth, than it became a hard
solid Body, and unfit for drinking. My Distress now grew
insupportable! I had destroyed, as I thought, my dear Husband, and my
favourite Servant; and I plainly perceived, that I should die for want
in the midst of so much Wealth. Ah, said I, why did I long for Riches!
Having enough already, why did I covet more? Thus terrified, I began
to rave, and beat my Breast, which awaked Sir Charles, who
kindly called me from this State of Inquietude, and composed my Mind.”
This Scene I have often considered as a Lesson, instructing me, that a
Load of Riches bring, instead of Felicity, a Load of Troubles; and
that the only Source of Happiness is Contentment. Go,
therefore, you who have too much, and give it to those who are in
want; so shall you be happy yourselves, by making others happy. This
is a Precept from the Almighty, a Precept which must be regarded; for
The Lord is about your Paths, and about your Bed, and spieth out
all your Ways.
An Anecdote, respecting TOM TWO-SHOES, communicated by a
Gentleman, who is now writing the History of his Life.
It is generally known, that Tom Two-Shoes went to Sea when he was
a very little Boy, and very poor; and that he returned a very great Man,
and very rich; but no one knows how he acquired so much Wealth but
myself, and a few Friends, who have perused the Papers from which I am
compiling the History of his Life.
After Tom had been at Sea some Years, he was unfortunately cast
away, on that Part of the Coast of Africa inhabited by the
Hottentots. Here he met with a strange Book, which the
Hottentots did not understand, and which gave him some Account
of Prester John’s Country; and being a Lad of great Curiosity
and Resolution he determined to see it; accordingly he set out on the
Pursuit, attended by a young Lion, which he had tamed and made so fond
of him, that he followed him like a Dog, and obeyed all his Commands;
and indeed it was happy for him that he had such a Companion; for as
his Road lay through large Woods and Forests, that were full of wild
Beasts and without Inhabitants, he must have been soon starved or torn
in Pieces, had he not been both fed and protected by this noble
Animal.
Tom had provided himself with two Guns, a Sword, and as much
Powder and Ball as he could carry; with these Arms, and such a
Companion, it was mighty easy for him to get Food; for the Animals in
these wild and extensive Forests, having never seen the Effects of a
Gun, readily ran from the Lion, who hunted on one Side, to Tom,
who hunted on the other, so that they were either caught by the Lion,
or shot by his Master; and it was pleasant enough, after a hunting
Match, and the Meat was dressed, to see how Cheek by Joul they sat
down to Dinner.
When they came info the Land of Utopia, he discovered the
Statue of a Man created on an open Plain, which had this Inscription
on the Pedestal: On May-day in the Morning, when the Sun
rises, I shall have a Head of Gold. As it was now the latter End
of April, he stayed to see this wonderful Change; and in the
mean time, enquiring of a poor Shepherd what was the Reason of the
Statue being erected there, and with that Inscription, he was
informed, that it was set up many Years ago by an ArabianPhilosopher, who travelled all the World over in Search of a real
Friend; that he lived with, and was extremely fond of a great Man who
inhabited the next Mountain; but that on some Occasion they
quarrelled, and the Philosopher, leaving the Mountain, retired into
the Plain, where he erected this Statue with his own Hands, and soon
after died. To this he added, that all the People for many Leagues
round came there every May Morning, expecting to see the
Stone-head turned to Gold.
Tom got up very early on the first of May to behold this
amazing Change, and when he came near the Statue he saw a Number of
People, who all ran away from him in the utmost Consternation, hating
never before seen a Lion follow a Man like a Lap-dog. Being thus left
alone, he fixed his Eyes on the Sun, then rising with resplendent
Majesty, and afterwards turned to the Statue, but could see no Change
in the Stone.–Surely, says he to himself, there is some mystical
Meaning in this! This Inscription must be an Ænigma, the hidden
Meaning of which I will endeavour to find; for a Philosopher would
never expect a Stone to be turned to Gold; accordingly he measured the
Length of the Shadow, which the Statue gave on the Ground by the Sun
shining on it, and marked that particular Part where the Head fell,
then getting a Chopness (a Thing like a Spade) and digging, he
discovered a Copper-chest, full of Gold, with this Inscription
engraved on the Lid of it.
                               Thy WIT,
                      Oh Man! whoever thou art,
                      Hath disclos’d the Ænigma,
                   And discover’d the GOLDEN HEAD.
                         Take it and use it,
                       But use it with WISDOM;
                              For know,
                    That GOLD, properly employ’d,
                       May dispense Blessings,
                 And promote the Happiness of Morals;
                         But when hoarded up,
                            Or misapply’d,
             Is but Trash, that makes Mankind miserable.
                               Remember
                      The unprofitable Servant,
                  Who hid his Talent in a Napkin;
                                 And
                         The profligate Son,
                Who squander’d away his Substance and
                         fed with the Swine.
                  As thou hast got the GOLDEN HEAD,
                      Observe the Golden Mean,
                       Be Good and be happy.
This Lesson, coming as it were from the Dead, struck him with such
Awe, and Reverence for Piety and Virtue, that, before he removed the
Treasure, he kneeled down, and earnestly and fervently prayed that he
might make a prudent, just and proper Use of it. He then conveyed the
Chest away; but how he got it to England, the Reader will be
informed in the History of his Life. It may not be improper, however,
in this Place, to give the Reader some Account of the Philosopher who
hid this Treasure, and took so much Pains to find a true and real
Friend to enjoy it. As Tom had Reason to venerate his Memory,
he was very particular in his Enquiry, and had this Character of
him;–that he was a Man well acquainted with Nature and with Trade;
that he was pious, friendly, and of a sweet and affable Disposition.
That he had acquired a Fortune by Commerce, and having no Relations to
leave it to, he travelled through Arabia, Persia, India, Libiaand Utopia in search of a real Friend. In this Pursuit he found
several with whom he exchanged good Offices, and that were polite and
obliging, but they often flew off for Trifles; or as soon as he
pretended to be in Distress, and requested their Assistance, left him
to struggle with his own Difficulties. So true is that Copy in our
Books, which says, Adversity is the Touchstone of Friendship.
At last, however, he met with the Utopian Philosopher, or the
wise Man of the Mountain, as he is called, and thought in him he had
found the Friend he wanted; for though he often pretended to be in
Distress, and abandoned to the Frowns of Fortune, this Man always
relieved him, and with such Chearfulness and Sincerity, that
concluding he had found out the only Man to whom he ought to open both
his Purse and his Heart, he let him so far into his Secrets, as to
desire his Assistance in hiding a large Sum of Money, which he wanted
to conceal, lest the Prince of the Country, who was absolute, should,
by the Advice of his wicked Minister, put him to Death for his Gold.
The two Philosophers met and hid the Money, which the Stranger, after
some Days, went to see, but found it gone. How was he struck to the
Heart, when he found that his Friend, whom he had often tried, and who
had relieved him in his Distress, could not withstand this Temptation,
but broke through the sacred Bonds of Friendship, and turned even a
Thief for Gold which he did not want, as he was already very rich. Oh!
said he, what is the Heart of Man made of? Why am I condemned to live
among People who have no Sincerity, and who barter the most sacred
Ties of Friendship and Humanity for the Dirt that we tread on? Had I
lost my Gold and found a real Friend, I should have been happy with
the Exchange, but now I am most miserable. After some Time he wiped
off his Tears, and being determined not to be so imposed on, he had
Recourse to Cunning and the Arts of Life. He went to his pretended
Friend with a chearful Countenance, told him he had more Gold to hide,
and desired him to appoint a Time when they might go together, and
open the Earth to put it into the same Pot; the other, in Hopes of
getting more Wealth, appointed the next Evening. They went together,
opened the Ground, and found the Money they had first placed there,
for the artful Wretch, he so much confided in, had conveyed it again
into the Pot, in order to obtain more. Our Philosopher immediately
took the Gold, and putting it into his Pocket, told the other he had
now altered his Mind, and should bury it no more, till he found a Man
more worthy of his Confidence. See what People lose by being
dishonest. This calls to my Mind the Words of the Poet:
 A Wit’s a Feather, and a Chief’s a Rod,
  An honest Man’s the noblest Work of God.
Remember this Story, and take Care whom you trust; but don’t be
covetous, sordid and miserable; for the Gold we have is but lent us to
do Good with. We received all from the Hand of God, and every Person
in Distress hath a just Title to a Portion of it.
A Letter from the Printer, which he
desires may be inserted.
Sir,
I have done with your Copy, so you may return it to the
Vatican, if you please; and pray tell Mr. Angelo to
brush up the Cuts, that, in the next Edition, they may give us a good
Impression.
The Foresight and Sagacity of Mrs. Margery’s Dog calls to my
Mind a Circumstance, which happened when I was a Boy. Some Gentlemen
in the Place where I lived had been hunting, and were got under a
great Tree to shelter themselves from a Thunder Storm; when a Dog that
always followed one of the Gentlemen leaped up his Horse several
Times, and then ran away and barked. At last, the Gentlemen all
followed to see what he would be at; and they were no sooner gone from
the Tree, but it was shivered in Pieces by Lightning! ’Tis remarkable,
that as soon as they came from the Tree the Dog appeared to be very
well satisfied, and barked no more. The Gentleman after this always
regarded the Dog as his Friend, treated him in his Old Age with great
Tenderness, and fed him with Milk as long as he lived.
My old Master Grierson had also a Dog, that ought to be
mentioned with Regard; for he used to set him up as a Pattern of
Sagacity and Prudence, not only to his Journeymen, but to the whole
Neighbours. This Dog had been taught a thousand Tricks, and among
other Feats he could dance, tumble, and drink Wine and Punch till he
was little better than mad. It happened one Day, when the Men had made
him drunk with Liquor, and he was capering about, that he fell into a
large Vessel of boiling Water. They soon got him out, and he
recovered; but he was very much hurt, and being sensible, that this
Accident arose from his losing his Senses by Drinking, he would never
taste any strong Liquor afterwards.–My old Master, on relating this
Story, and shewing the Dog, used to address us thus, Ah, my
Friends, had you but half the Sense of this poor Dog here, you would
never get fuddled, and be Fools.
I am, Sir, Your’s, &c. W.B.
The BOOKS usually read by the Scholars of Mrs. TWO-SHOES, are these,
and are sold at Mr. NEWBERY’S at the Bible and Sun in
St. Paul’s Church-yard.
 1. The Christmas-Box, Price 1d.
 2. The History of Giles Gingerbread, 1d.
 3. The New-Year’s-Gift, 2d.
 4. The Easter-Gift, 2d.
 5. The Whitsuntide-Gift, 2d.
 6. The Twelfth-Day-Gift, 1s.
 7. The Valentine’s-Gift, 6d.
 8. The FAIRING or Golden Toy, 6d.
 9. The Royal Battledore, 2d.
10. The Royal Primer, 3d.
11. The Little Lottery-Book, 3d.
12. The Little Pretty Pocket-Book, 6d.
13. The Infant Tutor, or pretty Little
    Spelling-Book, 6d.
14. The Pretty Book for Children, 6d.
15. Tom Trapwit’s Art of being Merry and Wife, 6d.
16. Tom Trip’s History of Birds and Beasts, Price 6d.
17. Food for the Mind, or a New Riddle Book, 6d.
18. Fables in Verse and Prose by Æsop, and your old Friend
    Woglog, 6d.
19. The Holy Bible abridged, 6d.
20. The History of the Creation, 6d.
21. A new and noble History of England, 6d.
22. Philosophy for Children, 6d.
23. Philosophy of Tops and Balls, 1s.
24. Pretty Poems for Children 3 Foot high, 6d.
25. Pretty Poems for Children 6 Foot high, 1s.
26. Lilliputian Magazine, or Golden Library, 1s.
27. Short Histories for the Improvement of the Mind, 1s.
28. The New Testament, adapted to the Capacities
    of Children, 1s.
29. The Life of our Blessed SAVIOUR, 1s.
30. The Lives of the Holy Apostles and Evangelists, 1s.
31. The Lives of the Fathers of the Christian Church for
    the first four Centuries, 1s.
32. A Concise Exposition of the Book of Common Prayer,
    with the Lives of its Compilers, 1s.
33. The Museum for Youth, 1s.
34. An Easy Spelling Dictionary for those who would write
    correctly, 1s.
35. A Pocket Dictionary for those who would know the precise
    Meaning of all the Words in the English Language, 3s.
36. A Compendious History of England, 2s.
37. The Present State of Great Britain, 2s.
38. A Little Book of Letters and Cards, to teach young Ladies and
    Gentlemen how to write to their Friends in a polite, easy
    and elegant Manner, 1s.
39. The Gentleman and Lady’s Key to Polite Literature; or, A
    Compendious Dictionary of Fabulous History, 2s.
40. The News-Readers Pocket-Book; or, A Military
    Dictionary, 2s.
41. A Curious Collection of Voyages, selected from the Writers of all
    Nations, 10 Vol. Pr. bound 1l.
42. A Curious Collection of Travels, selected from the Writers of all
    Nations, 10 Vol; Pr. bound 1l.
By the KING’S Royal Patent,
Are Sold by J. NEWBERY, at the Bible and Sun in St.
Paul’s Church-Yard.
 1. Dr. James’s Powders for Fevers, the Small-Pox, Measles,
    Colds, &c. 2s. 6d.
 2. Dr. Hooper’s Female Pills, 1s.
 3. Mr. Greenough’s Tincture for Teeth, 1s.
 4. Ditto for the Tooth-Ach, 1s.
 5. Stomachic Lozenges for the Heart-burn, Cholic,
    Indigestion, &c. 1s. 6d.
 6. The Balsam of Health, or, (as it is by some called) the
    Balsam of Life, 1s. 6d.
 7. The Original Daffy’s Elixir, 1s. 3d.
 8. Dr. Anderson’s Scots Pills, 1s.
 9. The Original British Oil, 1s.
10. The Alterative Pills, which are a safe, and certain Cure
    for the King’s Evil, and all Scrophulous Complaints, 5s. the Box,
    containing 40 Doses.–See a Dissertation on these Disorders
    sold at the Place above-mentioned, Price 6d.
 

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
