


          Of something which happened to Little Two-Shoes        in a Barn, more dreadful than the Ghost in the Church;
    and how she returned Good for Evil to her Enemy Sir Timothy.
Some Days after this a more dreadful Accident befel Little Madge.
She happened to be coming late from teaching, when it rained,
thundered, and lightened, and therefore she took Shelter in a Farmer’s
Barn at a Distance from the Village. Soon after, the Tempest drove in
four Thieves, who, not seeing such a little creep-mouse Girl as
Two-Shoes, lay down on the Hay next to her, and began to talk over
their Exploits, and to settle Plans for future Robberies. Little
Margery on hearing them, covered herself with Straw. To be sure she
was sadly frighted, but her good Sense taught her, that the only
Security she had was in keeping herself concealed; therefore she laid
very still, and breathed very softly. About Four o’Clock these wicked
People came to a Resolution to break both Sir William Dove’s House,
and Sir Timothy Gripe’s, and by Force of Arms to carry off all their
Money, Plate and Jewels; but as it was thought then too late, they
agreed to defer it till the next Night. After laying this Scheme they
all set out upon their Pranks, which greatly rejoiced Margery, as it
would any other little Girl in her Situation. Early in the Morning she
went to Sir William, and told him the whole of their Conversation.
Upon which, he asked her Name, gave her Something, and bid her call at
his House the Day following. She also went to Sir Timothynotwithstanding standing he had used her so ill; for she knew it was
her Duty to do Good for Evil. As soon as he was informed who she
was, he took no Notice of her; upon which she desired to speak to Lady
Gripe; and having informed her Ladyship of the Affair, she went her
Way. This Lady had more Sense than her Husband, which indeed is not a
singular Case; for instead of despising Little Margery and her
Information, she privately set People to guard the House. The Robbers
divided themselves, and went about the Time mentioned to both Houses,
and were surprized by the Guards, and taken. Upon examining these
Wretches, one of which turned Evidence, both Sir William and Sir
Timothy found that they owed their Lives to the Discovery made by
Little Margery, and the first took great Notice of her, and would no
longer let her lie in a Barn; but Sir Timothy only said, that he was
ashamed to owe his Life to the Daughter of one who was his Enemy; so
true it is, that a proud Man seldom forgives those he has injured.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
