


            How Little Margery learned to read,
                  and by Degrees taught others.
Little Margery saw how good, and how wise Mr. Smith was,
and concluded, that this was owing to his great Learning, therefore
she wanted of all Things to learn to read. For this Purpose she used
to meet the little Boys and Girls as they came from School, borrow
their Books, and sit down and read till they returned;
By this Means she soon got more Learning than any of her Playmates,
and laid the following Scheme for instructing those who were more
ignorant than herself. She found, that only the following Letters were
required to spell all the Words in the World; but as some of these
Letters are large and some small, she with her Knife cut out of
several Pieces of Wood ten Setts of each of these:
                    a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o
                    p q r  (s)  s t u v w x y z.
[Post-processor’s note: (s) is an old-English style non-terminating
letter “s”.]
                       And six Setts of these:
                     A B C D E F G H I K L M N O
                        P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.
And having got an old Spelling-Book, she made her Companions set up
all the Words they wanted to spell, and after that she taught them to
compose Sentences. You know what a Sentence is, my Dear, I will be
good, is a Sentence; and is made up, as you see, of several Words.
The usual Manner of Spelling, or carrying on the Game, as they called
it, was this: Suppose the Word to be spelt was Plumb Pudding (and who
can suppose a better) the Children were placed in a Circle, and the
first brought the Letter P, the next l, the next u, the next
m, and so on till the Whole was spelt; and if any one brought a
wrong Letter, he was to pay a Fine, or play no more. This was at their
Play; and every Morning she used to go round to teach the Children
with these Rattle-traps in a Basket, as you see in the Print.
I once went her Rounds with her, and was highly diverted, as you may
be, if you please to look into the next Chapter.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
