


               Of the amazing Sagacity and Instincts
                         of a little Dog.
Soon after this, a dreadful Accident happened in the School. It was on
a Thursday Morning, I very well remember, when the Children
having learned their Lessons soon, she had given them Leave to play,
and they were all running about the School, and diverting themselves
with the Birds and the Lamb; at this Time the Dog, all of a sudden,
laid hold of his Mistress’s Apron, and endeavoured to pull her out of
the School. She was at first surprized, however, she followed him to
see what he intended. No sooner had he led her into the Garden, but he
ran back, and pulled out one of the Children in the same manner; upon
which she ordered them all to leave the School immediately, and they
had not been out five Minutes, before the Top of the House fell in.
What a miraculous Deliverance was here! How gracious! How good was God
Almighty, to save all these Children from Destruction, and to make Use
of such an Instrument, as a little sagacious Animal to accomplish his
Divine Will. I should have observed, that as soon as they were all in
the Garden, the Dog came leaping round them to express his Joy, and
when the House was fallen, laid himself down quietly by his Mistress.
Some of the Neighbours, who saw the School fall, and who were in great
Pain for Margery and the little ones, soon spread the News
through the Village, and all the Parents, terrified for their
Children, came crowding in Abundance; they had, however, the
Satisfaction to find them all safe, and upon their Knees, with their
Mistress, giving God thanks for their happy Deliverance.
            ADVICE from the MAN in the MOON.
Jumper, Jumper, Jumper, what a pretty Dog he is, and how
sensible? Had Mankind half the Sagacity of Jumper, they would
guard against Accidents of this Sort, by having a public Survey,
occasionally made of all the Houses in every Parish (especially of
those, which are old and decayed) and not suffer them to remain in a
crazy State, ’till they fall down on the Heads of the poor
Inhabitants, and crush them to Death. Why, it was but Yesterday, that
a whole House fell down in Grace-church-street, and another in
Queen’s-street, and an hundred more are to tumble, before this
Time twelve Months; so Friends, take Care of yourselves, and tell the
Legislature, they ought to take Care for you. How can you be so
careless? Most of your Evils arise from Carelesness and Extravagance,
and yet you excuse yourselves, and lay the Fault upon Fortune. Fortune
is a Fool, and you are a Blockhead, if you put it in her Power to play
Tricks with you.
Yours,
The MAN in the MOON.
You are not to wonder, my dear Reader, that this little Dog should
have more Sense than you, or your Father, or your Grandfather.
Though God Almighty has made Man the Lord of the Creation, and endowed
him with Reason, yet in many Respects, he has been altogether as
bountiful to other Creatures of his forming. Some of the Senses of
other Animals are more acute than ours, as we find by daily
Experience. You know this little Bird, sweet Jug, Jug, Jug,
’tis a Nightingale. This little Creature, after she has entertained us
with her Songs all the Spring, and bred up her little ones, flies into
a foreign Country, and finds her Way over the Great Sea, without any
of the Instruments and Helps which Men are obliged to make Use of for
that Purpose. Was you as wise as the Nightingale, you might make all
the Sailors happy, and have twenty thousand Pounds for teaching them
the Longitude.
You would not think Ralph the Raven half so wise and so good as he
is, though you see him here reading his book. Yet when the Prophet
Elijah, was obliged to fly from Ahab King of Israel, and hide
himself in a Cave, the Ravens, at the Command of God Almighty, fed him
every Day, and preserved his Life.
And the Word of the Lord came unto Elijah, saying, Hide
thyself by the Brook Cherith, that is before Jordan, and
I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee there. And the Ravens brought
him Bread and Flesh in the Morning, and Bread and Flesh in the
Evening, and he drank of the Brook, Kings, B.I.C. 17.
And the pretty Pidgeon when the World was drowned, and he was confined
with Noah in the Ark, was sent forth by him to see whether the
Waters were abated, And he sent forth a Dove from him, to see if
the Waters were abated from off the Face of the Ground. And the Dove
came in to him in the Evening, and lo, in her Mouth was an Olive Leaf
plucked off: So Noah knew that the Waters were abated from off
the Earth. Gen. viii. 8. 11.
As these, and other Animals, are so sensible and kind to us, we ought
to be tender and good to them, and not beat them about, and kill them,
and take away their young ones, as many wicked Boys do. Does not the
Horse and the Ass carry you and your burthens; don’t the Ox plough
your Ground, the Cow give you Milk, the Sheep cloath your Back, the
Dog watch your House, the Goose find you in Quills to write with, the
Hen bring Eggs for your Custards and Puddings, and the Cock call you
up in the Morning, when you are lazy, and like to hurt yourselves by
laying too long in Bed? If so, how can you be so cruel to them, and
abuse God Almighty’s good Creatures? Go, naughty Boy, go; be sorry for
what you have done, and do so no more, that God Almighty may forgive
you. Amen, say I, again and again. God will bless you, but not
unless you are merciful and good.
The downfal of the School, was a great Misfortune to Mrs.
Margery; for she not only lost all her Books, but was destitute
of a Place to teach in; but Sir William Dove, being informed of
this, ordered the House to be built at his own Expence, and ’till that
could be done, Farmer Grove was so kind, as to let her have his
large Hall to teach in.
The House built by Sir William, had a Statue erected over the
Door of a Boy sliding on the Ice, and under it were these Lines,
written by Mrs. Two-Shoes, and engraved at her Expence.
  On SIN. A SIMILE.
    As a poor Urchin on the Ice,
  When he has tumbl’d once or twice,
  With cautious Step, and trembling goes,
  The drop-stile Pendant on his Nose,
  And trudges on to seek the Shore,
  Resolv’d to trust the Ice no more:
  But meeting with a daring Mate,
  Who often us’d to slide and scate,
  Again is into Danger led,
  And falls again, and breaks his head.
    So Youth when first they’re drawn to sin,
  And see the Danger they are in,
  Would gladly quit the thorney Way,
  And think it is unsafe to stay;
  But meeting with their wicked Train,
  Return with them to sin again:
  With them the Paths of Vice explore;
  With them are ruin’d ever more.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
