


          How Mrs. MARGERY was taken up for a Witch,
                and what happened on that Occasion.
And so it is true? And they have taken up Mrs. Margery then,
and accused her of being a Witch, only because she was wiser than some
of her Neighbours! Mercy upon me! People stuff Children’s Heads with
Stories of Ghosts, Faries, Witches, and such Nonsense when they are
young, and so they continue Fools all their Days. The whole World
ought to be made acquainted with her Case, and here it is at their
Service.
The Case of Mrs. MARGERY.
Mrs. Margery, as we have frequently observed, was always doing
Good, and thought she could never sufficiently gratify those who had
done any Thing to serve her. These generous Sentiments, naturally led
her to consult the Interest of Mr. Grove, and the rest of her
Neighbours; and as most of their Lands were Meadow, and they depended
much on their Hay, which had been for many Years greatly damaged by
wet Weather, she contrived an Instrument to direct them when to mow
their Grass with Safety, and prevent their Hay being spoiled. They all
came to her for Advice, and by that Means got in their Hay without
Damage, while most of that in the neighbouring Villages was spoiled.
This made a great Noise in the Country, and so provoked were the
People in the other Parishes, that they accused her of being a Witch,
and sent Gasser Goosecap, a busy Fellow in other People’s
Concerns, to find out Evidence against her. This Wiseacre happened to
come to her School, when she was walking about with the Raven on one
Shoulder, the Pidgeon on the other, the Lark on her Hand, and the Lamb
and the Dog by her Side; which indeed made a droll Figure, and so
surprized the that he cried out, a Witch! a Witch! upon this she
laughing, answered, a Conjurer! a Conjurer! and so they parted; but it
did not end thus, for a Warrant was issued out against Mrs.
Margery, and she was carried to a Meeting of the Justices,
whither all the Neighbours followed her.
At the Meeting, one of the Justices, who knew little of Life, and less
of the Law, behaved very idly; and though no Body was able to prove
any Thing against her, asked, who she could bring to her Character?
Who can you bring against my Character, Sir, says she, there
are People enough who would appear in my Defence, were it necessary;
but I never supposed that any one here could be so weak, as to believe
there was any such Thing as a Witch. If I am a Witch, this is my
Charm, and (laying a Barometer or Weather Glass on the Table) it is
with this, says she, that I have taught my Neighbours to know the
State of the Weather. All the Company laughed, and Sir William
Dove, who was on the Bench, asked her Accusers, how they could be
such Fools, as to think there was any such Thing as a Witch. It is
true, continued he, many innocent and worthy People have been abused
and even murdered on this absurd and foolish Supposition; which is a
Scandal to our Religion, to our Laws, to our Nation, and to common
Sense; but I will tell you a Story.
There was in the West of England a poor industrious Woman, who
laboured under the same evil Report, which this good Woman is accused
of. Every Hog that died with the Murrain, every Cow that slipt her
Calf, she was accountable for: If a Horse had the Staggers, she was
supposed to be in his Head; and whenever the Wind blew a little harder
than ordinary, Goody Giles was playing her Tricks, and riding
upon a Broomstick in the Air. These, and a thousand other Phantasies,
too ridiculous to recite, possessed the Pates of the common People:
Horse-shoes were nailed with the Heels upwards, and many Tricks made
use of, to mortify the poor Creature; and such was their Rage against
her, that they petitioned Mr. Williams, the Parson of the
Parish, not to let her come to Church; and at last, even insisted upon
it: But this he over-ruled, and allowed the poor old Woman a Nook in
one of the Isles to herself, where she muttered over her Prayers in
the best Manner she could. The Parish, thus disconcerted and enraged,
withdrew the small Pittance they allowed for her Support, and would
have reduced her to the Necessity of starving, had she not been still
assisted by the benevolent Mr. Williams.
But I hasten to the Sequel of my Story, in which you will find, that
the true Source from whence Witchcraft springs is Poverty,
Age, and Ignorance; and that it is impossible for a
Woman to pass for a Witch, unless she is very poor, very
old, and lives in a Neighbourhood where the People are void of
common Sense.
Some Time after, a Brother of her’s died in London, who, though he
would not part with a Farthing while he lived, at his Death was
obliged to leave her five thousand Pounds, that he could not carry
with him.–This altered the Face of Jane’s Affairs prodigiously:
She was no longer Jane, alias Joan Giles, the ugly old Witch, but
Madam Giles; her old ragged Garb was exchanged for one that was new
and genteel; her greatest Enemies made their Court to her, even the
Justice himself came to wish her Joy; and though several Hogs and
Horses died, and the Wind frequently blew afterwards, yet Madam
Giles was never supposed to have a Hand in it; and from hence it is
plain, as I observed before, that a Woman must be very poor, very
old, and live in a Neighbourhood, where the People are very stupid,
before she can possibly pass for a Witch.
’Twas a Saying of Mr. Williams, who would sometimes be jocose,
and had the Art of making even Satire agreeable; that if ever
Jane deserved the Character of a Witch, it was after this Money
was left her; for that with her five thousand Pounds, she did more
Acts of Charity and friendly Offices, than all the People of Fortune
within fifty Miles of the Place.
After this, Sir William inveighed against the absurd and
foolish Notions, which the Country People had imbibed concerning
Witches, and Witchcraft, and having proved that there was no such
Thing, but that all were the Effects of Folly and Ignorance, he gave
the Court such an Account of Mrs. Margery, and her Virtue, good
Sense, and prudent Behaviour, that the Gentlemen present were
enamoured with her, and returned her public Thanks for the great
Service she had done the Country. One Gentleman in particular, I mean
Sir Charles Jones, had conceived such an high Opinion of her,
that he offered her a considerable Sum to take the Care of his Family,
and the Education of his Daughter, which, however, she refused; but
this Gentleman, sending for her afterwards when he had a dangerous Fit
of Illness, she went, and behaved so prudently in the Family, and so
tenderly to him and his Daughter, that he would not permit her to
leave his House, but soon after made her Proposals of Marriage. She
was truly sensible of the Honour he intended her, but, though poor,
she would not consent to be made a Lady, till he had effectually
provided for his Daughter; for she told him, that Power was a
dangerous Thing to be trusted with, and that a good Man or Woman would
never throw themselves into the Road of Temptation.
All Things being settled, and the Day fixed, the Neighbours came in
Crouds to see the Wedding; for they were all glad, that one who had
been such a good little Girl, and was become such a virtuous and good
Woman, was going to be made a Lady; but just as the Clergyman had
opened his Book, a Gentleman richly dressed ran into the Church, and
cry’d, Stop! stop! This greatly alarmed the Congregation, particularly
the intended Bride and Bridegroom, whom he first accosted, and desired
to speak with them apart. After they had been talking some little
Time, the People were greatly surprized to see Sir Charlesstand Motionless, and his Bride cry, and faint away in the Stranger’s
Arms. This seeming Grief, however, was only a Prelude to a Flood of
Joy, which immediately succeeded; for you must know, gentle Reader,
that this Gentleman, so richly dressed and bedizened with Lace, was
that identical little Boy, whom you before saw in the Sailor’s Habit;
in short, it was little Tom Two Shoes, Mrs. Margery’sBrother, who was just come from beyond Sea, where he had made a large
Fortune, and hearing, as soon as he landed, of his Sister’s intended
Wedding, had rode Post, to see that a proper Settlement was made on
her; which he thought she was now intitled to, as he himself was both
able and willing to give her an ample Fortune. They soon returned to
the Communion-Table, and were married in Tears, but they were Tears of
Joy.
There is something wonderful in this young Gentleman’s Preservation
and Success in Life; which we shall acquaint the Reader of, in the
History of his Life and Adventures, which will soon be published.
                         CHAP. VII. and Last.
 The true Use of Riches.
The Harmony and Affection that subsisted between this happy Couple, is
inexpressible; but Time, which dissolves the closest Union, after six
Years, severed Sir Charles from his Lady; for being seized with
a violent Fever he died, and left her full of Grief, tho’ possessed of
a large Fortune.
We forgot to remark, that after her Marriage, Lady Jones (for
so we must now call her) ordered the Chappel to be fitted up, and
allowed the Chaplain a considerable Sum out of her own private Purse,
to visit the Sick, and say Prayers every Day to all the People that
could attend. She also gave Mr. Johnson ten Guineas a Year, to
preach a Sermon, annually, on the Necessity and Duties of the marriage
State, and on the Decease of Sir Charles; she gave him ten
more, to preach yearly on the Subject of Death; she had put all the
Parish into Mourning for the Loss of her Husband; and to those Men who
attended this yearly Service, she gave Harvest Gloves, to their Wives
Shoes and Stockings, and to all the Children little Books and
Plumb-cakes: We must also observe, that she herself wove a Chaplet of
Flowers, and before the Service, placed it on his Grave-stone; and a
suitable Psalm was always sung by the Congregation.
About this Time, she heard that Mr. Smith was oppressed by Sir
Timothy Gripe, the Justice, and his Friend Graspall, who
endeavoured to deprive him of Part of his Tythes; upon which she, in
Conjunction with her Brother, defended him, and the Cause was tried in
Westminster-hall, where Mr. Smith gained a Verdict; and
it appearing that Sir Timothy had behaved most scandalously, as
a Justice of the Peace, he was struck off the List, and no longer
permitted to act in that Capacity. This was a Cut to a Man of his
imperious Disposition, and this was followed by one yet more severe;
for a Relation of his, who had an undoubted Right to the
Mouldwell Estate, finding that it was possible to get the
better at Law of a rich Man, laid Claim to it, brought his Action, and
recovered the whole Manor of Mouldwell, and being afterwards
inclined to sell it, he, in Consideration of the Aid Lady
Margery had lent him during his Distress, made her the first
Offer, and she purchased the Whole, and threw it into different Farms,
that the Poor might be no longer under the Dominion of two over-grown
Men.
This was a great Mortification to Sir Timothy, as well as to
his Friend Graspall, who from this Time experienced nothing but
Misfortunes, and was in a few Years so dispossessed of his Ill-gotten
Wealth, that his Family were reduced to seek Subsistance from the
Parish, at which those who had felt the Weight of his Iron Hand
rejoiced; but Lady Margery desired, that his Children might be
treated with Care and Tenderness; for they, says she, are no
Ways accountable for the Actions of their Father.
At her first coming into Power, she took Care to gratify her old
Friends, especially Mr. and Mrs. Smith, whose Family she made
happy.–She paid great Regard to the Poor, made their Interest her
own, and to induce them to come regularly to Church, she ordered a
Loaf, or the Price of a Loaf, to be given to every one who would
accept of it. This brought many of them to Church, who by degrees
learned their Duty, and then came on a more noble Principle. She also
took Care to encourage Matrimony; and in order to induce her Tenants
and Neighbours to enter into that happy State, she always gave the
young Couple something towards House-keeping; and stood Godmother to
all their Children, whom she had in Parties, every SundayEvening, to teach them their Catechism, and lecture them in Religion
and Morality; after which she treated them with a Supper, gave them
such Books as they wanted, and then dispatched them with her Blessing.
Nor did she forget them at her Death, but left each a Legacy, as will
be seen among other charitable Donations when we publish her Will,
which we may do in some future Volume. There is one Request however so
singular, that we cannot help taking some Notice of it in this Place;
which is, that of her giving so many Acres of Land to be planted
yearly with Potatoes, for all the Poor of any Parish who would come
and fetch them for the Use of their Families; but if any took them to
sell they were deprived of that Privilege ever after. And these Roots
were planted and raised from the Rent arising from a Farm which she
had assigned over for that purpose. In short, she was a Mother to the
Poor, a Physician to the Sick, and a Friend to all who were in
Distress. Her Life was the greatest Blessing, and her Death the
greatest Calamity that ever was felt in the Neighbourhood. A Monument,
but without Inscription, was erected to her Memory in the Church-yard,
over which the Poor as they pass weep continually, so that the Stone
is ever bathed in Tears.
On this Occasion the following Lines were spoken extempore by a young
Gentleman.
  How vain the Tears that fall from you,
  And here supply the Place of Dew?
  How vain to weep the happy Dead,
  Who now to heavenly Realms are fled?
  Repine no more, your Plaints forbear,
  And all prepare to meet them there.
                               The END.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
