


                 What happened at Farmer Grove’s;
                and how she gratified him for the Use
                           of his Room.
While at Mr. Grove’s, which was in the Heart of the Village,
she not only taught the Children in the Day Time, but the Farmer’s
Servants, and all the Neighbours, to read and write in the Evening;
and it was a constant Practice before they went away, to make them all
go to Prayers, and sing Psalms. By this Means, the People grew
extremely regular, his Servants were always at Home, instead of being
at the Ale-house, and he had more Work done than ever. This gave not
only Mr. Grove, but all the Neighbours, an high Opinion of her
good Sense and prudent Behaviour: And she was so much esteemed, that
most of the Differences in the Parish were left to her Decision; and
if a Man and Wife quarrelled (which sometimes happened in that Part of
the Kingdom) both Parties certainly came to her for Advice. Every Body
knows, that Martha Wilson was a passionate scolding Jade, and
that John her husband, was a surly ill-tempered Fellow. These
were one Day brought by the Neighbours for Margery to talk to
them, when they fairly quarrelled before her, and were going to Blows;
but she stepping between them, thus addressed the Husband;
John, says she, you are a Man, and ought to have more Sense
than to fly in a Passion, at every Word that is said amiss by your
Wife; and Martha, says she, you ought to know your Duty better,
than to say any Thing to aggravate your Husband’s Resentment. These
frequent Quarrels, arise from the Indulgence of your violent Passions;
for I know, you both love one another, notwithstanding what has passed
between you. Now, pray tell me John, and tell me Martha,
when you have had a Quarrel the over Night, are you not both sorry for
it the next Day? They both declared that they were: Why then, says
she, I’ll tell you how to prevent this for the future, if you will
both promise to take my Advice. They both promised her. You know, says
she, that a small Spark will set Fire to Tinder, and that Tinder
properly placed will fire a House; an angry Word is with you as that
Spark, for you are both as touchy as Tinder, and very often make your
own House too hot to hold you. To prevent this, therefore, and to live
happily for the future, you must solemnly agree, that if one speaks an
angry Word, the other will not answer, ’till he or she has distinctly
called over all the Letters in the Alphabet, and the other not reply,
’till he has told twenty; by this Means your Passions will be stifled,
and Reason will have Time to take the Rule.
This is the best Recipe that was ever given for a married Couple to
live in Peace: Though John and his Wife frequently attempted to
quarrel afterwards, they never could get their Passions to any
considerable Height, for there was something so droll in thus carrying
on the Dispute, that before they got to the End of the Argument, they
saw the Absurdity of it, laughed, kissed, and were Friends.
Just as Mrs. Margery had settled this Difference between
John and his Wife, the Children (who had been sent out to play,
while that Business was transacting) returned some in Tears, and
others very disconsolate, for the Loss of a little Dormouse they were
very fond of, and which was just dead. Mrs. Margery, who had
the Art of moralizing and drawing Instructions from every Accident,
took this Opportunity of reading them a Lecture on the Uncertainty of
Life, and the Necessity of being always prepared for Death. You should
get up in the Morning, says she, and to conduct yourselves, as if that
Day was to be your last, and lie down at Night, as if you never
expected to see this World any more. This may be done, says she,
without abating of your Chearfulness, for you are not to consider
Death as an Evil, but as a Convenience, as an useful Pilot, who is to
convey you to a Place of greater Happiness: Therefore, play my dear
Children, and be merry; but be innocent and good. The good Man sets
Death at Defiance, for his Darts are only dreadful to the Wicked.
After this, she permitted the Children to bury the little Dormouse,
and desired one of them to write his Epitaph, and here it is.
Epitaph on a DORMOUSE, really
     written by a little BOY.
  In Paper Case,
  Hard by this Place,
Dead a poor Dormouse lies;
  And soon or late,
  Summon’d by Fate,
Each Prince, each Monarch dies.
  Ye Sons of Verse,
  While I rehearse,
Attend instructive Rhyme;
  No Sins had Dor,
  To answer for,
Repent of yours in Time.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
