


              Containing an Account of all the Spirits,
                 or Ghosts, she saw in the Church.
The People were ashamed to ask Little Madge any Questions
before Mr. Long, but as soon as he was gone, they all got round
her to satisfy their Curiousity, and desired she would give them a
particular Account of all that she had heard and seen.
                              Her TALE.
I went to the Church, said she, as most of you did last Night, to see
the Burying, and being very weary, I sate me down in Mr.
Jones’s Pew, and fell fast asleep. At Eleven of the Clock I
awoke; which I believe was in some measure occasioned by the Clock’s
striking, for I heard it. I started up, and could not at first tell
where I was; but after some Time I recollected the Funeral, and soon
found that I was shut in the Church. It was dismal dark, and I could
see nothing; but while I was standing in the Pew, something jumped up
upon me behind, and laid, as I thought, its Hands over my
Shoulders.–I own, I was a little afraid at first; however, I
considered that I had always been constant at Prayers and at Church,
and that I had done nobody any Harm, but had endeavoured to do what
Good I could; and then, thought I, what have I to fear? yet I kneeled
down to say my Prayers. As soon as I was on my Knees something very
cold, as cold as Marble, ay, as cold as Ice, touched my Neck, which
made me start; however, I continued my Prayers, and having begged
Protection from Almighty GOD, I found my Spirits come, and I was
sensible that I had nothing to fear; for GOD Almighty protects not
only all those who are good, but also all those who endeavour to be
good.–Nothing can withstand the Power, and exceed the Goodness of GOD
Almighty. Armed with the Confidence of his Protection, I walked down
the Church Isle, when I heard something, pit pat, pit pat, pit pat,
come after me, and something touched my Hand, which seemed as cold as
a Marble Monument. I could not think what this was, yet I knew it
could not hurt me, and therefore I made myself easy, but being very
cold, and the Church being paved with Stone, which was very damp, I
felt my Way as well as I could to the Pulpit, in doing which something
brushed by me, and almost threw me down. However I was not frightened,
for I knew, that GOD Almighty would suffer nothing to hurt me.
At last, I found out the Pulpit, and having shut too the Door, I laid
me down on the Mat and Cushion to sleep; when something thrust and
pulled the Door, as I thought for Admittance, which prevented my going
to sleep. At last it cries, Bow, wow, wow; and I concluded it
must be Mr. Saunderson’s Dog, which had followed me from their
House to Church, so I opened the Door, and called Snip, Snip,
and the Dog jumped up upon me immediately. After this Snip and
I lay down together, and had a most comfortable Nap; for when I awoke
again it was almost light. I then walked up and down all the Isles of
the Church to keep myself warm; and though I went into the Vault, and
trod on Lady Ducklington’s Coffin, I saw no Ghost, and I
believe it was owing to the Reason Mr. Long has given you,
namely, that there is no such Thing to be seen. As to my Part, I would
as soon lie all Night in the Church as in any other Place; and I am
sure that any little Boy or Girl, who is good, and loves GOD Almighty,
and keeps his Commandments, may as safely lie in the Church, or the
Church-yard, as any where else, if they take Care not to get Cold; for
I am sure there are no Ghosts, either to hurt, or to frighten them;
though any one possessed of Fear might have taken Neighbour
Saunderson’s Dog with his cold Nose for a Ghost; and if they
had not been undeceived, as I was, would never have thought otherwise.
All the Company acknowledged the Justness of the Observation, and
thanked Little Two-Shoes for her Advice.
After this, my dear Children, I hope you will not believe any foolish
Stories that ignorant, weak, or designing People may tell you about
Ghosts; for the Tales of Ghosts, Witches, and Fairies, are the
Frolicks of a distempered Brain. No wise Man ever saw either of them.
Little Margery you see was not afraid; no, she had good Sense,
and a good Conscience, which is a Cure for all these imaginary
Evils.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
