


         The whole History of the Considering Cap, set forth
        at large for the Benefit of all whom it may concern.
The great Reputation Mrs. Margery acquired by composing
Differences in Families, and especially, between Man and Wife, induced
her to cultivate that Part of her System of Morality and Economy, in
order to render it more extensively useful. For this Purpose, she
contrived what she called a Charm for the Passions; which was a
considering Cap, almost as large as a Grenadier’s, but of three equal
Sides; on the first of which was written, I MAY BE WRONG; on the
second, IT IS FIFTY TO ONE BUT YOU ARE; and on the third, I’LL
CONSIDER OF IT. The other Parts on the out-side, were filled with odd
Characters, as unintelligible as the Writings of the old
Egyptians; but within Side there was a Direction for its Use,
of the utmost Consequence; for it strictly enjoined the Possessor to
put on the Cap, whenever he found his Passions begin to grow
turbulent, and not to deliver a Word whilst it was on, but with great
Coolness and Moderation. As this Cap was an universal Cure for
Wrong-headedness, and prevented numberless Disputes and Quarrels, it
greatly hurt the Trade of the poor Lawyers, but was of the utmost
Service to the rest of the Community. They were bought by Husbands and
Wives, who had themselves frequent Occasion for them, and sometimes
lent them to their Children: They were also purchased in large
Quantities by Masters and Servants; by young Folks, who were intent on
Matrimony, by Judges, Jurymen, and even Physicians and Divines; nay,
if we may believe History, the Legislators of the Land did not disdain
the Use of them; and we are told, that when any important Debate
arose, Cap, was the Word, and each House looked like a grand
Synod of Egyptian Priests. Nor was this Cap of less Use to
Partners in Trade, for with these, as well as with Husband and Wife,
if one was out of Humour, the other threw him the Cap, and he was
obliged to put it on, and keep it till all was quiet. I myself saw
thirteen Caps worn at a Time in one Family, which could not have
subsisted an Hour without them; and I was particularly pleased at Sir
Humphry Huffum’s, to hear a little Girl, when her Father was
out of Humour, ask her Mamma, if she should reach down the Cap?
These Caps, indeed, were of such Utility, that People of Sense never
went without them; and it was common in the Country, when a Booby made
his Appearance, and talked Nonsense, to say, he had no Cap in his
Pocket.
 Advice from Friar Bacon.
What was Fortunatus’s Wishing Cap, when compared to this? That
Cap, is said to have conveyed People instantly from one Place to
another; but, as the Change of Place does not change the Temper and
Disposition of the Mind, little Benefit can be expected from it; nor
indeed is much to be hoped from his famous Purse: That Purse, it is
said, was never empty, and such a Purse, may be sometimes convenient;
but as Money will not purchase Peace, it is not necessary for a Man to
encumber himself with a great deal of it. Peace and Happiness depend
so much upon the State of a Man’s own Mind, and upon the Use of the
considering Cap, that it is generally his own Fault, if he is
miserable. One of these Caps will last a Man his whole Life, and is a
Discovery of much greater Importance to the Public than the
Philosopher’s Stone. Remember what was said by my Brazen Head, Time
is, Time was, Time is past: Now the Time is, therefore buy
the Cap immediately, and make a proper Use of it, and be happy before
the Time is past.
Yours ROGER BACON.
Continue...

This eBook of “Goody Two-Shoes” (or, Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes, 1881) by Anonymous belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
