


It was hard to be called a “kid"–harder still to be left out of the
game. And, besides, it wasn’t fair. Marmaduke knew he could catch that
ball as well, and hit it as often as any of them.
This is the way it began:–
That morning Jehosophat had gone with the Toyman to Sawyer’s Mill over
on Wally’s Creek. Marmaduke felt lonely, for there was nobody but
Hepzebiah to play with, and she wouldn’t leave her dolls, and he had
long ago gotten past playing with them. As he was wandering
forlornly around the barnyard, wondering what he could do, he heard a
shout over by the Miller farm.
“You’re out!”
It was a very fascinating cry, an inviting one as well. Looking over
the field he saw boys–at least six of them–playing baseball. So he
hurried over to get in the game, too.
But his old enemy “Fatty” told him that they didn’t “want any
kids hangin’ around.”
And Dicky Means agreed with that.
“Naw, we don’t want any kids!”
“I can catch an’ I can pitch–curves, too,” Marmaduke protested, but
they wouldn’t believe him.
“You can’t, either,” Fatty yelled back, “you’d muff it every time.
Wouldn’t he, Means?”
He was talking to Dicky Means, but he called him by his last
name just because he had heard grown-up men do that sometimes and he
thought it was very smart.
Again Dicky Means agreed with Fatty.
“_Sure he’d muff it every time.”
Reddy Toms and Harold Skinner didn’t take Marmaduke’s part, nor did
Sammy Soapstone, though he had borrowed Marmaduke’s mouth-organ and
lost it, and had Marmaduke’s appendix all pickled in alcohol in a big
bottle and wouldn’t give it back, either. But they were all bigger
than Marmaduke, so what could he do but sit on the fence and watch
them, while his fingers fairly itched to catch one of those “flies."
And the crack of the bat against the ball did sound so fine across the
field.
At last he couldn’t stand it, so he got down from the fence, and
shouted at them,
“I wouldn’t play in your ole game–not for a million dollars!”
And off he walked towards his own barn, swinging his arms all the way,
as if he were holding a bat and showing them just how well he could
play. My! what long “flies” he would knock, if he only had the
chance–over the dead chestnut tree, over the Gold Rooster on the top
of the barn, and even above the Long White Finger of the Church
Pointing at the Sky. Maybe, sometime, if he hit it hard enough and
just right, the ball would sail on and on, and up and up, to the Moon:
and the Ole Man there would catch it and throw it down to him again.
But he would have to practice a lot first, so, when he reached the
house, he went in and found a ball of his own. He turned it over and
over in his fingers, admiring it. It was a fine one, with leather as
white as buckskin but very hard, and thick seams sewed in the cover
with heavy thread, winding in and out in horseshoe curves.
It had a dandy name, too,–"Rocket,” that was it. And he threw it up
high up, up, up, until it reached the eaves of the barn and startled
the swallows, who flew out and swept the sky with their pretty wings,
chattering angrily at him.
He watched to see where the ball would fall, and ran under it, holding
his hands like a little cup. It fell into them, but it fell outeven quicker than it had fallen in. Jiminy! but that ball was hard!
Marmaduke thought the man who made it should have left the “et” from
its name and called it plain “Rock” instead. It was just like a rock
covered with hard leather.
He tried it again, but he didn’t throw it up quite so high.
“Crack!” it went against the side of the barn, and little clouds of
hay-dust from the loft danced in the air, and the swallows chattered
still more angrily:
“He persists–sists–sists–sists–sists,” they called to one another.
This time the ball fell on his cheekbone and raised a lump as round
and as hard as a marble.
He didn’t cry. Oh, no! for he was trying hard these days to be a
regular boy and never to cry even one little whimper. So he just went
in the house and Mother put a kiss and some arnica on it–it is always
more effective if mixed that way–and out he came and tried it all
over again. For regular boys never give up. Of course, at first he
threw the ball a little lower than before, but that was only wise. And
this time it did fall into his hands and he held it tight. Over and
over he practised until his hands were pretty red from catching the
hard “Rocket” ball, but he felt very happy inside–which is what
counts, for one doesn’t mind being sore outside if one is all
right within.
However, all the time he could hear the sound of that bat over on the
Miller lot. Then–all of a sudden–he heard an altogether different
sort of noise–more like a crash and a smash than a crack.
“Glass!” that was it!
“Hooray!” he shouted in delight, ’now that Fatty’s going to get
it.”
But he was wrong. Fatty was too plump to hit a ball so hard. It was
Dicky Means that had done it. And, like Fatty, he was always up to
tricks, only usually Fatty planned them and Dicky did them.
Yes, it was Dicky Means who had hit that ball right through Mis’
Miller’s window, the big parlor window, too, and she expected the
Methodist ladies of the Laborforlovesociety that very afternoon. There
was Mis’ Miller now, running out of the house and shrieking,–
“You younglimbosatan, you’ll pay for that!”
“Pleeze, Mis’ Miller, I haven’t any money,” Dicky was saying, very
politely, with his eye on the broom she held in her hand, “I’ll pay
you tomorrow.”
“No, you’ll settle it now,” she told him–very cross she was,
too, “or I’ll tell your mother, and your father’ll paddle you in the
woodshed.” Then she added,–"an’ you won’t get your ball.”
Dicky seemed to be more worried about the ball than about the
woodshed, for he whined.
“Aw, pleeze, Mis’ Miller, have a heart!”
You see, “Have a heart!” was an expression he had heard down in the
city, and for the last week the boys had been using it every chance
they got.
Still it didn’t work on Mis’ Miller, for she only shook her head
angrily and took her broom and shouted,–
“Scat, get out!"–just as if they were so many cats–"an’ don’t come
back for the ball till you come with the money in your hand.”
And as everybody in the neighborhood used to say, “Gracious, but Mis’
Miller has a turrible temper!” or “Whew, but can’t she get mad?” and
because she was flourishing that broom right in their faces, why, they
did scat like so many cats, just as she had told them.
Across the field they all came running, straight towards Marmaduke,
who pretended not to see them at all, but just kept passing his Rocket
ball from one hand to the other, trying to juggle it like the trick
men in the circus.
When they saw that ball, all the boys suddenly grew very polite to
Marmaduke.
“Lend us your ball, Marmy!” they said.
“Wouldn’t you like to have it!” he replied, still juggling the ball,
but he watched them out of the corner of his eye. They had been pretty
mean to him, but he supposed he ought to be decent even if they
weren’t, and besides it would be fine to play a real game with “sides"
instead of one just by himself.
“All right,” he said, after making them wait long enough to want that
ball very much, “if you’ll play ’sides’ ’stead of’ two o’ cat,’ and
let me be captain.”
“Aw!” said Dicky, “you’re not big enough.”
“All right,” replied Marmaduke, still juggling that fine Rocket ball,
“you’ll have to play with some ole rock then.”
“Aw, come ’n, have a heart!”
Marmaduke thought it over for a little while. To “have a heart” was
like “heaping coals of fire” on people’s heads, in minister’s
language, he supposed. And he wasn’t so fond of that. But anyway he
gave in.
“All right,” he agreed, “come ’n, where’ll we play?”
“Here,” said Fatty, “this big rock’ll be home-plate, and that one over
there by the chestnut tree ’first.’ An’ we’ll choose up sides–first
choosin’!”
Then Dicky, who insisted on being the other captain, picked up the bat
and threw it with the handle uppermost to Fatty, who caught it around
the middle. Then Dicky clasped his fingers around the bat just above
Fatty’s hand; then Fatty put his left hand above Dicky’s right; and
Dicky his left hand next; and so on until their fingers almost reached
the handle of the bat. There was just a little space left. If Fatty
could squeeze his plump fingers in between Dicky’s and the top he
would win, and he could have first choice of the best players for his
side. But his fingers were much too fat.
“Your pinky’s over,” said Dicky, and Reddy Toms picked up a flat stone
and scraped it over the top of the bat, and Fatty howled and let go.
So it was Dicky’s turn to choose, and Marmaduke waited breathlessly.
He hoped that he would be chosen first, second anyway. He ought to be,
for wasn’t it his ball they were going to play with!
But–
“I’ll take Reddy,” said Dicky;
“Sammy,” said Fatty;
“Skinny,” chose Dicky next;
“Froggy Waters,” chose Fatty–and poor little Marmaduke was left to
the last, as if he were the worst player in the whole world.
“Well,” said Dicky, “I spouse I’ve got to take him. But he’ll
lose the game for us.”
He turned to Marmaduke.
“I’ll tell you what, Marmy,” he said, “you can be the spectators–a
whole pile of them–in the grand stand. Wouldn’t you like to be a
grand stand? That’s great. Isn’t it, fellows?”
“Sure,” they all said, grinning, but Marmaduke didn’t want to be any
spectator, not even a grand stand. He wanted to be doing things, not
watching. Lose that game, would he? No, he’d show them, he’d win it
instead. He’d hit that ball clean over the fence–so far they’d never
find it. But whew! That wouldn’t do. He’d better not hit it quite so
far or he’d lose his dandy Rocket ball.
But they had to give in and let him play before he would give them
that ball. Then the two captains told their men to take their
positions.
“I’ll pitch,” declared Dicky, “’n Reddy’ll catch. Skinny you play
’first,’ and Marmaduke out in the field. You kin go to sleep, too, for
all I care–for you can’t catch anything even if you had a peach
basket to hold it in.”
“Play ball!” shouted Fatty, and they all took their places, Dicky’s
team in the field, and Fatty’s at the bat.
Marmaduke had to stand way out, and he didn’t have much to do for a
while, for the other team either struck out, or hit the ball towards
Dicky, the pitcher, or Skinny at ’first.’ Once a ball did come his way
“Hold it!” shouted Dicky, but Marmaduke was so excited that he threw
himself right at it, and the ball rolled between his legs.
“Aw! didn’t I tell you?” said Dicky in disgust, and all on the other
team shouted:
“Butterfingers!”
And, as every boy in the world knows, it is a great disgrace to be
called “Butterfingers.”
When the first inning was over the score stood six to five, and
Fatty’s team was ahead.
In the next inning the ball never once came towards Marmaduke, way out
there in the field. All he could do was to watch the other boys catch
the “pop-flies,” stop the grounders, or run back and forth between
first base and home. It was hard, too, when Marmaduke wanted so much
to be in the thick of it.
Before long the score stood seventeen to fifteen, still in favor of
Fatty’s team. At last they were put out, and it was Marmaduke’s turn
to bat. If he could only knock a home run it would bring Skinny in and
tie the score.
“Strike one!” called Sammy, who was catching.
Marmaduke swung at the next one too wildly.
“Strike two!”
And then, sad to tell,–
“Strike three!”
He was out–no doubt about it!
“Aw!” exclaimed Dicky, “what’d I tell you–you ought to be fired.”
Marmaduke felt very much ashamed as he took his place out in the field
again, with the score thirty-six to thirty against them.
Just then the Toyman and Jehosophat came up the road on their way back
from Sawyer’s Mill, and the Toyman stopped his horses to watch the
game for a minute. Marmaduke gritted his teeth and clenched his hands.
He would have to do well now when they were looking on.
Before he knew it, two of the other team were out. Then, all of a
sudden, he heard a loud crack. Looking up, he saw the ball sailing
through the air. It wasn’t sailing towards Dicky or Skinny. It was
coming straight in his direction!
He formed his hands in the shape of a cup and waited. He was going to
hold that ball–if it ever got there. And, sure enough, it fell in his
outstretched hands. My! how that Rocket ball stung and burned! But he
hung on for dear life.
“Butterfingers!” he heard Fatty call to “rattle” him. And that settled
the matter, for, if he hadn’t heard that word, he might have dropped
the ball after all, but he was so determined to make Fatty take it all
back that he made his fingers tight as a vise around the ball–and it
stayed–it stayed there!
[Illustration: “He formed his hands in the shape of a cup and
waited."]
When he came in to take his turn at bat, Dicky patted him on the
shoulder.
“Good boy, Mary!” he said, and Outfielder Green felt as pleased and
proud as before he had been ashamed. But he felt even happier a little
later.
It was the last half of the last inning. Reddy and Skinny each made
one run and Dicky made two, and now the score stood thirty-six to
thirty-five. Fatty’s team was only one run ahead, and Dicky was on
first with Marmaduke at the bat.
Now was Marmaduke’s chance to win the game–the chance of a lifetime!
Fatty twirled the ball in his hand. Though he was fat, he could pitch
like a regular pitcher. At least his motions were just as funny. He
would curl up his fingers in a strange way to make what he called a
curve. Then he would hold the ball up to his chin and look wisely over
at first base, watching Dicky. Then he would curl his arms around his
head several times, and at last he would let the ball fly.
Marmaduke tried hard to hit it, but he just tipped it.
“Foul!” called the catcher.
And Marmaduke missed the next one and the next. He had only one chance
left now. And Fatty twisted himself up almost in knots, to make an
extra fine curve, I suppose, for Marmaduke’s benefit. Six times he did
this before he let the ball go.
It came towards the home-plate and Marmaduke, as fast as an arrow. He
gritted his teeth, and gripped his hands tight around the bat, and hit
at that Rocket ball harder than he ever had in his life; and all the
time his ears were listening for the “crack!”
Of course, it all happened very quickly, more quickly than we can ever
tell about it in words, but–to make a long story short–he heard that
crack!
He had hit it! And away the Rocket ball flew towards the dead chestnut
tree, up, up, by the old crow’s nest, and plop! right in the nest it
dropped.
And Dicky came racing home, and Marmaduke not far behind him, his face
red with excitement and his eyes shining.
And how the team cheered him now, and patted him on the back, and said
“Good boy, Mary!” again, and how happy he felt!
There was a nice ending to it too, although the dandy Rocket ball was
lost in the old crow’s nest. For, when he told them about it all at
the supper-table that night, Father turned to the Toyman, and,
reaching into his pockets, where some money jingled, said:–
“So the home-team won, did they? though they lost the ball? Well,
Frank, there are some more ’dandy Rockets’ where that came from,
aren’t there?”
The Toyman was quite sure there were, and Father added,–
“And that baseball glove, that big catcher’s mitt that Marmaduke
always wanted–do you ’spouse that’s still in the store?”
Again the Toyman seemed rather hopeful, and the promise was fulfilled
on the following Saturday. And many a time the hard Rocket ball and
lots of other balls, too, thumped in that big leather mitt.
Continue...

This eBook of “Half-Past Seven Stories” by Robert Gordon Anderson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Half Past Seven StoriesBy Robert Gordon AndersonAt Amazon
