


In her home at Frankfurt, Clara, the little daughter of Herr
Sesemann, was lying on the invalid couch on which she spent her
whole day, being wheeled in it from room to room. Just now she
was in what was known as the study, where, to judge by the
various things standing and lying about, which added to the cosy
appearance of the room, the family was fond of sitting. A
handsome bookcase with glass doors explained why it was called
the study, and here evidently the little girl was accustomed to
have her lessons.
Clara’s little face was thin and pale, and at this moment her
two soft blue eyes were fixed on the clock, which seemed to her
to go very slowly this day, and with a slight accent of
impatience, which was very rare with her, she asked, “Isn’t it
time yet, Fraulein Rottenmeier?”
This lady was sitting very upright at a small work-table, busy
with her embroidery. She had on a mysterious-looking loose
garment, a large collar or shoulder-cape that gave a certain
solemnity to her appearance, which was enhanced by a very lofty
dome-shaped head dress. For many years past, since the mistress
of the house had died, the housekeeping and the superintendence
of the servants had been entrusted by Herr Sesemann to Fraulein
Rottenmeier. He himself was often away from home, and he left
her in sole charge, with the condition only that his little
daughter should have a voice in all matters, and that nothing
should be done against her wish.
As Clara was putting her impatient question for the second time,
Dete and Heidi arrived at the front door, and the former
inquired of the coachman, who had just got down from his box, if
it was too late to see Fraulein Rottenmeier.
“That’s not my business,” grumbled the coachman; “ring the bell
in the hall for Sebastian.”
Dete did so, and Sebastian came downstairs; he looked astonished
when he saw her, opening his eyes till they were nearly as big
as the large round buttons on his coat.
“Is it too late for me to see Fraulein Rottenmeier?” Dete asked
again.
“That’s not my business,” answered the man; “ring that other
bell for the maid Tinette,” and without troubling himself any
farther Sebastian disappeared.
Dete rang again. This time Tinette appeared with a spotless
white cap perched on the top of her head and a mocking expression
of face.
“What is it?” she called from the top of the stairs. Dete
repeated her question. Tinette disappeared, but soon came back
and called down again to Dete, “Come up, she is expecting you.”
Dete and Heidi went upstairs and into the study, Tinette
following. Dete remained standing politely near the door, still
holding Heidi tightly by the hand, for she did not know what the
child might take it into her head to do amid these new
surroundings.
Fraulein Rottenmeier rose slowly and went up to the little new
companion for the daughter of the house, to see what she was
like. She did not seem very pleased with her appearance. Heidi
was dressed in her plain little woollen frock, and her hat was
an old straw one bent out of shape. The child looked innocently
out from beneath it, gazing with unconcealed astonishment at the
lady’s towering head dress.
“What is your name?” asked Fraulein Rottenmeier, after
scrutinisingly examining the child for some minutes, while Heidi
in return kept her eyes steadily fixed upon the lady.
“Heidi,” she answered in a clear, ringing voice.
“What? what? that’s no Christian name for a child; you were not
christened that. What name did they give you when you were
baptized?” continued Fraulein Rottenmeier.
“I do not remember,” replied Heidi.
“What a way to answer!” said the lady, shaking her head. “Dete,
is the child a simpleton or only saucy?”
“If the lady will allow me, I will speak for the child, for she
is very unaccustomed to strangers,” said Dete, who had given
Heidi a silent poke for making such an unsuitable answer. “She
is certainly not stupid nor yet saucy, she does not know what it
means even; she speaks exactly as she thinks. To-day she is for
the first time in a gentleman’s house and she does not know good
manners; but she is docile and very willing to learn, if the
lady will kindly make excuses for her. She was christened
Adelaide, after her mother, my sister, who is now dead.”
“Well, that’s a name that one can pronounce,” remarked Fraulein
Rottenmeier. “But I must tell you, Dete, that I am astonished to
see so young a child. I told you that I wanted a companion of
the same age as the young lady of the house, one who could share
her lessons, and all her other occupations. Fraulein Clara is now
over twelve; what age is this child?”
“If the lady will allow me,” began Dete again, in her usual
fluent manner, “I myself had lost count of her exact age; she is
certainly a little younger, but not much; I cannot say
precisely, but I think she is ten, or thereabouts.”
“Grandfather told me I was eight,” put in Heidi. Dete gave her
another poke, but as the child had not the least idea why she
did so she was not at all confused.
“What–only eight!” cried Fraulein Rottenmeier angrily. “Four
years too young! Of what use is such a child! And what have you
learnt? What books did you have to learn from?”
“None,” said Heidi.
“How? what? How then did you learn to read?” continued the lady.
“I have never learnt to read, or Peter either,” Heidi informed
her.
“Mercy upon us! you do not know how to read! Is it really so?"
exclaimed Fraulein Rottenmeier, greatly horrified. “Is it
possible–not able to read? What have you learnt then?”
“Nothing,” said Heidi with unflinching truthfulness.
“Young woman,” said the lady to Dete, after having paused for a
minute or two to recover from her shock, “this is not at all the
sort of companion you led me to suppose; how could you think of
bringing me a child like this?”
But Dete was not to be put down so easily, and answered warmly,
“If the lady will allow me, the child is exactly what I thought
she required; the lady described what she wished for, a child
unlike all other children, and I could find no other to suit,
for the greater number I know are not peculiar, but one very much
the same as the other, and I thought this child seemed as if made
for the place. But I must go now, for my mistress will be waiting
for me; if the lady will permit I will come again soon and see
how she is getting on.” And with a bow Dete quickly left the room
and ran downstairs. Fraulein Rottenmeier stood for a moment taken
aback and then ran after Dete. If the child was to stop she had
many things yet to say and ask about her, and there the child
was, and what was more, Dete, as she plainly saw, meant to leave
her there.
Heidi remained by the door where she had been standing since she
first came in. Clara had looked on during the interview without
speaking; now she beckoned to Heidi and said, “Come here!”
Heidi went up to her.
“Would you rather be called Heidi or Adelaide?” asked Clara.
“I am never called anything but Heidi,” was the child’s prompt
answer.
“Then I shall always call you by that name,” said Clara, “it
suits you. I have never heard it before, but neither have I ever
seen a child like you before. Have you always had that short
curly hair?”
“Yes, I think so,” said Heidi.
“Are you pleased to come to Frankfurt?” went on Clara.
“No, but I shall go home to-morrow and take grandmother a white
loaf,” explained Heidi.
“Well, you are a funny child!” exclaimed Clara. “You were
expressly sent for to come here and to remain with me and share
my lessons; there will be some fun about them now as you cannot
read, something new to do, for often they are dreadfully dull,
and I think the morning will never pass away. You know my tutor
comes every morning at about ten o’clock, and then we go on with
lessons till two, and it does seem such a long time. Sometimes
he takes up the book and holds it close up to his face, as if he
was very short-sighted, but I know it’s only because he wants so
dreadfully to gape, and Fraulein Rottenmeier takes her large
handkerchief out also now and then and covers her face with it,
as if she was moved by what we had been reading, but that is
only because she is longing to gape too. And I myself often want
to gape, but I am obliged to stop myself, for if Fraulein
Rottenmeier sees me gaping she runs off at once and fetches the
cod-liver oil and says I must have a dose, as I am getting weak
again, and the cod-liver oil is horrible, so I do my best not to
gape. But now it will be much more amusing, for I shall be able
to lie and listen while you learn to read.”
Heidi shook her head doubtfully when she heard of learning to
read.
“Oh, nonsense, Heidi, of course you must learn to read,
everybody must, and my tutor is very kind, and never cross, and
he will explain everything to you. But mind, when he explains
anything to you, you won’t be able to understand; but don’t ask
any questions, or else he will go on explaining and you will
understand less than ever. Later when you have learnt more and
know about things yourself, then you will begin to understand
what he meant.”
Fraulein Rottenmeier now came back into the room; she had not
been able to overtake Dete, and was evidently very much put out;
for she had wanted to go into more details concerning the child,
and to convince Dete how misleading she had been, and how unfit
Heidi was as a companion for Clara; she really did not know what
to be about, or how to undo the mischief, and it made her all
the more angry that she herself was responsible for it, having
consented to Heidi being fetched. She ran backwards and forwards
in a state of agitation between the study and the dining-room,
and then began scolding Sebastian, who was standing looking at
the table he had just finished laying to see that nothing was
missing.
“You can finish your thoughts to-morrow morning; make haste, or
we shall get no dinner to-day at all.”
Then hurrying out she called Tinette, but in such an ill-
tempered voice that the maid came tripping forward with even more
mincing steps than usual, but she looked so pert that even
Fraulein Rottenmeier did not venture to scold her, which only
made her suppressed anger the greater.
“See that the room is prepared for the little girl who has just
arrived,” said the lady, with a violent effort at self-control.
“Everything is ready; it only wants dusting.”
“It’s worth my troubling about,” said Tinette mockingly as she
turned away.
Meanwhile Sebastian had flung open the folding doors leading
into the dining-room with rather more noise than he need, for he
was feeling furious, although he did not dare answer back when
Fraulein Rottenmeier spoke to him; he then went up to Clara’s
chair to wheel her into the next room. As he was arranging the
handle at the back preparatory to doing so, Heidi went near and
stood staring at him. Seeing her eyes fixed upon him, he
suddenly growled out, “Well, what is there in me to stare at like
that?” which he would certainly not have done if he had been
aware that Fraulein Rottenmeier was just then entering the room.
“You look so like Peter,” answered Heidi. The lady-housekeeper
clasped her hands in horror. “Is it possible!” she stammered half-
aloud, “she is now addressing the servant as if he were a friend!
I never could have imagined such a child!”
Sebastian wheeled the couch into the dining-room and helped
Clara on to her chair. Fraulein Rottenmeier took the seat beside
her and made a sign to Heidi to take the one opposite. They were
the only three at table, and as they sat far apart there was
plenty of room for Sebastian to hand his dishes. Beside Heidi’s
plate lay a nice white roll, and her eyes lighted up with
pleasure as she saw it. The resemblance which Heidi had noticed
had evidently awakened in her a feeling of confidence towards
Sebastian, for she sat as still as a mouse and without moving
until he came up to her side and handed her the dish of fish;
then she looked at the roll and asked, “Can I have it?” Sebastian
nodded, throwing a side glance at Fraulein Rottenmeier to see
what effect this request would have upon her. Heidi immediately
seized the roll and put it in her pocket. Sebastian’s face became
convulsed, he was overcome with inward laughter but knew his
place too well to laugh aloud. Mute and motionless he still
remained standing beside Heidi; it was not his duty to speak, nor
to move away until she had helped herself. Heidi looked
wonderingly at him for a minute or two, and then said, “Am I to
eat some of that too?” Sebastian nodded again. “Give me some
then,” she said, looking calmly at her plate. At this Sebastian’s
command of his countenance became doubtful, and the dish began to
tremble suspiciously in his hands.
“You can put the dish on the table and come back presently,"
said Fraulein Rottenmeier with a severe expression of face.
Sebastian disappeared on the spot. “As for you, Adelaide, I see I
shall have to teach you the first rules of behavior,” continued
the lady-housekeeper with a sigh. “I will begin by explaining to
you how you are to conduct yourself at table,” and she went on to
give Heidi minute instructions as to all she was to do. “And
now,” she continued, “I must make you particularly understand
that you are not to speak to Sebastian at table, or at any other
time, unless you have an order to give him, or a necessary
question to put to him; and then you are not to address him as
if he was some one belonging to you. Never let me hear you speak
to him in that way again! It is the same with Tinette, and for
myself you are to address me as you hear others doing. Clara
must herself decide what you are to call her.”
“Why, Clara, of course,” put the latter. Then followed a long
list of rules as to general behavior, getting up and going to
bed, going in and out of the room, shutting the doors, keeping
everything tidy, during the course of which Heidi’s eyes
gradually closed, for she had been up before five o’clock that
morning and had had a long journey. She leant back in her chair
and fell fast asleep. Fraulein Rottenmeier having at last come
to the end of her sermonizing said, “Now remember what I have
said, Adelaide! Have you understood it all?”
“Heidi has been asleep for ever so long,” said Clara, her face
rippling all over with amusement, for she had not had such an
entertaining dinner for a long time.
“It is really insupportable what one has to go through with this
child,” exclaimed Fraulein Rottenmeier, in great indignation,
and she rang the bell so violently that Tinette and Sebastian
both came running in and nearly tumbling over one another; but no
noise was sufficient to wake Heidi, and it was with difficulty
they could rouse her sufficiently to get her along to her
bedroom, to reach which she had to pass first through the study,
then through Clara’s bedroom, then through Fraulein Rottenmeier’s
sitting-room, till she came to the corner room that had been set
apart for her.
Continue...

This eBook of “Heidi” by Johanna Spyri belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Heidi (Children's Classics)By Johanna SpyriAt Amazon
