


A few days after these events there was great commotion and much
running up and down stairs in Herr Sesemann’s house. The master
had just returned, and Sebastian and Tinette were busy carrying
up one package after another from the carriage, for Herr
Sesemann always brought back a lot of pretty things for his home.
He himself had not waited to do anything before going in to see
his daughter. Heidi was sitting beside her, for it was late
afternoon, when the two were always together. Father and
daughter greeted each other with warm affection, for they were
deeply attached to one another. Then he held out his hand to
Heidi, who had stolen away into the corner, and said kindly to
her, “And this is our little Swiss girl; come and shake hands
with me! That’s right! Now, tell me, are Clara and you good
friends with one another, or do you get angry and quarrel, and
then cry and make it up, and then start quarreling again on the
next occasion?”
“No, Clara is always kind to me,” answered Heidi.
“And Heidi,” put in Clara quickly, “has not once tried to
quarrel.”
“That’s all right, I am glad to hear it,” said her father, as he
rose from his chair. “But you must excuse me, Clara, for I want
my dinner; I have had nothing to eat all day. Afterwards I will
show you all the things I have brought home with me.”
He found Fraulein Rottenmeier in the dining-room superintending
the preparation for his meal, and when he had taken his place
she sat down opposite to him, looking the every embodiment of bad
news, so that he turned to her and said, “What am I to expect,
Fraulein Rottenmeier? You greet me with an expression of
countenance that quite frightens me. What is the matter? Clara
seems cheerful enough.”
“Herr Sesemann,” began the lady in a solemn voice, “it is a
matter which concerns Clara; we have been frightfully imposed
upon.”
“Indeed, in what way?” asked Herr Sesemann as he went on calmly
drinking his wine.
“We had decided, as you remember, to get a companion for Clara,
and as I knew how anxious you were to have only those who were
well-behaved and nicely brought up about her, I thought I would
look for a little Swiss girl, as I hoped to find such a one as I
have often read about, who, born as it were of the mountain air,
lives and moves without touching the earth.”
“Still I think even a Swiss child would have to touch the earth
if she wanted to go anywhere,” remarked Herr Sesemann,
“otherwise they would have been given wings instead of feet.”
“Ah, Herr Sesemann, you know what I mean,” continued Fraulein
Rottenmeier. “I mean one so at home among the living creatures
of the high, pure mountain regions, that she would be like some
idealistic being from another world among us.”
“And what could Clara do with such an idealistic being as you
describe, Fraulein Rottenmeier.”
“I am not joking, Herr Sesemann, the matter is a more serious
one than you think; I have been shockingly, disgracefully imposed
upon.”
“But how? what is there shocking and disgraceful? I see nothing
shocking in the child,” remarked Herr Sesemann quietly.
“If you only knew of one thing she has done, if you only knew of
the kind of people and animals she has brought into the house
during your absence! The tutor can tell you more about that.”
“Animals? what am I to understand by animals, Fraulein
Rottenmeier?”
“It is past understanding; the whole behavior of the child would
be past understanding, if it were not that at times she is
evidently not in her right mind.”
Herr Sesemann had attached very little importance to what was
told him up till now–but not in her right mind! that was more
serious and might be prejudicial to his own child. Herr Sesemann
looked very narrowly at the lady opposite to assure himself that
the mental aberration was not on her side. At that moment the
door opened and the tutor was announced.
“Ah! here is some one,” exclaimed Herr Sesemann, “who will help
to clear up matters for me. Take a seat,” he continued, as he
held out his hand to the tutor. “You will drink a cup of coffee
with me–no ceremony, I pray! And now tell me, what is the
matter with this child that has come to be a companion to my
daughter? What is this strange thing I hear about her bringing
animals into the house, and is she in her right senses?”
The tutor felt he must begin with expressing his pleasure at
Herr Sesemann’s return, and with explaining that he had come in
on purpose to give him welcome, but Herr Sesemann begged him to
explain without delay the meaning of all he had heard about
Heidi. The tutor started in his usual style. “If I must give my
opinion about this little girl, I should like first to state
that, if on one side, there is a lack of development which has
been caused by the more or less careless way in which she has
been brought up, or rather, by the neglect of her education,
when young, and by the solitary life she has led on the mountain,
which is not wholly to be condemned; on the contrary, such a
life has undoubtedly some advantages in it, if not allowed to
overstep a certain limit of time–”
“My good friend,” interrupted Herr Sesemann, “you are giving
yourself more trouble than you need. I only want to know if the
child has caused you alarm by any animals she has brought into
the house, and what your opinion is altogether as to her being a
fit companion or not for my daughter?”
“I should not like in any way to prejudice you against her,"
began the tutor once more; “for if on the one hand there is a
certain inexperience of the ways of society, owing to the
uncivilised life she led up to the time of her removal to
Frankfurt, on the other hand she is endowed with certain good
qualities, and, taken on the whole–”
“Excuse me, my dear sir, do not disturb yourself, but I must–I
think my daughter will be wanting me,” and with that Herr
Sesemann quickly left the room and took care not to return. He
sat himself down beside his daughter in the study, and then
turning to Heidi, who had risen, “Little one, will you fetch
me,” he began, and then paused, for he could not think what to
ask for, but he wanted to get the child out of the room for a
little while, “fetch me a glass of water.”
“Fresh water?” asked Heidi.
“Yes–Yes–as fresh as you can get it,” he answered. Heidi
disappeared on the spot.
“And now, my dear little Clara,” he said, drawing his chair
nearer and laying her hand in his, “answer my questions clearly
and intelligibly: what kind of animals has your little companion
brought into the house, and why does Fraulein Rottenmeier think
that she is not always in her right mind?”
Clara had no difficulty in answering. The alarmed lady had
spoken to her also about Heidi’s wild manner of talking, but
Clara had not been able to put a meaning to it. She told her
father everything about the tortoise and the kittens, and
explained to him what Heidi had said the day Fraulein Rottenmeier
had been put in such a fright. Herr Sesemann laughed heartily at
her recital. “So you do not want me to send the child home
again,” he asked, “you are not tired of having her here?”
“Oh, no, no,” Clara exclaimed, “please do not send her away.
Time has passed much more quickly since Heidi was here, for
something fresh happens every day, and it used to be so dull, and
she has always so much to tell me.”
“That’s all right then–and here comes your little friend. Have
you brought me some nice fresh water?” he asked as Heidi handed
him a glass.
“Yes, fresh from the pump,” answered Heidi.
“You did not go yourself to the pump?” said Clara.
“Yes I did; it is quite fresh. I had to go a long way, for there
were such a lot of people at the first pump; so I went further
down the street, but there were just as many at the second pump,
but I was able to get some water at the one in the next street,
and the gentleman with the white hair asked me to give his kind
regards to Herr Sesemann.”
“You have had quite a successful expedition,” said Herr Sesemann
laughing, “and who was the gentleman?”
“He was passing, and when he saw me he stood still and said, ’As
you have a glass will you give me a drink; to whom are you
taking the water?’ and when I said, ’To Herr Sesemann,’ he
laughed very much, and then he gave me that message for you, and
also said he hoped you would enjoy the water.”
“Oh, and who was it, I wonder, who sent me such good wishes–
tell me what he was like,” said Herr Sesemann.
“He was kind and laughed, and he had a thick gold chain and a
gold thing hanging from it with a large red stone, and a horse’s
head at the top of his stick.”
“It’s the doctor–my old friend the doctor,” exclaimed Clara and
her father at the same moment, and Herr Sesemann smiled to
himself at the thought of what his friend’s opinion must have
been of this new way of satisfying his thirst for water.
That evening when Herr Sesemann and Fraulein Rottenmeier were
alone, settling the household affairs, he informed her that he
intended to keep Heidi; he found the child in a perfectly right
state of mind, and his daughter liked her as a companion. “I
desire, therefore,” he continued, laying stress upon his words,
“that the child shall be in every way kindly treated, and that
her peculiarities shall not be looked upon as crimes. If you
find her too much for you alone, I can hold out a prospect of
help, for I am shortly expecting my mother here on a long visit,
and she, as you know, can get on with anybody, whatever they may
be like.”
“O yes, I know,” replied Fraulein Rottenmeier, but there was no
tone of relief in her voice as she thought of the coming help.
Herr Sesemann was only home for a short time; he left for Paris
again before the fortnight was over, comforting Clara, who could
not bear that he should go from her again so soon, with the
prospect of her grandmother’s arrival, which was to take place
in a few days’ time. Herr Sesemann had indeed only just gone when
a letter came from Frau Sesemann, announcing her arrival on the
following day, and stating the hour when she might be expected,
in order that a carriage should be sent to meet her at the
station. Clara was overjoyed, and talked so much about her
grandmother that evening, that Heidi began also to call her
“grandmamma,” which brought down on her a look of displeasure
from Fraulein Rottenmeier; this, however, had no particular
effect on Heidi, for she was accustomed now to being continually
in that lady’s black books. But as she was going to her room
that night, Fraulein Rottenmeier waylaid her, and drawing her
into her own, gave her strict injunctions as to how she was to
address Frau Sesemann when she arrived; on no account was she to
call her “grandmamma,” but always to say “madam” to her. “Do you
understand?” said the lady, as she saw a perplexed expression on
Heidi’s face. The latter had not understood, but seeing the
severe expression of the lady’s face she did not ask for more
explanation.
Continue...

This eBook of “Heidi” by Johanna Spyri belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Heidi (Children's Classics)By Johanna SpyriAt Amazon
