


Grandmamma wrote the day before her arrival to let the children
know that they might expect her without fail. Peter brought up
the letter early the following morning. Grandfather and the
children were already outside and the goats were awaiting him,
shaking their heads frolicsomely in the fresh morning air, while
the children stroked them and wished them a pleasant journey up
the mountain. Uncle stood near, looking now at the fresh faces
of the children, now at his well-kept goats, with a smile on his
face, evidently well pleased with the sight of both.
As Peter neared the group his steps slackened, and the instant
he had handed the letter to Uncle he turned quickly away as if
frightened, and as he went he gave a hasty glance behind him, as
if the thing he feared was pursuing him, and then he gave a leap
and ran off up the mountain.
“Grandfather,” said Heidi, who had been watching him with
astonished eyes, “why does Peter always behave now like the
Great Turk when he thinks somebody is after him with a stick; he
turns and shakes his head and goes off with a bound just like
that?”
“Perhaps Peter fancies he sees the stick which he so well
deserves coming after him,” answered grandfather.
Peter ran up the first slope without a pause; when he was well
out of sight, however, he stood still and looked suspiciously
about him. Suddenly he gave a jump and looked behind him with a
terrified expression, as if some one had caught hold of him by
the nape of the neck; for Peter expected every minute that the
police-constable from Frankfurt would leap out upon him from
behind some bush or hedge. The longer his suspense lasted, the
more frightened and miserable he became; he did not know a
moment’s peace.
Heidi now set about tidying the hut, as grandmamma must find
everything clean and in good order when she arrived.
Clara looked on amused and interested to watch the busy Heidi at
her work.
So the morning soon went by, and grandmamma might now be
expected at any minute. The children dressed themselves and went
and sat together outside on the seat ready to receive her.
Grandfather joined them, that they might see the splendid bunch
of blue gentians which he had been up the mountain to gather,
and the children exclaimed with delight at the beauty of the
flowers as they shone in the morning sun. The grandfather then
carried them indoors. Heidi jumped up from time to time to see if
there was any sign of grandmamma’s approach.
At last she saw the procession winding up the mountain just in
the order she had expected. First there was the guide, then the
white horse with grandmamma mounted upon it, and last of all the
porter with a heavy bundle on his back, for grandmamma would not
think of going up the mountain without a full supply of wraps
and rugs.
Nearer and nearer wound the procession; at last it reached the
top and grandmamma was there looking down on the children from
her horse. She no sooner saw them, however, sitting side by
side, than she began quickly dismounting, as she cried out in a
shocked tone of voice, “Why is this? why are you not lying in
your chair, Clara? What are you all thinking about?” But even
before she had got close to them she threw up her hands in
astonishment, exclaiming further, “Is it really you, dear child?
Why, your cheeks have grown quite round and rosy! I should hardly
have known you again!” And she was hastening forward to embrace
her, when Heidi slipped down from the seat, and Clara leaning on
her shoulder, the two children began walking along quite coolly
and naturally. Then indeed grandmamma was surprised, or rather
alarmed, for she thought at first that it must be some unheard-
of proceeding of Heidi’s devising.
But no–Clara was actually walking steadily and uprightly beside
Heidi–and now the two children turned and came towards her with
beaming faces and rosy cheeks. Laughing and crying she ran to
them and embraced first Clara and then Heidi, and then Clara
again, unable to speak for joy. All at once she caught sight of
Uncle standing by the seat and looking on smiling at the
meeting. She took Clara’s arm in hers, and with continual
expressions of delight at the fact that the child could now
really walk about with her, she went up to the old man, and then
letting go Clara’s arm she seized his hands.
“My dear Uncle! my dear Uncle! how much we have to thank you
for! It is all your doing! it is your caring and nursing––”
“And God’s good sun and mountain air,” he interrupted her,
smiling.
“Yes, and don’t forget the beautiful milk I have,” put in Clara.
“Grandmamma, you can’t think what a quantity of goat’s milk I
drink, and how nice it is!”
“I can see that by your cheeks, child,” answered grandmamma. “I
really should not have known you; you have grown quite strong
and plump, and taller too; I never hoped or expected to see you
look like that. I cannot take my eyes off you, for I can hardly
yet believe it. But now I must telegraph without delay to my son
in Paris, and tell him he must come here at once. I shall not say
why; it will be the greatest happiness he has ever known. My
dear Uncle, how can I send a telegram; have you dismissed the men
yet?”
“They have gone,” he answered, “but if you are in a hurry I will
fetch Peter, and he can take it for you.”
Grandmamma thanked him, for she was anxious that the good news
should not be kept from her son a day longer than was possible.
So Uncle went aside a little way and blew such a resounding
whistle through his fingers that he awoke a responsive echo
among the rocks far overhead. He had not to wait many minutes
before Peter came running down in answer, for he knew the sound
of Uncle’s whistle. Peter arrived, looking as white as a ghost,
for he quite thought Uncle was sending for him to give him up.
But as it was he only had a written paper given him with
instructions to take it down at once to the post-office at
Dorfli; Uncle would settle for the payment later, as it was not
safe to give Peter too much to look after.
Peter went off with the paper in his hand, feeling some relief
of mind for the present, for as Uncle had not whistled for him in
order to give him up it was evident that no policeman had yet
arrived.
So now they could all sit down in peace to their dinner round
the table in front of the hut, and grandmamma was given a
detailed account of all that had taken place. How grandfather had
made Clara try first to stand and then to move her feet a little
every day, and how they had settled for the day’s excursion up
the mountain and the chair had been blown away. How Clara’s
desire to see the flowers had induced her to take the first walk,
and so by degrees one thing had led to another. The recital took
some time, for grandmamma continually interrupted it with fresh
exclamations of surprise and thankfulness: “It hardly seems
possible! I can scarcely believe it is not all a dream! Are we
really awake, and are all sitting here by the mountain hut, and
is that round-faced, healthy-looking child my poor little, white,
sickly Clara?”
And Clara and Heidi could not get over their delight at the
success of the surprise they had so carefully arranged for
grandmamma and at the latter’s continued astonishment.
Meanwhile Herr Sesemann, who had finished his business in Paris,
had also been preparing a surprise. Without saying a word to his
mother he got into the train one sunny morning and travelled
that day to Basle; the next morning he continued his journey, for
a great longing had seized him to see his little daughter from
whom he had been separated the whole summer. He arrived at Ragatz
a few hours after his mother had left. When he heard that she had
that very day started for the mountain, he immediately hired a
carriage and drove off to Mayenfeld; here he found that he could
if he liked drive on as far as Dorfli, which he did, as he
thought the walk up from that place would be as long as he cared
for.
Herr Sesemann found he was right, for the climb up the mountain,
as it was, proved long and fatiguing to him. He went on and on,
but still no hut came in sight, and yet he knew there was one
where Peter lived half way up, for the path had been described
to him over and over again.
There were traces of climbers to be seen on all sides; the
narrow footpaths seemed to run in every direction, and Herr
Sesemann began to wonder if he was on the right one, and whether
the hut lay perhaps on the other side of the mountain. He looked
round to see if any one was in sight of whom he could ask the
way; but far and wide there was not a soul to be seen or a sound
to be heard. Only at moments the mountain wind whistled through
the air, and the insects hummed in the sunshine or a happy bird
sang out from the branches of a solitary larch tree. Herr
Sesemann stood still for a while to let the cool Alpine wind blow
on his hot face. But now some one came running down the mountain-
side–it was Peter with the telegram in his hand. He ran straight
down the steep slope, not following the path on which Herr
Sesemann was standing. As soon as the latter caught sight of him
he beckoned to him to come. Peter advanced towards him slowly and
timidly, with a sort of sidelong movement, as if he could only
move one leg properly and had to drag the other after him. “Hurry
up, lad,” called Herr Sesemann, and when Peter was near enough,
“Tell me,” he said, “is this the way to the hut where the old man
and the child Heidi live, and where the visitors from Frankfurt
are staying?”
A low sound of fear was the only answer he received, as Peter
turned to run away in such precipitous haste that he fell head
over heels several times, and went rolling and bumping down the
slope in involuntary bounds, just in the same way as the chair,
only that Peter fortunately did not fall to pieces as that had
done. Only the telegram came to grief, and that was torn into
fragments and flew away.
“How extraordinarily timid these mountain dwellers are!” thought
Herr Sesemann to himself, for he quite believed that it was the
sight of a stranger that had made such an impression on this
unsophisticated child of the mountains.
After watching Peter’s violent descent towards the valley for a
few minutes he continued his journey.
Peter, meanwhile, with all his efforts, could not stop himself,
but went rolling on, and still tumbling head over heels at
intervals in a most remarkable manner.
But this was not the most terrible part of his sufferings at the
moment, for far worse was the fear and horror that possessed
him, feeling sure, as he did now, that the policeman had really
come over for him from Frankfurt. He had no doubt at all that the
stranger who had asked him the way was the very man himself.
Just as he had rolled to the edge of that last high slope above
Dorfli he was caught in a bush, and at last able to keep himself
from falling any farther. He lay still for a second or two to
recover himself, and to think over matters.
“Well done! another of you come bumping along like this!” said a
voice close to Peter, “and which of you to-morrow is the wind
going to send rolling down like a badly-sewn sack of potatoes?"
It was the baker, who stood there laughing. He had been
strolling out to refresh himself after his hot day’s work, and
had watched with amusement as he saw Peter come rolling over and
over in much the same way as the chair.
Peter was on his feet in a moment. He had received a fresh
shock. Without once looking behind him he began hurrying up the
slope again. He would have liked best to go home and creep into
bed, so as to hide himself, for he felt safest when there. But he
had left the goats up above, and Uncle had given him strict
injunctions to make haste back so that they might not be left
too long alone. And he stood more in awe of Uncle than any one,
and would not have dared to disobey him on any account. There was
no help for it, he had to go back, and Peter went on groaning and
limping. He could run no more, for the anguish of mind he had
been through, and the bumping and shaking he had received, were
beginning to tell upon him. And so with lagging steps and groans
he slowly made his way up the mountain.
Shortly after meeting Peter, Herr Sesemann passed the first hut,
and so was satisfied that he was on the right path. He continued
his climb with renewed courage, and at last, after a long and
exhausting walk, he came in sight of his goal. There, only a
little distance farther up, stood the grandfather’s home, with
the dark tops of the fir trees waving above its roof.
Herr Sesemann was delighted to have come to the last steep bit
of his journey, in another minute or two he would be with his
little daughter, and he pleased himself with the thought of her
surprise. But the company above had seen his approaching figure
and recognized who it was, and they were preparing something he
little expected as a surprise on their part.
As he stepped on to the space in front of the hut two figures
came towards him. One a tall girl with fair hair and pink cheeks,
leaning on Heidi, whose dark eyes were dancing with joy. Herr
Sesemann suddenly stopped, staring at the two children, and all
at once the tears started to his eyes. What memories arose in his
heart! Just so had Clara’s mother looked, the fair-haired girl
with the delicate pink-and-white complexion. Herr Sesemann did
not know if he was awake or dreaming.
“Don’t you know me, papa?” called Clara to him, her face beaming
with happiness. “Am I so altered since you saw me?”
Then Herr Sesemann ran to his child and clasped her in his arms.
“Yes, you are indeed altered! How is it possible? Is it true
what I see?” And the delighted father stepped back to look full
at her again, and to make sure that the picture would not vanish
before his eyes.
“Are you my little Clara, really my little Clara?” he kept on
saying, then he clasped her in his arms again, and again put her
away from him that he might look and make sure it was she who
stood before him.
And now grandmamma came up, anxious for a sight of her son’s
happy face.
“Well, what do you say now, dear son?” she exclaimed. “You have
given us a pleasant surprise, but it is nothing in comparison to
what we have prepared for you, you must confess,” and she gave
her son an affectionate kiss as she spoke. “But now,” she went
on, “you must come and pay your respects to Uncle, who is our
chief benefactor.”
“Yes, indeed, and with the little inmate of our own house, our
little Heidi, too,” said Herr Sesemann, shaking Heidi by the
hand. “Well? are you still well and happy in your mountain home?
but I need not ask, no Alpine rose could look more blooming. I
am glad, child, it is a pleasure to me to see you so.”
And Heidi looked up with equal pleasure into Herr Sesemann’s
kind face. How good he had always been to her! And that he should
find such happiness awaiting him up here on the mountain made her
heart beat with gladness.
Grandmamma now led her son to introduce him to Uncle, and while
the two men were shaking hands and Herr Sesemann was expressing
his heartfelt thanks and boundless astonishment to the old man,
grandmamma wandered round to the back to see the old fir trees
again.
Here another unexpected sight met her gaze, for there, under the
trees where the long branches had left a clear space on the
ground, stood a great bush of the most wonderful dark blue
gentians, as fresh and shining as if they were growing on the
spot. She clasped her hands, enraptured with their beauty.
“How exquisite! what a lovely sight!” she exclaimed. “Heidi,
dearest child, come here! Is it you who have prepared this
pleasure for me? It is perfectly wonderful!”
The children ran up.
“No, no, I did not put them there,” said Heidi, “but I know who
did.”
“They grow just like that on the mountain, grandmamma, only if
anything they look more beautiful still,” Clara put in; “but
guess who brought those down to-day,” and as she spoke she gave
such a pleased smile that the grandmother thought for a moment
the child herself must have gathered them. But that was hardly
possible.
At this moment a slight rustling was heard behind the fir trees.
It was Peter, who had just arrived. He had made a long round,
having seen from the distance who it was standing beside Uncle
in front of the hut, and he was trying to slip by unobserved. But
grandmamma had seen and recognized him, and suddenly the thought
struck her that it might be Peter who had brought the flowers
and that he was now trying to get away unseen, feeling shy about
it; but she could not let him go off like that, he must have some
little reward.
“Come along, boy; come here, do not be afraid,” she called to
him.
Peter stood still, petrified with fear. After all he had gone
through that day he felt he had no longer any power of
resistance left. All he could think was, “It’s all up with me
now.” Every hair of his head stood on end, and he stepped forth
from behind the fir trees, his face pale and distorted with
terror.
“Courage, boy,” said grandmamma in her effort to dispel his
shyness, “tell me now straight out without hesitation, was it
you who did it?”
Peter did not lift his eyes and therefore did not see at what
grandmamma was pointing. But he knew that Uncle was standing at
the corner of the hut, fixing him with his grey eyes, while
beside him stood the most terrible person that Peter could
conceive–the police-constable from Frankfurt. Quaking in every
limb, and with trembling lips he muttered a low, “Yes.”
“Well, and what is there dreadful about that?” said grandmamma.
“Because–because–it is all broken to pieces and no one can put
it together again.” Peter brought out his words with difficulty,
and his knees knocked together so that he could hardly stand.
Grandmamma went up to Uncle. “Is that poor boy a little out of
his mind?” she asked sympathisingly.
“Not in the least,” Uncle assured her, “it is only that he was
the wind that sent the chair rolling down the slope, and he is
expecting his well-deserved punishment.”
Grandmamma found this hard to believe, for in her opinion Peter
did not look an entirely bad boy, nor could he have any reason
for destroying such a necessary thing as the chair. But Uncle
had only given expression to the suspicion that he had from the
moment the accident happened. The angry looks which Peter had
from the beginning cast at Clara, and the other signs of his
dislike to what had been taking place on the mountain, had not
escaped Uncle’s eye. Putting two and two together he had come to
the right conclusion as to the cause of the disaster, and he
therefore spoke without hesitation when he accused Peter. The
lady broke into lively expostulations on hearing this.
“No, no, dear Uncle, we will not punish the poor boy any
further. One must be fair to him. Here are all these strangers
from Frankfurt who come and carry away Heidi, his one sole
possession, and a possession well worth having too, and he is
left to sit alone day after day for weeks, with nothing to do but
brood over his wrongs. No, no, let us be fair to him; his anger
got the upper hand and drove him an act of revenge–a foolish
one, I own, but then we all behave foolishly when we are angry."
And saying this she went back to Peter, who still stood
frightened and trembling. She sat down on the seat under the fir
trees and called him to her kindly,–
“Come here, boy, and stand in front of me, for I have something
to say to you. Leave off shaking and trembling, for I want you
to listen to me. You sent the chair rolling down the mountain so
that it was broken to pieces. That was a very wrong thing to do,
as you yourself knew very well at the time, and you also knew
that you deserved to be punished for it, and in order to escape
this you have been doing all you can to hide the truth from
everybody. But be sure of this, Peter: that those who do wrong
make a mistake when they think no one knows anything about it.
For God sees and hears everything, and when the wicked doer
tries to hide what he has done, then God wakes up a little
watchman that He places inside us all when we are born and who
sleeps on quietly till we do something wrong. And the little
watchman has a small goad in his hand, And when he wakes up he
keeps on pricking us with it, so that we have not a moment’s
peace. And the watchman torments us still further, for he keeps
on calling out, ’Now you will be found out! Now they will drag
you off to punishment!’ And so we pass our life in fear and
trouble, and never know a moment’s happiness or peace. Have you
not felt something like that lately, Peter?”
Peter gave a contrite nod of the head, as one who knew all about
it, for grandmamma had described his own feelings exactly.
“And you calculated wrongly also in another way,” continued
grandmamma, “for you see the harm you intended has turned out
for the best for those you wished to hurt. As Clara had no chair
to go in and yet wanted so much to see the flowers, she made the
effort to walk, and every day since she has been walking better
and better, and if she remains up here she will in time be able
to go up the mountain every day, much oftener than she would
have done in her chair. So you see, Peter, God is able to bring
good out of evil for those whom you meant to injure, and you who
did the evil were left to suffer the unhappy consequences of it.
Do you thoroughly understand all I have said to you, Peter? If
so, do not forget my words, and whenever you feel inclined to do
anything wrong, think of the little watchman inside you with his
goad and his disagreeable voice. Will you remember all this?”
“Yes, I will,” answered Peter, still very subdued, for he did
not yet know how the matter was going to end, as the police
constable was still standing with the Uncle.
“That’s right, and now the thing is over and done for,” said
grandmamma. “But I should like you to have something for a
pleasant reminder of the visitors from Frankfurt. Can you tell
me anything that you have wished very much to have? What would
you like best as a present?”
Peter lifted his head at this, and stared open-eyed at
grandmamma. Up to the last minute he had been expecting
something dreadful to happen, and now he might have anything that
he wanted. His mind seemed all of a whirl.
“I mean what I say,” went on grandmamma. “You shall choose what
you would like to have as a remembrance from the Frankfurt
visitors, and as a token that they will not think any more of
the wrong thing you did. Now do you understand me, boy?”
The fact began at last to dawn upon Peter’s mind that he had no
further punishment to fear, and that the kind lady sitting in
front of him had delivered him from the police constable. He
suddenly felt as if the weight of a mountain had fallen off him.
He had also by this time awakened to the further conviction that
it was better to make a full confession at once of anything he
had done wrong or had left undone, and so he said, “And I lost
the paper, too.”
Grandmamma had to consider a moment what he meant, but soon
recalled his connection with her telegram, and answered kindly,–
“You are a good boy to tell me! Never conceal anything you have
done wrong, and then all will come right again. And now what
would you like me to give you?”
Peter grew almost giddy with the thought that he could have
anything in the world that he wished for. He had a vision of the
yearly fair at Mayenfeld with the glittering stalls and all the
lovely things that he had stood gazing at for hours, without a
hope of ever possessing one of them, for Peter’s purse never
held more than a halfpenny, and all these fascinating objects
cost double that amount. There were the pretty little red
whistles that he could use to call his goats, and the splendid
knives with rounded handles, known as toad-strikers, with which
one could do such famous work among the hazel bushes.
Peter remained pondering; he was trying to think which of these
two desirable objects he should best like to have, and he found
it difficult to decide. Then a bright thought occurred to him;
he would then be able to think over the matter between now and
next year’s fair.
“A penny,” answered Peter, who was no longer in doubt.
Grandmamma could not help laughing. “That is not an extravagant
request. Come here then!” and she pulled out her purse and put
four bright round shillings in his hand and, then laid some
pennies on top of it. “We will settle our accounts at once,” she
continued, “and I will explain them to you. I have given you as
many pennies as there are weeks in the year, and so every Sunday
throughout the year you can take out a penny to spend.”
“As long as I live?” said Peter quite innocently.
Grandmamma laughed more still at this, and the men hearing her,
paused in their talk to listen to what was going on.
“Yes, boy, you shall have it all your life–I will put it down
in my will. Do you hear, my son? and you are to put it down in
yours as well: a penny a week to Peter as long as he lives.”
Herr Sesemann nodded his assent and joined in the laughter.
Peter looked again at the present in his hand to make sure he
was not dreaming, and then said, “Thank God!”
And he went off running and leaping with more even than his
usual agility, and this time managed to keep his feet, for it was
not fear, but joy such as he had never known before in his life,
that now sent him flying up the mountain. All trouble and
trembling had disappeared, and he was to have a penny every week
for life.
As later, after dinner, the party were sitting together
chatting, Clara drew her father a little aside, and said with an
eagerness that had been unknown to the little tired invalid,–
“O papa, if you only knew all that grandfather has done for me
from day to day! I cannot reckon his kindnesses, but I shall
never forget them as long as I live! And I keep on thinking what
I could do for him, or what present I could make him that would
give him half as much pleasure as he has given me.”
“That is just what I wish most myself, Clara,” replied her
father, whose face grew happier each time he looked at his
little daughter. “I have been also thinking how we can best show
our gratitude to our good benefactor.”
Herr Sesemann now went over to where Uncle and grandmamma were
engaged in lively conversation. Uncle stood up as he approached,
and Herr Sesemann, taking him by the hand said,–
“Dear friend, let us exchange a few words with one another. You
will believe me when I tell you that I have known no real
happiness for years past. What worth to me were money and
property when they were unable to make my poor child well and
happy? With the help of God you have made her whole and strong,
and you have given new life not only to her but to me. Tell me
now, in what way can I show my gratitude to you? I can never
repay all you have done, but whatever is in my power to do is at
your service. Speak, friend, and tell me what I can do?”
Uncle had listened to him quietly, with a smile of pleasure on
his face as he looked at the happy father.
“Herr Sesemann,” he replied in his dignified way, “believe me
that I too have my share in the joy of your daughter’s recovery,
and my trouble is well repaid by it. I thank you heartily for
all you have said, but I have need of nothing; I have enough for
myself and the child as long as I live. One wish alone I have,
and if that could be satisfied I should have no further care in
life.”
“Speak, dear friend, and tell me what it is,” said Herr Sesemann
entreatingly.
“I am growing old,” Uncle went on, “and shall not be here much
longer. I have nothing to leave the child when I die, and she
has no relations, except one person who will always like to make
what profit out of her she can. If you could promise me that
Heidi shall never have to go and earn her living among strangers,
then you would richly reward me for all I have done for your
child.”
“There could never be any question of such a thing as that, my
dear friend,” said Herr Sesemann quickly. “I look upon the child
as our own. Ask my mother, my daughter; you may be sure that
they will never allow the child to be left in any one else’s
care! But if it will make you happier I give you here my hand
upon it. I promise you: Heidi shall never have to go and earn her
living among strangers; I will make provision against this both
during my life and after. But now I have something else to say.
Independent of her circumstances, the child is totally unfitted
to live a life away from home; we found out that when she was
with us. But she has made friends, and among them I know one who
is at this moment in Frankfurt; he is winding up his affairs
there, that he may be free to go where he likes and take his
rest. I am speaking of my friend, the doctor, who came over here
in the autumn and who, having well considered your advice,
intends to settle in this neighborhood, for he has never felt so
well and happy anywhere as in the company of you and Heidi. So
you see the child will henceforth have two protectors near her–
and may they both live long to share the task!”
“God grant it indeed may be so!” added grandmamma, shaking
Uncle’s hand warmly as she spoke, to show how sincerely she
echoed her son’s wish. Then putting her arm round Heidi, who was
standing near, she drew the child to her.
“And I have a question to ask you too, dear Heidi. Tell me if
there is anything you particularly wish for.”
“Yes, there is,” answered Heidi promptly, looking up delightedly
at grandmamma.
“Then tell me at once, dear, what it is.”
“I want to have the bed I slept in at Frankfurt with the high
pillows and the thick coverlid, and then grandmother will not
have to lie with her head down hill and hardly able to breathe,
and she will be warm enough under the coverlid not to have to
wear her shawl in bed to prevent her freezing to death.”
In her eagerness to obtain what she had set her heart upon Heidi
hardly gave herself time to get out all she had to say, and did
not pause for breath till she reached the end of her sentence.
“Dearest child,” answered grandmamma, moved by Heidi’s speech,
“what is this you tell me of grandmother! You are right to
remind me. In the midst of our own happiness we forget too often
that which we ought to remember before all things. When God has
shown us some special mercy we should think at once of those who
are denied so many things. I will telegraph to Frankfurt at once!
Fraulein Rottenmeier shall pack up the bed this very day, and it
will be here in two days’ time. God willing, grandmother shall
soon be sleeping comfortably upon it.”
Heidi skipped round grandmamma in her glee, and then stopping
all of a sudden, said quickly, “I must make haste down and tell
grandmother, and she will be in trouble too at my not having
been to see her for such a long time.” For she felt she could not
wait another moment before carrying the good news down to
grandmother, and, moreover, the recollection came to her of the
distress the old woman was in when she last saw her.
“No, no, Heidi, what can you be thinking of,” said her
grandfather reprovingly. “You can’t be running backwards and
forwards like that when you have visitors.”
But grandmamma interfered on Heidi’s behalf. “The child is not
so far wrong, Uncle,” she said, “and poor grandmother has too
long been deprived of Heidi for our sakes. Let us all go down to
her together. I believe my horse is waiting for me and I can ride
down from there, and as soon as I get to Dorfli the message
shall be sent off. What do you think of my plan, son?”
Herr Sesemann had not yet had time to speak of his travelling
plans, so he begged his mother to wait a few moments that he
might tell her what he proposed doing.
Herr Sesemann had been arranging that he and his mother should
make a little tour in Switzerland, first ascertaining if Clara
was in a fit state to go some part of the way with them. But now
he would have the full enjoyment of his daughter’s company, and
that being so he did not want to miss any of these beautiful
days of later summer, but to start at once on the journey that he
now looked forward to with such additional pleasure. And so he
proposed that they should spend the night in Dorfli and that
next day he should come and fetch Clara, then they would all
three go down to Ragatz and make that their starting point.
Clara was rather upset at first at the thought of saying good-
bye like this to the mountain; she could not help being pleased,
however, at the prospect of the journey, and no time was allowed
her to give way to lamentation.
Grandmamma had already taken Heidi by the hand, preparatory to
leading the way, when she suddenly turned. “But what is to
become of Clara?” she asked, remembering all at once that the
child could not yet take so long a walk. She gave a nod of
satisfaction as she saw that Uncle had already taken Clara up in
his arms and was following her with sturdy strides. Herr Sesemann
brought up the rear, and so they all started down the mountain.
Heidi kept jumping for joy as she and grandmamma walked along
side by side, and grandmamma asked all about grandmother, how
she lived, and what she did, especially in the winter when it was
so cold. And Heidi gave her a minute account of everything, for
she knew all that went on at grandmother’s, and told her how
grandmother sat crouching in her corner and trembling with cold.
She was able to give her exact particulars of what grandmother
had and had not to eat. Grandmamma listened with interest and
sympathy until they came to Grandmother’s. Brigitta was just
hanging out Peter’s second shirt in the sun, so that he might
have it ready to put on when he had worn the other long enough.
As soon as she saw the company approaching she rushed indoors.
“The whole party of them are just going past, mother, evidently
all returning home again,” she informed the old woman. “Uncle is
with them, carrying the sick child.”
“Alas, is it really to be so then?” sighed the grandmother. “And
you saw Heidi with them? Then they are taking her away. If only
she could come and put her hand in mine again! If I could but
hear her voice once more!”
At this moment the door flew open and Heidi sprang across to the
corner and threw her arms round grandmother.
“Grandmother! grandmother! my bed is to be sent from Frankfurt
with all the three pillows and the thick coverlid; grandmamma
says it will be here in two days.” Heidi could not get out her
words quickly enough, for she was impatient to see grandmother’s
great joy at the news. The latter smiled, but said a little
sadly,–
“She must indeed be a good kind lady, and I ought to be glad to
think she is taking you with her, but I shall not outlive it
long.”
“What is this I hear? Who has been telling my good grandmother
such tales?” exclaimed a kindly voice, and grandmother felt her
hand taken and warmly pressed, for grandmamma had followed Heidi
in and heard all that was said. “No, no, there is no thought of
such a thing! Heidi is going to stay with you and make you
happy. We want to see her again, but we shall come to her. We
hope to pay a visit to the Alm every year, for we have good cause
to offer up especial thanks to God upon this spot where so great
a miracle has been wrought upon our child.”
And now grandmother’s face was lighted up with genuine
happiness, and she pressed Frau Sesemann’s hand over and over
again, unable to speak her thanks, while two large tears of joy
rolled down her aged cheeks. And Heidi saw the glad change come
over grandmother’s face, and she too now was entirely happy.
She clung to the old woman, saying, “Hasn’t it all come about,
grandmother, just like the hymn I read to you last time? Isn’t
the bed from Frankfurt sent to make you well?”
“Yes, Heidi, and many, many other good things too, which God has
sent me,” said the grandmother, deeply moved. “I did not think
it possible that there were so many kind people, ready to trouble
themselves about a poor old woman and to do so much for her.
Nothing strengthens our belief in a kind heavenly Father who
never forgets even the least of His creatures so much as to know
that there are such people, full of goodness and pity for a poor
useless creature such as I am.”
“My good grandmother,” said Frau Sesemann, interrupting her, “we
are all equally poor and helpless in the eyes of God, and all
have equal need that He should not forget us. But now we must
say good-bye, but only till we meet again, for when we pay our
next year’s visit to the Alm you will be the first person we
shall come and see; meanwhile we shall not forget you.” And Frau
Sesemann took grandmother’s hand again and shook it in farewell.
But grandmother would not let her off even then without more
words of gratitude, and without calling down on her benefactress
and all belonging to her every blessing that God had to bestow.
At last Herr Sesemann and his mother were able to continue their
journey downwards, while Uncle carried Clara back home, with
Heidi beside him, so full of joy of what was coming for
grandmother that every step was a jump.
But there were many tears shed the following morning by the
departing Clara, who wept to say good-bye to the beautiful
mountain home where she had been happier than ever in her life
before. Heidi did her best to comfort her. “Summer will be here
again in no time,” she said, “and then you will come again, and
it will be nicer still, for you will be able to walk about from
the beginning. We can then go out every day with the goats up to
where the flowers grow, and enjoy ourselves from the moment you
arrive.”
Herr Sesemann had come as arranged to fetch his little daughter
away, and was just now standing and talking with Uncle, for they
had much to say to one another. Clara felt somewhat consoled by
Heidi’s words, and wiped away her tears.
“Be sure you say good-bye for me to Peter and the goats, and
especially to Little Swan. I wish I could give Little Swan a
present, for she has helped so much to make me strong.”
“Well, you can if you like,” replied Heidi, “send her a little
salt; you know how she likes to lick some out of grandfather’s
hand when she comes home at night.”
Clara was delighted at this idea. “Oh, then I shall send a
hundred pounds of salt from Frankfurt, for I want her to have
something as a remembrance of me.”
Herr Sesemann now beckoned to the children as it was time to be
off. Grandmamma’s white horse had been brought up for Clara, as
she was no longer obliged to be carried in a chair.
Heidi ran to the far edge of the slope and continued to wave her
hand to Clara until the last glimpse of horse and rider had
disappeared.
And now the bed has arrived, and grandmother is sleeping so
soundly all night that she is sure to grow stronger.
Grandmamma, moreover, has not forgotten how cold the winter is
on the mountain. She has sent a large parcel of warm clothing of
every description, so that grandmother can wrap herself round
and round, and will certainly not tremble with cold now as she
sits in her corner.
There is a great deal of building going on at Dorfli. The doctor
has arrived, and, for the present, is occupying his old
quarters. His friends have advised him to buy the old house that
Uncle and Heidi live in during the winter, which had evidently,
judging from the height of the rooms and the magnificent stove
with its artistically-painted tiles, been a fine gentleman’s
place at one time. The doctor is having this part of the old
house rebuilt for himself, the other part being repaired for
Uncle and Heidi, for the doctor is aware that Uncle is a man of
independent spirit, who likes to have a house to himself. Quite
at the back a warm and well-walled stall is being put up for the
two goats, and there they will pass their winter in comfort.
The doctor and Uncle are becoming better friends every day, and
as they walk about the new buildings to see how they are getting
on, their thoughts continually turn to Heidi, for the chief
pleasure to each in connection with the house is that they will
have the light-hearted little child with them there.
“Dear friend,” said the doctor on one of these occasions as they
were standing together, “you will see this matter in the same
light as I do, I am sure. I share your happiness in the child as
if, next to you, I was the one to whom she most closely
belonged, but I wish also to share all responsibilities,
concerning her and to do my best for the child. I shall then feel
I have my rights in her, and shall look forward to her being with
me and caring for me in my old age, which is the one great wish
of my heart. She will have the same claims upon me as if she were
my own child, and I shall provide for her as such, and so we
shall be able to leave her without anxiety when the day comes
that you and I must go.”
Uncle did not speak, but he clasped the doctor’s hand in his,
and his good friend could read in the old man’s eyes how greatly
moved he was and how glad and grateful he felt.
Heidi and Peter were at this moment sitting with grandmother,
and the one had so much to relate, and the others to listen to,
that they all three got closer and closer to one another, hardly
able to breathe in their eagerness not to miss a word.
And how much there was to tell of all the events that had taken
place that last summer, for they had not had many opportunities
of meeting since then.
And it was difficult to say which of the three looked the
happiest at being together again, and at the recollection of all
the wonderful things that had happened. Mother Brigitta’s face
was perhaps the happiest of all, as now, with the help of
explanation she was able to understand for the first time the
history of Peter’s weekly penny for life.
Then at last the grandmother spoke, “Heidi, read me one of the
hymns! I can feel I can do nothing for the remainder of my life
but thank the Father in Heaven for all the mercies he has shown
us!”
 

This eBook of “Heidi” by Johanna Spyri belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Heidi (Children's Classics)By Johanna SpyriAt Amazon
