


When Heidi opened her eyes on her first morning in Frankfurt she
could not think where she was. Then she rubbed them and looked
about her. She was sitting up in a high white bed, on one side
of a large, wide room, into which the light was falling through
very, very long white curtains; near the window stood two chairs
covered with large flowers, and then came a sofa with the same
flowers, in front of which was a round table; in the corner was
a washstand, with things upon it that Heidi had never seen in her
life before. But now all at once she remembered that she was in
Frankfurt; everything that had happened the day before came back
to her, and finally she recalled clearly the instructions that
had been given her by the lady-housekeeper, as far as she had
heard them. Heidi jumped out of bed and dressed herself; then
she ran first to one window and then another; she wanted to see
the sky and country outside; she felt like a bird in a cage
behind those great curtains. But they were too heavy for her to
put aside, so she crept underneath them to get to the window. But
these again were so high that she could only just get her head
above the sill to peer out. Even then she could not see what she
longed for. In vain she went first to one and then the other of
the windows–she could see nothing but walls and windows and
again walls and windows. Heidi felt quite frightened. It was
still early, for Heidi was accustomed to get up early and run
out at once to see how everything was looking, if the sky was
blue and if the sun was already above the mountains, or if the
fir trees were waving and the flowers had opened their eyes. As a
bird, when it first finds itself in its bright new cage, darts
hither and thither, trying the bars in turn to see if it cannot
get through them and fly again into the open, so Heidi continued
to run backwards and forwards, trying to open first one and then
the other of the windows, for she felt she could not bear to see
nothing but walls and windows, and somewhere outside there must
be the green grass, and the last unmelted snows on the mountain
slopes, which Heidi so longed to see. But the windows remained
immovable, try what Heidi would to open them, even endeavoring
to push her little fingers under them to lift them up; but it was
all no use. When after a while Heidi saw that her efforts were
fruitless, she gave up trying, and began to think whether she
would not go out and round the house till she came to the grass,
but then she remembered that the night before she had only seen
stones in front of the house. At that moment a knock came to the
door, and immediately after Tinette put her head inside and
said, “Breakfast is ready.” Heidi had no idea what an invitation
so worded meant, and Tinette’s face did not encourage any
questioning on Heidi’s part, but rather the reverse. Heidi was
sharp enough to read its expression, and acted accordingly. So
she drew the little stool out from under the table, put it in
the corner and sat down upon it, and there silently awaited what
would happen next. Shortly after, with a good deal of rustling
and bustling Fraulein Rottenmeier appeared, who again seemed
very much put out and called to Heidi, “What is the matter with
you, Adelheid? Don’t you understand what breakfast is? Come along
at once!”
Heidi had no difficulty in understanding now and followed at
once. Clara had been some time at the breakfast table and she
gave Heidi a kindly greeting, her face looking considerably more
cheerful than usual, for she looked forward to all kinds of new
things happening again that day. Breakfast passed off quietly;
Heidi ate her bread and butter in a perfectly correct manner,
and when the meal was over and Clara wheeled back into the study,
Fraulein Rottenmeier told her to follow and remain with Clara
until the tutor should arrive and lessons begin.
As soon as the children were alone again, Heidi asked, “How can
one see out from here, and look right down on to the ground?”
“You must open the window and look out,” replied Clara amused.
“But the windows won’t open,” responded Heidi sadly.
“Yes, they will,” Clara assured her. “You cannot open them, nor
I either, but when you see Sebastian you can ask him to open
one.”
It was a great relief to Heidi to know that the windows could be
opened and that one could look out, for she still felt as if she
was shut up in prison. Clara now began to ask her questions
about her home, and Heidi was delighted to tell her all about the
mountain and the goats, and the flowery meadows which were so
dear to her.
Meanwhile her tutor had arrived; Fraulein Rottenmeier, however,
did not bring him straight into the study but drew him first
aside into the dining-room, where she poured forth her troubles
and explained to him the awkward position in which she was
placed, and how it had all come about. It appeared that she had
written some time back to Herr Sesemann to tell him that his
daughter very much wished to have a companion, and had added how
desirable she thought it herself, as it would be a spur to Clara
at her lessons and an amusement for her in her playtime.
Fraulein Rottenmeier had privately wished for this arrangement on
her own behalf, as it would relieve her from having always to
entertain the sick girl herself, which she felt at times was too
much for her. The father had answered that he was quite willing
to let his daughter have a companion, provided she was treated in
every way like his own child, as he would not have any child
tormented or put upon, “which was a very unnecessary remark,” put
in Fraulein Rottenmeier, “for who wants to torment children!” But
now she went on to explain how dreadfully she had been taken in
about the child, and related all the unimaginable things of which
she had already been guilty, so that not only would he have to
begin with teaching her the A B C, but would have to start with
the most rudimentary instruction as regarded everything to do
with daily life. She could see only one way out of this
disastrous state of affairs, and that was for the tutor to
declare that it was impossible for the two to learn together
without detriment to Clara, who was so far ahead of the other;
that would be a valid excuse for getting rid of the child, and
Herr Sesemann would be sure to agree to the child being sent home
again, but she dared not do this without his order, since he was
aware that by this time the companion had arrived. But the tutor
was a cautious man and not inclined to take a partial view of
matters. He tried to calm Fraulein Rottenmeier, and gave it as
his opinion that if the little girl was backward in some things
she was probably advanced in others, and a little regular
teaching would soon set the balance right. When Fraulein
Rottenmeier saw that he was not ready to support her, and
evidently quite ready to undertake teaching the alphabet, she
opened the study door, which she quickly shut again as soon as he
had gone through, remaining on the other side herself, for she
had a perfect horror of the A B C. She walked up and down the
dining-room, thinking over in her own mind how the servants were
to be told to address Adelaide. The father had written that she
was to be treated exactly like his own daughter, and this would
especially refer, she imagined, to the servants. She was not
allowed, however, a very long interval of time for consideration,
for suddenly the sound of a frightful crash was heard in the
study, followed by frantic cries for Sebastian. She rushed into
the room. There on the floor lay in a confused heap, books,
exercise-books, inkstand, and other articles with the table-cloth
on the top, while from beneath them a dark stream of ink was
flowing all across the floor. Heidi had disappeared.
“Here’s a state of things!” exclaimed Fraulein Rottenmeier,
wringing her hands. “Table-cloth, books, work-basket, everything
lying in the ink! It was that unfortunate child, I suppose!”
The tutor was standing looking down at the havoc in distress;
there was certainly only one view to be taken of such a matter
as this and that an unfavorable one. Clara meanwhile appeared to
find pleasure in such an unusual event and in watching the
results. “Yes, Heidi did it,” she explained, “but quite by
accident; she must on no account be punished; she jumped up in
such violent haste to get away that she dragged the tablecloth
along with her, and so everything went over. There were a number
of vehicles passing, that is why she rushed off like that;
perhaps she has never seen a carriage.”
“Is it not as I said? She has not the smallest notion about
anything! not the slightest idea that she ought to sit still and
listen while her lessons are going on. But where is the child
who has caused all this trouble? Surely she has not run away!
What would Herr Sesemann say to me?” She ran out of the room and
down the stairs. There, at the bottom, standing in the open door-
way, was Heidi, looking in amazement up and down the street.
“What are you doing? What are you thinking of to run away like
that?” called Fraulein Rottenmeier.
“I heard the sound of the fir trees, but I cannot see where they
are, and now I cannot hear them any more,” answered Heidi,
looking disappointedly in the direction whence the noise of the
passing carriages had reached her, and which to Heidi had seemed
like the blowing of the south wind in the trees, so that in
great joy of heart she had rushed out to look at them.
“Fir trees! do you suppose we are in a wood? What ridiculous
ideas are these? Come upstairs and see the mischief you have
done!”
Heidi turned and followed Fraulein Rottenmeier upstairs; she was
quite astonished to see the disaster she had caused, for in her
joy and haste to get to the fir trees she had been unaware of
having dragged everything after her.
“I excuse you doing this as it is the first time, but do not let
me know you doing it a second time,” said Fraulein Rottenmeier,
pointing to the floor. “During your lesson time you are to sit
still and attend. If you cannot do this I shall have to tie you
to your chair. Do you understand?”
“Yes,” replied Heidi, “but I will certainly not move again,” for
now she understood that it was a rule to sit still while she was
being taught.
Sebastian and Tinette were now sent for to clear up the broken
articles and put things in order again; the tutor said good-
morning and left, as it was impossible to do any more lessons
that day; there had been certainly no time for gaping this
morning.
Clara had to rest for a certain time during the afternoon, and
during this interval, as Fraulein Rottenmeier informed Heidi,
the latter might amuse herself as she liked. When Clara had been
placed on her couch after dinner, and the lady-housekeeper had
retired to her room, Heidi knew that her time had come to choose
her own occupation. It was just what she was longing for, as
there was something she had made up her mind to do; but she
would require some help for its accomplishment, and in view of
this she took her stand in the hall in front of the dining-room
door in order to intercept the person she wanted. In a few
minutes up came Sebastian from the kitchen with a tray of silver
tea-things, which he had to put away in the dining-room cupboard.
As he reached the top stairs Heidi went up to him and addressed
him in the formal manner she had been ordered to use by Fraulein
Rottenmeier.
Sebastian looked surprised and said somewhat curtly, “What is it
you want, miss?”
“I only wished to ask you something, but it is nothing bad like
this morning,” said Heidi, anxious to conciliate him, for she
saw that Sebastian was rather in a cross temper, and quite
thought that it was on account of the ink she had spilt on the
floor.
“Indeed, and why, I should first like to know, do you address me
like that?” replied Sebastian, evidently still put out.
“Fraulein Rottenmeier told me always to speak to you like that,"
said Heidi.
Then Sebastian laughed, which very much astonished Heidi, who
had seen nothing amusing in the conversation, but Sebastian, now
he understood that the child was only obeying orders, added in a
friendly voice, “What is it then that miss wants?”
It was now Heidi’s turn to be a little put out, and she said,
“My name is not miss, it is Heidi.”
“Quite so, but the same lady has ordered me to call you miss,"
explained Sebastian.
“Has she? oh, then I must be called so,” said Heidi
submissively, for she had already noticed that whatever Fraulein
Rottenmeier said was law. “Then now I have three names,” she
added with a sigh.
“What was it little miss wished to ask?” said Sebastian as he
went on into the dining-room to put away his silver.
“How can a window be opened?”
“Why, like that!” and Sebastian flung up one of the large
windows.
Heidi ran to it, but she was not tall enough to see out, for her
head only reached the sill.
“There, now miss can look out and see what is going on below,"
said Sebastian as he brought her a high wooden stool to stand
on.
Heidi climbed up, and at last, as she thought, was going to see
what she had been longing for. But she drew back her head with a
look of great disappointment on her face.
“Why, there is nothing outside but the stony streets,” she said
mournfully; “but if I went right round to the other side of the
house what should I see there, Sebastian?”
“Nothing but what you see here,” he told her.
“Then where can I go to see right away over the whole valley?”
“You would have to climb to the top of a high tower, a church
tower, like that one over there with the gold ball above it.
From there you can see right away ever so far.”
Heidi climbed down quickly from her stool, ran to the door, down
the steps and out into the street. Things were not, however,
quite so easy as she thought. Looking from the window the tower
had appeared so close that she imagined she had only to run over
the road to reach it. But now, although she ran along the whole
length of the street, she still did not get any nearer to it,
and indeed soon lost sight of it altogether; she turned down
another street, and went on and on, but still no tower. She
passed a great many people, but they all seemed in such a hurry
that Heidi thought they had not time to tell her which way to go.
Then suddenly at one of the street corners she saw a boy
standing, carrying a hand-organ on his back and a funny-looking
animal on his arm. Heidi ran up to him and said, “Where is the
tower with the gold ball on the top?”
“I don’t know,” was the answer.
“Who can I ask to show me?” she asked again.
“I don’t know.”
“Do you know any other church with a high tower?”
“Yes, I know one.”
“Come then and show it me.”
“Show me first what you will give me for it,” and the boy held
out his hand as he spoke. Heidi searched about in her pockets
and presently drew out a card on which was painted a garland of
beautiful red roses; she looked at it first for a moment or two,
for she felt rather sorry to part with it; Clara had only that
morning made her a present of it–but then, to look down into
the valley and see all the lovely green slopes! “There,” said
Heidi, holding out the card, “would you like to have that?”
The boy drew back his hand and shook his head.
“What would you like then?” asked Heidi, not sorry to put the
card back in her pocket.
“Money.”
“I have none, but Clara has; I am sure she will give me some;
how much do you want?”
“Twopence.”
“Come along then.”
They started off together along the street, and on the way Heidi
asked her companion what he was carrying on his back; it was a
hand-organ, he told her, which played beautiful music when he
turned the handle. All at once they found themselves in front of
an old church with a high tower; the boy stood still, and said,
“There it is.”
“But how shall I get inside?” asked Heidi, looking at the fast
closed doors.
“I don’t know,” was the answer.
“Do you think that I can ring as they do for Sebastian?”
“I don’t know.”
Heidi had by this time caught sight of a bell in the wall which
she now pulled with all her might. “If I go up you must stay
down here, for I do not know the way back, and you will have to
show me.”
“What will you give me then for that?”
“What do you want me to give you?”
“Another twopence.”
They heard the key turning inside, and then some one pulled open
the heavy creaking door; an old man came out and at first looked
with surprise and then in anger at the children, as he began
scolding them: “What do you mean by ringing me down like this?
Can’t you read what is written over the bell, ’For those who
wish to go up the tower’?”
The boy said nothing but pointed his finger at Heidi. The latter
answered, “But I do want to go up the tower.”
“What do you want up there?” said the old man. “Has somebody
sent you?”
“No,” replied Heidi, “I only wanted to go up that I might look
down.”
“Get along home with you and don’t try this trick on me again,
or you may not come off so easily a second time,” and with that
he turned and was about to shut the door. But Heidi took hold of
his coat and said beseechingly, “Let me go up, just once.”
He looked around, and his mood changed as he saw her pleading
eyes; he took hold of her hand and said kindly, “Well, if you
really wish it so much, I will take you.”
The boy sat down on the church steps to show that he was content
to wait where he was.
Hand in hand with the old man Heidi went up the many steps of
the tower; they became smaller and smaller as they neared the
top, and at last came one very narrow one, and there they were at
the end of their climb. The old man lifted Heidi up that she
might look out of the open window.
“There, now you can look down,” he said.
Heidi saw beneath her a sea of roofs, towers, and chimney-pots;
she quickly drew back her head and said in a sad, disappointed
voice, “It is not at all what I thought.”
“You see now, a child like you does not understand anything
about a view! Come along down and don’t go ringing at my bell
again!”
He lifted her down and went on before her down the narrow
stairway. To the left of the turn where it grew wider stood the
door of the tower-keeper’s room, and the landing ran out beside
it to the edge of the steep slanting roof. At the far end of
this was a large basket, in front of which sat a big grey cat,
that snarled as it saw them, for she wished to warn the passers-
by that they were not to meddle with her family. Heidi stood
still and looked at her in astonishment, for she had never seen
such a monster cat before; there were whole armies of mice,
however, in the old tower, so the cat had no difficulty in
catching half a dozen for her dinner every day. The old man
seeing Heidi so struck with admiration said, “She will not hurt
you while I am near; come, you can have a peep at the kittens.”
Heidi went up to the basket and broke out into expressions of
delight.
“Oh, the sweet little things! the darling kittens,” she kept on
saying, as she jumped from side to side of the basket so as, not
to lose any of the droll gambols of the seven or eight little
kittens that were scrambling and rolling and falling over one
another.
“Would you like to have one?” said the old man, who enjoyed
watching the child’s pleasure.
“For myself to keep?” said Heidi excitedly, who could hardly
believe such happiness was to be hers.
“Yes, of course, more than one if you like–in short, you can
take away the whole lot if you have room for them,” for the old
man was only too glad to think he could get rid of his kittens
without more trouble.
Heidi could hardly contain herself for joy. There would be
plenty of room for them in the large house, and then how
astonished and delighted Clara would be when she saw the sweet
little kittens.
“But how can I take them with me?” asked Heidi, and was going
quickly to see how many she could carry away in her hands, when
the old cat sprang at her so fiercely that she shrank back in
fear.
“I will take them for you if you will tell me where,” said the
old man, stroking the cat to quiet her, for she was an old
friend of his that had lived with him in the tower for many
years.
“To Herr Sesemann’s, the big house where there is a gold dog’s
head on the door, with a ring in its mouth,” explained Heidi.
Such full directions as these were not really needed by the old
man, who had had charge of the tower for many a long year and
knew every house far and near, and moreover Sebastian was an
acquaintance of his.
“I know the house,” he said, “but when shall I bring them, and
who shall I ask for?–you are not one of the family, I am sure.”
“No, but Clara will be so delighted when I take her the
kittens.”
The old man wished now to go downstairs, but Heidi did not know
how to tear herself away from the amusing spectacle.
“If I could just take one or two away with me! one for myself
and one for Clara, may I?”
“Well, wait a moment,” said the man, and he drew the cat
cautiously away into his room, and leaving her by a bowl of food
came out again and shut the door. “Now take two of them.”
Heidi’s eyes shone with delight. She picked up a white kitten
and another striped white and yellow, and put one in the right,
the other in the left pocket. Then she went downstairs. The boy
was still sitting outside on the steps, and as the old man shut
the door of the church behind them, she said, “Which is our way
to Herr Sesemann’s house?”
“I don’t know,” was the answer.
Heidi began a description of the front door and the steps and
the windows, but the boy only shook his head, and was not any the
wiser.
“Well, look here,” continued Heidi, “from one window you can see
a very, very large grey house, and the roof runs like this–"
and Heidi drew a zigzag line in the air with her forefinger.
With this the boy jumped up, he was evidently in the habit of
guiding himself by similar landmarks. He ran straight off with
Heidi after him, and in a very short time they had reached the
door with the large dog’s head for the knocker. Heidi rang the
bell. Sebastian opened it quickly, and when he saw it was Heidi,
“Make haste! make haste,” he cried in a hurried voice.
Heidi sprang hastily in and Sebastian shut the door after her,
leaving the boy, whom he had not noticed, standing in wonder on
the steps.
“Make haste, little miss,” said Sebastian again; “go straight
into the dining-room, they are already at table; Fraulein
Rottenmeier looks like a loaded cannon. What could make the
little miss run off like that?”
Heidi walked into the room. The lady housekeeper did not look
up, Clara did not speak; there was an uncomfortable silence.
Sebastian pushed her chair up for her, and when she was seated
Fraulein Rottenmeier, with a severe countenance, sternly and
solemnly addressed her: “I will speak with you afterwards,
Adelheid, only this much will I now say, that you behaved in a
most unmannerly and reprehensible way by running out of the
house as you did, without asking permission, without any one
knowing a word about it; and then to go wandering about till this
hour; I never heard of such behavior before.”
“Miau!” came the answer back.
This was too much for the lady’s temper; with raised voice she
exclaimed, “You dare, Adelheid, after your bad behavior, to
answer me as if it were a joke?”
“I did not–” began Heidi–"Miau! miau!”
Sebastian almost dropped his dish and rushed out of the room.
“That will do,” Fraulein Rottenmeier tried to say, but her voice
was almost stifled with anger. “Get up and leave the room.”
Heidi stood up frightened, and again made an attempt to explain.
“I really did not–” “Miau! miau! miau!”
“But, Heidi,” now put in Clara, “when you see that it makes
Fraulein Rottenmeier angry, why do you keep on saying miau?”
“It isn’t I, it’s the kittens,” Heidi was at last given time to
say.
“How! what! kittens!” shrieked Fraulein Rottenmeier. “Sebastian!
Tinette! Find the horrid little things! take them away!” And she
rose and fled into the study and locked the door, so as to make
sure that she was safe from the kittens, which to her were the
most horrible things in creation.
Sebastian was obliged to wait a few minutes outside the door to
get over his laughter before he went into the room again. He
had, while serving Heidi, caught sight of a little kitten’s head
peeping out of her pocket, and guessing the scene that would
follow, had been so overcome with amusement at the first miaus
that he had hardly been able to finish handing the dishes. The
lady’s distressed cries for help had ceased before he had
sufficiently regained his composure to go back into the dining-
room. It was all peace and quietness there now, Clara had the
kittens on her lap, and Heidi was kneeling beside her, both
laughing and playing with the tiny, graceful little animals.
“Sebastian,” exclaimed Clara as he came in, “you must help us;
you must find a bed for the kittens where Fraulein Rottenmeier
will not spy them out, for she is so afraid of them that she
will send them away at once; but we want to keep them, and have
them out whenever we are alone. Where can you put them?”
“I will see to that,” answered Sebastian willingly. “I will make
a bed in a basket and put it in some place where the lady is not
likely to go; you leave it to me.” He set about the work at
once, sniggling to himself the while, for he guessed there would
be a further rumpus about this some day, and Sebastian was not
without a certain pleasure in the thought of Fraulein Rottenmeier
being a little disturbed.
Not until some time had elapsed, and it was nearing the hour for
going to bed, did Fraulein Rottenmeier venture to open the door
a crack and call through, “Have you taken those dreadful little
animals away, Sebastian?”
He assured her twice that he had done so; he had been hanging
about the room in anticipation of this question, and now quickly
and quietly caught up the kittens from Clara’s lap and
disappeared with them.
The castigatory sermon which Fraulein Rottenmeier had held in
reserve for Heidi was put off till the following day, as she
felt too exhausted now after all the emotions she had gone
through of irritation, anger, and fright, of which Heidi had
unconsciously been the cause. She retired without speaking, Clara
and Heidi following, happy in their minds at knowing that the
kittens were lying in a comfortable bed.
Continue...

This eBook of “Heidi” by Johanna Spyri belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Heidi (Children's Classics)By Johanna SpyriAt Amazon
