


Methinks the Maid loved that ancient sword better than all her
shining armour of silver! Strange to say, the jewelled sheath of
the King’s Toledo blade fitted the weapon from Fierbois, and he
supplemented the priests’ gift of a scabbard by this second rich
one. The Maid accepted it with graceful thanks; yet both the
gorgeous cases were laid away, and a simple sheath of leather made;
for the sword was to be carried at her side into battle, and
neither white nor crimson velvet was suited to such a purpose.
Nor would the Maid let us have her sword sharpened for her. A
curious look came upon her face as Bertrand pointed out that
although now clean and shining, its edges were too blunt for real
use. She looked round upon us as we stood before her, and passed
her fingers lovingly down the edges of the weapon.
“I will keep it as it is,” she answered; “for though I must needs
carry it into battle with me, I pray my Lord that it may never be
my duty to shed Christian blood. And if the English King will but
listen to the words of counsel which I have sent to him, perchance
it may even now be that bloodshed will be spared.”
In sooth, I believe that she would far rather have seen the enemy
disperse of their own accord, than win the honour and glory of the
campaign, which she knew beforehand would bring to her renown, the
like of which no woman in the world’s history has ever won. She
would have gone back gladly, I truly believe, to her home in
Domremy, and uttered no plaint, even though men ceased after the
event to give her the praise and glory; for herself she never
desired such.
But we, who knew the temper of the English, were well aware that
this would never be. Even though they might by this time have heard
somewhat of the strange thing which had happened, and how the
French were rallying round the standard of the Angelic Maid, yet
would they not readily believe that their crushed and beaten foes
would have power to stand against them. More ready would they be to
scoff than to fear.
Now, at last, after all these many hindrances and delays, all was
in readiness for the start. April had well nigh run its course, and
nature was looking her gayest and loveliest when the day came that
we marched forth out of the Castle of Chinon, a gallant little
army, with the Maid in her shining white armour and her fluttering
white pennon at our head, and took the road to Tours, where the
great and redoubtable La Hire was to meet us, and where we were to
find a great band of recruits and soldiers, all eager now to be led
against the foe.
Much did we wonder how the Generals of the French army would
receive the Maid, set, in a sense, over them as Commander-in-Chief
of this expedition, with a mandate from the King that she was to be
obeyed, and that her counsels and directions were to be followed.
We heard conflicting rumours on this score. There were those who
declared that so desperate was the condition of the city, and so
disheartened the garrison and citizens that they welcomed with joy
the thought of this deliverer, and believed already that she was
sent of God for their succour and salvation. Others, on the
contrary, averred that the officers of the army laughed to scorn
the thought of being aided or led by a woman–a peasant–une
peronelle de bas lieu, as they scornfully called her–and that they
would never permit themselves to be led or guided by one who could
have no knowledge of war, even though she might be able to read the
secrets of the future.
In spite of what had been now ruled by the Church concerning her,
there were always those, both in the French and English camps, who
called her a witch; and we, who heard so many flying rumours,
wondered greatly what view the redoubtable La Hire took of this
matter, and Dunois, the Bastard of Orleans, as he was often called.
For these two men, with Xaintrailles, were the ruling Generals in
Orleans, and their voice would be paramount with the army there,
and would carry much weight with those reinforcements for the
relieving force which we were to find awaiting us at Tours and at
Blois.
Now La Hire, as all men know, was a man of great renown, and of
immense personal weight and influence. He was a giant in stature,
with a voice like a trumpet, and thews of steel; a mighty man in
battle, a daring leader, yet cautious and sagacious withal; a man
feared and beloved by those whom he led in warfare; a gay roysterer
at other times, with as many strange oaths upon his lips as there
are saints in the calendar; what the English call a swashbuckler
and daredevil; a man whom one would little look to be led or guided
by a woman, for he was impatient of counsel, and headstrong alike
in thought and action.
And this was the man who was to meet us at Tours, form his
impression of the Maid, and throw the great weight of his personal
influence either into one scale or the other. Truth to tell, I was
something nervous of this ordeal, and there were many who shared my
doubts and fears. But the Maid rode onward, serene and calm, the
light of joy and hope in her eyes, untroubled by any doubts. At
last she was on her way to the relief of the beleaguered city;
there was no room for misgiving in her faithful heart.
We entered Tours amid the clashing of joy bells, the plaudits of
the soldiers, and the laughter, the weeping, the blessings of an
excited populace, who regarded the Maid as the saviour of the
realm. They crowded to their windows and waved flags and kerchiefs.
They thronged upon her in the streets to gaze at her fair face and
greet her as a deliverer.
It was indeed a moving scene; but she rode through it, calm and
tranquil, pausing in the press to speak a few words of thanks and
greeting, but preserving always her gentle maidenly air of dignity
and reserve. And so we came to the house which had been set apart
for her use on her stay, and there we saw, standing at the foot of
the steps which led from the courtyard into the house, a mighty,
mailed figure, the headpiece alone lacking of his full armour, a
carven warrior, as it seemed, with folded arms and bent brows,
gazing upon us as we filed in under the archway, but making no move
to approach us.
I did not need the whisper which ran through the ranks of our
escort to know that this man was the great and valiant La Hire.
As the Maid’s charger paused at the foot of the steps, this man
strode forward with his hand upraised as in a salute, and giving
her his arm, he assisted her to alight, and for a few moments the
two stood looking into each other’s eyes with mutual recognition,
taking, as it were, each the measure of the other.
The Maid was the first to speak, her eyes lighting with that deep
down, indescribable smile, which she kept for her friends alone.
When I saw that smile in her eyes, as they were upraised to La
Hire’s face, all my fears vanished in a moment.
“You are the Dauphin’s brave General La Hire, from Orleans,” she
said; “I thank you, monsieur, for your courtesy in coming thus to
meet me. For so can we take counsel together how best the enemies
of our country may be overthrown.”
“You are the Maid, sent of God and the King for the deliverance of
the realm,” answered La Hire, as he lifted her hand to his lips, “I
bid you welcome in the name of Orleans, its soldiers, and its
citizens. For we have been like men beneath a spell–a spell too
strong for us to break. You come to snap the spell, to break the
yoke, and therefore I bid you great welcome on the part of myself
and the citizens and soldiers of Orleans. Without your counsels to
His Majesty, and the aid you have persuaded him to send, the city
must assuredly have fallen ere this. Only the knowledge that help
was surely coming has kept us from surrender.”
“I would the help had come sooner, my General,” spoke the Maid;
“but soon or late it is one with my Lord, who will give us the
promised victory.”
From that moment friendship, warm and true, was established betwixt
the bronzed warrior and the gentle Maid, who took up, as by natural
right, her position of equal–indeed, of superior–in command, not
with any haughty assumption, not with any arrogant words or looks,
but sweetly and simply, as though there were no question but that
the place was hers; that to her belonged the ordering of the
forces, the overlooking of all. Again and again, even we, who had
come to believe so truly in her divine commission, were astonished
at the insight she showed, the sagacity of her counsels, the
wonderful authority she was able to exert over the soldiers brought
together, a rude, untrained, insubordinate mass of men, collected
from all ranks and classes of the people, some being little better
than bands of marauders, living on prey and plunder, since of
regular fighting there had been little of late; others, mercenaries
hired by the nobles to swell their own retinues; many raw recruits,
fired by ardour at the thought of the promised deliverance; a few
regular trained bands, with their own officers in command, but
forming altogether a heterogeneous company, by no means easy to
drill into order, and swelled by another contingent at Blois, of
very much the same material.
But the Maid assembled the army together, and thus addressed them.
At least, this was the substance of her words; nothing can
reproduce the wonderful earnestness and power of her voice and
look, for her face kindled as she spoke, and the sunshine playing
upon her as she sat her charger in the glory of her silver armour,
seemed to encompass her with a pure white light, so that men’s eyes
were dazzled as they looked upon her, and they whispered one to the
other:
“The Angelic Maid! The Angelic Maid! surely it is an Angel of God
come straight down from Heaven to aid and lead us.”
“My friends,” she spoke, and her voice carried easily to every
corner of the great square, packed with a human mass, motionless,
hanging upon her words; “My friends, we are about to start forth
upon a crusade as holy as it is possible for men to be concerned
in, for it is as saviours and deliverers of your brethren and our
country that we go; and the Lord of Hosts is with us. He has bidden
us march, and He has promised to go with us, even as He was with
the Israelites of old. And if we do not see His presence in pillar
of cloud by day, and pillar of fire by night, we yet do know and
feel Him near us; and He will give abundant proof that He fights
upon our side!”
She lifted her face for a moment to the sky. She was bareheaded,
and every head was bared in that vast crowd as she uttered the name
of the Most High. It seemed as though a light from Heaven fell upon
her as she spoke, and a deep murmur ran through the throng. It was
as if they answered that they needed no other vision than that of
the Maid herself.
“If then the Lord be with us, must we not show ourselves worthy of
His holy presence in our midst? O my friends, since I have been
with you these few days, my heart has been pained and grieved by
that which I have heard and seen. Oaths and blasphemies fall from
your lips, and you scarce know it yourselves. Drunkenness and vice
prevail. O my friends, let this no longer be amongst us! Let us
cleanse ourselves from all impurities; let our conversation be yea,
yea, nay, nay. Let none take the name of the Lord in vain, nor soil
His holy cause by vice and uncleanness. O let us all, day by day,
as the sun rises anew each morning, assemble to hear Mass, and to
receive the Holy Sacrament. Let every man make his confession. Holy
priests are with us to hear all, and to give absolution. Let us
start forth upon the morrow purified and blessed of God, and let us
day by day renew that holy cleansing and blessing, that the Lord
may indeed be with us and rest amongst us, and that His heart be
not grieved and burdened by that which He shall see and hear
amongst those to whom He has promised His help and blessing!”
Thus she spoke; and a deep silence fell upon all, in the which it
seemed to me the fall of a pin might have been heard. The Maid sat
quite still for a moment, her own head bent as though in prayer.
Then she lifted it, and a radiant smile passed over her face, a
smile as of assurance and thankful joy. She raised her hand and
waved it, almost as though she blessed, whilst she greeted her
soldiers, and then she turned her horse, the crowd making way for
her in deep reverential silence, and rode towards her own lodging,
where she remained shut up in her own room for the rest of the day.
But upon the following morning a strange thing had happened. Every
single camp follower–all the women and all the disorderly rabble
that hangs upon the march of an army–had disappeared. They had
slunk off in the night, and were utterly gone. The soldiers were
gathered in the churches to hear Mass. All that could do so
attended where it was known the Maid would be, and when she had
received the Sacrament herself, hundreds crowded to do the like;
and I suppose there were thousands in the city that day, who,
having confessed and received absolution, received the pledge of
the Lord’s death, though perhaps some of them had not thought of
such a duty for years and years.
And here I may say that this was not an act for once and all. Day
by day in the camp Mass was celebrated, and the Holy Sacrament
given to all who asked and came. The Maid ever sought to begin the
day thus, and we of her personal household generally followed her
example. Even La Hire would come and kneel beside her, a little
behind, though it was some while before he desired to partake of
the Sacrament himself. But to be near her in this act of devotion
seemed to give him joy and confidence and for her sake, because he
saw it pained her, he sought to break off his habit of profane
swearing, and the use of those strange oaths before which men had
been wont to quake.
And she, seeing how sorely tried he was to keep from his accustomed
habit, did come to his aid with one of her frank and almost
boy-like smiles, and told him that he might swear by his baton if
he needs must use some expletive; but that no holy name must
lightly pass his lips.
Strange indeed was it to see the friendship which had so quickly
sprung up between that rough warrior and the Maid, whom he could
almost have crushed to death between his mighty hands.
If all the Generals in the army were as noble minded as he, and as
ready to receive her whom God had sent them, we should have little
to fear; but there was Dunois yet to reckon with, who had promised
to come forth and meet her outside the town (for the blockade, as I
have before said, was not perfect; and on the south side men could
still come and go with caution and care), and to lead her in
triumph within its walls, if the English showed not too great
resistance.
But even now we were to find how that they did not yet trust the
Maid’s authority as it should be trusted; and even La Hire was in
fault here, as afterwards he freely owned. For the Maid had told
them to lead her to the city on the north side, as her plan was to
strike straight through the English lines, and scatter the
besieging force ere ever she entered the town at all. But since the
city lies to the north of the river, and the English had built
around it twelve great bastilles, as they called them, and lay in
all their strength on this side, it seemed too venturesome to
attack in such a manner; and in this La Hire and Dunois were both
agreed. But La Hire did not tell the Maid of any disagreements, but
knowing the country to be strange to her, he led her and the army
by a route which she believed the right one, till suddenly we beheld
the towers of Orleans and the great surrounding fortifications
rising up before our eyes; and, behold! the wide river with its
bridge more than half destroyed, lay between us and our goal!
At this sight the eyes of the Maid flashed fire, and she turned
them upon La Hire, but spoke never a word. His face flushed a dull
crimson with a sudden, unexpected shame. To do him justice be it
said, that (as we later heard) he had been against this deception
after having seen the Maid; but there were now many notable
generals and marshals and officers with the army, all of whom were
resolved upon this course of action, which had been agreed upon
beforehand with Dunois, and they had overborne his objections,
which were something faint-hearted perhaps, for with his love and
admiration for the Maid, he trembled, as he now explained to her,
to lead her by so perilous a route, and declared that she could
well be conducted into the city through the Burgundy gate, by
water, without striking a blow, instead of having to fight her way
in past the English bastions.
“I thank you for your care for me, my friend,” she answered, “but
it were better to have obeyed my voice. The English arrows could
not have touched me. We should have entered unopposed. Now much
precious time must needs be lost, for how can this great army be
transported across yonder river?–and the bridge, even if we could
dislodge the English from the tower of Les Tourelles, is broken
down and useless.”
Indeed it seemed plain to all that the Generals had made a great
blunder; for though we marched on to Checy, where Dunois met us,
and whence some of the provisions brought for the starving city
could be dispatched in the boats assembled there, it was plain that
there was no transport sufficient for the bulk of the army; and the
Maid, as she and Dunois stood face to face, at last regarded him
with a look of grave and searching scrutiny.
“Are you he whom men call the Bastard of Orleans?”
“Lady, I am; and I come to welcome you with gladness, for we are
sore beset by our foes; yet all within the city are taking heart of
grace, believing that a Deliverer from Heaven has been sent to
them.”
“They think well,” answered the Maid, “and right glad am I to come.
But wherefore have I been led hither by this bank, instead of the
one upon which Talbot and his English lie?”
“Lady, the wisest of our leaders held that this would be the safest
way.”
“The counsel of God and our Lord is more sure and more powerful
than that of generals and soldiers,” she answered gravely. “You
have made an error in this. See to it that such error be not
repeated. I will that in all things my Lord be obeyed.”
The Generals stood dumb and discomfited before her; a thrill ran
through the army when her words were repeated there; but, indeed,
we all quickly saw the wisdom of her counsel and the folly of her
adversaries; for the bulk of the army had perforce to march back to
Blois to cross the river there, whilst only a thousand picked men
with the chiefest of the Generals and the convoys of provisions
prepared to enter the city by water and pass through the Burgundy
Gate.
At the first it seemed as though even this would be a dangerous
task, for the wind blew hard in a contrary direction, and the
deeply-laden boats began to be in peril of foundering. But as we
stood watching them from the bank, and saw their jeopardy, and some
were for recalling them and waiting, the Maid’s voice suddenly rang
forth in command:
“Leave them alone, and hasten forward with the others. The wind
will change, and a favouring breeze shall carry us all safe into
the city. The English shall not fire a shot to hinder us, for the
fear of the Maid has fallen upon them!”
We gazed at her in wonder as she stood a little apart, her face
full of power and calm certainty. And indeed, it was but a very few
minutes later that the wind dropped to a dead calm, and a light air
sprang up from a contrary direction, and the laden boats gladly
spreading sail, floated quietly onwards with their precious load
towards the suffering city.
Then we embarked, somewhat silently, for the awe which fell upon
those who had never seen the Maid before, extended even to us.
Moreover, with those frowning towers of the English so close upon
us, crowded with soldiers who seemed to know what was happening,
and who were coming into Orleans, it was scarce possible not to
look for resistance and hostile attack.
But curious as it may seem, not a shot was fired as we passed
along. A silence strange and sinister seemed to hang over the lines
of the enemy; but when we reached the city how all was changed!
It was about eight o’clock in the evening when at last we finished
our journey by water and land, and entered the devoted town. There
the chiefest citizens came hurrying to meet us, leading a white
charger for their Deliverer to ride upon.
And when she was mounted, the people thronged about her weeping and
shouting, blessing and hailing her as their champion and saviour.
The streets were thronged with pale-faced men; women and children
hung from the windows, showering flowers at our feet. Torches lit
up the darkening scene, and shone from the breastplates and
headpieces of the mailed men. But the Maid in her white armour
seemed like a being from another sphere; and the cry of “St.
Michael! St. Michael himself!” resounded on all sides, and one did
not wonder.
Nothing would serve the Maid but to go straight to the Cathedral
first, and offer thanksgiving for her arrival here, and the people
flocked with her, till the great building was filled to overflowing
with her retinue of soldiers and her self-constituted followers.
Some begged of her to address them from the steps at the conclusion
of the brief service, but she shook her head.
“I have no words for them–only I love them all,” she answered,
with a little natural quiver of emotion in her voice. “Tell them
so, and that I have come to save them. And then let me go home.”
So La Hire stood forth and gave the Maid’s message in his trumpet
tones, and the Maid was escorted by the whole of the joyful and
loving crowd to the house of the Treasurer Boucher, where were her
quarters, and where she was received with acclamation and joy. And
thus the Maid entered the beleaguered city of Orleans.
Continue...

This eBook of “A Heroine of France” by Evelyn Everett-Green belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Heroine of France the Story of Joan of ArcBy Evelyn Everett-GreenAt Amazon
