


So the thing had come to pass at last–as she had always said it
must. Robert de Baudricourt was about to send her to the Court of
the Dauphin at Chinon. The weary days of waiting were at an end.
She was to start forthwith; she and her escort were alike ready,
willing, and eager. Her strange mystic faith and lofty courage
seemed to have spread through the ranks of the chosen few who were
to attend her.
I trow, had she asked it, half the men of Vaucouleurs would have
gladly followed in her train; for the whole town was moved to its
core by the presence of the Maid in its midst. Almost were the
townsfolk ready to worship her, only that there was something in
her own simplicity and earnest piety which forbade such
demonstration. All knew that the Maid herself would be first to
rebuke any person offering to her homage other than true man can
and ought to offer to true woman.
And now let me speak here, once and for all, of the love and
reverence and devotion which the Maid had power to kindle in the
hearts of those with whom she came in contact. I can indeed speak
of this, for I am proud to this day to call myself her true knight.
From the first I felt towards her as I have felt to none since–not
even to the wife of my manhood’s tried affections. It was such a
love as may be inspired by some almost angelic, presence–there was
no passion in it. I believe I speak truly when I say that not one
of the Maid’s true followers and knights and comrades-in-arms, ever
thought of her as possible wife–ever even dreamed of her as lover.
She moved amongst us as a being from another sphere. She inspired
us with a courage, a power, and a confidence in her and in our
cause, which nothing could shake or daunt. She was like a star, set
in the firmament of heaven. Our eyes, our hearts turned towards
her, but she was never as one of us.
Still less was she as other women are, fashioned for soft
flatteries, ready to be wooed and won. Ah, no! With the Maid it was
far otherwise. Truly do I think that of herself she had no thought,
save as she was the instrument appointed of her Lord to do the
appointed work. To that task her whole soul was bent. It filled her
to the full with an ecstasy of devotion which required no words in
which to express itself. And I can faithfully say that it was not
the beauty of her face, the sweetness of her ringing voice, nor the
grace and strength of her supple form which made of men her willing
followers and servants.
No, it was a power stronger and more sacred than any such carnal
admiration. It came from the conviction, which none could fail to
reach, that this Maid was indeed chosen and set apart of Heaven for
a great and mighty work, and that in obeying her, one was obeying
the will of God, and working out some purpose determined in the
counsels of the heavenlies.
With her man’s garb and light armour, the Maid had assumed an air
of unconscious command which sat with curious graceful dignity upon
the serene calm of her ordinary demeanour. Towards her followers of
the humbler sort she ever showed herself full of consideration and
kindliness. She felt for their fatigues or privations in marching,
was tenderly solicitous later on for the wounded. Above all, she
was insistent that the dying should receive the consolations of
religion, and it was a terrible thought to her that either friend
or foe should perish unshriven and unassoiled.
Her last act at Vaucouleurs, ere we started off in the early dawn
of a late February day, was to attend Mass with all her following.
An hour later, after a hasty meal provided by De Baudricourt, we
were all in the saddle, equipped and eager for the start. The Maid
sat her chestnut charger as to the manner born. The pawings of the
impatient animal caused her no anxiety. She was looking with a keen
eye over her little band of followers, taking in, as a practised
leader of men might do, their equipment and general readiness for
the road. She pointed out to me several small defects which
required adjusting and rectifying.
Already she seemed to have assumed without effort, and as a matter
of course, the position of leader and general. There was no
abatement of her gentle sweetness of voice or aspect, but the air
of command combined with it as though it came direct and without
effort as a gift from heaven. None resented it; all submitted to
it, and submitted with a sense of lofty joy and satisfaction which
I have never experienced since, and which is beyond my power to
describe.
There was one change in the outward aspect of the Maid, for her
beautiful hair had been cut off, and now her head was crowned only
by its cluster of short curling locks, upon which today she wore a
cloth cap, though soon she was to adopt the headpiece which
belonged to the light armour provided. She had been pleased by the
dress of white and blue cut-cloth which I had humbly offered her,
and right well did it become her. The other suit provided by the
townsfolk was carried by one of the squires, that she might have
change of garment if (as was but too probable) we should encounter
drenching rains or blustering snow storms.
So far she had no sword of her own, nor had she spoken of the need
of such a weapon for herself. But as we assembled in the courtyard
of the Castle, getting ourselves into the order of the march, De
Baudricourt himself appeared upon the steps leading into the
building, bearing in his hands a sword in a velvet scabbard, which
he gravely presented to the Maid.
“A soldier, lady, has need of a weapon,” were his words, as he
placed it in her hands; “take this sword, then. I trow it will do
you faithful service; and may the Lord in whom you trust lead you
to victory, and save this distracted realm of France from the
perils which threaten to overwhelm her!”
“I thank you, Seigneur de Baudricourt,” she answered, as she took
the weapon, and permitted me to sling it for her in the belt for
the purpose which she already wore, “I will keep your gift, and
remember your good words, and how that you have been chosen of
heaven to send me forth thus, and have done the bidding of the
Lord, as I knew that so true a man must needs do at the appointed
time. For the rest, have no fear. The Lord will accomplish that
which He has promised. Before the season now beginning so tardily
has reached its height, the Dauphin will be the anointed King of
France, the English will have suffered defeat and Orleans will be
free!”
“Heaven send you speak sooth, fair Maid,” answered the rugged old
soldier, as he eyed the slim figure before him with something of
mingled doubt, wonder, and reverence in his eyes.
Then as though some strange impulse possessed him, he took her hand
and kissed it, and bending the knee before her, said:
“Give me, I pray you, a blessing, ere you depart!”
A wonderful light sprang into her eyes. She laid her hand upon the
grizzled head, and lifted her own face, as was her wont, to the
sunny sky.
“The blessing of the King of Heaven be upon you, Robert de
Baudricourt, in that you have been an instrument chosen of Him. The
grace and love of our Blessed Lady be yours, in that you have shown
kindness and favour to a simple maid of the people, set apart by
Heaven for a certain task. The favour and protection of the Saints
be yours, in that you have believed the words of one who spake of
them, and have been obedient to the command sent to you from them!”
She ceased speaking; but still continued to gaze upward with rapt
and earnest eyes. Every head was bared, and we all gazed upon her,
as upon one who looks through the open Gate of Heaven, and to whom
is vouchsafed a glimpse of the Beatific Vision.
Then clear and sweet her voice rose once more. Her face was
transfigured; a great light seemed to shine either upon or from it,
no man could say which.
“O Lord God, Father of the Heavenlies, O sweet Jesu, Saviour of
mankind, O Blessed Mother, Queen of Heaven, O Holy Michael,
Archangel of the shining sword, O Blessed Saints–Catherine and
Margaret, beloved of Heaven–give to these, Your children, Your
blessing, Your help, Your protection, Your counsel! Be with us in
our journeyings–in our uprising and down lying, in our going out
and coming in–in all we put our hands unto! Be with us and uphold
us, and bring us in safety to our journey’s end; for we go forth in
the strength which is from above, and which can never fail us till
the work appointed be accomplished!”
Then we rode forth, out of the courtyard, and into the streets of
the town, which were thronged and lined with townsfolk, and with
people from the surrounding villages, who had crowded in to see the
wonderful Maid, and witness the outgoing of the little band which
was to accompany her to Chinon.
Two of the Maid’s brothers had sought to be of her train, and one
went with us upon that day. The second she sent back with a letter
(written at her dictation by my fingers, for she herself knew not
letters, though of so quick an understanding in other matters) to
her parents, praying earnestly for their forgiveness for what must
seem to them like disobedience, and imploring their blessing. And
this letter she dispatched by Jean, permitting Pierre to accompany
us on the march.
Her mother and two younger brothers, at least, believed in her
mission by this time; but her father was doubtful and displeased,
fearful for her safety, and suspicious of her credentials; and the
eldest son remained of necessity at home to help his father, and
whether or no he believed in his sister’s call, I have never truly
heard. But I know it pleased her that Pierre should be in her
escort, though she was careful not to show him any marked favour
above others; and as in days to come she was more and more thrown
with the great ones of the land, she of necessity was much parted
from him, though the bond of sisterly love was never slackened; and
both Pierre, and afterwards Jean, followed her through all the
earlier parts of her victorious career.
Leaving Vaucouleurs, we had need to march with circumspection, for
the country was in no settled state, and it was probable that
rumours of our march might have got abroad, and that roving bands
of English or Burgundian soldiers might be on the look out for us;
for already it was being noised abroad that a miraculous Maid had
appeared to the aid of France, and though, no doubt, men jeered,
and professed incredulity, still it was likely that she would be
regarded in the light of a valuable prize if she could be carried
off, and taken either to Duke Philip or to the Regent Bedford in
Paris.
We had with us a King’s archer from Chinon, who had been sent with
news of the disaster at Rouvray. He was to conduct us back to
Chinon by the best and safest routes. But he told us that the
country was beset by roving bands of hostile soldiers, that his
comrades had been slain, and that he himself only escaped as by a
miracle; and his advice was urgent that after the first day we
should travel by night, and lie in hiding during the hours of
daylight–a piece of advice which we were fain to follow, being no
strong force, able to fight our way through a disturbed country,
and being very solicitous for the safety of the precious Maid who
was at once our chiefest hope and chiefest care.
This, then, we did, after that first day’s travel in the bright
springtide sunshine. We were attended for many a mile by a
following of mounted men from the district round, and when, as the
sun began to wester in the sky, they took their leave of us, the
Maid thanked them with gracious words for their company and good
wishes, though she would not suffer them to kiss her hand or pay
her homage; and after that they had departed, we did halt for many
hours, eating and resting ourselves; for we meant to march again
when the moon was up, and not lose a single night, so eager was the
Maid to press on towards Chinon.
Of our journey I will not speak too particularly. Ofttimes we were
in peril from the close proximity of armed bands, as we lay in
woods and thickets by day, avoiding towns and villages, lest we
should draw too much notice upon ourselves. Ofttimes we suffered
from cold, from hunger, from drenching rains and bitter winds. Once
our way was barred by snow drifts, and often the swollen rivers and
streams forced us to wander for miles seeking a ford that was
practicable.
But whatever were the hardships encountered, no word of murmuring
ever escaped the lips of the Maid; rather her courage and sweet
serenity upheld us all, and her example of patience and
unselfishness inspired even the roughest of the men-at-arms with a
desire to emulate it. Never, methinks, on such a toilsome march was
so little grumbling, so little discouragement, and, above all, so
little swearing. And this, in particular, was the doing of the
Maid. For habit is strong with us all, and when things went amiss
the oath would rise to the lips of the men about her, and be
uttered without a thought.
But that was a thing she could not bear. Her sweet pained face
would be turned upon the speaker. Her clear, ringing tones would
ask the question:
“Shall we, who go forward in the name of the Lord, dare to take His
holy name lightly upon our lips? What are His own words? Swear not
at all. Shall we not seek to obey Him? Are we not vowed to His
service? And must not the soldier be obedient above all others?
Shall we mock Him by calling ourselves His followers, and yet doing
that without a thought which He hath forbidden?”
Not once nor twice, but many times the Maid had to speak such words
as these; but she never feared to speak them, and her courage and
her purity of heart and life threw its spell over the rough men she
had led, and they became docile in her hands like children, ready
to worship the very ground she trod on.
Long afterwards it was told me by one of mine own men-at-arms that
there had been a regular plot amongst the rougher of the soldiers
at the outset to do her a mischief, and to sell her into the hands
of the Burgundians or the English. But even before leaving
Vaucouleurs the men had wavered, half ashamed of their own doubts
and thoughts, and before we had proceeded two days’ journey
forward, all, to a man, would have laid down their lives in her
service.
The only matter that troubled the Maid was that we were unable to
hear Mass, as she longed to do daily. The risk of showing ourselves
in town or village was too great. But there came a night, when, as
we journeyed, we approached the town of Fierbois, a place very well
known to me; and when we halted in a wood with the first light of
day, and the wearied soldiers made themselves beds amid the dried
fern and fallen leaves, I approached the Maid, who was gazing
wistfully towards the tapering spire of a church, visible at some
distance away, and I said to her:
“Gentle Maid, yonder is the church of Sainte Catherine at Fierbois,
and there will be, without doubt, early Mass celebrated within its
walls. If you will trust yourself with Bertrand and myself, I trow
we could safely convey you thither, and bring you back again, ere
the day be so far advanced that the world will be astir to wonder
at us.”
Her face brightened as though a sunbeam had touched it. She needed
not to reply in words. A few minutes later, and we were walking
together through the wood, and had quickly reached the church,
where the chiming of the bell told us that we should not be
disappointed of our hope.
We knelt at the back of the church, and there were few worshippers
there that morning. I could not but watch the face of the Maid, and
suddenly I felt a curious thrill run through me, as though I had
been touched by an unseen hand. I looked at her, and upon her face
had come a look which told me that she was listening to some voice
unheard by me. She clasped her hands, her eyes travelled toward the
altar, and remained fixed upon it, as though she saw a vision. Her
lips moved, and I thought I heard the murmured words:
“Blessed Sainte Catherine, I hear. I will remember. When the time
comes I shall know what to do.”
When the priest had finished his office we slipped out before any
one else moved, and reached the shelter of the woods again without
encountering any other person. I almost hoped that the Maid would
speak to us of what had been revealed to her in that church, but
she kept the matter in her own heart. Yet, methinks, she pondered
it long and earnestly; for although she laid her down as if to
sleep, her eyes were generally wide open, looking upwards through
the leafless budding boughs of the trees as though they beheld
things not of this earth.
It was upon this day that I wrote, at the Maid’s request, a letter
to the uncrowned King at Chinon, asking of him an audience on
behalf of Jeanne d’Arc, the maiden from Domremy, of whom he had
probably heard. This letter I dispatched to Sir Guy de Laval,
asking him to deliver it to the King with his own hands, and to
bring us an answer ere we reached Chinon, which we hoped now to do
in a short while.
The missive was carried by the King’s archer, who knew his road
right well, and was acquainted with the person of Sir Guy. He was
to ride forward in all haste, whilst we were to follow in slower
and more cautious fashion.
I think it was about the fifth day of March when the great towers
of Chinon first broke upon our gaze. We had been travelling all the
night, and it was just as the dawn was breaking that we espied the
huge round turrets rising, as it were, from amid the mists which
clung about the river and its banks. There we halted, for no
message had yet come from the King; but upon the Maid’s face was a
look of awe and radiant joy as she stood a little apart, gazing
upon the goal of her toilsome journey. No fear beset her as to her
reception, just as no fears had troubled her with regard to perils
by the way.
“God clears the road for me,” she said, when news had been brought
from time to time of bands of soldiers whom we had narrowly
escaped; and now, as she looked upon the towers of Chinon, growing
more and more distinct as the daylight strengthened, her face wore
a smile of serene confidence in which natural fear and shrinking
had no part.
“The Dauphin will receive me. Fear nothing. The work which is begun
will go forward to its completion. God hath spoken in His power. He
hath spoken, and His word cannot fail.”
So after we had fed she lay down, wrapped in a cloak, and fell
asleep like a child; whilst I rode forward a little way along the
plain, for I had seen a handful of horsemen sallying forth, as it
seemed from the Castle, and I hoped that it was Sir Guy bearing
letter or message from the King.
Nor was I mistaken in this hope. Soon I was certain of my man, and
Sir Guy in turn recognising me, spurred forward in advance of his
followers, and we met alone in the plain, Bertrand, my companion,
being with me.
“So there really is to be a miracle worked, and by a Maid!” cried
Sir Guy, as we rode with him towards our camp; “Mort de Dieu–but
it is passing strange! All the Court is in a fever of wonder about
this Angelic Maid, as some call her; whilst others vow she is
either impostor or witch. Is it the same, Bertrand, of whom you did
speak upon the day we parted company?”
“The same; and yet in one way not the same, for since then she hath
grown apace in power and wonder, so that all who see her marvel at
her, and some be ready to worship her. But we will say no more. You
shall see for yourself, and the King also shall see, if he refuse
not to receive one who comes to him as the messenger of God.”
“I am sent to conduct the Maid presently to the Castle,” answered
Sir Guy. “There is now great desire to see her and hear her, and to
try and test the truth of her mission. The Generals scoff aloud at
the thought of going to battle with a maid for leader. The
Churchmen look grave, and talk of witchcraft and delusion. The
ladies of the Court are in a fever to see her. As for the King and
his Ministers, they are divided in mind ’twixt hope and fear; but
truly matters are come to such desperate pass with us that, if some
help come not quickly, the King will flee him away from his
distracted realm, and leave the English and Burgundians to ravage
and subdue at will!”
“God forbid!” said I, and crossed myself.
Scarce had I spoken the words before I saw approaching us on her
chestnut charger the Maid herself, who rode forward to meet us at a
foot’s pace, and reined back a few yards from us, her eyes fixed
full upon the face of Sir Guy, who uncovered, I scarce know why,
for how should he know that this youthful soldier was indeed the
Maid herself?
“You come from the Dauphin,” she said; “go tell him that the
darkest hour but heralds the dawn. He must not flee away. He must
stay to face his foes. I will lead his armies to victory, and he
shall yet be crowned King of France. Let him never speak more of
deserting his realm. That shall not–that must not be!”
Sir Guy was off his horse by now; he bent his knee to the Maid.
“I will tell the King that the Deliverer hath truly come,” he said;
and taking her hand, ere she could prevent it, he reverently kissed
it.
Continue...

This eBook of “A Heroine of France” by Evelyn Everett-Green belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Heroine of France the Story of Joan of ArcBy Evelyn Everett-GreenAt Amazon
