


REQUIREMENTS OF SPEECH
Vocabulary–Parts of Speech–Requisites
It is very easy to learn how to speak and write correctly, as for all
purposes of ordinary conversation and communication, only about 2,000
different words are required. The mastery of just twenty hundred words,
the knowing where to place them, will make us not masters of the English
language, but masters of correct speaking and writing. Small number, you
will say, compared with what is in the dictionary! But nobody ever uses
all the words in the dictionary or could use them did he live to be the
age of Methuselah, and there is no necessity for using them.
There are upwards of 200,000 words in the recent editions of the large
dictionaries, but the one-hundredth part of this number will suffice for
all your wants. Of course you may think not, and you may not be content
to call things by their common names; you may be ambitious to show
superiority over others and display your learning or, rather, your
pedantry and lack of learning. For instance, you may not want to call a
spade a spade. You may prefer to call it a spatulous device for abrading
the surface of the soil. Better, however, to stick to the old familiar,
simple name that your grandfather called it. It has stood the test of
time, and old friends are always good friends.
To use a big word or a foreign word when a small one and a familiar one
will answer the same purpose, is a sign of ignorance. Great scholars and
writers and polite speakers use simple words.
To go back to the number necessary for all purposes of conversation
correspondence and writing, 2,000, we find that a great many people who
pass in society as being polished, refined and educated use less, for
they know less. The greatest scholar alive hasn’t more than four thousand
different words at his command, and he never has occasion to use half the
number.
In the works of Shakespeare, the most wonderful genius the world has ever
known, there is the enormous number of 15,000 different words, but almost
10,000 of them are obsolete or meaningless today.
Every person of intelligence should be able to use his mother tongue
correctly. It only requires a little pains, a little care, a little study
to enable one to do so, and the recompense is great.
Consider the contrast between the well-bred, polite man who knows how to
choose and use his words correctly and the underbred, vulgar boor, whose
language grates upon the ear and jars the sensitiveness of the finer
feelings. The blunders of the latter, his infringement of all the canons
of grammar, his absurdities and monstrosities of language, make his very
presence a pain, and one is glad to escape from his company.
The proper grammatical formation of the English language, so that one may
acquit himself as a correct conversationalist in the best society or be
able to write and express his thoughts and ideas upon paper in the right
manner, may be acquired in a few lessons.
It is the purpose of this book, as briefly and concisely as possible, to
direct the reader along a straight course, pointing out the mistakes he
must avoid and giving him such assistance as will enable him to reach the
goal of a correct knowledge of the English language. It is not a Grammar
in any sense, but a guide, a silent signal-post pointing the way in the
right direction.
All the words in the English language are divided into nine great
classes. These classes are called the Parts of Speech. They are Article,
Noun, Adjective, Pronoun, Verb, Adverb, Preposition, Conjunction and
Interjection. Of these, the Noun is the most important, as all the others
are more or less dependent upon it. A Noun signifies the name of any
person, place or thing, in fact, anything of which we can have either
thought or idea. There are two kinds of Nouns, Proper and Common. Common
Nouns are names which belong in common to a race or class, as man,
city. Proper Nouns distinguish individual members of a race or class as
John, Philadelphia. In the former case man is a name which belongs
in common to the whole race of mankind, and city is also a name which
is common to all large centres of population, but John signifies a
particular individual of the race, while Philadelphia denotes a
particular one from among the cities of the world.
Nouns are varied by Person, Number, Gender, and Case. Person is that
relation existing between the speaker, those addressed and the subject
under consideration, whether by discourse or correspondence. The Persons
are First, Second and Third and they represent respectively the
speaker, the person addressed and the person or thing mentioned or under
consideration.
Number is the distinction of one from more than one. There are two
numbers, singular and plural; the singular denotes one, the plural two or
more. The plural is generally formed from the singular by the addition of
s or es.
Gender has the same relation to nouns that sex has to individuals, but
while there are only two sexes, there are four genders, viz., masculine,
feminine, neuter and common. The masculine gender denotes all those of
the male kind, the feminine gender all those of the female kind, the
neuter gender denotes inanimate things or whatever is without life, and
common gender is applied to animate beings, the sex of which for the time
being is indeterminable, such as fish, mouse, bird, etc. Sometimes things
which are without life as we conceive it and which, properly speaking,
belong to the neuter gender, are, by a figure of speech called
Personification, changed into either the masculine or feminine gender,
as, for instance, we say of the sun, He is rising; of the moon, Sheis setting.
Case is the relation one noun bears to another or to a verb or to a
preposition. There are three cases, the Nominative, the Possessiveand the Objective. The nominative is the subject of which we are
speaking or the agent which directs the action of the verb; the
possessive case denotes possession, while the objective indicates the
person or thing which is affected by the action of the verb.
An Article is a word placed before a noun to show whether the latter is
used in a particular or general sense. There are but two articles, a or
an and the.
An Adjective is a word which qualifies a noun, that is, which shows
some distinguishing mark or characteristic belonging to the noun.
A Pronoun is a word used for or instead of a noun to keep us from
repeating the same noun too often. Pronouns, like nouns, have case,
number, gender and person. There are three kinds of pronouns, personal,
relative and adjective.
A verb is a word which signifies action or the doing of something. A
verb is inflected by tense and mood and by number and person, though the
latter two belong strictly to the subject of the verb.
An adverb is a word which modifies a verb, an adjective and sometimes
another adverb.
A preposition serves to connect words and to show the relation between
the objects which the words express.
A conjunction is a word which joins words, phrases, clauses and
sentences together.
An interjection is a word which expresses surprise or some sudden
emotion of the mind.
The three essentials of the English language are: Purity, Perspicuityand Precision.
By Purity is signified the use of good English. It precludes the use of
all slang words, vulgar phrases, obsolete terms, foreign idioms, ambiguous
expressions or any ungrammatical language whatsoever. Neither does it
sanction the use of any newly coined word until such word is adopted by
the best writers and speakers.
Perspicuity demands the clearest expression of thought conveyed in
unequivocal language, so that there may be no misunderstanding whatever
of the thought or idea the speaker or writer wishes to convey. All
ambiguous words, words of double meaning and words that might possibly be
construed in a sense different from that intended, are strictly
forbidden. Perspicuity requires a style at once clear and comprehensive
and entirely free from pomp and pedantry and affectation or any straining
after effect.
Precision requires concise and exact expression, free from redundancy
and tautology, a style terse and clear and simple enough to enable the
hearer or reader to comprehend immediately the meaning of the speaker or
writer. It forbids, on the one hand, all long and involved sentences,
and, on the other, those that are too short and abrupt. Its object is to
strike the golden mean in such a way as to rivet the attention of the
hearer or reader on the words uttered or written.
Continue...

This eBook of “How to Speak and Write Correctly” by Joseph Devlin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Elements of Style by William Strunk Jr. & How To Speak And Write Correctly by Joseph Devlin - Special EditionBy William Strunk Jr.At Amazon
