


MASTERS AND MASTERPIECES OF LITERATURE
Great Authors–Classification–The World’s Best Books.
The Bible is the world’s greatest book. Apart from its character as a work
of divine revelation, it is the most perfect literature extant.
Leaving out the Bible the three greatest works are those of Homer, Dante
and Shakespeare. These are closely followed by the works of Virgil and
Milton.
Homer, Dante, Cervantes, Shakespeare and Goethe.
(The best translation of Homer for the ordinary reader is by Chapman.
Norton’s translation of Dante and Taylor’s translation of Goethe’s
Faust are recommended.)
Besides the works mentioned everyone should endeavor to have the following:
Plutarch’s Lives, Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, Chaucer, Imitation
of Christ (Thomas a Kempis), Holy Living and Holy Dying (Jeremy Taylor),
Pilgrim’s Progress, Macaulay’s Essays, Bacon’s Essays, Addis on s Essays,
Essays of Elia (Charles Lamb), Les Miserables (Hugo), Heroes and Hero
Worship (Carlyle), Pal-grave’s Golden Treasury, Wordsworth, Vicar of
Wake field, Adam Bede (George Eliot), Vanity Fair (Thackeray),
Ivanhoe (Scott), On the Heights (Auerbach), Eugenie Grandet (Balzac),
Scarlet Letter (Hawthorne), Emerson’s Essays, Boswell’s Life of
Johnson, History of the English People (Green), Outlines of Universal
History, Origin of Species, Montaigne’s Essays, Longfellow, Tennyson,
Browning, Whittier, Ruskin, Herbert Spencer.
A good encyclopoedia is very desirable and a reliable dictionary
indispensable.
Scarlet Letter, Parkman’s Histories, Motley’s Dutch Republic, Grant’s
Memoirs, Franklin’s Autobiography, Webster’s Speeches, Lowell’s Bigelow
Papers, also his Critical Essays, Thoreau’s Walden, Leaves of Grass(Whitman), Leather-stocking Tales (Cooper), Autocrat of the Breakfast
Table, Ben Hur and Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
Bryant, Poe, Whittier, Longfellow, Lowell, Emerson, Whitman, Lanier,
Aldrich and Stoddard.
Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, Burns, Wordsworth, Keats, Shelley,
Tennyson, Browning.
Bacon, Addison, Steele, Macaulay, Lamb, Jeffrey, De Quincey, Carlyle,
Thackeray and Matthew Arnold.
In order of merit are: Hamlet, King Lear, Othello, Antony and
Cleopatra, Macbeth, Merchant of Venice, Henry IV, As You Like It,
Winter’s Tale, Romeo and Juliet, Midsummer Night’s Dream, Twelfth
Night, Tempest.
If you are not able to procure a library of the great masterpieces, get
at least a few. Read them carefully, intelligently and with a view to
enlarging your own literary horizon. Remember a good book cannot be read
too often, one of a deteriorating influence should not be read at all.
In literature, as in all things else, the good alone should prevail.
 

This eBook of “How to Speak and Write Correctly” by Joseph Devlin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Elements of Style by William Strunk Jr. & How To Speak And Write Correctly by Joseph Devlin - Special EditionBy William Strunk Jr.At Amazon
