


STYLE
Diction–Purity–Propriety–Precision.
It is the object of every writer to put his thoughts into as effective
form as possible so as to make a good impression on the reader. A person
may have noble thoughts and ideas but be unable to express them in such a
way as to appeal to others, consequently he cannot exert the full force
of his intellectuality nor leave the imprint of his character upon his
time, whereas many a man but indifferently gifted may wield such a facile
pen as to attract attention and win for himself an envious place among
his contemporaries.
In everyday life one sees illustrations of men of excellent mentality
being cast aside and ones of mediocre or in some cases, little, if any,
ability chosen to fill important places. The former are unable to impress
their personality; they have great thoughts, great ideas, but these
thoughts and ideas are locked up in their brains and are like prisoners
behind the bars struggling to get free. The key of language which would
open the door is wanting, hence they have to remain locked up.
Many a man has to pass through the world unheard of and of little benefit
to it or himself, simply because he cannot bring out what is in him and
make it subservient to his will. It is the duty of every one to develop his
best, not only for the benefit of himself but for the good of his fellow
men. It is not at all necessary to have great learning or acquirements, the
laborer is as useful in his own place as the philosopher in his; nor is it
necessary to have many talents. One talent rightly used is much better than
ten wrongly used. Often a man can do more with one than his contemporary
can do with ten, often a man can make one dollar go farther than twenty in
the hands of his neighbor, often the poor man lives more comfortably than
the millionaire. All depends upon the individual himself. If he make right
use of what the Creator has given him and live according to the laws of God
and nature he is fulfilling his allotted place in the universal scheme of
creation, in other words, when he does his best, he is living up to the
standard of a useful manhood.
Now in order to do his best a man of ordinary intelligence and education
should be able to express himself correctly both in speaking and writing,
that is, he should be able to convey his thoughts in an intelligent
manner which the simplest can understand. The manner in which a speaker
or writer conveys his thoughts is known as his Style. In other words
Style may be defined as the peculiar manner in which a man expresses
his conceptions through the medium of language. It depends upon the
choice of words and their arrangement to convey a meaning. Scarcely any
two writers have exactly the same style, that is to say, express their
ideas after the same peculiar form, just as no two mortals are fashioned
by nature in the same mould, so that one is an exact counterpart of the
other.
Just as men differ in the accent and tones of their voices, so do they
differ in the construction of their language.
Two reporters sent out on the same mission, say to report a fire, will
verbally differ in their accounts though materially both descriptions
will be the same as far as the leading facts are concerned. One will
express himself in a style different from the other.
If you are asked to describe the dancing of a red-haired lady at the last
charity ball you can either say–"The ruby Circe, with the Titian locks
glowing like the oriflamme which surrounds the golden god of day as he
sinks to rest amid the crimson glory of the burnished West, gave a divine
exhibition of the Terpsichorean art which thrilled the souls of the
multitude” or, you can simply say–"The red-haired lady danced very well
and pleased the audience.”
The former is a specimen of the ultra florid or bombastic style which may
be said to depend upon the pomposity of verbosity for its effect, the
latter is a specimen of simple natural Style. Needless to say it is to
be preferred. The other should be avoided. It stamps the writer as a
person of shallowness, ignorance and inexperience. It has been eliminated
from the newspapers. Even the most flatulent of yellow sheets no longer
tolerate it in their columns. Affectation and pedantry in style are now
universally condemned.
It is the duty of every speaker and writer to labor after a pleasing
style. It gains him an entrance where he would otherwise be debarred.
Often the interest of a subject depends as much on the way it is
presented as on the subject itself. One writer will make it attractive,
another repulsive. For instance take a passage in history. Treated by one
historian it is like a desiccated mummy, dry, dull, disgusting, while
under the spell of another it is, as it were, galvanized into a virile
living thing which not only pleases but captivates the reader.
The first requisite of style is choice of words, and this comes under
the head of Diction, the property of style which has reference to the
words and phrases used in speaking and writing. The secret of literary
skill from any standpoint consists in putting the right word in the right
place. In order to do this it is imperative to know the meaning of the
words we use, their exact literal meaning. Many synonymous words are
seemingly interchangeable and appear as if the same meaning were applicable
to three or four of them at the same time, but when all such words are
reduced to a final analysis it is clearly seen that there is a marked
difference in their meaning. For instance grief and sorrow seem to be
identical, but they are not. Grief is active, sorrow is more or less
passive; grief is caused by troubles and misfortunes which come to us
from the outside, while sorrow is often the consequence of our own
acts. Grief is frequently loud and violent, sorrow is always quiet
and retiring. Grief shouts, Sorrow remains calm.
If you are not sure of the exact meaning of a word look it up immediately
in the dictionary. Sometimes some of our great scholars are puzzled over
simple words in regard to meaning, spelling or pronunciation. Whenever
you meet a strange word note it down until you discover its meaning and
use. Read the best books you can get, books written by men and women who
are acknowledged masters of language, and study how they use their words,
where they place them in the sentences, and the meanings they convey to
the readers.
Mix in good society. Listen attentively to good talkers and try to
imitate their manner of expression. If a word is used you do not
understand, don’t be ashamed to ask its meaning.
True, a small vocabulary will carry you through, but it is an advantage
to have a large one. When you live alone a little pot serves just as well
as a large one to cook your victuals and it is handy and convenient, but
when your friends or neighbors come to dine with you, you will need a
much larger pot and it is better to have it in store, so that you will
not be put to shame for your scantiness of furnishings.
Get as many words as you possibly can–if you don’t need them now, pack
them away in the garrets of your brain so that you can call upon them if
you require them.
Keep a note book, jot down the words you don’t understand or clearly
understand and consult the dictionary when you get time.
Purity of style consists in using words which are reputable, national
and present, which means that the words are in current use by the best
authorities, that they are used throughout the nation and not confined to
one particular part, and that they are words in constant use at the
present time.
There are two guiding principles in the choice of words,–good useand good taste. Good use tells us whether a word is right or wrong;
good taste, whether it is adapted to our purpose or not.
A word that is obsolete or too new to have gained a place in the
language, or that is a provincialism, should not be used.
Here are the Ten Commandments of English style:
(1) Do not use foreign words.
(2) Do not use a long word when a short one will serve your purpose.
Fire is much better than conflagration.
(3) Do not use technical words, or those understood only by specialists
in their respective lines, except when you are writing especially for
such people.
(4) Do not use slang.
(5) Do not use provincialisms, as “I guess” for “I think"; “I reckon” for
“I know,” etc.
(6) Do not in writing prose, use poetical or antiquated words: as “lore,
e’er, morn, yea, nay, verily, peradventure.”
(7) Do not use trite and hackneyed words and expressions; as, “on the
job,” “up and in"; “down and out.”
(8) Do not use newspaper words which have not established a place in the
language as “to bugle"; “to suicide,” etc.
(9) Do not use ungrammatical words and forms; as, “I ain’t;” “he don’t.”
(10) Do not use ambiguous words or phrases; as–"He showed me all about
the house.”
Trite words, similes and metaphors which have become hackneyed and worn
out should be allowed to rest in the oblivion of past usage. Such
expressions and phrases as “Sweet sixteen” “the Almighty dollar,” “Uncle
Sam,” “On the fence,” “The Glorious Fourth,” “Young America,” “The lords
of creation,” “The rising generation,” “The weaker sex,” “The weaker
vessel,” “Sweetness long drawn out” and “chief cook and bottle washer,"
should be put on the shelf as they are utterly worn out from too much
usage.
Some of the old similes which have outlived their usefulness and should
be pensioned off, are “Sweet as sugar,” “Bold as a lion,” “Strong as an
ox,” “Quick as a flash,” “Cold as ice,” “Stiff as a poker,” “White as
snow,” “Busy as a bee,” “Pale as a ghost,” “Rich as Croesus,” “Cross as a
bear” and a great many more far too numerous to mention.
Be as original as possible in the use of expression. Don’t follow in the
old rut but try and strike out for yourself. This does not mean that you
should try to set the style, or do anything outlandish or out of the way,
or be an innovator on the prevailing custom. In order to be original
there is no necessity for you to introduce something novel or establish a
precedent. The probability is you are not fit to do either, by education
or talent. While following the style of those who are acknowledged
leaders you can be original in your language. Try and clothe an idea
different from what it has been clothed and better. If you are speaking
or writing of dancing don’t talk or write about “tripping the light
fantastic toe.” It is over two hundred years since Milton expressed it
that way in ’L’Allegro.” You’re not a Milton and besides over a million
have stolen it from Milton until it is now no longer worth stealing.
Don’t resurrect obsolete words such as whilom, yclept, wis, etc.,
and be careful in regard to obsolescent words, that is, words that are at
the present time gradually passing from use such as quoth, trow,
betwixt, amongst, froward, etc.
And beware of new words. Be original in the construction and arrangement
of your language, but don’t try to originate words. Leave that to the
Masters of language, and don’t be the first to try such words, wait until
the chemists of speech have tested them and passed upon their merits.
Quintilian said–"Prefer the oldest of the new and the newest of the
old.” Pope put this in rhyme and it still holds good:
In words, as fashions, the same rule will hold, Alike fantastic, if too
new or old: Be not the first by whom the new are tried, Nor yet the last
to lay the old aside.
Propriety of style consists in using words in their proper sense and as
in the case of purity, good usage is the principal test. Many words have
acquired in actual use a meaning very different from what they once
possessed. “Prevent” formerly meant to go before, and that meaning is
implied in its Latin derivation. Now it means to put a stop to, to
hinder. To attain propriety of style it is necessary to avoid confounding
words derived from the same root; as respectfully and respectively;
it is necessary to use words in their accepted sense or the sense which
everyday use sanctions.
Simplicity of style has reference to the choice of simple words and
their unaffected presentation. Simple words should always be used in
preference to compound, and complicated ones when they express the same
or almost the same meaning. The Anglo-Saxon element in our language
comprises the simple words which express the relations of everyday life,
strong, terse, vigorous, the language of the fireside, street, market and
farm. It is this style which characterizes the Bible and many of the
great English classics such as the “Pilgrim’s Progress,” “Robinson
Crusoe,” and “Gulliver’s Travels.”
Clearness of style should be one of the leading considerations with the
beginner in composition. He must avoid all obscurity and ambiguous
phrases. If he write a sentence or phrase and see that a meaning might be
inferred from it otherwise than intended, he should re-write it in such a
way that there can be no possible doubt. Words, phrases or clauses that
are closely related should be placed as near to each other as possible
that their mutual relation may clearly appear, and no word should be
omitted that is necessary to the complete expression of thought.
Unity is that property of style which keeps all parts of a sentence in
connection with the principal thought and logically subordinate to it. A
sentence may be constructed as to suggest the idea of oneness to the
mind, or it may be so loosely put together as to produce a confused and
indefinite impression. Ideas that have but little connection should be
expressed in separate sentences, and not crowded into one.
Keep long parentheses out of the middle of your sentences and when you
have apparently brought your sentences to a close don’t try to continue
the thought or idea by adding supplementary clauses.
Strength is that property of style which gives animation, energy and
vivacity to language and sustains the interest of the reader. It is as
necessary to language as good food is to the body. Without it the words
are weak and feeble and create little or no impression on the mind. In
order to have strength the language must be concise, that is, much
expressed in little compass, you must hit the nail fairly on the head and
drive it in straight. Go critically over what you write and strike out
every word, phrase and clause the omission of which impairs neither the
clearness nor force of the sentence and so avoid redundancy, tautology
and circumlocution. Give the most important words the most prominent
places, which, as has been pointed out elsewhere, are the beginning and
end of the sentence.
Harmony is that property of style which gives a smoothness to the
sentence, so that when the words are sounded their connection becomes
pleasing to the ear. It adapts sound to sense. Most people construct
their sentences without giving thought to the way they will sound and as
a consequence we have many jarring and discordant combinations such as
“Thou strengthenedst thy position and actedst arbitrarily and
derogatorily to my interests.”
Harsh, disagreeable verbs are liable to occur with the Quaker form Thouof the personal pronoun. This form is now nearly obsolete, the plural
you being almost universally used. To obtain harmony in the sentence
long words that are hard to pronounce and combinations of letters of one
kind should be avoided.
Style is expressive of the writer, as to who he is and what he is. As a
matter of structure in composition it is the indication of what a man can
do; as a matter of quality it is an indication of what he is.
Style has been classified in different ways, but it admits of so many
designations that it is very hard to enumerate a table. In fact there are
as many styles as there are writers, for no two authors write exactlyafter the same form. However, we may classify the styles of the various
authors in broad divisions as (1) dry, (2) plain, (3) neat, (4) elegant,
(5) florid, (6) bombastic.
The dry style excludes all ornament and makes no effort to appeal to
any sense of beauty. Its object is simply to express the thoughts in a
correct manner. This style is exemplified by Berkeley.
The plain style does not seek ornamentation either, but aims to make
clear and concise statements without any elaboration or embellishment.
Locke and Whately illustrate the plain style.
The neat style only aspires after ornament sparingly. Its object is to
have correct figures, pure diction and clear and harmonious sentences.
Goldsmith and Gray are the acknowledged leaders in this kind of style.
The elegant style uses every ornament that can beautify and avoids
every excess which would degrade. Macaulay and Addison have been
enthroned as the kings of this style. To them all writers bend the knee
in homage.
The florid style goes to excess in superfluous and superficial
ornamentation and strains after a highly colored imagery. The poems of
Ossian typify this style.
The bombastic is characterized by such an excess of words, figures and
ornaments as to be ridiculous and disgusting. It is like a circus clown
dressed up in gold tinsel Dickens gives a fine example of it in Sergeant
Buzfuz’ speech in the “Pickwick Papers.” Among other varieties of style
may be mentioned the colloquial, the laconic, the concise, the diffuse,
the abrupt the flowing, the quaint, the epigrammatic, the flowery, the
feeble, the nervous, the vehement, and the affected. The manner of these
is sufficiently indicated by the adjective used to describe them.
In fact style is as various as character and expresses the individuality
of the writer, or in other words, as the French writer Buffon very aptly
remarks, “the style is the man himself.”
Continue...

This eBook of “How to Speak and Write Correctly” by Joseph Devlin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Elements of Style by William Strunk Jr. & How To Speak And Write Correctly by Joseph Devlin - Special EditionBy William Strunk Jr.At Amazon
