


CHOICE OF WORDS
Small Words–Their Importance–The Anglo-Saxon Element
In another place in this book advice has been given to never use a long
word when a short one will serve the same purpose. This advice is to be
emphasized. Words of “learned length and thundering sound” should be
avoided on all possible occasions. They proclaim shallowness of intellect
and vanity of mind. The great purists, the masters of diction, the
exemplars of style, used short, simple words that all could understand;
words about which there could be no ambiguity as to meaning. It must be
remembered that by our words we teach others; therefore, a very great
responsibility rests upon us in regard to the use of a right language. We
must take care that we think and speak in a way so clear that there may
be no misapprehension or danger of conveying wrong impressions by vague
and misty ideas enunciated in terms which are liable to be misunderstood
by those whom we address. Words give a body or form to our ideas, without
which they are apt to be so foggy that we do not see where they are weak
or false. We must make the endeavor to employ such words as will put the
idea we have in our own mind into the mind of another. This is the
greatest art in the world–to clothe our ideas in words clear and
comprehensive to the intelligence of others. It is the art which the
teacher, the minister, the lawyer, the orator, the business man, must
master if they would command success in their various fields of endeavor.
It is very hard to convey an idea to, and impress it on, another when he
has but a faint conception of the language in which the idea is expressed;
but it is impossible to convey it at all when the words in which it is
clothed are unintelligible to the listener.
If we address an audience of ordinary men and women in the English
language, but use such words as they cannot comprehend, we might as well
speak to them in Coptic or Chinese, for they will derive no benefit from
our address, inasmuch as the ideas we wish to convey are expressed in
words which communicate no intelligent meaning to their minds.
Long words, learned words, words directly derived from other languages
are only understood by those who have had the advantages of an extended
education. All have not had such advantages. The great majority in this
grand and glorious country of ours have to hustle for a living from an
early age. Though education is free, and compulsory also, very many never
get further than the “Three R’s.” These are the men with whom we have to
deal most in the arena of life, the men with the horny palms and the iron
muscles, the men who build our houses, construct our railroads, drive our
street cars and trains, till our fields, harvest our crops–in a word,
the men who form the foundation of all society, the men on whom the world
depends to make its wheels go round. The language of the colleges and
universities is not for them and they can get along very well without it;
they have no need for it at all in their respective callings. The plain,
simple words of everyday life, to which the common people have been used
around their own firesides from childhood, are the words we must use in
our dealings with them.
Such words are understood by them and understood by the learned as well;
why then not use them universally and all the time? Why make a one-sided
affair of language by using words which only one class of the people, the
so-called learned class, can understand? Would it not be better to use,
on all occasions, language which the both classes can understand? If we
take the trouble to investigate we shall find that the men who exerted
the greatest sway over the masses and the multitude as orators, lawyers,
preachers and in other public capacities, were men who used very simple
language. Daniel Webster was among the greatest orators this country has
produced. He touched the hearts of senates and assemblages, of men and
women with the burning eloquence of his words. He never used a long word
when he could convey the same, or nearly the same, meaning with a short
one. When he made a speech he always told those who put it in form for
the press to strike out every long word. Study his speeches, go over all
he ever said or wrote, and you will find that his language was always
made up of short, clear, strong terms, although at times, for the sake of
sound and oratorical effect, he was compelled to use a rather long word,
but it was always against his inclination to do so, and where was the man
who could paint, with words, as Webster painted! He could picture things
in a way so clear that those who heard him felt that they had seen that
of which he spoke.
Abraham Lincoln was another who stirred the souls of men, yet he was not
an orator, not a scholar; he did not write M.A. or Ph.D. after his name,
or any other college degree, for he had none. He graduated from the
University of Hard Knocks, and he never forgot this severe Alma Materwhen he became President of the United States. He was just as plain, I
just as humble, as in the days when he split rails or plied a boat on the
Sangamon. He did not use big words, but he used the words of the people,
and in such a way as to make them beautiful. His Gettysburg address is an
English classic, one of the great masterpieces of the language.
From the mere fact that a word is short it does not follow that it is
always clear, but it is true that nearly all clear words are short, and
that most of the long words, especially those which we get from other
languages, are misunderstood to a great extent by the ordinary rank and
file of the people. Indeed, it is to be doubted if some of the “scholars"
using them, fully understand their import on occasions. A great many such
words admit of several interpretations. A word has to be in use a great
deal before people get thoroughly familiar with its meaning. Long words,
not alone obscure thought and make the ideas hazy, but at times they tend
to mix up things in such a way that positively harmful results follow
from their use.
For instance, crime can be so covered with the folds of long words as to
give it a different appearance. Even the hideousness of sin can be cloaked
with such words until its outlines look like a thing of beauty. When a bank
cashier makes off with a hundred thousand dollars we politely term his
crime defalcation instead of plain theft, and instead of calling
himself a thief we grandiosely allude to him as a defaulter. When we
see a wealthy man staggering along a fashionable thoroughfare under the
influence of alcohol, waving his arms in the air and shouting boisterously,
we smile and say, poor gentleman, he is somewhat exhilarated; or at worst
we say, he is slightly inebriated; but when we see a poor man who has
fallen from grace by putting an “enemy into his mouth to steal away his
brain” we express our indignation in the simple language of the words:
“Look at the wretch; he is dead drunk.”
When we find a person in downright lying we cover the falsehood with the
finely-spun cloak of the word prevarication. Shakespeare says, “a rose
by any other name would smell as sweet,” and by a similar sequence, a
lie, no matter by what name you may call it, is always a lie and should
be condemned; then why not simply call it a lie? Mean what you say and
say what you mean; call a spade a spade, it is the best term you can
apply to the implement.
When you try to use short words and shun long ones in a little while you
will find that you can do so with ease. A farmer was showing a horse to a
city-bred gentleman. The animal was led into a paddock in which an old
sow-pig was rooting. “What a fine quadruped!” exclaimed the city man.
“Which of the two do you mean, the pig or the horse?” queried the farmer,
“for, in my opinion, both of them are fine quadrupeds.”
Of course the visitor meant the horse, so it would have been much better
had he called the animal by its simple; ordinary name–, there would have
been no room for ambiguity in his remark. He profited, however, by the
incident, and never called a horse a quadruped again.
Most of the small words, the simple words, the beautiful words which
express so much within small bounds belong to the pure Anglo-Saxon element
of our language. This element has given names to the heavenly bodies, the
sun, moon and stars; to three out of the four elements, earth, fire and
water; three out of the four seasons, spring, summer and winter. Its simple
words are applied to all the natural divisions of time, except one, as day,
night, morning, evening, twilight, noon, mid-day, midnight, sunrise and
sunset. The names of light, heat, cold, frost, rain, snow, hail, sleet,
thunder, lightning, as well as almost all those objects which form the
component parts of the beautiful, as expressed in external scenery, such as
sea and land, hill and dale, wood and stream, etc., are Anglo-Saxon. To
this same language we are indebted for those words which express the
earliest and dearest connections, and the strongest and most powerful
feelings of Nature, and which, as a consequence, are interwoven with the
fondest and most hallowed associations. Of such words are father, mother,
husband, wife, brother, sister, son, daughter, child, home, kindred,
friend, hearth, roof and fireside.
The chief emotions of which we are susceptible are expressed in the same
language–love, hope, fear, sorrow, shame, and also the outward signs by
which these emotions are indicated, as tear, smile, laugh, blush, weep,
sigh, groan. Nearly all our national proverbs are Anglo-Saxon. Almost all
the terms and phrases by which we most energetically express anger,
contempt and indignation are of the same origin.
What are known as the Smart Set and so-called polite society, are
relegating a great many of our old Anglo-Saxon words into the shade,
faithful friends who served their ancestors well. These self-appointed
arbiters of diction regard some of the Anglo-Saxon words as too coarse, too
plebeian for their aesthetic tastes and refined ears, so they are
eliminating them from their vocabulary and replacing them with mongrels of
foreign birth and hybrids of unknown origin. For the ordinary people,
however, the man in the street or in the field, the woman in the kitchen or
in the factory, they are still tried and true and, like old friends, should
be cherished and preferred to all strangers, no matter from what source the
latter may spring.
Continue...

This eBook of “How to Speak and Write Correctly” by Joseph Devlin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Elements of Style by William Strunk Jr. & How To Speak And Write Correctly by Joseph Devlin - Special EditionBy William Strunk Jr.At Amazon
