




  In the Ta Kuan Garden, (Broad Vista,) the merits of Pao-yü are put to
      the test, by his being told to write devices for scrolls and
      tablets.
  Yuan Ch’un returns to the Jung Kuo mansion, on a visit to her parents,
      and offers her congratulations to them on the feast of lanterns,
      on the fifteenth of the first moon.
Ch’in Chung, to resume our story, departed this life, and Pao-yü went on
so unceasingly in his bitter lamentations, that Li Kuei and the other
servants had, for ever so long, an arduous task in trying to comfort him
before he desisted; but on his return home he was still exceedingly
disconsolate.
Dowager lady Chia afforded monetary assistance to the amount of several
tens of taels; and exclusive of this, she had sacrificial presents
likewise got ready. Pao-yü went and paid a visit of condolence to the
family, and after seven days the funeral and burial took place, but
there are no particulars about them which could be put on record.
Pao-yü, however, continued to mourn (his friend) from day to day, and
was incessant in his remembrance of him, but there was likewise no help
for it. Neither is it known after how many days he got over his grief.
On this day, Chia Chen and the others came to tell Chia Cheng that the
works in the garden had all been reported as completed, and that Mr.
Chia She had already inspected them. “It only remains,” (they said),
“for you, sir, to see them; and should there possibly be anything which
is not proper, steps will be at once taken to effect the alterations, so
that the tablets and scrolls may conveniently be written.”
After Chia Cheng had listened to these words, he pondered for a while.
“These tablets and scrolls,” he remarked, “present however a difficult
task. According to the rites, we should, in order to obviate any
shortcoming, request the imperial consort to deign and compose them; but
if the honourable consort does not gaze upon the scenery with her own
eyes, it will also be difficult for her to conceive its nature and
indite upon it! And were we to wait until the arrival of her highness,
to request her to honour the grounds with a visit, before she composes
the inscriptions, such a wide landscape, with so many pavilions and
arbours, will, without one character in the way of a motto, albeit it
may abound with flowers, willows, rockeries, and streams, nevertheless
in no way be able to show off its points of beauty to advantage.”
The whole party of family companions, who stood by, smiled. “Your views,
remarkable sir,” they ventured, “are excellent; but we have now a
proposal to make. Tablets and scrolls for every locality cannot, on any
account, be dispensed with, but they could not likewise, by any means,
be determined upon for good! Were now, for the time being, two, three or
four characters fixed upon, harmonising with the scenery, to carry out,
for form’s sake, the idea, and were they provisionally utilised as
mottoes for the lanterns, tablets and scrolls, and hung up, pending the
arrival of her highness, and her visit through the grounds, when she
could be requested to decide upon the devices, would not two exigencies
be met with satisfactorily?”
“Your views are perfectly correct,” observed Chia Cheng, after he had
heard their suggestion; “and we should go to-day and have a look at the
place so as then to set to work to write the inscriptions; which, if
suitable, can readily be used; and, if unsuitable, Yü-ts’un can then be
sent for, and asked to compose fresh ones.”
The whole company smiled. “If you, sir, were to compose them to-day,"
they ventured, “they are sure to be excellent; and what need will there
be again to wait for Yü-ts’un!”
“You people are not aware,” Chia Cheng added with a smiling countenance,
“that I’ve been, even in my young days, very mediocre in the composition
of stanzas on flowers, birds, rockeries and streams; and that now that
I’m well up in years and have moreover the fatigue and trouble of my
official duties, I’ve become in literary compositions like these, which
require a light heart and gladsome mood, still more inapt. Were I even
to succeed in composing any, they will unavoidably be so doltish and
forced that they would contrariwise be instrumental in making the
flowers, trees, garden and pavilions, through their demerits, lose in
beauty, and present instead no pleasing feature.”
“This wouldn’t anyhow matter,” remonstrated all the family companions,
“for after perusing them we can all decide upon them together, each one
of us recommending those he thinks best; which if excellent can be kept,
and if faulty can be discarded; and there’s nothing unfeasible about
this!”
“This proposal is most apposite,” rejoined Chia Cheng. “What’s more, the
weather is, I rejoice, fine to-day; so let’s all go in a company and
have a look.”
Saying this, he stood up and went forward, at the head of the whole
party; while Chia Chen betook himself in advance into the garden to let
every one know of their coming. As luck would have it, Pao-yü–for he
had been these last few days thinking of Ch’in Chung and so ceaselessly
sad and wounded at heart, that dowager lady Chia had frequently directed
the servants to take him into the new garden to play–made his entrance
just at this very time, and suddenly became aware of the arrival of Chia
Chen, who said to him with a smile, “Don’t you yet run away as fast as
you can? Mr. Chia Cheng will be coming in a while.”
At these words, Pao-yü led off his nurse and the youths, and rushed at
once out of the garden, like a streak of smoke; but as he turned a
corner, he came face to face with Chia Cheng, who was advancing towards
that direction, at the head of all the visitors; and as he had no time
to get out of the way, the only course open to him was to stand on one
side.
Chia Cheng had, of late, heard the tutor extol him by saying that he
displayed special ability in rhyming antithetical lines, and that
although he did not like to read his books, he nevertheless possessed
some depraved talents, and hence it was that he was induced at this
moment to promptly bid him follow him into the garden, with the intent
of putting him to the test.
Pao-yü could not make out what his object was, but he was compelled to
follow. As soon as they reached the garden gate, and he caught sight of
Chia Chen, standing on one side, along with several managers: “See that
the garden gate is closed for a time,” Chia Cheng exclaimed, “for we’ll
first see the outside and then go in.”
Chia Chen directed a servant to close the gate, and Chia Cheng first
looked straight ahead of him towards the gate and espied on the same
side as the main entrance a suite of five apartments. Above, the
cylindrical tiles resembled the backs of mud eels. The doors, railings,
windows, and frames were all finely carved with designs of the new
fashion, and were painted neither in vermilion nor in white colours. The
whole extent of the walls was of polished bricks of uniform colour;
while below, the white marble on the terrace and steps was engraved with
western foreign designs; and when he came to look to the right and to
the left, everything was white as snow. At the foot of the white-washed
walls, tiger-skin pebbles were, without regard to pattern, promiscuously
inserted in the earth in such a way as of their own selves to form
streaks. Nothing fell in with the custom of gaudiness and display so
much in vogue, so that he naturally felt full of delight; and, when he
forthwith asked that the gate should be thrown open, all that met their
eyes was a long stretch of verdant hills, which shut in the view in
front of them.
“What a fine hill, what a pretty hill!” exclaimed all the companions
with one voice.
“Were it not for this one hill,” Chia Cheng explained, “whatever scenery
is contained in it would clearly strike the eye, as soon as one entered
into the garden, and what pleasure would that have been?”
“Quite so,” rejoined all of them. “But without large hills and ravines
in one’s breast (liberal capacities), how could one attain such
imagination!”
After the conclusion of this remark, they cast a glance ahead of them,
and perceived white rugged rocks looking, either like goblins, or
resembling savage beasts, lying either crossways, or in horizontal or
upright positions; on the surface of which grew moss and lichen with
mottled hues, or parasitic plants, which screened off the light; while,
slightly visible, wound, among the rocks, a narrow pathway like the
intestines of a sheep.
“If we were now to go and stroll along by this narrow path,” Chia Cheng
suggested, “and to come out from over there on our return, we shall have
been able to see the whole grounds.”
Having finished speaking, he asked Chia Chen to lead the way; and he
himself, leaning on Pao-yü, walked into the gorge with leisurely step.
Raising his head, he suddenly beheld on the hill a block of stone, as
white as the surface of a looking-glass, in a site which was, in very
deed, suitable to be left for an inscription, as it was bound to meet
the eye.
“Gentlemen,” Chia Cheng observed, as he turned his head round and
smiled, “please look at this spot. What name will it be fit to give it?”
When the company heard his remark, some maintained that the two words
“Heaped verdure” should be written; and others upheld that the device
should be “Embroidered Hill.” Others again suggested: “Vying with the
Hsiang Lu;” and others recommended “the small Chung Nan.” And various
kinds of names were proposed, which did not fall short of several tens.
All the visitors had been, it must be explained, aware at an early
period of the fact that Chia Cheng meant to put Pao-yü’s ability to the
test, and for this reason they merely proposed a few combinations in
common use. But of this intention, Pao-yü himself was likewise
cognizant.
After listening to the suggestions, Chia Cheng forthwith turned his head
round and bade Pao-yü think of some motto.
“I’ve often heard,” Pao-yü replied, “that writers of old opine that it’s
better to quote an old saying than to compose a new one; and that an old
engraving excels in every respect an engraving of the present day.
What’s more, this place doesn’t constitute the main hill or the chief
feature of the scenery, and is really no site where any inscription
should be put, as it no more than constitutes the first step in the
inspection of the landscape. Won’t it be well to employ the exact text
of an old writer consisting of ’a tortuous path leading to a secluded
(nook).’ This line of past days would, if inscribed, be, in fact,
liberal to boot.”
After listening to the proposed line, they all sang its praise.
“First-rate! excellent!” they cried, “the natural talents of your second
son, dear friend, are lofty; his mental capacity is astute; he is unlike
ourselves, who have read books but are simple fools.”
“You shouldn’t,” urged Chia Cheng smilingly, “heap upon him excessive
praise; he’s young in years, and merely knows one thing which he turns
to the use of ten purposes; you should laugh at him, that’s all; but we
can by and by choose some device.”
As he spoke, he entered the cave, where he perceived beautiful trees
with thick foliage, quaint flowers in lustrous bloom, while a line of
limpid stream emanated out of a deep recess among the flowers and trees,
and oozed down through the crevice of the rock. Progressing several
steps further in, they gradually faced the northern side, where a
stretch of level ground extended far and wide, on each side of which
soared lofty buildings, intruding themselves into the skies, whose
carved rafters and engraved balustrades nestled entirely among the
depressions of the hills and the tops of the trees. They lowered their
eyes and looked, and beheld a pure stream flowing like jade, stone steps
traversing the clouds, a balustrade of white marble encircling the pond
in its embrace, and a stone bridge with three archways, the animals upon
which had faces disgorging water from their mouths. A pavilion stood on
the bridge, and in this pavilion Chia Chen and the whole party went and
sat.
“Gentlemen,” he inquired, “what shall we write about this?”
“In the record,” they all replied, “of the ’Drunken Old Man’s Pavilion,’
written in days of old by Ou Yang, appears this line: ’There is a
pavilion pinioned-like,’ so let us call this ’the pinioned-like
pavilion,’ and finish.”
“Pinioned-like,” observed Chia Cheng smiling, “is indeed excellent; but
this pavilion is constructed over the water, and there should, after
all, be some allusion to the water in the designation. My humble opinion
is that of the line in Ou Yang’s work, ’(the water) drips from between
the two peaks,’ we should only make use of that single word ’drips.’”
“First-rate!” rejoined one of the visitors, “capital! but what would
really be appropriate are the two characters ’dripping jadelike.’”
Chia Chen pulled at his moustache, as he gave way to reflection; after
which, he asked Pao-yü to also propose one himself.
“What you, sir, suggested a while back,” replied Pao-yü, “will do very
well; but if we were now to sift the matter thoroughly, the use of the
single word ’drip’ by Ou Yang, in his composition about the Niang
spring, would appear quite apposite; while the application, also on this
occasion, to this spring, of the character ’drip’ would be found not
quite suitable. Moreover, seeing that this place is intended as a
separate residence (for the imperial consort), on her visit to her
parents, it is likewise imperative that we should comply with all the
principles of etiquette, so that were words of this kind to be used,
they would besides be coarse and inappropriate; and may it please you to
fix upon something else more recondite and abstruse.”
“What do you, gentlemen, think of this argument?” Chia Cheng remarked
sneeringly. “A little while ago, when the whole company devised
something original, you observed that it would be better to quote an old
device; and now that we have quoted an old motto, you again maintain
that it’s coarse and inappropriate! But you had better give us one of
yours.”
“If two characters like ’dripping jadelike’ are to be used,” Pao-yü
explained, “it would be better then to employ the two words ’Penetrating
Fragrance,’ which would be unique and excellent, wouldn’t they?”
Chia Cheng pulled his moustache, nodded his head and did not utter a
word; whereupon the whole party hastily pressed forward with one voice
to eulogize Pao-yü’s acquirements as extraordinary.
“The selection of two characters for the tablet is an easy matter,"
suggested Chia Cheng, “but now go on and compose a pair of antithetical
phrases with seven words in each.”
Pao-yü cast a glance round the four quarters, when an idea came into his
head, and he went on to recite:
  The willows, which enclose the shore, the green borrow from three
      bamboos;
  On banks apart, the flowers asunder grow, yet one perfume they give.
Upon hearing these lines, Chia Cheng gave a faint smile, as he nodded
his head, whilst the whole party went on again to be effusive in their
praise. But forthwith they issued from the pavilions, and crossed the
pond, contemplating with close attention each elevation, each stone,
each flower, or each tree. And as suddenly they raised their heads, they
caught sight, in front of them, of a line of white wall, of numbers of
columns, and beautiful cottages, where flourished hundreds and thousands
of verdant bamboos, which screened off the rays of the sun.
“What a lovely place!” they one and all exclaimed.
Speedily the whole company penetrated inside, perceiving, as soon as
they had entered the gate, a zigzag arcade, below the steps of which was
a raised pathway, laid promiscuously with stones, and on the furthest
part stood a diminutive cottage with three rooms, two with doors leading
into them and one without. Everything in the interior, in the shape of
beds, teapoys, chairs and tables, were made to harmonise with the space
available. Leading out of the inner room of the cottage was a small door
from which, as they egressed, they found a back-court with lofty pear
trees in blossom and banana trees, as well as two very small retiring
back-courts. At the foot of the wall, unexpectedly became visible an
aperture where was a spring, for which a channel had been opened
scarcely a foot or so wide, to enable it to run inside the wall. Winding
round the steps, it skirted the buildings until it reached the front
court, where it coiled and curved, flowing out under the bamboos.
“This spot,” observed Chia Cheng full of smiles, “is indeed pleasant!
and could one, on a moonlight night, sit under the window and study, one
would not spend a whole lifetime in vain!”
As he said this, he quickly cast a glance at Pao-yü, and so terrified
did Pao-yü feel that he hastily drooped his head. The whole company lost
no time in choosing some irrelevant talk to turn the conversation, and
two of the visitors prosecuted their remarks by adding that on the
tablet, in this spot, four characters should be inscribed.
“Which four characters?” Chia Cheng inquired, laughingly.
“The bequeathed aspect of the river Ch’i!” suggested one of them.
“It’s commonplace,” observed Chia Cheng.
Another person recommended “the remaining vestiges of the Chü Garden.”
“This too is commonplace!” replied Chia Cheng.
“Let brother Pao-yü again propound one!” interposed Chia Chen, who stood
by.
“Before he composes any himself,” Chia Cheng continued, “his wont is to
first discuss the pros and cons of those of others; so it’s evident that
he’s an impudent fellow!”
“He’s most reasonable in his arguments,” all the visitors protested,
“and why should he be called to task?”
“Don’t humour him so much!” Chia Cheng expostulated. “I’ll put up for
to-day,” he however felt constrained to tell Pao-yü, “with your haughty
manner, and your rubbishy speech, so that after you have, to begin with,
given us your opinion, you may next compose a device. But tell me, are
there any that will do among the mottoes suggested just now by all the
gentlemen?”
“They all seem to me unsuitable!” Pao-yü did not hesitate to say by way
of reply to this question.
Chia Cheng gave a sardonic smile. “How all unsuitable?” he exclaimed.
“This,” continued Pao-yü, “is the first spot which her highness will
honour on her way, and there should be inscribed, so that it should be
appropriate, something commending her sacred majesty. But if a tablet
with four characters has to be used, there are likewise devices ready at
hand, written by poets of old; and what need is there to compose any
more?”
“Are forsooth the devices ’the river Ch’i and the Chu Garden’ not those
of old authors?” insinuated Chia Cheng.
“They are too stiff,” replied Pao-yü. “Would not the four characters: ’a
phoenix comes with dignified air,’ be better?”
With clamorous unanimity the whole party shouted: “Excellent:” and Chia
Cheng nodding his head; “You beast, you beast!” he ejaculated, “it may
well be said about you that you see through a thin tube and have no more
judgment than an insect! Compose another stanza,” he consequently bade
him; and Pao-yü recited:
  In the precious tripod kettle, tea is brewed, but green is still the
      smoke!
  O’er is the game of chess by the still window, but the fingers are yet
      cold.
Chia Cheng shook his head. “Neither does this seem to me good!” he said;
and having concluded this remark he was leading the company out, when
just as he was about to proceed, he suddenly bethought himself of
something.
“The several courts and buildings and the teapoys, sideboards, tables
and chairs,” he added, “may be said to be provided for. But there are
still all those curtains, screens and portieres, as well as the
furniture, nicknacks and curios; and have they too all been matched to
suit the requirements of each place?”
“Of the things that have to be placed about,” Chia Chen explained, a
good number have, at an early period, been added, and of course when the
time comes everything will be suitably arranged. As for the curtains,
screens, and portieres, which have to be hung up, I heard yesterday
brother Lien say that they are not as yet complete, that when the works
were first taken in hand, the plan of each place was drawn, the
measurements accurately calculated and some one despatched to attend to
the things, and that he thought that yesterday half of them were bound
to come in.
Chia Cheng, upon hearing this explanation, readily remembered that with
all these concerns Chia Chen had nothing to do; so that he speedily sent
some one to go and call Chia Lien.
Having arrived in a short while, “How many sorts of things are there in
all?” Chia Cheng inquired of him. “Of these how many kinds have by this
time been got ready? and how many more are short?”
At this question, Chia Lien hastily produced, from the flaps of his
boot, a paper pocket-book, containing a list, which he kept inside the
tops of his boot. After perusing it and reperusing it, he made suitable
reply. “Of the hundred and twenty curtains,” he proceeded, “of stiff
spotted silks, embroidered with dragons in relief, and of the curtains
large and small, of every kind of damask silk, eighty were got
yesterday, so that there still remain forty of them to come. The two
portieres were both received yesterday; and besides these, there are the
two hundred red woollen portieres, two hundred portieres of Hsiang Fei
bamboo; two hundred door-screens of rattan, with gold streaks, and of
red lacquered bamboo; two hundred portieres of black lacquered rattan;
two hundred door-screens of variegated thread-netting with clusters of
flowers. Of each of these kinds, half have come in, but the whole lot of
them will be complete no later than autumn. Antimacassars, table-cloths,
flounces for the beds, and cushions for the stools, there are a thousand
two hundred of each, but these likewise are ready and at hand.”
As he spoke, they proceeded outwards, but suddenly they perceived a hill
extending obliquely in such a way as to intercept the passage; and as
they wound round the curve of the hill faintly came to view a line of
yellow mud walls, the whole length of which was covered with paddy
stalks for the sake of protection, and there were several hundreds of
apricot trees in bloom, which presented the appearance of being fire,
spurted from the mouth, or russet clouds, rising in the air. Inside this
enclosure, stood several thatched cottages. Outside grew, on the other
hand, mulberry trees, elms, mallows, and silkworm oaks, whose tender
shoots and new twigs, of every hue, were allowed to bend and to
intertwine in such a way as to form two rows of green fence. Beyond this
fence and below the white mound, was a well, by the side of which stood
a well-sweep, windlass and such like articles; the ground further down
being divided into parcels, and apportioned into fields, which, with the
fine vegetables and cabbages in flower, presented, at the first glance,
the aspect of being illimitable.
“This is,” Chia Cheng observed chuckling, “the place really imbued with
a certain amount of the right principle; and laid out, though it has
been by human labour, yet when it strikes my eye, it so moves my heart,
that it cannot help arousing in me the wish to return to my native place
and become a farmer. But let us enter and rest a while.”
As he concluded these words, they were on the point of walking in, when
they unexpectedly discerned a stone, outside the trellis gate, by the
roadside, which had also been left as a place on which to inscribe a
motto.
“Were a tablet,” argued the whole company smilingly, “put up high in a
spot like this, to be filled up by and by, the rustic aspect of a farm
would in that case be completely done away with; and it will be better,
yea far better to erect this slab on the ground, as it will further make
manifest many points of beauty. But unless a motto could be composed of
the same excellence as that in Fan Shih-hu’s song on farms, it will not
be adequate to express its charms!”
“Gentlemen,” observed Chia Cheng, “please suggest something.”
“A short while back,” replied the whole company, “your son, venerable
brother, remarked that devising a new motto was not equal to quoting an
old one, and as sites of this kind have been already exhausted by
writers of days of old, wouldn’t it be as well that we should
straightway call it the ’apricot blossom village?’ and this will do
splendidly.”
When Chia Cheng heard this remark, he smiled and said, addressing
himself to Chia Chen: “This just reminds me that although this place is
perfect in every respect, there’s still one thing wanting in the shape
of a wine board; and you had better then have one made to-morrow on the
very same pattern as those used outside in villages; and it needn’t be
anything gaudy, but hung above the top of a tree by means of bamboos.”
Chia Chen assented. “There’s no necessity,” he went on to explain, “to
keep any other birds in here, but only to rear a few geese, ducks, fowls
and such like; as in that case they will be in perfect keeping with the
place.”
“A splendid idea!” Chia Cheng rejoined, along with all the party.
“’Apricot blossom village’ is really first-rate,” continued Chia Cheng
as he again addressed himself to the company; “but the only thing is
that it encroaches on the real designation of the village; and it will
be as well to wait (until her highness comes), when we can request her
to give it a name.”
“Certainly!” answered the visitors with one voice; “but now as far as a
name goes, for mere form, let us all consider what expressions will be
suitable to employ.”
Pao-yü did not however give them time to think; nor did he wait for Chia
Cheng’s permission, but suggested there and then: “In old poetical works
there’s this passage: ’At the top of the red apricot tree hangs the flag
of an inn,’ and wouldn’t it be advisable, on this occasion, to
temporarily adopt the four words: ’the sign on the apricot tree is
visible’?”
“’Is visible’ is excellent,” suggested the whole number of them, “and
what’s more it secretly accords with the meaning implied by ’apricot
blossom village.’”
“Were the two words ’apricot blossom’ used for the name of the village,
they would be too commonplace and unsuitable;” added Pao-yü with a
sardonic grin, “but there’s another passage in the works of a poet of
the T’ang era: ’By the wooden gate near the water the corn-flower emits
its fragrance;’ and why not make use of the motto ’corn fragrance
village,’ which will be excellent?”
When the company heard his proposal, they, with still greater vigour,
unanimously combined in crying out “Capital!” as they clapped their
hands.
Chia Cheng, with one shout, interrupted their cries, “You ignorant child
of wrath!” he ejaculated; “how many old writers can you know, and how
many stanzas of ancient poetical works can you remember, that you will
have the boldness to show off in the presence of all these experienced
gentlemen? (In allowing you to give vent to) all the nonsense you
uttered my object was no other than to see whether your brain was clear
or muddled; and all for fun’s sake, that’s all; and lo, you’ve taken
things in real earnest!”
Saying this, he led the company into the interior of the hall with the
mallows. The windows were pasted with paper, and the bedsteads made of
wood, and all appearance of finery had been expunged, and Chia Cheng’s
heart was naturally much gratified; but nevertheless, scowling angrily
at Pao-yü, “What do you think of this place?” he asked.
When the party heard this question, they all hastened to stealthily give
a nudge to Pao-yü, with the express purpose of inducing him to say it
was nice; but Pao-yü gave no ear to what they all urged. “It’s by far
below the spot,” he readily replied, “designated ’a phoenix comes with
dignified air.’”
“You ignorant stupid thing!” exclaimed Chia Cheng at these words; “what
you simply fancy as exquisite, with that despicable reliance of yours
upon luxury and display, are two-storied buildings and painted pillars!
But how can you know anything about this aspect so pure and unobtrusive,
and this is all because of that failing of not studying your books!”
“Sir,” hastily answered Pao-yü, “your injunctions are certainly correct;
but men of old have often made allusion to ’natural;’ and what is, I
wonder, the import of these two characters?”
The company had perceived what a perverse mind Pao yü possessed, and
they one and all were much surprised that he should be so silly beyond
the possibility of any change; and when now they heard the question he
asked, about the two characters representing “natural,” they, with one
accord, speedily remarked, “Everything else you understand, and how is
it that on the contrary you don’t know what ’natural’ implies? The word
’natural’ means effected by heaven itself and not made by human labour.”
“Well, just so,” rejoined Pao-yü; “but the farm, which is laid out in
this locality, is distinctly the handiwork of human labour; in the
distance, there are no neighbouring hamlets; near it, adjoin no wastes;
though it bears a hill, the hill is destitute of streaks; though it be
close to water, this water has no spring; above, there is no pagoda
nestling in a temple; below, there is no bridge leading to a market; it
rises abrupt and solitary, and presents no grand sight! The palm would
seem to be carried by the former spot, which is imbued with the natural
principle, and possesses the charms of nature; for, though bamboos have
been planted in it, and streams introduced, they nevertheless do no
violence to the works executed. ’A natural landscape,’ says, an ancient
author in four words; and why? Simply because he apprehended that what
was not land, would, by forcible ways, be converted into land; and that
what was no hill would, by unnatural means, be raised into a hill. And
ingenious though these works might be in a hundred and one ways, they
cannot, after all, be in harmony.”...
But he had no time to conclude, as Chia Cheng flew into a rage. “Drive
him off,” he shouted; (but as Pao-yü) was on the point of going out, he
again cried out: “Come back! make up,” he added, “another couplet, and
if it isn’t clear, I’ll for all this give you a slap on your mouth.”
Pao-yü had no alternative but to recite as follows:
  A spot in which the “Ko” fibre to bleach, as the fresh tide doth swell
      the waters green!
  A beauteous halo and a fragrant smell the man encompass who the cress
      did pluck!
Chia Cheng, after this recital, nodded his head. “This is still worse!"
he remarked, but as he reproved him, he led the company outside, and
winding past the mound, they penetrated among flowers, and wending their
steps by the willows, they touched the rocks and lingered by the stream.
Passing under the trellis with yellow roses, they went into the shed
with white roses; they crossed by the pavilion with peonies, and walked
through the garden, where the white peony grew; and entering the court
with the cinnamon roses, they reached the island of bananas. As they
meandered and zigzagged, suddenly they heard the rustling sound of the
water, as it came out from a stone cave, from the top of which grew
parasitic plants drooping downwards, while at its bottom floated the
fallen flowers.
“What a fine sight!” they all exclaimed; “what beautiful scenery!”
“Gentlemen,” observed Chia Cheng, “what name do you propose for this
place?”
“There’s no further need for deliberation,” the company rejoined; “for
this is just the very spot fit for the three words ’Wu Ling Spring.’”
“This too is matter-of-fact!” Chia Cheng objected laughingly, “and
likewise antiquated.”
“If that won’t do,” the party smiled, “well then what about the four
characters implying ’An old cottage of a man of the Ch’in dynasty?’”
“This is still more exceedingly plain!” interposed Pao-yü. “’The old
cottage of a man of the Ch’in dynasty’ is meant to imply a retreat from
revolution, and how will it suit this place? Wouldn’t the four
characters be better denoting ’an isthmus with smart weed, and a stream
with flowers’?”
When Chia Cheng heard these words, he exclaimed: “You’re talking still
more stuff and nonsense?” and forthwith entering the grotto, Chia Cheng
went on to ask of Chia Chen, “Are there any boats or not?”
“There are to be,” replied Chia Chen, “four boats in all from which to
pick the lotus, and one boat for sitting in; but they haven’t now as yet
been completed.”
“What a pity!” Chia Cheng answered smilingly, “that we cannot go in.”
“But we could also get into it by the tortuous path up the hill,” Chia
Chen ventured; and after finishing this remark, he walked ahead to show
the way, and the whole party went over, holding on to the creepers, and
supporting themselves by the trees, when they saw a still larger
quantity of fallen leaves on the surface of the water, and the stream
itself, still more limpid, gently and idly meandering along on its
circuitous course. By the bank of the pond were two rows of weeping
willows, which, intermingling with peach and apricot trees, screened the
heavens from view, and kept off the rays of the sun from this spot,
which was in real truth devoid of even a grain of dust.
Suddenly, they espied in the shade of the willows, an arched wooden
bridge also reveal itself to the eye, with bannisters of vermilion
colour. They crossed the bridge, and lo, all the paths lay open before
them; but their gaze was readily attracted by a brick cottage spotless
and cool-looking; whose walls were constructed of polished bricks, of
uniform colour; (whose roof was laid) with speckless tiles; and whose
enclosing walls were painted; while the minor slopes, which branched off
from the main hill, all passed along under the walls on to the other
side.
“This house, in a site like this, is perfectly destitute of any charm!"
added Chia Cheng.
And as they entered the door, abruptly appeared facing them, a large
boulder studded with holes and soaring high in the skies, which was
surrounded on all four sides by rocks of every description, and
completely, in fact, hid from view the rooms situated in the compound.
But of flowers or trees, there was not even one about; and all that was
visible were a few strange kinds of vegetation; some being of the
creeper genus, others parasitic plants, either hanging from the apex of
the hill, or inserting themselves into the base of the rocks; drooping
down even from the eaves of the house, entwining the pillars, and
closing round the stone steps. Or like green bands, they waved and
flapped; or like gold thread, they coiled and bent, either with seeds
resembling cinnabar, or with blossoms like golden olea; whose fragrance
and aroma could not be equalled by those emitted by flowers of ordinary
species.
“This is pleasant!” Chia Cheng could not refrain from saying; “the only
thing is that I don’t know very much about flowers.”
“What are here are lianas and ficus pumila!” some of the company
observed.
“How ever can the liana and the ficus have such unusual scent?"
questioned Chia Cheng.
“Indeed they aren’t!” interposed Pao-yü. “Among all these flowers, there
are also ficus and liana, but those scented ones are iris, ligularia,
and ’Wu’ flowers; that kind consist, for the most part, of ’Ch’ih’
flowers and orchids; while this mostly of gold-coloured dolichos. That
species is the hypericum plant, this the ’Yü Lu’ creeper. The red ones
are, of course, the purple rue; the green ones consist for certain, of
the green ’Chih’ plant; and, to the best of my belief, these various
plants are mentioned in the ’Li Sao’ and ’Wen Hsuan.’ These rare plants
are, some of them called something or other like ’Huo Na’ and ’Chiang
Hui;’ others again are designated something like ’Lun Tsu’ and ’Tz’u
Feng;’ while others there are whose names sound like ’Shih Fan,’ ’Shui
Sung’ and ’Fu Liu,’ which together with other species are to be found in
the ’Treatise about the Wu city’ by Tso T’ai-chung. There are also those
which go under the appellation of ’Lu T’i,’ or something like that;
while there are others that are called something or other like ’Tan
Chiao,’ ’Mi Wu’ and ’Feng Lien;’ reference to which is made in the
’Treatise on the Shu city.’ But so many years have now elapsed, and the
times have so changed (since these treatises were written), that people,
being unable to discriminate (the real names) may consequently have had
to appropriate in every case such names as suited the external aspect,
so that they may, it is quite possible, have gradually come to be called
by wrong designations.”
But he had no time to conclude; for Chia Cheng interrupted him. “Who has
ever asked you about it?” he shouted; which plunged Pao-yü into such a
fright, that he drew back, and did not venture to utter another word.
Chia Cheng perceiving that on both sides alike were covered passages
resembling outstretched arms, forthwith continued his steps and entered
the covered way, when he caught sight, at the upper end, of a
five-roomed building, without spot or blemish, with folding blinds
extending in a connected line, and with corridors on all four sides; (a
building) which with its windows so green, and its painted walls,
excelled, in spotless elegance, the other buildings they had seen
before, to which it presented such a contrast.
Chia Cheng heaved a sigh. “If one were able,” he observed, “to boil his
tea and thrum his lyre in here, there wouldn’t even be any need for him
to burn any more incense. But the execution of this structure is so
beyond conception that you must, gentlemen, compose something nice and
original to embellish the tablet with, so as not to render such a place
of no effect!”
“There’s nothing so really pat,” suggested the company smiling; “as ’the
orchid-smell-laden breeze’ and ’the dew-bedecked epidendrum!”
“These are indeed the only four characters,” rejoined Chia Cheng, “that
could be suitably used; but what’s to be said as far as the scroll
goes?”
“I’ve thought of a couplet,” interposed one of the party, “which you’ll
all have to criticise, and put into ship-shape; its burden is this:
 “The musk-like epidendrum smell enshrouds the court, where shines the
      sun with oblique beams;
  The iris fragrance is wafted over the isle illumined by the moon’s
      clear rays.”
“As far as excellence is concerned, it’s excellent,” observed the whole
party, “but the two words representing ’with oblique beams’ are not
felicitous.”
And as some one quoted the line from an old poem:
  The angelica fills the court with tears, what time the sun doth slant.
“Lugubrious, lugubrious!” expostulated the company with one voice.
Another person then interposed. “I also have a couplet, whose merits
you, gentlemen, can weigh; it runs as follows:
 “Along the three pathways doth float the Yü Hui scented breeze!
  The radiant moon in the whole hall shines on the gold orchid!”
Chia Cheng tugged at his moustache and gave way to meditation. He was
just about also to suggest a stanza, when, upon suddenly raising his
head, he espied Pao-yü standing by his side, too timid to give vent to a
single sound.
“How is it,” he purposely exclaimed, “that when you should speak, you
contrariwise don’t? Is it likely that you expect some one to request you
to confer upon us the favour of your instruction?”
“In this place,” Pao-yü rejoined at these words, “there are no such
things as orchids, musk, resplendent moon or islands; and were one to
begin quoting such specimens of allusions, to scenery, two hundred
couplets could be readily given without, even then, having been able to
exhaust the supply!”
“Who presses your head down,” Chia Cheng urged, “and uses force that you
must come out with all these remarks?”
“Well, in that case,” added Pao-yü, “there are no fitter words to put on
the tablet than the four representing: ’The fragrance pure of the
ligularia and iris.’ While the device on the scroll might be:
 “Sung is the nutmeg song, but beauteous still is the sonnet!
  Near the T’u Mei to sleep, makes e’en a dream with fragrance full!”
“This is,” laughed Chia Cheng sneeringly, “an imitation of the line:
 “A book when it is made of plaintain leaves, the writing green is also
      bound to be!
“So that there’s nothing remarkable about it.”
“Li T’ai-po, in his work on the Phoenix Terrace,” protested the whole
party, “copied, in every point, the Huang Hua Lou. But what’s essential
is a faultless imitation. Now were we to begin to criticise minutely the
couplet just cited, we would indeed find it to be, as compared with the
line ’A book when it is made of plantain leaves,’ still more elegant and
of wider application!”
“What an idea?” observed Chia Cheng derisively.
But as he spoke, the whole party walked out; but they had not gone very
far before they caught sight of a majestic summer house, towering high
peak-like, and of a structure rising loftily with storey upon storey;
and completely locked in as they were on every side they were as
beautiful as the Jade palace. Far and wide, road upon road coiled and
wound; while the green pines swept the eaves, the jady epidendrum
encompassed the steps, the animals’ faces glistened like gold, and the
dragons’ heads shone resplendent in their variegated hues.
“This is the Main Hall,” remarked Chia Cheng; “the only word against it
is that there’s a little too much finery.”
“It should be so,” rejoined one and all, “so as to be what it’s intended
to be! The imperial consort has, it is true, an exalted preference for
economy and frugality, but her present honourable position requires the
observance of such courtesies, so that (finery) is no fault.”
As they made these remarks and advanced on their way the while, they
perceived, just in front of them, an archway project to view,
constructed of jadelike stone; at the top of which the coils of large
dragons and the scales of small dragons were executed in perforated
style.
“What’s the device to be for this spot?” inquired Chia Cheng.
“It should be ’fairy land,’” suggested all of them, “so as to be
apposite!”
Chia Cheng nodded his head and said nothing. But as soon as Pao-yü
caught sight of this spot something was suddenly aroused in his heart
and he began to ponder within himself. “This place really resembles
something that I’ve seen somewhere or other.” But he could not at the
moment recall to mind what year, moon, or day this had happened.
Chia Cheng bade him again propose a motto; but Pao-yü was bent upon
thinking over the details of the scenery he had seen on a former
occasion, and gave no thought whatever to this place, so that the whole
company were at a loss what construction to give to his silence, and
came simply to the conclusion that, after the bullying he had had to put
up with for ever so long, his spirits had completely vanished, his
talents become exhausted and his speech impoverished; and that if he
were harassed and pressed, he might perchance, as the result of anxiety,
contract some ailment or other, which would of course not be a suitable
issue, and they lost no time in combining together to dissuade Chia
Cheng.
“Never mind,” they said, “to-morrow will do to compose some device;
let’s drop it now.”
Chia Cheng himself was inwardly afraid lest dowager lady Chia should be
anxious, so that he hastily remarked as he forced a smile. “You beast,
there are, after all, also occasions on which you are no good! but never
mind! I’ll give you one day to do it in, and if by to-morrow you haven’t
been able to compose anything, I shall certainly not let you off. This
is the first and foremost place and you must exercise due care in what
you write.”
Saying this, he sallied out, at the head of the company, and cast
another glance at the scenery.
Indeed from the time they had entered the gate up to this stage, they
had just gone over five or six tenths of the whole ground, when it
happened again that a servant came and reported that some one had
arrived from Mr. Yü-’ts’un’s to deliver a message. “These several places
(which remain),” Chia Cheng observed with a smile, “we have no time to
pass under inspection; but we might as well nevertheless go out at least
by that way, as we shall be able, to a certain degree, to have a look at
the general aspect.”
With these words, he showed the way for the family companions until they
reached a large bridge, with water entering under it, looking like a
curtain made of crystal. This bridge, the fact is, was the dam, which
communicated with the river outside, and from which the stream was
introduced into the grounds.
“What’s the name of this water-gate?” Chia Cheng inquired.
“This is,” replied Pao-yü, “the main stream of the Hsin Fang river, and
is therefore called the Hsin Fang water-gate.”
“Nonsense!” exclaimed Chia Cheng. “The two words Hsin Fang must on no
account be used!”
And as they speedily advanced on their way, they either came across
elegant halls, or thatched cottages; walls made of piled-up stone, or
gates fashioned of twisted plants; either a secluded nunnery or Buddhist
fane, at the foot of some hill; or some unsullied houses, hidden in a
grove, tenanted by rationalistic priestesses; either extensive corridors
and winding grottoes; or square buildings, and circular pavilions. But
Chia Cheng had not the energy to enter any of these places, for as he
had not had any rest for ever so long, his legs felt shaky and his feet
weak.
Suddenly they also discerned ahead of them a court disclose itself to
view.
“When we get there,” Chia Cheng suggested, “we must have a little rest."
Straightway as he uttered the remark, he led them in, and winding round
the jade-green peach-trees, covered with blossom, they passed through
the bamboo fence and flower-laden hedge, which were twisted in such a
way as to form a circular, cavelike gateway, when unexpectedly appeared
before their eyes an enclosure with whitewashed walls, in which verdant
willows drooped in every direction.
Chia Cheng entered the gateway in company with the whole party. Along
the whole length of both sides extended covered passages, connected with
each other; while in the court were laid out several rockeries. In one
quarter were planted a number of banana trees; on the opposite stood a
plant of begonia from Hsi Fu. Its appearance was like an open umbrella.
The gossamer hanging (from its branches) resembled golden threads. The
corollas (seemed) to spurt out cinnabar.
“What a beautiful flower! what a beautiful flower!” ejaculated the whole
party with one voice; “begonias are verily to be found; but never before
have we seen anything the like of this in beauty.”
“This is called the maiden begonia and is, in fact, a foreign species,"
Chia Cheng observed. “There’s a homely tradition that it is because it
emanates from the maiden kingdom that its flowers are most prolific; but
this is likewise erratic talk and devoid of common sense.”
“They are, after all,” rejoined the whole company, “so unlike others (we
have seen), that what’s said about the maiden kingdom is, we are
inclined to believe, possibly a fact.”
“I presume,” interposed Pao-yü, “that some clever bard or poet,
(perceiving) that this flower was red like cosmetic, delicate as if
propped up in sickness, and that it closely resembled the nature of a
young lady, gave it, consequently, the name of maiden! People in the
world will propagate idle tales, all of which are unavoidably treated as
gospel!”
“We receive (with thanks) your instructions; what excellent
explanation!” they all remarked unanimously, and as they expressed these
words, the whole company took their seats on the sofas under the
colonnade.
“Let’s think of some original text or other for a motto,” Chia Cheng
having suggested, one of the companions opined that the two characters:
“Banana and stork” would be felicitous; while another one was of the
idea that what would be faultless would be: “Collected splendour and
waving elegance!”
“’Collected splendour and waving elegance’ is excellent,” Chia Cheng
observed addressing himself to the party; and Pao-yü himself, while also
extolling it as beautiful, went on to say: “There’s only one thing
however to be regretted!”
“What about regret?” the company inquired.
“In this place,” Pao-yü explained, “are set out both bananas as well as
begonias, with the intent of secretly combining in them the two
properties of red and green; and if mention of one of them be made, and
the other be omitted, (the device) won’t be good enough for selection.”
“What would you then suggest?” Chia Cheng asked.
“I would submit the four words, ’the red (flowers) are fragrant, the
green (banana leaves) like jade,’ which would render complete the
beauties of both (the begonias and bananas).”
“It isn’t good! it isn’t good!” Chia Cheng remonstrated as he shook his
head; and while passing this remark, he conducted the party into the
house, where they noticed that the internal arrangements effected
differed from those in other places, as no partitions could, in fact, be
discerned. Indeed, the four sides were all alike covered with boards
carved hollow with fretwork, (in designs consisting) either of rolling
clouds and hundreds of bats; or of the three friends of the cold season
of the year, (fir, bamboo and almond); of scenery and human beings, or
of birds or flowers; either of clusters of decoration, or of relics of
olden times; either of ten thousand characters of happiness or of ten
thousand characters of longevity. The various kinds of designs had been
all carved by renowned hands, in variegated colours, inlaid with gold,
and studded with precious gems; while on shelf upon shelf were either
arranged collections of books, or tripods were laid out; either pens and
inkslabs were distributed about, or vases with flowers set out, or
figured pots were placed about; the designs of the shelves being either
round or square; or similar to sunflowers or banana leaves; or like
links, half overlapping each other. And in very truth they resembled
bouquets of flowers or clusters of tapestry, with all their fretwork so
transparent. Suddenly (the eye was struck) by variegated gauzes pasted
(on the wood-work), actually forming small windows; and of a sudden by
fine thin silks lightly overshadowing (the fretwork) just as if there
were, after all, secret doors. The whole walls were in addition traced,
with no regard to symmetry, with outlines of the shapes of curios and
nick-nacks in imitation of lutes, double-edged swords, hanging bottles
and the like, the whole number of which, though (apparently) suspended
on the walls, were all however on a same level with the surface of the
partition walls.
“What fine ingenuity!” they all exclaimed extollingly; “what a labour
they must have been to carry out!”
Chia Cheng had actually stepped in; but scarcely had they reached the
second stage, before the whole party readily lost sight of the way by
which they had come in. They glanced on the left, and there stood a
door, through which they could go. They cast their eyes on the right,
and there was a window which suddenly impeded their progress. They went
forward, but there again they were obstructed by a bookcase. They turned
their heads round, and there too stood windows pasted with transparent
gauze and available door-ways: but the moment they came face to face
with the door, they unexpectedly perceived that a whole company of
people had likewise walked in, just in front of them, whose appearance
resembled their own in every respect. But it was only a mirror. And when
they rounded the mirror, they detected a still larger number of doors.
“Sir,” Chia Chen remarked with a grin; “if you’ll follow me out through
this door, we’ll forthwith get into the back-court; and once out of the
back-court, we shall be, at all events, nearer than we were before.”
Taking the lead, he conducted Chia Cheng and the whole party round two
gauze mosquito houses, when they verily espied a door through which they
made their exit, into a court, replete with stands of cinnamon roses.
Passing round the flower-laden hedge, the only thing that spread before
their view was a pure stream impeding their advance. The whole company
was lost in admiration. “Where does this water again issue from?” they
cried.
Chia Chen pointed to a spot at a distance. “Starting originally,” he
explained, “from that water-gate, it runs as far as the mouth of that
cave, when from among the hills on the north-east side, it is introduced
into that village, where again a diverging channel has been opened and
it is made to flow in a south-westerly direction; the whole volume of
water then runs to this spot, where collecting once more in one place,
it issues, on its outward course, from beneath that wall.”
“It’s most ingenious!” they one and all exclaimed, after they had
listened to him; but, as they uttered these words, they unawares
realised that a lofty hill obstructed any further progress. The whole
party felt very hazy about the right road. But “Come along after me,"
Chia Chen smilingly urged, as he at once went ahead and showed the way,
whereupon the company followed in his steps, and as soon as they turned
round the foot of the hill, a level place and broad road lay before
them; and wide before their faces appeared the main entrance.
“This is charming! this is delightful!” the party unanimously exclaimed,
“what wits must have been ransacked, and ingenuity attained, so as to
bring things to this extreme degree of excellence!”
Forthwith the party egressed from the garden, and Pao-yü’s heart
anxiously longed for the society of the young ladies in the inner
quarters, but as he did not hear Chia Cheng bid him go, he had no help
but to follow him into the library. But suddenly Chia Cheng bethought
himself of him. “What,” he said, “you haven’t gone yet! the old lady
will I fear be anxious on your account; and is it pray that you haven’t
as yet had enough walking?”
Pao-yü at length withdrew out of the library. On his arrival in the
court, a page, who had been in attendance on Chia Cheng, at once pressed
forward, and took hold of him fast in his arms. “You’ve been lucky
enough,” he said, “to-day to have been in master’s good graces! just a
while back when our old mistress despatched servants to come on several
occasions and ask after you, we replied that master was pleased with
you; for had we given any other answer, her ladyship would have sent to
fetch you to go in, and you wouldn’t have had an opportunity of
displaying your talents. Every one admits that the several stanzas you
recently composed were superior to those of the whole company put
together; but you must, after the good luck you’ve had to-day, give us a
tip!”
“I’ll give each one of you a tiao,” Pao-yü rejoined smirkingly.
“Who of us hasn’t seen a tiao?” they all exclaimed, “let’s have that
purse of yours, and have done with it!”
Saying this, one by one advanced and proceeded to unloosen the purse,
and to unclasp the fan-case; and allowing Pao-yü no time to make any
remonstrance, they stripped him of every ornament in the way of
appendage which he carried about on his person. “Whatever we do let’s
escort him home!” they shouted, and one after another hustled round him
and accompanied him as far as dowager lady Chia’s door.
Her ladyship was at this moment awaiting his arrival, so that when she
saw him walk in, and she found out that (Chia Cheng) had not bullied
him, she felt, of course, extremely delighted. But not a long interval
elapsed before Hsi Jen came to serve the tea; and when she perceived
that on his person not one of the ornaments remained, she consequently
smiled and inquired: “Have all the things that you had on you been again
taken away by these barefaced rascals?”
As soon as Lin Tai-yü heard this remark, she crossed over to him and saw
at a glance that not one single trinket was, in fact, left. “Have you
also given them,” she felt constrained to ask, “the purse that I gave
you? Well, by and by, when you again covet anything of mine, I shan’t
let you have it.”
After uttering these words, she returned into her apartment in high
dudgeon, and taking the scented bag, which Pao-yü had asked her to make
for him, and which she had not as yet finished, she picked up a pair of
scissors, and instantly cut it to pieces.
Pao-yü noticing that she had lost her temper, came after her with
hurried step, but the bag had already been cut with the scissors; and as
Pao-yü observed how extremely fine and artistic this scented bag was, in
spite of its unfinished state, he verily deplored that it should have
been rent to pieces for no rhyme or reason. Promptly therefore
unbuttoning his coat, he produced from inside the lapel the purse, which
had been fastened there. “Look at this!” he remarked as he handed it to
Tai-yü; “what kind of thing is this! have I given away to any one what
was yours?” Lin Tai-yü, upon seeing how much he prized it as to wear it
within his clothes, became alive to the fact that it was done with
intent, as he feared lest any one should take it away; and as this
conviction made her sorry that she had been so impetuous as to have cut
the scented bag, she lowered her head and uttered not a word.
“There was really no need for you to have cut it,” Pao-yü observed; “but
as I know that you’re loth to give me anything, what do you say to my
returning even this purse?”
With these words, he threw the purse in her lap and walked off; which
vexed Tai-yü so much the more that, after giving way to tears, she took
up the purse in her hands to also destroy it with the scissors, when
Pao-yü precipitately turned round and snatched it from her grasp.
“My dear cousin,” he smilingly pleaded, “do spare it!” and as Tai-yü
dashed down the scissors and wiped her tears: “You needn’t,” she urged,
“be kind to me at one moment, and unkind at another; if you wish to have
a tiff, why then let’s part company!” But as she spoke, she lost control
over her temper, and, jumping on her bed, she lay with her face turned
towards the inside, and set to work drying her eyes.
Pao-yü could not refrain from approaching her. “My dear cousin, my own
cousin,” he added, “I confess my fault!”
“Go and find Pao-yü!” dowager lady Chia thereupon gave a shout from
where she was in the front apartment, and all the attendants explained
that he was in Miss Lin’s room.
“All right, that will do! that will do!” her ladyship rejoined, when she
heard this reply; “let the two cousins play together; his father kept
him a short while back under check, for ever so long, so let him have
some distraction. But the only thing is that you mustn’t allow them to
have any quarrels.” To which the servants in a body expressed their
obedience.
Tai-yü, unable to put up with Pao-yü’s importunity, felt compelled to
rise. “Your object seems to be,” she remarked, “not to let me have any
rest. If it is, I’ll run away from you.” Saying which, she there and
then was making her way out, when Pao-yü protested with a face full of
smiles: “Wherever you go, I’ll follow!” and as he, at the same time,
took the purse and began to fasten it on him, Tai-yü stretched out her
hand, and snatching it away, “You say you don’t want it,” she observed,
“and now you put it on again! I’m really much ashamed on your account!"
And these words were still on her lips when with a sound of Ch’ih, she
burst out laughing.
“My dear cousin,” Pao-yü added, “to-morrow do work another scented bag
for me!”
“That too will rest upon my good pleasure,” Tai-yü rejoined.
As they conversed, they both left the room together and walked into
madame Wang’s suite of apartments, where, as luck would have it,
Pao-ch’ai was also seated.
Unusual commotion prevailed, at this time, over at madame Wang’s, for
the fact is that Chia Se had already come back from Ku Su, where he had
selected twelve young girls, and settled about an instructor, as well as
about the theatrical properties and the other necessaries. And as Mrs.
Hsüeh had by this date moved her quarters into a separate place on the
northeast side, and taken up her abode in a secluded and quiet house,
(madame Wang) had had repairs of a distinct character executed in the
Pear Fragrance Court, and then issued directions that the instructor
should train the young actresses in this place; and casting her choice
upon all the women, who had, in days of old, received a training in
singing, and who were now old matrons with white hair, she bade them
have an eye over them and keep them in order. Which done, she enjoined
Chia Se to assume the chief control of all matters connected with the
daily and monthly income and outlay, as well as of the accounts of all
articles in use of every kind and size.
Lin Chih-hsiao also came to report: “that the twelve young nuns and
Taoist girls, who had been purchased after proper selection, had all
arrived, and that the twenty newly-made Taoist coats had also been
received. That there was besides a maiden, who though devoted to
asceticism, kept her chevelure unshaved; that she was originally a
denizen of Suchow, of a family whose ancestors were also people of
letters and official status; that as from her youth up she had been
stricken with much sickness, (her parents) had purchased a good number
of substitutes (to enter the convent), but all with no relief to her,
until at last this girl herself entered the gate of abstraction when she
at once recovered. That hence it was that she grew her hair, while she
devoted herself to an ascetic life; that she was this year eighteen
years of age, and that the name given to her was Miao Yü; that her
father and mother were, at this time, already dead; that she had only by
her side, two old nurses and a young servant girl to wait upon her; that
she was most proficient in literature, and exceedingly well versed in
the classics and canons; and that she was likewise very attractive as
far as looks went; that having heard that in the city of Ch’ang-an,
there were vestiges of Kuan Yin and relics of the canons inscribed on
leaves, she followed, last year, her teacher (to the capital). She now
lives,” he said, “in the Lao Ni nunnery, outside the western gate; her
teacher was a great expert in prophetic divination, but she died in the
winter of last year, and her dying words were that as it was not
suitable for (Miao Yü) to return to her native place, she should await
here, as something in the way of a denouement was certain to turn up;
and this is the reason why she hasn’t as yet borne the coffin back to
her home!”
“If such be the case,” madame Wang readily suggested, “why shouldn’t we
bring her here?”
“If we are to ask her,” Lin Chih-hsiao’s wife replied, “she’ll say that
a marquis’ family and a duke’s household are sure, in their honourable
position, to be overbearing to people; and I had rather not go.”
“As she’s the daughter of an official family,” madame Wang continued,
“she’s bound to be inclined to be somewhat proud; but what harm is there
to our sending her a written invitation to ask her to come!”
Lin Chih-hsiao’s wife assented; and leaving the room, she made the
secretary write an invitation and then went to ask Miao Yü. The next day
servants were despatched, and carriages and sedan chairs were got ready
to go and bring her over.
What subsequently transpired is not as yet known, but, reader, listen to
the account given in the following chapter.
Continue...

This eBook of “Hung Lou Meng, Book I” (Or, the Dream of the Red Chamber,
a Chinese Novel in Two Books - by Cao Xueqin - translated by H. Bencraft
Joly) belongs to the public domain.

All books:
Part I (A),
Part I (B),
Part II (A),
Part II (B).

Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
