




  The tongue of the village old dame finds as free vent as a river that
      has broken its banks.
  The affectionate cousin makes up his mind to sift to the very bottom
      the story told by old goody Liu.
Upon seeing, the story explains, P’ing Erh arrive, they unanimously
inquired, “What is your mistress up to? How is it she hasn’t come?”
“How ever could she spare the time to get as far as here?” P’ing Erh
smiled and replied. “But, she said, she hasn’t anything good to eat, so
she bade me, as she couldn’t possibly run over, come and find out
whether there be any more crabs or not; (if there be), she enjoined me
to ask for a few to take to her to eat at home.”
“There are plenty!” Hsiang-yün rejoined; and directing, with alacrity, a
servant to fetch a present box, she put in it ten of the largest crabs.
“I’ll take a few more of the female ones,” P’ing Erh remarked.
One and all then laid hands upon P’ing Erh and tried to drag her into a
seat, but P’ing Erh would not accede to their importunities.
“I insist upon your sitting down,” Li Wan laughingly exclaimed, and as
she kept pulling her about, and forcing her to sit next to her, she
filled a cup of wine and put it to her lips. P’ing Erh hastily swallowed
a sip and endeavoured immediately to beat a retreat.
“I won’t let you go,” shouted Li Wan. “It’s so evident that you’re only
got that woman Feng in your thoughts as you don’t listen to any of my
words!”
Saying this, she went on to bid the nurses go ahead, and take the box
over. “Tell her,” she added, “that I’ve kept P’ing Erh here.”
A matron presently returned with a box. “Lady Secunda,” she reported,
“says that you, lady Chu, and our young mistresses must not make fun of
her for having asked for something to eat; and that in this box you’ll
find cakes made of water-lily powder, and rolls prepared with chicken
fat, which your maternal aunt, on the other side, just sent for your
ladyship and for you, young ladies, to taste. That she bids you,” (the
matron) continued, turning towards P’ing Erh, “come over on duty, but
your mind is so set upon pleasure that you loiter behind and don’t go
back. She advises you, however, not to have too many cups of wine.”
“Were I even to have too much,” P’ing Erh smiled, “what could she do to
me?”
Uttering these words, she went on with her drink; after which she
partook of some more crab.
“What a pity it is,” interposed Li Wan, caressing her, “that a girl with
such good looks as you should have so ordinary a fortune as to simply
fall into that room as a menial! But wouldn’t any one, who is not
acquainted with actual facts, take you for a lady and a mistress?”
While she went on eating and drinking with Pao-ch’ai, Hsiang-yün and the
other girls, P’ing Erh turned her head round. “Don’t rub me like that!"
she laughed, “It makes me feel quite ticklish.”
“Ai-yo!” shouted Li Wan. “What’s this hard thing?”
“It’s a key,” P’ing Erh answered.
“What fine things have you got that the fear lest people should take it
away, prompts you to carry this about you? I keep on, just for a laugh,
telling people the whole day long that when the bonze T’ang was fetching
the canons, a white horse came and carried him! That when Liu Chih-yüan
was attacking the empire, a melon-spirit appeared and brought him a coat
of mail, and that in the same way, where our vixen Feng is, there you
are to be found! You are your mistress’ general key; and what do you
want this other key for?”
“You’ve primed yourself with wine, my lady,” P’ing Erh smiled, “and here
you once more chaff me and make a laughing-stock of me.”
“This is really quite true,” Pao-ch’ai laughed. “Whenever we’ve got
nothing to do, and we talk matters over, (we’re quite unanimous) that
not one in a hundred could be picked out to equal you girls in here. The
beauty is that each one of you possesses her own good qualities!”
“In every thing, whether large or small, a heavenly principle rules
alike,” Li Wan explained. “Were there, for instance, no Yüan Yang in our
venerable senior’s apartments, how would it ever do? Commencing with
Madame Wang herself, who is it who could muster sufficient courage to
expostulate with the old lady? Yet she plainly has the pluck to put in
her remonstrances with her; and, as it happens, our worthy ancestor
lends a patient ear to only what she says and no one else. None of the
others can remember what our old senior has in the way of clothes and
head-ornaments, but she can remember everything; and, were she not there
to look after things, there is no knowing how many would not be swindled
away. That child besides is so straightforward at heart, that, despite
all this, she often puts in a good word for others, and doesn’t rely
upon her influence to look down disdainfully upon any one!”
“It was only yesterday,” Hsi Ch’un observed with a smile, “that our dear
ancestor said that she was ever so much better than the whole lot of
us!”
“She’s certainly splendid!” P’ing Erh ventured. “How could we rise up to
her standard?”
“Ts’ai Hsia,” Pao-yü put in, “who is in mother’s rooms, is a good sort
of girl!”
“Of course she is!” T’an Ch’un assented. “But she’s good enough as far
as external appearances go, but inwardly she’s a sly one! Madame Wang is
just like a joss; she does not give her mind to any sort of business;
but this girl is up to everything; and it is she who in all manner of
things reminds her mistress what there is to be done. She even knows
everything, whether large or small, connected with Mr. Chia Cheng’s
staying at home or going out of doors; and when at any time Madame Wang
forgets, she, from behind the scenes, prompts her how to act.”
“Well, never mind about her!” Li Wan suggested. “But were,” she pursued,
pointing at Pao-yü, “no Hsi Jen in this young gentleman’s quarters, just
you imagine what a pitch things would reach! That vixen Feng may truly
resemble the prince Pa of the Ch’u kingdom; and she may have two arms
strong enough to raise a tripod weighing a thousand catties, but had she
not this maid (P’ing Erh), would she be able to accomplish everything so
thoroughly?”
“In days gone by,” P’ing Erh interposed, “four servant-girls came along
with her, but what with those who’ve died and those who’ve gone, only I
remain like a solitary spirit.”
“You’re, after all, the fortunate one!” Li Wan retorted, “but our hussey
Feng too is lucky in having you! Had I not also once, just remember, two
girls, when your senior master Chu was alive? Am I not, you’ve seen for
yourselves, a person to bear with people? But in such a surly frame of
mind did I find them both day after day that, as soon as your senior
master departed this life, I availed myself of their youth (to give them
in marriage) and to pack both of them out of my place. But had either of
them been good for anything and worthy to be kept, I would, in fact,
have now had some one to give me a helping hand!”
As she spoke, the very balls of her eyes suddenly became quite red.
“Why need you again distress your mind?” they with one voice, exclaimed.
“Isn’t it better that we should break up?”
While conversing, they rinsed their hands; and, when they had agreed to
go in a company to dowager lady Chia’s and Madame Wang’s and inquire
after their health, the matrons and servant-maids swept the pavilion and
collected and washed the cups and saucers.
Hsi Jen proceeded on her way along with P’ing Erh. “Come into my room,"
said Hsi Jen to P’ing Erh, “and sit down and have another cup of tea.”
“I won’t have any tea just now,” P’ing Erh answered. “I’ll come some
other time.”
So saying, she was about to go off when Hsi Jen called out to her and
stopped her.
“This month’s allowances,” she asked, “haven’t yet been issued, not even
to our old mistress and Madame Wang; why is it?”
Upon catching this inquiry, P’ing Erh hastily retraced her steps and
drew near Hsi Jen. After looking about to see that no one was in the
neighbourhood, she rejoined in a low tone of voice, “Drop these
questions at once! They’re sure, anyhow, to be issued in a couple of
days.”
“Why is it,” smiled Hsi Jen, “that this gives you such a start?”
“This month’s allowances,” P’ing Erh explained to her in a whisper,
“have long ago been obtained in advance by our mistress Secunda and
given to people for their own purposes; and it’s when the interest has
been brought from here and there that the various sums will be lumped
together and payment be effected. I confide this to you, but, mind, you
mustn’t go and tell any other person about it.”
“Is it likely that she hasn’t yet enough money for her own
requirements?” Hsi Jen smiled. “Or is it that she’s still not satisfied?
And what’s the use of her still going on bothering herself in this way?”
“Isn’t it so!” laughed P’ing Erh. “From just handling the funds for this
particular item, she has, during these few years, so manipulated them as
to turn up several hundreds of taels profit out of them. Nor does she
spend that monthly allowance of hers for public expenses. But the moment
she accumulates anything like eight or ten taels odd, she gives them out
too. Thus the interest on her own money alone comes up to nearly a
thousand taels a year.”
“You and your mistress take our money,” Hsi Jen observed laughingly,
“and get interest on it; fooling us as if we were no better than
idiots.”
“Here you are again with your uncharitable words!” P’ing Erh
remonstrated. “Can it be that you haven’t yet enough to meet your own
expenses with?”
“I am, it’s true, not short of money,” Hsi Jen replied, “as I have
nowhere to go and spend it; but the thing is that I’m making provision
for that fellow of ours, (Pao-yü).”
“If you ever find yourself in any great straits and need money,” P’ing
Erh resumed, “you’re at liberty to take first those few taels I’ve got
over there to suit your own convenience with, and by and bye I can
reduce them from what is due to you and we’ll be square.”
“I’m not in need of any just now,” retorted Hsi Jen. “But should I not
have enough, when I want some, I’ll send some one to fetch them, and
finish.”
P’ing Erh promised that she would let her have the money at any time she
sent for it, and, and taking the shortest cut, she issued out of the
garden gate. Here she encountered a servant despatched from the other
side by lady Feng. She came in search of P’ing Erh. “Our lady,” she
said, “has something for you to do, and is waiting for you.”
“What’s up that it’s so pressing?” P’ing Erh inquired. “Our senior
mistress detained me by force to have a chat, so I couldn’t manage to
get away. But here she time after time sends people after me in this
manner!”
“Whether you go or not is your own look out,” the maid replied. “It
isn’t worth your while getting angry with me! If you dare, go and tell
these things to our mistress!”
P’ing Erh spat at her contemptuously, and rushed back in anxious haste.
She discovered, however, that lady Feng was not at home. But
unexpectedly she perceived that the old goody Liu, who had paid them a
visit on a previous occasion for the purpose of obtaining pecuniary
assistance, had come again with Pan Erh, and was seated in the opposite
room, along with Chang Ts’ai’s wife and Chou Jui’s wife, who kept her
company. But two or three servant-maids were inside as well emptying on
the floor bags containing dates, squash and various wild greens.
As soon as they saw her appear in the room, they promptly stood up in a
body. Old goody Liu had, on her last visit, learnt what P’ing Erh’s
status in the establishment was, so vehemently jumping down, she
enquired, “Miss, how do you do? All at home,” she pursued, “send you
their compliments. I meant to have come earlier and paid my respects to
my lady and to look you up, miss; but we’ve been very busy on the farm.
We managed this year to reap, after great labour, a few more piculs of
grain than usual. But melons, fruits and vegetables have also been
plentiful. These things, you see here, are what we picked during the
first crop; and as we didn’t presume to sell them, we kept the best to
present to our lady and the young ladies to taste. The young ladies
must, of course, be surfeited with all the delicacies and fine things
they daily get, but by having some of our wild greens to eat, they will
show some regard for our poor attention.”
“Many thanks for all the trouble you have taken!” Ping Erh eagerly
rejoined. Then pressing her to resume her place, she sat down herself;
and, urging Mrs. Chang and Mrs. Chou to take their seats, she bade a
young waiting-maid go and serve the tea.
“There’s a joyous air about your face to-day, Miss, and your eye-balls
are all red,” the wife of Chou Jui and the wife of Chang Ts’ai thereupon
smilingly ventured.
“Naturally!” P’ing Erh laughed. “I generally don’t take any wine, but
our senior mistress, and our young ladies caught hold of me and insisted
upon pouring it down my throat. I had no alternative therefore but to
swallow two cups full; so my face at once flushed crimson.”
“I have a longing for wine,” Chang Ts’ai’s wife smiled; “but there’s no
one to offer me any. But when any one by and by invites you, Miss, do
take me along with you!”
At these words, one and all burst out laughing.
“Early this morning,” Chou Jui’s wife interposed, “I caught a glimpse of
those crabs. Only two or three of them would weigh a catty; so in those
two or three huge hampers, there must have been, I presume, seventy to
eighty catties!”
“If some were intended for those above as well as for those below;” Chou
Jui’s wife added, “they couldn’t, nevertheless, I fear, have been
enough.”
“How could every one have had any?” P’ing Erh observed. “Those simply
with any name may have tasted a couple of them; but, as for the rest,
some may have touched them with the tips of their hands, but many may
even not have done as much.”
“Crabs of this kind!” put in old goody Liu, “cost this year five
candareens a catty; ten catties for five mace; five times five make two
taels five, and three times five make fifteen; and adding what was
wanted for wines and eatables, the total must have come to something
over twenty taels. O-mi-to-fu! why, this heap of money is ample for us
country-people to live on through a whole year!”
“I expect you have seen our lady?” P’ing Erh then asked.
“Yes, I have seen her,” assented old goody Liu. “She bade us wait.” As
she spoke, she again looked out of the window to see what the time of
the day could be. “It’s getting quite late,” she afterwards proceeded.
“We must be going, or else we mayn’t be in time to get out of the city
gates; and then we’ll be in a nice fix.”
“Quite right,” Chou Jui’s wife observed. “I’ll go and see what she’s up
to for you.”
With these words, she straightway left the room. After a long absence,
she returned. “Good fortune has, indeed, descended upon you, old dame!"
she smiled. “Why, you’ve won the consideration of those two ladies!”
“What about it?” laughingly inquired P’ing Erh and the others.
“Lady Secunda,” Chou Jui’s wife explained with a smile, “was with our
venerable lady, so I gently whispered to her: ’old goody Liu wishes to
go home; it’s getting late and she fears she mightn’t be in time to go
out of the gates!’ ’It’s such a long way off!’ Our lady Secunda
rejoined, ’and she had all the trouble and fatigue of carrying that load
of things; so if it’s too late, why, let her spend the night here and
start on the morrow!’ Now isn’t this having enlisted our mistress’
sympathies? But not to speak of this! Our old lady also happened to
overhear what we said, and she inquired: ’who is old goody Liu?’ Our
lady Secunda forthwith told her all. ’I was just longing,’ her venerable
ladyship pursued, ’for some one well up in years to have a chat with;
ask her in, and let me see her!’ So isn’t this coming in for
consideration, when least unexpected?”
So speaking, she went on to urge old goody Liu to get down and betake
herself to the front.
“With a figure like this of mine,” old goody Liu demurred, “how could I
very well appear before her? My dear sister-in-law, do tell her that
I’ve gone!”
“Get on! Be quick!” P’ing Erh speedily cried. “What does it matter? Our
old lady has the highest regard for old people and the greatest pity for
the needy! She’s not one you could compare with those haughty and
overbearing people! But I fancy you’re a little too timid, so I’ll
accompany you as far as there, along with Mrs. Chou.”
While tendering her services, she and Chou Jui’s wife led off old goody
Liu and crossed over to dowager lady Chia’s apartments on this side of
the mansion. The boy-servants on duty at the second gate stood up when
they saw P’ing Erh approach. But two of them also ran up to her, and,
keeping close to her heels: “Miss!” they shouted out. “Miss!”
“What have you again got to say?” P’ing Erh asked.
“It’s pretty late just now,” one of the boys smilingly remarked; “and
mother is ill and wants me to go and call the doctor, so I would, dear
Miss, like to have half a day’s leave; may I?”
“Your doings are really fine!” P’ing Erh exclaimed. “You’ve agreed among
yourselves that each day one of you should apply for furlough; but
instead of speaking to your lady, you come and bother me! The other day
that Chu Erh went, Mr. Secundus happened not to want him, so I assented,
though I also added that I was doing it as a favour; but here you too
come to-day!”
“It’s quite true that his mother is sick,” Chou Jui’s wife interceded;
“so, Miss, do say yes to him also, and let him go!”
“Be back as soon as it dawns to-morrow!” P’ing Erh enjoined. “Wait, I’ve
got something for you to do, for you’ll again sleep away, and only turn
up after the sun has blazed away on your buttocks. As you go now, give a
message to Wang Erh! Tell him that our lady bade you warn him that if he
does not hand over the balance of the interest due by to-morrow, she
won’t have anything to do with him. So he’d better let her have it to
meet her requirements and finish.”
The servant-lad felt in high glee and exuberant spirits. Expressing his
obedience, he walked off.
P’ing Erh and her companions repaired then to old lady Chia’s
apartments. Here the various young ladies from the Garden of Broad Vista
were at the time assembled paying their respects to their grandmother.
As soon as old goody Liu put her foot inside, she saw the room thronged
with girls (as seductive) as twigs of flowers waving to and fro, and so
richly dressed, as to look enveloped in pearls, and encircled with
king-fisher ornaments. But she could not make out who they all were. Her
gaze was, however, attracted by an old dame, reclining alone on a divan.
Behind her sat a girl, a regular beauty, clothed in gauze, engaged in
patting her legs. Lady Feng was on her feet in the act of cracking some
joke.
Old goody Liu readily concluded that it must be dowager lady Chia, so
promptly pressing forward, she put on a forced smile and made several
curtseys. “My obeisance to you, star of longevity!” she said.
Old lady Chia hastened, on her part, to bow and to inquire after her
health. Then she asked Chou Jui’s wife to bring a chair over for her to
take a seat. But Pan Erh was still so very shy that he did not know how
to make his obeisance.
“Venerable relative,” dowager lady Chia asked, “how old are you this
year?”
Old goody Liu immediately rose to her feet. “I’m seventy-five this
year,” she rejoined.
“So old and yet so hardy!” Old lady Chia remarked, addressing herself to
the party. “Why she’s older than myself by several years! When I reach
that age, I wonder whether I shall be able to move!”
“We people have,” old goody Liu smilingly resumed, “to put up, from the
moment we come into the world, with ever so many hardships; while your
venerable ladyship enjoys, from your birth, every kind of blessing! Were
we also like this, there’d be no one to carry on that farming work.”
“Are your eyes and teeth still good?” Dowager lady Chia went on to
inquire.
“They’re both still all right,” old goody Liu replied. “The left molars,
however, have got rather shaky this year.”
“As for me, I’m quite an old fossil,” dowager lady Chia observed. “I’m
no good whatever. My eyesight is dim; my ears are deaf, my memory is
gone. I can’t even recollect any of you, old family connections. When
therefore any of our relations come on a visit, I don’t see them for
fear lest I should be ridiculed. All I can manage to eat are a few
mouthfuls of anything tender enough for my teeth; and I can just dose a
bit or, when I feel in low spirits, I distract myself a little with
these grandsons and grand-daughters of mine; that’s all I’m good for.”
“This is indeed your venerable ladyship’s good fortune!” old goody Liu
smiled. “We couldn’t enjoy anything of the kind, much though we may long
for it.”
“What good fortune!” dowager lady Chia exclaimed. “I’m a useless old
thing, no more.”
This remark made every one explode into laughter.
Dowager lady Chia also laughed. “I heard our lady Feng say a little
while back,” she added, “that you had brought a lot of squash and
vegetables, and I told her to put them by at once. I had just been
craving to have newly-grown melons and vegetables; but those one buys
outside are not as luscious as those produced in your farms.”
“This is the rustic notion,” old goody Liu laughed, “to entirely subsist
on fresh things! Yet, we long to have fish and meat for our fare, but we
can’t afford it.”
“I’ve found a relative in you to-day,” dowager lady Chia said, “so you
shouldn’t go empty-handed! If you don’t despise this place as too mean,
do stay a day or two before you start! We’ve also got a garden here; and
this garden produces fruits too; you can taste some of them to-morrow
and take a few along with you home, in order to make it look like a
visit to relatives.”
When lady Feng saw how delighted old lady Chia was with the prospects of
the old dame’s stay, she too lost no time in doing all she could to
induce her to remain. “Our place here,” she urged, “isn’t, it’s true, as
spacious as your threshing-floor; but as we’ve got two vacant rooms,
you’d better put up in them for a couple of days, and choose some of
your village news and old stories and recount them to our worthy
senior.”
“Now you, vixen Feng,” smiled dowager lady Chia, “don’t raise a laugh at
her expense! She’s only a country woman; and will an old dame like her
stand any chaff from you?”
While remonstrating with her, she bade a servant go, before attending to
anything else, and pluck a few fruits. These she handed to Pan Erh to
eat. But Pan Erh did not venture to touch them, conscious as he was of
the presence of such a number of bystanders. So old lady Chia gave
orders that a few cash should be given him, and then directed the pages
to take him outside to play.
After sipping a cup of tea, old goody Liu began to relate, for the
benefit of dowager lady Chia, a few of the occurrences she had seen or
heard of in the country. These had the effect of putting old lady Chia
in a more exuberant frame of mind. But in the midst of her narration, a
servant, at lady Feng’s instance, asked goody Liu to go and have her
evening meal. Dowager lady Chia then picked out, as well, several kinds
of eatables from her own repast, and charged some one to take them to
goody Liu to feast on.
But the consciousness that the old dame had taken her senior’s fancy
induced lady Feng to send her back again as soon as she had taken some
refreshments. On her arrival, Yüan Yang hastily deputed a matron to take
goody Liu to have a bath. She herself then went and selected two pieces
of ordinary clothes, and these she entrusted to a servant to hand to the
old dame to change. Goody Liu had hitherto not set eyes upon any such
grand things, so with eagerness she effected the necessary alterations
in her costume. This over, she made her appearance outside, and, sitting
in front of the divan occupied by dowager lady Chia, she went on to
narrate as many stories as she could recall to mind. Pao-yü and his
cousins too were, at the time, assembled in the room, and as they had
never before heard anything the like of what she said, they, of course,
thought her tales more full of zest than those related by itinerant
blind story-tellers.
Old goody Liu was, albeit a rustic person, gifted by nature with a good
deal of discrimination. She was besides advanced in years; and had gone
through many experiences in her lifetime, so when she, in the first
place, saw how extremely delighted old lady Chia was with her, and, in
the second, how eager the whole crowd of young lads and lasses were to
listen to what fell from her mouth, she even invented, when she found
her own stock exhausted, a good many yarns to recount to them.
“What with all the sowing we have to do in our fields and the vegetables
we have to plant,” she consequently proceeded, “have we ever in our
village any leisure to sit with lazy hands from year to year and day to
day; no matter whether it’s spring, summer, autumn or winter, whether it
blows or whether it rains? Yea, day after day all that we can do is to
turn the bare road into a kind of pavilion to rest and cool ourselves
on! But what strange things don’t we see! Last winter, for instance,
snow fell for several consecutive days, and it piled up on the ground
three or four feet deep. One day, I got up early, but I hadn’t as yet
gone out of the door of our house when I heard outside the noise of
firewood (being moved). I fancied that some one must have come to steal
it, so I crept up to a hole in the window; but, lo, I discovered that it
was no one from our own village.”
“It must have been,” interposed dowager lady Chia, “some wayfarers, who
being smitten with the cold, took some of the firewood, they saw ready
at hand, to go and make a fire and warm themselves with! That’s highly
probable!”
“It was no wayfarers at all,” old goody Liu retorted smiling, “and
that’s what makes the story so strange. Who do you think it was,
venerable star of longevity? It was really a most handsome girl of
seventeen or eighteen, whose hair was combed as smooth as if oil had
been poured over it. She was dressed in a deep red jacket, a white silk
petticoat....”
When she reached this part of her narrative, suddenly became audible the
voices of people bawling outside. “It’s nothing much,” they shouted,
“don’t frighten our old mistress!” Dowager lady Chia and the other
inmates caught, however, their cries and hurriedly inquired what had
happened. A servant-maid explained in reply that a fire had broken out
in the stables in the southern court, but that there was no danger, as
the flames had been suppressed.
Their old grandmother was a person with very little nerve. The moment,
therefore, the report fell on her car, she jumped up with all despatch,
and leaning on one of the family, she rushed on to the verandah to
ascertain the state of things. At the sight of the still brilliant
light, shed by the flames, on the south east part of the compound, old
lady Chia was plunged in consternation, and invoking Buddha, she went on
to shout to the servants to go and burn incense before the god of fire.
Madame Wang and the rest of the members of the household lost no time in
crossing over in a body to see how she was getting on. “The fire has
been already extinguished,” they too assured her, “please, dear
ancestor, repair into your rooms!”
But it was only after old lady Chia had seen the light of the flames
entirely subside that she at length led the whole company indoors. “What
was that girl up to, taking the firewood in that heavy fall of snow?"
Pao-yü thereupon vehemently inquired of goody Liu. “What, if she had got
frostbitten and fallen ill?”
“It was the reference made recently to the firewood that was being
abstracted,” his grandmother Chia said, “that brought about this fire;
and do you still go on asking more about it? Leave this story alone, and
tell us something else!”
Hearing this reminder, Pao-yü felt constrained to drop the subject, much
against his wishes, and old goody Liu forthwith thought of something
else to tell them.
“In our village,” she resumed, “and on the eastern side of our
farmstead, there lives an old dame, whose age is this year, over ninety.
She goes in daily for fasting, and worshipping Buddha. Who’d have
thought it, she so moved the pity of the goddess of mercy that she gave
her this message in a dream: ’It was at one time ordained that you
should have no posterity, but as you have proved so devout, I have now
memorialised the Pearly Emperor to grant you a grandson!’ The fact is,
this old dame had one son. This son had had too an only son; but he died
after they had with great difficulty managed to rear him to the age of
seventeen or eighteen. And what tears didn’t they shed for him! But, in
course of time, another son was actually born to him. He is this year
just thirteen or fourteen, resembles a very ball of flower, (so plump is
he), and is clever and sharp to an exceptional degree! So this is indeed
a clear proof that those spirits and gods do exist!”
This long tirade proved to be in harmony with dowager lady Chia’s and
Madame Wang’s secret convictions on the subject. Even Madame Wang
therefore listened to every word with all profound attention. Pao-yü,
however, was so pre-occupied with the story about the stolen firewood
that he fell in a brown study and gave way to conjectures.

“Yesterday,” T’an Ch’un at this point remarked, “We put cousin Shih to a
lot of trouble and inconvenience, so, when we get back, we must consult
about convening a meeting, and, while returning her entertainment, we
can also invite our venerable ancestor to come and admire the
chrysanthemums; what do you think of this?”
“Our worthy senior,” smiled Pao-yü, “has intimated that she means to
give a banquet to return cousin Shih’s hospitality, and to ask us to do
the honours. Let’s wait therefore until we partake of grandmother’s
collation, before we issue our own invitations; there will be ample time
then to do so.”
“The later it gets, the cooler the weather becomes,” T’an Ch’un
observed, “and our dear senior is not likely to enjoy herself.”
“Grandmother,” added Pao-yü, “is also fond of rain and snow, so wouldn’t
it be as well to wait until the first fall, and then ask her to come and
look at the snow. This will be better, won’t it? And were we to recite
our verses with snow about us, it will be ever so much more fun!”
“To hum verses in the snow,” Lin Tai-yü speedily demurred with a smile,
“won’t, in my idea, be half as nice as building up a heap of firewood
and then stealing it, with the flakes playing about us. This will be by
far more enjoyable!”
This proposal made Pao-ch’ai and the others laugh. Pao-yü cast a glance
at her but made no reply.
But, in a short time, the company broke up. Pao-yü eventually gave old
goody Liu a tug on the sly and plied her with minute questions as to who
the girl was. The old dame was placed under the necessity of fabricating
something for his benefit. “The truth is,” she said, “that there stands
on the north bank of the ditch in our village a small ancestral hall, in
which offerings are made, but not to spirits or gods. There was in
former days some official or other...”
“While speaking, she went on to try and recollect his name and surname.
“No matter about names or surnames!” Pao-yü expostulated. “There’s no
need for you to recall them to memory! Just mention the facts; they’ll
be enough.”
“This official,” old goody Liu resumed, “had no son. His offspring
consisted of one young daughter, who went under the name of Jo Yü, (like
Jade). She could read and write, and was doated upon by this official
and his consort, just as if she were a precious jewel. But,
unfortunately, when this young lady, Jo Yü, grew up to be seventeen, she
contracted some disease and died.”
When these words fell on Pao-yü’s ears, he stamped his foot and heaved a
sigh. “What happened after that?” he then asked.
Old goody Liu pursued her story.
“So incessantly,” she continued, “did this official and his consort
think of their child that they raised this ancestral hall, erected a
clay image of their young daughter Jo Yü in it, and appointed some one
to burn incense and trim the fires. But so many days and years have now
elapsed that the people themselves are no more alive, the temple is in
decay, and the image itself is become a spirit.”
“It hasn’t become a spirit,” remonstrated Pao-yü with vehemence. “Human
beings of this kind may, the rule is, die, yet they are not dead.”
“O-mi-to-fu!” ejaculated old goody Liu; “is it really so! Had you, sir,
not enlightened us, we would have remained under the impression that she
had become a spirit! But she repeatedly transforms herself into a human
being, and there she roams about in every village, farmstead, inn and
roadside. And the one I mentioned just now as having taken the firewood
is that very girl! The villagers in our place are still consulting with
the idea of breaking this clay image and razing the temple to the
ground.”
“Be quick and dissuade them!” eagerly exclaimed Pao-yü. “Were they to
raze the temple to the ground, their crime won’t be small.”
“It’s lucky that you told me, Sir,” old goody Liu added. “When I get
back to-morrow, I’ll make them relinquish the idea and finish!”
“Our venerable senior and my mother,” Pao-yü pursued, “are both
charitable persons. In fact, all the inmates of our family, whether old
or young, do, in like manner, delight in good deeds, and take pleasure
in distributing alms. Their greatest relish is to repair temples, and to
put up images to the spirits; so to-morrow, I’ll make a subscription and
collect a few donations for you, and you can then act as incense-burner.
When sufficient money has been raised, this fane can be repaired, and
another clay image put up; and month by month I’ll give you incense and
fire money to enable you to burn joss-sticks; won’t this be A good thing
for you?”
“In that case,” old goody Liu rejoined, “I shall, thanks to that young
lady’s good fortune, have also a few cash to spend.”
Pao-yü thereupon likewise wanted to know what the name of the place was,
the name of the village, how far it was there and back, and whereabout
the temple was situated.
Old goody Liu replied to his questions, by telling him every idle
thought that came first to her lips. Pao-yü, however, credited the
information she gave him and, on his return to his rooms, he exercised,
the whole night, his mind with building castles in the air.
On the morrow, as soon as daylight dawned, he speedily stepped out of
his room, and, handing Pei Ming several hundreds of cash, he bade him
proceed first in the direction and to the place specified by old goody
Liu, and clearly ascertain every detail, so as to enable him, on his
return from his errand, to arrive at a suitable decision to carry out
his purpose. After Pei Ming’s departure, Pao-yü continued on pins on
needles and on the tiptoe of expectation. Into such a pitch of
excitement did he work himself, that he felt like an ant in a burning
pan. With suppressed impatience, he waited and waited until sunset. At
last then he perceived Pei Ming walk in, in high glee.
“Have you discovered the place?” hastily inquired Pao-yü.
“Master,” Pei Ming laughed, “you didn’t catch distinctly the directions
given you, and you made me search in a nice way! The name of the place
and the bearings can’t be those you gave me, Sir; that is why I’ve had
to hunt about the whole day long! I prosecuted my inquiries up to the
very ditch on the north east side, before I eventually found a ruined
temple.”
Upon hearing the result of his researches, Pao-yü was much gratified.
His very eyebrows distended. His eyes laughed. “Old goody Liu,” he said
with eagerness, “is a person well up in years, and she may at the moment
have remembered wrong; it’s very likely she did. But recount to me what
you saw.”
“The door of that temple,” Pei Ming explained, “really faces south, and
is all in a tumble-down condition. I searched and searched till I was
driven to utter despair. As soon, however, as I caught sight of it,
’that’s right,’ I shouted, and promptly walked in. But I at once
discovered a clay figure, which gave me such a fearful start, that I
scampered out again; for it looked as much alive as if it were a real
living being.”
Pao-yü smiled full of joy. “It can metamorphose itself into a human
being,” he observed, “so, of course, it has more or less a life-like
appearance.”
“Was it ever a girl?” Pei Ming rejoined clapping his hands. “Why it was,
in fact, no more than a green-faced and red-haired god of plagues.”
Pao-yü, at this answer, spat at him contemptuously. “You are, in very
truth, a useless fool!” he cried. “Haven’t you even enough gumption for
such a trifling job as this?”
“What book, I wonder, have you again been reading, master?” Pei Ming
continued. “Or you may, perhaps, have heard some one prattle a lot of
trash and believed it as true! You send me on this sort of wild goose
chase and make me go and knock my head about, and how can you ever say
that I’m good for nothing?”
Pao-yü did not fail to notice that he was in a state of exasperation so
he lost no time in trying to calm him. “Don’t be impatient!” he urged.
“You can go again some other day, when you’ve got nothing to attend to,
and institute further inquiries! If it turns out that she has
hood-winked us, why, there will, naturally, be no such thing. But if,
verily, there is, won’t you also lay up for yourself a store of good
deeds? I shall feel it my duty to reward you in a most handsome manner.”
As he spoke, he espied a servant-lad, on service at the second gate,
approach and report to him: “The young ladies in our venerable
ladyship’s apartments are standing at the threshold of the second gate
and looking out for you, Mr. Secundus.”
But as, reader, you are not aware what they were on the look-out to tell
him, the subsequent chapter will explain it for you.
 

This eBook of “Hung Lou Meng, Book II” (Or, the Dream of the Red Chamber,
a Chinese Novel in Two Books - by Cao Xueqin - translated by H. Bencraft
Joly) belongs to the public domain.

All books:
Part I (A),
Part I (B),
Part II (A),
Part II (B).
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Hung Lou Meng: Book IIBy Cao XueqinAt Amazon
