




  Chia Yuan-ch’un is, on account of her talents, selected to enter the
      Feng Ts’ao Palace.
  Ch’in Ching-ch’ing departs, in the prime of life, by the yellow spring
      road.
But we must now return to the two lads, Ch’in Chung and Pao-yü. After
they had passed, along with lady Feng from the Temple of the Iron Fence,
whither she had gone to see how things were getting on, they entered the
city in their carriages. On their arrival at home, they paid their
obeisance to dowager lady Chia, madame Wang and the other members of the
family, whence they returned to their own quarters, where nothing worth
mentioning transpired during the night.
On the next day, Pao-yü perceiving that the repairs to the outer
schoolroom had been completed, settled with Ch’in Chung that they should
have evening classes. But as it happened that Ch’in Chung, who was
naturally of an extremely delicate physique, caught somewhat of a chill
in the country and clandestinely indulged, besides, in an intimacy with
Chih Neng, which unavoidably made him fail to take good care of himself,
he was, shortly after his return, troubled with a cough and a feverish
cold, with nausea for drink and food, and fell into such an extremely
poor state of health that he simply kept indoors and nursed himself, and
was not in a fit condition to go to school. Pao-yü’s spirits were
readily damped, but as there was likewise no remedy he had no other
course than to wait until his complete recovery, before he could make
any arrangements.
Lady Feng had meanwhile received a reply from Yün Kuang, in which he
informed her that everything had been satisfactorily settled, and the
old nun apprised the Chang family that the major had actually suppressed
his indignation, hushed his complaints, and taken back the presents of
the previous engagement. But who would have ever anticipated that a
father and mother, whose hearts were set upon position and their
ambition upon wealth, could have brought up a daughter so conscious of
propriety and so full of feeling as to seize the first opportunity,
after she had heard that she had been withdrawn from her former
intended, and been promised to the Li family, to stealthily devise a way
to commit suicide, by means of a handkerchief. The son of the Major,
upon learning that Chin Ko had strangled herself, there and then jumped
into the river and drowned himself, as he too was a being full of love.
The Chang and Li families were, sad to relate, very much cut up, and, in
very truth, two lives and money had been sacrificed all to no use.
Lady Feng, however, during this while, quietly enjoyed the three
thousand taels, and madame Wang did not have even so much as the
faintest idea of the whole matter. But ever since this occasion, lady
Feng’s audacity acquired more and more strength; and the actions of this
kind, which she, in after days, performed, defy enumeration.
One day, the very day on which Chia Cheng’s birthday fell, while the
members of the two households of Ning and Jung were assembled together
offering their congratulations, and unusual bustle and stir prevailed, a
gatekeeper came in, at quite an unexpected moment, to announce that Mr.
Hsia, Metropolitan Head Eunuch of the six palaces, had come with the
special purpose of presenting an edict from his Majesty; a bit of news
which plunged Chia She, Chia Cheng and the whole company into great
consternation, as they could not make out what was up. Speedily
interrupting the theatrical performance, they had the banquet cleared,
and the altar laid out with incense, and opening the centre gate they
fell on their knees to receive the edict.
Soon they caught sight of the head eunuch, Hsia Ping-chung, advancing on
horseback, and besides himself, a considerable retinue of eunuchs. The
eunuch Hsia did not, in fact, carry any mandate or present any decree;
but straightway advancing as far as the main hall, he dismounted, and,
with a face beaming with smiles, he walked into the Hall and took his
stand on the southern side.
“I have had the honour,” he said, “of receiving a special order to at
once summon Chia Cheng to present himself at Court and be admitted in
His Majesty’s presence in the Lin Ching Hall.”
When he had delivered this message, he did not so much as take any tea,
but forthwith mounted his horse and took his leave.
Chia Cheng and the others could not even conceive what omen this summons
implied, but he had no alternative but to change his clothes with all
haste and to present himself at Court, while dowager lady Chia and the
inmates of the whole household were, in their hearts, a prey to such
perplexity and uncertainty that they incessantly despatched messengers
on flying steeds to go and bring the news.
After the expiry of four hours, they suddenly perceived Lai Ta and three
or four other butlers run in, quite out of breath, through the
ceremonial gate and report the glad tidings. “We have received,” they
added, “our master’s commands, to hurriedly request her venerable
ladyship to take madame Wang and the other ladies into the Palace, to
return thanks for His Majesty’s bounty;” and other words to the same
purport.
Dowager lady Chia was, at this time, standing, with agitated heart,
under the verandah of the Large Hall waiting for tidings, whilst the two
ladies, mesdames Hsing and Wang, Mrs. Yu, Li Wan, lady Feng, Ying Ch’un
and her sisters, even up to Mrs. Hsüeh and the rest, were congregated in
one place ascertaining what was the news. Old lady Chia likewise called
Lai Ta in and minutely questioned him as to what had happened. “Your
servants,” replied Lai Ta, “simply stood waiting outside the Lin Chuang
gate, so that we were in total ignorance of what was going on inside,
when presently the Eunuch Hsia came out and imparted to us the glad
tidings; telling us that the eldest of the young ladies in our household
had been raised, by His Majesty, to be an overseer in the Feng Ts’ao
Palace, and that he had, in addition, conferred upon her the rank of
worthy and virtuous secondary consort. By and by, Mr. Chia Cheng came
out and also told us the same thing. Master is now gone back again to
the Eastern Palace, whither he requests your venerable ladyship to go at
once and offer thanks for the Imperial favour.”
When old lady Chia and the other members of the family heard these
tidings they were at length reassured in their minds, and so elated were
they all in one moment that joy was visible in their very faces. Without
loss of time, they commenced to don the gala dresses suitable to their
rank; which done, old lady Chia led the way for the two ladies, mesdames
Hsing and Wang, as well as for Mrs. Yu; and their official chairs, four
of them in all, entered the palace like a trail of fish; while Chia She
and Chia Chen, who had likewise changed their clothes for their court
dress, took Chia Se and Chia Jung along and proceeded in attendance upon
dowager lady Chia.
Indeed, of the two households of Ning and Jung, there was not one,
whether high or low, woman or man, who was not in a high state of
exultation, with the exception of Pao-yü, who behaved just as if the
news had not reached his ears; and can you, reader, guess why? The fact
is that Chih Neng, of the Water Moon Convent, had recently entered the
city in a surreptitious manner in search of Ch’in Chung; but, contrary
to expectation, her visit came to be known by Ch’in Yeh, who drove Chih
Neng away and laid hold of Ch’in Chung and gave him a flogging. But this
outburst of temper of his brought about a relapse of his old complaint,
with the result that in three or five days, he, sad to say, succumbed.
Ch’in Chung had himself ever been in a delicate state of health and had
besides received a caning before he had got over his sickness, so that
when he now saw his aged father pass away from the consequences of a fit
of anger, he felt, at this stage, so full of penitence and distress that
the symptoms of his illness were again considerably aggravated. Hence it
was that Pao-yü was downcast and unhappy at heart, and that nothing
could, in spite of the promotion of Yuan Ch’un by imperial favour,
dispel the depression of his spirits.
Dowager lady Chia and the rest in due course offered thanks and returned
home, the relatives and friends came to present their congratulations,
great stir and excitement prevailed during these few days in the two
mansions of Ning and Jung, and every one was in high glee; but he alone
looked upon everything as if it were nothing; taking not the least
interest in anything; and as this reason led the whole family to sneer
at him, the result was that he got more and more doltish.
Luckily, however, Chia Lien and Tai-yü were on their way back, and had
despatched messengers, in advance, to announce the news that they would
be able to reach home the following day, so that when Pao-yü heard the
tidings, he was at length somewhat cheered. And when he came to
institute minute inquiries, he eventually found out: “that Chia Yü-ts’un
was also coming to the capital to have an audience with His Majesty,
that it was entirely because Wang Tzu-t’eng had repeatedly laid before
the Throne memorials recommending him that he was coming on this
occasion to wait in the metropolis for a vacancy which he could fill up;
that as he was a kinsman of Chia Lien’s, acknowledging the same
ancestors as he did, and he stood, on the other hand, with Tai-yü, in
the relationship of tutor and pupil, he was in consequence following the
same road and coming as their companion; that Lin Ju-hai had already
been buried in the ancestral vault, and that every requirement had been
attended to with propriety; that Chia Lien, on this voyage to the
capital, would, had he progressed by the ordinary stages, have been over
a month before he could reach home, but that when he came to hear the
good news about Yuan Ch’un, he pressed on day and night to enter the
capital; and that the whole journey had been throughout, in every
respect, both pleasant and propitious.”
But Pao-yü merely ascertained whether Tai-yü was all right, and did not
even so much as trouble his mind with the rest of what he heard; and he
remained on the tiptoe of expectation, till noon of the morrow; when, in
point of fact, it was announced that Mr. Lien, together with Miss Lin,
had made their entrance into the mansion. When they came face to face,
grief and joy vied with each other; and they could not help having a
good cry for a while; after which followed again expressions of sympathy
and congratulations; while Pao-yü pondered within himself that Tai-yü
had become still more surpassingly handsome.
Tai-yü had also brought along with her a good number of books, and she
promptly gave orders that the sleeping rooms should be swept, and that
the various nicknacks should be put in their proper places. She further
produced a certain quantity of paper, pencils and other such things, and
distributed them among Pao Ch’ai, Ying Ch’un, Pao-yü and the rest; and
Pao-yü also brought out, with extreme care, the string of Ling-ling
scented beads, which had been given to him by the Prince of Pei Ching,
and handed them, in his turn, to Tai-yü as a present.
“What foul man has taken hold of them?” exclaimed Tai-yü. “I don’t want
any such things;” and as she forthwith dashed them down, and would not
accept them, Pao-yü was under the necessity of taking them back. But for
the time being we will not allude to them, but devote our attention to
Chia Lien.
Having, after his arrival home, paid his salutations to all the inmates,
he retired to his own quarters at the very moment that lady Feng had
multifarious duties to attend to, and had not even a minute to spare;
but, considering that Chia Lien had returned from a distant journey, she
could not do otherwise than put by what she had to do, and to greet him
and wait on him.
“Imperial uncle,” she said, in a jocose manner, when she realised that
there was no outsider present in the room, “I congratulate you! What
fatigue and hardship you, Imperial uncle, have had to bear throughout
the whole journey, your humble servant heard yesterday, when the courier
sent ahead came and announced that Your Highness would this day reach
this mansion. I have merely got ready a glass of mean wine for you to
wipe down the dust with, but I wonder, whether Your Highness will deign
to bestow upon it the lustre of your countenance, and accept it.”
Chia Lien smiled. “How dare I presume to such an honour,” he added by
way of rejoinder; “I’m unworthy of such attention! Many thanks, many
thanks.”
P’ing Erh and the whole company of waiting-maids simultaneously paid
their obeisance to him, and this ceremony concluded, they presented tea.
Chia Lien thereupon made inquiries about the various matters, which had
transpired in their home after his departure, and went on to thank lady
Feng for all the trouble she had taken in the management of them.
“How could I control all these manifold matters,” remarked lady Feng;
“my experience is so shallow, my speech so dull and my mind so simple,
that if any one showed me a club, I would mistake it for a pin. Besides,
I’m so tender-hearted that were any one to utter a couple of glib
remarks, I couldn’t help feeling my heart give way to compassion and
sympathy. I’ve had, in addition, no experience in any weighty questions;
my pluck is likewise so very small that when madame Wang has felt in the
least displeased, I have not been able to close my eyes and sleep.
Urgently did I more than once resign the charge, but her ladyship
wouldn’t again agree to it; maintaining, on the contrary, that my object
was to be at ease, and that I was not willing to reap experience.
Leaving aside that she doesn’t know that I take things so much to heart,
that I can scoop the perspiration in handfuls, that I daren’t utter one
word more than is proper, nor venture to recklessly take one step more
than I ought to, you know very well which of the women servants, in
charge of the menage in our household, is easy to manage! If ever I make
the slightest mistake, they laugh at me and poke fun at me; and if I
incline a little one way, they show their displeasure by innuendoes;
they sit by and look on, they use every means to do harm, they stir up
trouble, they stand by on safe ground and look on and don’t give a
helping hand to lift any one they have thrown over, and they are, one
and all of them, old hands in such tricks. I’m moreover young in years
and not able to keep people in check, so that they naturally don’t show
any regard for me! What is still more ridiculous is that after the death
of Jung Erh’s wife in that mansion, brother Chen, time and again, begged
madame Wang, on his very knees, to do him the favour to ask me to lend
him a hand for several days. I repeatedly signified my refusal, but her
ladyship gave her consent in order to oblige him, so that I had no help
but to carry out her wish; putting, as is my wont, everything
topsy-turvey, and making matters worse than they were; with the result
that brother Chen up to this day bears me a grudge and regrets having
asked for my assistance. When you see him to-morrow, do what you can to
excuse me by him. ’Young as she is,’ tell him, ’and without experience
of the world, who ever could have instigated Mr. Chia Cheng to make such
a mistake as to choose her.’”
While they were still chatting, they heard people talking in the outer
apartments, and lady Feng speedily inquired who it was. P’ing Erh
entered the room to reply. “Lady Hsüeh,” she said, “has sent sister
Hsiang Ling over to ask me something; but I’ve already given her my
answer and sent her back.”
“Quite so,” interposed Chia Lien with a smile. “A short while ago I went
to look up Mrs. Hsüeh and came face to face with a young girl, whose
features were supremely perfect, and as I suspected that, in our
household, there was no such person, I asked in the course of
conversation, Mrs. Hsüeh about her, and found out eventually that this
was the young waiting-maid they had purchased on their way to the
capital, Hsiang Ling by name, and that she had after all become an
inmate of the household of that big fool Hsüeh. Since she’s had her hair
dressed as a married woman she does look so much more pre-eminently
beautiful! But that big fool Hsüeh has really brought contamination upon
her.”
“Ai!” exclaimed lady Feng, “here you are back from a trip to Suchow and
Hang Chow, where you should have seen something of the world! and have
you still an eye as envious and a heart so covetous? Well, if you wish
to bestow your love on her, there’s no difficulty worth speaking of.
I’ll take P’ing Erh over and exchange her for her; what do you say to
that? that old brother Hsüeh is also one of those men, who, while eating
what there is in the bowl, keeps an eye on what there is in the pan! For
the last year or so, as he couldn’t get Hsiang Ling to be his, he made
ever so many distressing appeals to Mrs. Hsüeh; and Mrs. Hsüeh while
esteeming Hsiang Ling’s looks, though fine, as after all a small matter,
(thought) her deportment and conduct so far unlike those of other girls,
so gentle and so demure that almost the very daughters of masters and
mistresses couldn’t attain her standard, that she therefore went to the
trouble of spreading a banquet, and of inviting guests, and in open
court, and in the legitimate course, she gave her to him for a secondary
wife. But half a month had scarcely elapsed before he looked upon her
also as a good-for-nothing person as he did upon a large number of them!
I can’t however help feeling pity for her in my heart.”
Scarcely had she time to conclude what she had to say when a youth, on
duty at the second gate, transmitted the announcement that Mr. Chia
Cheng was in the Library waiting for Mr. Secundus. At these words, Chia
Lien speedily adjusted his clothes, and left the apartment; and during
his absence, lady Feng inquired of P’ing Erh what Mrs. Hsüeh wanted a
few minutes back, that she sent Hsiang Ling round in such a hurry.
“What Hsiang Ling ever came?” replied P’ing Erh. “I simply made use of
her name to tell a lie for the occasion. Tell me, my lady, (what’s come
to) Wang Erh’s wife? why she’s got so bad that there’s even no common
sense left in her!” Saying this she again drew near lady Feng’s side,
and in a soft tone of voice, she continued: “That interest of yours, my
lady, she doesn’t send later, nor does she send it sooner; but she must
send it round the very moment when master Secundus is at home! But as
luck would have it, I was in the hall, so that I came across her;
otherwise, she would have walked in and told your ladyship, and Mr.
Secundus would naturally have come to know about it! And our master
would, with that frame of mind of his, have fished it out and spent it,
had the money even been at the bottom of a pan full of oil! and were he
to have heard that my lady had private means, would he not have been
still more reckless in spending? Hence it was that, losing no time in
taking the money over, I had to tell her a few words which, who would
have thought, happened to be overheard by your ladyship; that’s why, in
the presence of master Secundus, I simply explained that Hsiang Ling had
come!”
These words evoked a smile from lady Feng. “Mrs. Hsueh, I thought to
myself,” she observed, “knows very well that your Mr. Secundus has come,
and yet, regardless of propriety, she, instead (of keeping her at home),
sends some one over from her inner rooms! and it was you after all, you
vixen, playing these pranks!”
As she uttered this remark, Chia Lien walked in, and lady Feng issued
orders to serve the wine and the eatables, and husband and wife took
their seats opposite to each other; but notwithstanding that lady Feng
was very partial to drink, she nevertheless did not have the courage to
indulge her weakness, but merely partook of some to keep him company.
Chia Lien’s nurse, dame Chao, entered the room, and Chia Lien and lady
Feng promptly pressed her to have a glass of wine, and bade her sit on
the stove-couch, but dame Chao was obstinate in her refusal. P’ing Erh
and the other waiting-maids had at an early hour placed a square stool
next to the edge of the couch, where was likewise a small footstool, and
on this footstool dame Chao took a seat, whereupon Chia Lien chose two
dishes of delicacies from the table, which he handed her to place on the
square stool for her own use.
“Dame Chao,” lady Feng remarked, “couldn’t very well bite through that,
for mind it might make her teeth drop! This morning,” she therefore
asked of P’ing Erh, “I suggested that that shoulder of pork stewed with
ham was so tender as to be quite the thing to be given to dame Chao to
eat; and how is it you haven’t taken it over to her? But go at once and
tell them to warm it and bring it in! Dame Chao,” she went on, “just you
taste this Hui Ch’üan wine brought by your foster-son.”
“I’ll drink it,” replied dame Chao, “but you, my lady, must also have a
cup: what’s there to fear? the one thing to guard against is any excess,
that’s all! But I’ve now come over, not for any wine or eatables; on the
contrary, there’s a serious matter, which I would ask your ladyship to
impress on your mind, and to show me some regard, for this master of
ours is only good to utter fine words, but when the time (to act) does
come, he forgets all about us! As I have had the good fortune to nurse
him in his infancy and to bring him up to this age, ’I too have grown
old in years,’ I said to him, ’and all that belong to me are those two
sons, and do look upon them with some particular favour!’ With any one
else I shouldn’t have ventured to open my mouth, but him I anyway
entreated time and again on several occasions. His assent was of course
well and good, but up to this very moment he still withholds his help.
Now besides from the heavens has dropped such a mighty piece of good
luck; and in what place will there be no need of servants? that’s why I
come to tell you, my lady, as is but right, for were I to depend upon
our master, I fear I shall even die of starvation.”
Lady Feng laughed. “You’d better,” she suggested, “put those two elder
foster brothers of his both under my charge! But you’ve nursed that
foster-son from his babyhood, and don’t you yet know that disposition of
his, how that he takes his skin and flesh and sticks it, (not on the
body of a relative), but, on the contrary, on that of an outsider and
stranger? (to Chia Lien.) Which of those foster brothers whom you have
now discarded, isn’t clearly better than others? and were you to have
shown them some favour and consideration, who would have ventured to
have said ’don’t?’ Instead of that, you confer benefits upon thorough
strangers, and all to no purpose whatever! But these words of mine are
also incorrect, eh? for those whom we regard as strangers you,
contrariwise, will treat just as if they were relatives!”
At these words every one present in the room burst out laughing; even
nurse Chao could not repress herself; and as she invoked Buddha,–"In
very truth,” she exclaimed, “in this room has sprung up a kind-hearted
person! as regards relatives and strangers, such foolish distinctions
aren’t drawn by our master; and it’s simply because he’s full of pity
and is tenderhearted that he can’t put off any one who gives vent to a
few words of entreaty, and nothing else!”
“That’s quite it!” rejoined lady Feng smiling sarcastically, “to those
whom he looks upon as relatives, he’s kindhearted, but with me and his
mother he’s as hard as steel.”
“What you say, my lady, is very considerate,” remarked nurse Chao, “and
I’m really so full of delight that I’ll have another glass of good wine!
and, if from this time forward, your ladyship will act as you think
best, I’ll have then nothing to be sorry for!”
Chia Lien did not at this juncture feel quite at his ease, but he could
do no more than feign a smile. “You people,” he said, “should leave off
talking nonsense, and bring the eatables at once and let us have our
meal, as I have still to go on the other side and see Mr. Chia Chen, to
consult with him about business.”
“To be sure you have,” ventured lady Feng, “and you shouldn’t neglect
your legitimate affairs; but what did Mr. Chia Chen tell you when he
sent for you just a while back?”
“It was about the visit (of Yuan Ch’un) to her parents,” Chia Lien
explained.
“Has after all permission for the visit been granted?” lady Feng
inquired with alacrity.
“Though not quite granted,” Chia Lien replied joyously, “it’s
nevertheless more or less an accomplished fact.”
“This is indeed evidence of the great bounty of the present Emperor!"
lady Feng observed smirkingly; “one doesn’t hear in books, or see in
plays, written from time to time, any mention of such an instance, even
so far back as the days of old!”
Dame Chao took up again the thread of the conversation. “Indeed it’s
so!” she interposed; “But I’m in very truth quite stupid from old age,
for I’ve heard every one, high and low, clamouring during these few
days, something or other about ’Hsing Ch’in’ or no ’Hsing Ch’in,’ but I
didn’t really pay any heed to it; and now again, here’s something more
about this ’Hsing Ch’in,’ but what’s it all about, I wonder?”
“The Emperor at present on the Throne,” explained Chia Lien, “takes into
consideration the feelings of his people. In the whole world, there is
(in his opinion), no more essential thing than filial piety; maintaining
that the feelings of father, mother, son and daughter are
indiscriminately subject to one principle, without any distinction
between honorable and mean. The present Emperor himself day and night
waits upon their majesties his Father and the Empress Dowager, and yet
cannot, in the least degree, carry out to the full his ideal of filial
piety. The secondary consorts, meritorious persons and other inmates of
the Palace, he remembered, had entered within its precincts many years
back, casting aside fathers and mothers, so how could they not help
thinking of them? Besides, the fathers and mothers, who remain at home
must long for their daughters, of whom they cannot get even so much as a
glimpse, and if, through this solicitude, they were to contract any
illness, the harmony of heaven would also be seriously impaired, so for
this reason, he memorialised the Emperor, his father, and the Empress
Dowager that every month, on the recurrence of the second and sixth
days, permission should be accorded to the relatives of the imperial
consorts to enter the palace and make application to see their
daughters. The Emperor, his father, and Empress Dowager were, forthwith,
much delighted by this representation, and eulogised, in high terms, the
piety and generosity of the present Emperor, his regard for the will of
heaven and his research into the nature of things. Both their sacred
Majesties consequently also issued a decree to the effect: that the
entrance of the relatives of the imperial consorts into the Palace could
not but interfere with the dignity of the state, and the rules of
conventional rites, but that as the mothers and daughters could not
gratify the wishes of their hearts, Their Majesties would, after all,
show a high proof of expedient grace, and issue a special command that:
’exclusive of the generous bounty, by virtue of which the worthy
relations of the imperial consorts could enter the palace on the second
and sixth days, any family, having extensive accommodation and separate
courts suitable for the cantonment of the imperial body-guard, could,
without any detriment, make application to the Inner Palace, for the
entrance of the imperial chair into the private residences, to the end
that the personal feelings of relations might be gratified, and that
they should collectively enjoy the bliss of a family reunion.’ After the
issue of this decree, who did not leap from grateful joy! The father of
the honourable secondary consort Chou has now already initiated works,
in his residence, for the repairs to the separate courts necessary for
the visiting party. Wu T’ien-yu too, the father of Wu, the distinguished
consort, has likewise gone outside the city walls in search of a
suitable plot of ground; and don’t these amount to well-nigh
accomplished facts?”
“O-mi-to-fu!” exclaimed dame Chao. “Is it really so? but from what you
say, our family will also be making preparations for the reception of
the eldest young lady!”
“That goes without saying,” added Chia Lien, “otherwise, for what
purpose could we be in such a stir just now?”
“It’s of course so!” interposed lady Feng smiling, “and I shall now have
an opportunity of seeing something great of the world. My misfortune is
that I’m young by several years; for had I been born twenty or thirty
years sooner, all these old people wouldn’t really be now treating me
contemptuously for not having seen the world! To begin with, the Emperor
Tai Tsu, in years gone by, imitated the old policy of Shun, and went on
a tour, giving rise to more stir than any book could have ever produced;
but I happen to be devoid of that good fortune which could have enabled
me to come in time.”
“Ai ya, ya!” ejaculated dame Chao, “such a thing is rarely met with in a
thousand years! I was old enough at that time to remember the
occurrence! Our Chia family was then at Ku Su, Yangchow and all along
that line, superintending the construction of ocean vessels, and the
repairs to the seaboard. This was the only time in which preparations
were made for the reception of the Emperor, and money was lavished in
quantities as great as the billowing waters of the sea!”
This subject once introduced, lady Feng took up the thread of the
conversation with vehemence. “Our Wang family,” she said, “did also make
preparations on one occasion. At that time my grandfather was in sole
charge of all matters connected with tribute from various states, as
well as with general levées, so that whenever any foreigners arrived,
they all came to our house to be entertained, while the whole of the
goods, brought by foreign vessels from the two Kuang provinces, from
Fukien, Yunnan and Chekiang, were the property of our family.”
“Who isn’t aware of these facts?” ventured dame Chao; “there is up to
this day a saying that, ’in the eastern sea, there was a white jade bed
required, and the dragon prince came to request Mr. Wang of Chin Ling
(to give it to him)!’ This saying relates to your family, my lady, and
remains even now in vogue. The Chen family of Chiang Nan has recently
held, oh such a fine old standing! it alone has entertained the Emperor
on four occasions! Had we not seen these things with our own eyes, were
we to tell no matter whom, they wouldn’t surely ever believe them! Not
to speak of the money, which was as plentiful as mud, all things,
whether they were to be found in the world or not, were they not heaped
up like hills, and collected like the waters of the sea? But with the
four characters representing sin and pity they didn’t however trouble
their minds.”
“I’ve often heard,” continued lady Feng, “my eldest uncle say that
things were in such a state, and how couldn’t I believe? but what
surprises me is how it ever happened that this family attained such
opulence and honour!”
“I’ll tell your ladyship and all in one sentence,” replied nurse Chao.
“Why they simply took the Emperor’s money and spent it for the Emperor’s
person, that’s all! for what family has such a lot of money as to
indulge in this useless extravagance?”
While they were engaged in this conversation, a servant came a second
time, at the instance of madame Wang, to see whether lady Feng had
finished her meal or not; and lady Feng forthwith concluding that there
must be something waiting for her to attend to, hurriedly rushed through
her repast. She had just rinsed her mouth and was about to start when
the youths, on duty at the second gate, also reported that the two
gentlemen, Mr. Chia Jung and Mr. Chia Se, belonging to the Eastern
mansion, had arrived.
Chia Lien had, at length, rinsed his mouth; but while P’ing Erh
presented a basin for him to wash his hands, he perceived the two young
men walk in, and readily inquired of them what they had to say.
Lady Feng was, on account (of their arrival), likewise compelled to
stay, and she heard Chia Jung take the lead and observe: “My father has
sent me to tell you, uncle, that the gentlemen, have already decided
that the whole extent of ground, starting from the East side, borrowing
(for the occasion) the flower garden of the Eastern mansion, straight up
to the North West, had been measured and found to amount in all to three
and a half li; that it will be suitable for the erection of extra
accommodation for the visiting party; that they have already
commissioned an architect to draw a plan, which will be ready by
to-morrow; that as you, uncle, have just returned home, and must
unavoidably feel fatigued, you need not go over to our house, but that
if you have anything to say you should please come tomorrow morning, as
early as you can, and consult verbally with him.”
“Thank uncle warmly,” Chia Lien rejoined smilingly, “for the trouble he
has taken in thinking of me; I shall, in that case, comply with his
wishes and not go over. This plan is certainly the proper one, for while
trouble will thus be saved, the erection of the quarters will likewise
be an easy matter; for had a distinct plot to be selected and to be
purchased, it would involve far greater difficulties. What’s more,
things wouldn’t, after all, be what they properly should be. When you
get back, tell your father that this decision is the right one, and that
should the gentlemen have any further wish to introduce any change in
their proposals, it will rest entirely with my uncle to prevent them, as
it’s on no account advisable to go and cast one’s choice on some other
plot; that to-morrow as soon as it’s daylight, I’ll come and pay my
respects to uncle, when we can enter into further details in our
deliberations!”
Chia Jung hastily signified his assent by several yes’s, and Chia Se
also came forward to deliver his message. “The mission to Ku Su,” he
explained, “to find tutors, to purchase servant girls, and to obtain
musical instruments, and theatrical properties and the like, my uncle
has confided to me; and as I’m to take along with me the two sons of a
couple of majordomos, and two companions of the family, besides, Tan
P’ing-jen and Pei Ku-hsiu, he has, for this reason, enjoined me to come
and see you, uncle.”
Upon hearing this, Chia Lien scrutinised Chia Se. “What!” he asked, “are
you able to undertake these commissions? These matters are, it’s true,
of no great moment; but there’s something more hidden in them!”
Chia Se smiled. “The best thing I can do,” he remarked, “will be to
execute them in my novice sort of way, that’s all.”
Chia Jung was standing next to lady Feng, out of the light of the lamp,
and stealthily pulled the lapel of her dress. Lady Feng understood the
hint, and putting on a smiling expression, “You are too full of fears!"
she interposed. “Is it likely that our uncle Chen doesn’t, after all,
know better than we do what men to employ, that you again give way to
apprehensions that he isn’t up to the mark! but who are those who are,
in every respect, up to the mark? These young fellows have grown up
already to this age, and if they haven’t eaten any pork, they have
nevertheless seen a pig run. If Mr. Chen has deputed him to go, he is
simply meant to sit under the general’s standard; and do you imagine,
forsooth, that he has, in real earnest, told him to go and bargain about
the purchase money, and to interview the brokers himself? My own idea is
that (the choice) is a very good one.”
“Of course it is!” observed Chia Lien; “but it isn’t that I entertain
any wish to be factious; my only object is to devise some plan or other
for him. Whence will,” he therefore went on to ask, “the money required
for this purpose come from?”
“A little while ago the deliberations reached this point,” rejoined Chia
Se; “and Mr. Lai suggested that there was no necessity at all to take
any funds from the capital, as the Chen family, in Chiang Nan, had still
in their possession Tls. 50,000 of our money. That he would to-morrow
write a letter of advice and a draft for us to take along, and that we
should, first of all, obtain cash to the amount of Tls. 30,000, and let
the balance of Tls. 20,000 remain over, for the purchase of painted
lanterns, and coloured candles, as well as for the outlay for every kind
of portieres, banners, curtains and streamers.”
Chia Lien nodded his head. “This plan is first-rate!” he added.
“Since that be so,” observed lady Feng, as she addressed herself to Chia
Se, “I’ve two able and reliable men; and if you would take them with
you, to attend to these matters, won’t it be to your convenience?”
Chia Se forced a smile. “I was just on the point,” he rejoined, “of
asking you, aunt, for the loan of two men, so that this suggestion is a
strange coincidence.”
As he went on to ascertain what were their names, lady Feng inquired
what they were of nurse Chao. But nurse Chao had, by this time, become
quite dazed from listening to the conversation, and P’ing Erh had to
give her a push, as she smiled, before she returned to consciousness.
“The one,” she hastened to reply, “is called Chao T’ien-liang and the
other Chao T’ien-tung.”
“Whatever you do,” suggested lady Feng, “don’t forget them; but now I’m
off to look after my duties.”
With these words, she left the room, and Chia Jung promptly followed her
out, and with gentle voice he said to her: “Of whatever you want, aunt,
issue orders that a list be drawn up, and I’ll give it to my brother to
take with him, and he’ll carry out your commissions according to the
list.”
“Don’t talk nonsense!” replied lady Feng laughing; “I’ve found no place,
as yet, where I could put away all my own things; and do the stealthy
practices of you people take my fancy?”
As she uttered these words she straightway went her way.
Chia Se, at this time, likewise, asked Chia Lien: “If you want anything
(in the way of curtains), I can conveniently have them woven for you,
along with the rest, and bring them as a present to you.”
“Don’t be in such high glee!” Chia Lien urged with a grin, “you’ve but
recently been learning how to do business, and have you come first and
foremost to excel in tricks of this kind? If I require anything, I’ll of
course write and tell you, but we needn’t talk about it.”
Having finished speaking, he dismissed the two young men; and, in quick
succession, servants came to make their business reports, not limited to
three and five companies, but as Chia Lien felt exhausted, he forthwith
sent word to those on duty at the second gate not to allow any one at
all to communicate any reports, and that the whole crowd should wait
till the next day, when he would give his mind to what had to be done.
Lady Feng did not come to retire to rest till the third watch; but
nothing need be said about the whole night.
The next morning, at an early hour, Chia Lien got up and called on Chia
She and Chia Cheng; after which, he came over to the Ning Kuo mansion;
when, in company with the old major-domos and other servants, as well as
with several old family friends and companions, he inspected the grounds
of the two mansions, and drew plans of the palatial buildings (for the
accommodation of the Imperial consort and her escort) on her visit to
her parents; deliberating at the same time, on the subject of the works
and workmen.
From this day the masons and workmen of every trade were collected to
the full number; and the articles of gold, silver, copper, and pewter,
as well as the earth, timber, tiles, and bricks, were brought over, and
carried in, in incessant supplies. In the first place, orders were
issued to the workmen to demolish the wall and towers of the garden of
Concentrated Fragrance, and extend a passage to connect in a straight
line with the large court in the East of the Jung mansion; for the whole
extent of servants’ quarters on the Eastern side of the Jung mansion had
previously been pulled down.
The two residences of Ning and Jung were, in these days, it is true,
divided by a small street, which served as a boundary line, and there
was no communication between them, but this narrow passage was also
private property, and not in any way a government street, so that they
could easily be connected, and as in the garden of Concentrated
Fragrance, there was already a stream of running water, which had been
introduced through the corner of the Northern wall, there was no further
need now of going to the trouble of bringing in another. Although the
rockeries and trees were not sufficient, the place where Chia She lived,
was an old garden of the Jung mansion, so that the bamboos, trees, and
rockeries in that compound, as well as the arbours, railings and other
such things could all be very well removed to the front; and by these
means, these two grounds, situated as they were besides so very near to
each other, could, by being thrown into one, conduce to the saving of
considerable capital and labour; for, in spite of some deficiency, what
had to be supplied did not amount to much. And it devolved entirely upon
a certain old Hu, a man of note, styled Shan Tzu-yeh, to deliberate upon
one thing after another, and to initiate its construction.
Chia Cheng was not up to these ordinary matters, so that it fell to Chia
She, Chia Chen, Chia Lien, Lai Ta, Lai Sheng, Lin Chih-hsiao, Wu
Hsin-teng, Chan Kuang, Ch’eng Jih-hsing and several others to allot the
sites, to set things in order, (and to look after) the heaping up of
rockeries, the digging of ponds, the construction of two-storied
buildings, the erection of halls, the plantation of bamboos and the
cultivation of flowers, everything connected with the improvement of the
scenery devolving, on the other hand, upon Shan Tzu-yeh to make
provision for, and after leaving Court, he would devote such leisure
moments as he had to merely going everywhere to give a look at the most
important spots, and to consult with Chia She and the others; after
which he troubled his mind no more with anything. And as Chia She did
nothing else than stay at home and lie off, whenever any matter turned
up, trifling though it may have been as a grain of mustard seed or a
bean, Chia Chen and his associates had either to go and report it in
person or to write a memorandum of it. Or if he had anything to say, he
sent for Chia Lien, Lai Ta and others to come and receive his
instructions. Chia Jung had the sole direction of the manufacture of the
articles in gold and silver; and as for Chia Se, he had already set out
on his journey to Ku Su. Chia Chen, Lai Ta and the rest had also to call
out the roll with the names of the workmen, to superintend the works and
other duties relative thereto, which could not be recorded by one pen
alone; sufficient to say that a great bustle and stir prevailed, but to
this subject we shall not refer for a time, but allude to Pao-yü.
As of late there were in the household concerns of this magnitude to
attend to, Chia Cheng did not come to examine him in his lessons, so
that he was, of course, in high spirits, but, as unfortunately Ch’in
Chung’s complaint became, day by day, more serious, he was at the same
time really so very distressed at heart on his account, that enjoyment
was for him out of the question.
On this day, he got up as soon as it was dawn, and having just combed
his hair and washed his face and hands, he was bent upon going to ask
dowager lady Chia to allow him to pay a visit to Ch’in Chung, when he
suddenly espied Ming Yen peep round the curtain-wall at the second gate,
and then withdraw his head. Pao-yü promptly walked out and inquired what
he was up to.
“Mr. Ch’in Chung,” observed Ming Yen, “is not well at all.”
Pao-yü at these words was quite taken aback. “It was only yesterday,” he
hastily added, “that I saw him, and he was still bright and cheery; and
how is it that he’s anything but well now?”
“I myself can’t explain,” replied Ming Yen; “but just a few minutes ago
an old man belonging to his family came over with the express purpose of
giving me the tidings.”
Upon hearing this news, Pao-yü there and then turned round and told
dowager lady Chia; and the old lady issued directions to depute some
trustworthy persons to accompany him. “Let him go,” (she said), “and
satisfy his feelings towards his fellow-scholar; but as soon as he has
done, he must come back; and don’t let him tarry too long.”
Pao-yü with hurried step left the room and came and changed his clothes.
But as on his arrival outside, the carriage had not as yet been got
ready, he fell into such a state of excitement, that he went round and
round all over the hall in quite an erratic manner. In a short while,
after pressure had been brought to bear, the carriage arrived, and
speedily mounting the vehicle, he drove up to the door of Ch’in Chung’s
house, followed by Li Kuei, Ming Yen and the other servants. Everything
was quiet. Not a soul was about. Like a hive of bees they flocked into
the house, to the astonishment of two distant aunts, and of several male
cousins of Ch’in Chung, all of whom had no time to effect their retreat.
Ch’in Chung had, by this time, had two or three fainting fits, and had
already long ago been changed his mat. As soon as Pao-yü realised the
situation, he felt unable to repress himself from bursting forth aloud.
Li Kuei promptly reasoned with him. “You shouldn’t go on in this way,"
he urged, “you shouldn’t. It’s because Mr. Ch’in is so weak that lying
flat on the stove-couch naturally made his bones feel uncomfortable; and
that’s why he has temporarily been removed down here to ease him a
little. But if you, sir, go on in this way, will you not, instead of
doing him any good, aggravate his illness?”
At these words, Pao-yü accordingly restrained himself, and held his
tongue; and drawing near, he gazed at Ch’in Chung’s face, which was as
white as wax, while with closed eyes, he gasped for breath, rolling
about on his pillow.
“Brother Ching,” speedily exclaimed Pao-yü, “Pao-yü is here!” But though
he shouted out two or three consecutive times, Ch’in Chung did not heed
him.
“Pao-yü has come!” Pao-yü went on again to cry. But Ch’in Chung’s spirit
had already departed from his body, leaving behind only a faint breath
of superfluous air in his lungs.
He had just caught sight of a number of recording devils, holding a
warrant and carrying chains, coming to seize him, but Ch’in Chung’s soul
would on no account go along with them; and remembering how that there
was in his home no one to assume the direction of domestic affairs, and
feeling concerned that Chih Neng had as yet no home, he consequently
used hundreds of arguments in his entreaties to the recording devils;
but alas! these devils would, none of them, show him any favour. On the
contrary, they heaped invectives upon Ch’in Chung.
“You’re fortunate enough to be a man of letters,” they insinuated, “and
don’t you know the common saying that: ’if the Prince of Hell call upon
you to die at the third watch, who can presume to retain you, a human
being, up to the fifth watch?’ In our abode, in the unseen, high as well
as low, have all alike a face made of iron, and heed not selfish
motives; unlike the mortal world, where favouritism and partiality
prevail. There exist therefore many difficulties in the way (to our
yielding to your wishes).”
While this fuss was going on, Ch’in Chung’s spirit suddenly grasped the
four words, “Pao-yü has come,” and without loss of time, it went on
again to make further urgent appeals. “Gentlemen, spiritual deputies,"
it exclaimed; “show me a little mercy and allow me to return to make
just one remark to an intimate friend of mine, and I’ll be back again.”
“What intimate friend is this again?” the devils observed with one
voice.
“I’m not deceiving you, gentlemen,” rejoined Ch’in Chung; “it’s the
grandson of the duke of Jung Kuo, whose infant name is Pao-yü.”
The Decider of life was, at first, upon hearing these words, so seized
with dismay that he vehemently abused the devils sent on the errand.
“I told you,” he shouted, “to let him go back for a turn; but you would
by no means comply with my words! and now do you wait until he has
summoned a man of glorious fortune and prosperous standing to at last
desist?”
When the company of devils perceived the manner of the Decider of life,
they were all likewise so seized with consternation that they bustled
with hand and feet; while with hearts also full of resentment: “You,
sir,” they replied, “were at one time such a terror, formidable as
lightning; and are you not forsooth able to listen with equanimity to
the two sounds of ’Pao-yü?’ our humble idea is that mortal as he is, and
immortal as we are, it wouldn’t be to our credit if we feared him!”
But whether Ch’in Chung, after all, died or survived, the next chapter
will explain.
Continue...

This eBook of “Hung Lou Meng, Book I” (Or, the Dream of the Red Chamber,
a Chinese Novel in Two Books - by Cao Xueqin - translated by H. Bencraft
Joly) belongs to the public domain.

All books:
Part I (A),
Part I (B),
Part II (A),
Part II (B).

Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
