




  By a demoniacal art, a junior uncle and an elder brother’s wife
      (Pao-yü and lady Feng) come across five devils.
  The gem of Spiritual Perception meets, in a fit of torpor, the two
      perfect men.
Hsiao Hung, the story continues, was much unsettled in her mind. Her
thoughts rolled on in one connected string. But suddenly she became
drowsy, and falling asleep, she encountered Chia Yün, who tried to carry
out his intention to drag her near him. She twisted herself round, and
endeavoured to run away; but was tripped over by the doorstep. This gave
her such a start that she woke up. Then, at length, she realised that it
was only a dream. But so restlessly did she, in consequence of this
fright, keep on rolling and tossing that she could not close her eyes
during the whole night. As soon as the light of the next day dawned, she
got up. Several waiting-maids came at once to tell her to go and sweep
the floor of the rooms, and to bring water to wash the face with. Hsiao
Hung did not even wait to arrange her hair or perform her ablutions;
but, turning towards the looking-glass, she pinned her chevelure up
anyhow; and, rinsing her hands, and, tying a sash round her waist, she
repaired directly to sweep the apartments.
Who would have thought it, Pao-yü also had set his heart upon her the
moment he caught sight of her the previous day. Yet he feared, in the
first place, that if he mentioned her by name and called her over into
his service, Hsi Jen and the other girls might feel the pangs of
jealousy. He did not, either in the second place, have any idea what her
disposition was like. The consequence was that he felt downcast; so much
so, that when he got up at an early hour, he did not even comb his hair
or wash, but simply remained seated, and brooded in a state of
abstraction. After a while, he lowered the window. Through the gauze
frame, from which he could distinctly discern what was going on outside,
he espied several servant-girls, engaged in sweeping the court. All of
them were rouged and powdered; they had flowers inserted in their hair,
and were grandly got up. But the only one, of whom he failed to get a
glimpse, was the girl he had met the day before.
Pao-yü speedily walked out of the door with slipshod shoes. Under the
pretence of admiring the flowers, he glanced, now towards the east; now
towards the west. But upon raising his head, he descried, in the
southwest corner, some one or other leaning by the side of the railing
under the covered passage. A crab-apple tree, however, obstructed the
view and he could not see distinctly who it was, so advancing a step
further in, he stared with intent gaze. It was, in point of fact, the
waiting-maid of the day before, tarrying about plunged in a reverie. His
wish was to go forward and meet her, but he did not, on the other hand,
see how he could very well do so. Just as he was cogitating within
himself, he, of a sudden, perceived Pi Hen come and ask him to go and
wash his face. This reminder placed him under the necessity of betaking
himself into his room. But we will leave him there, without further
details, so as to return to Hsiao Hung.
She was communing with her own thoughts. But unawares perceiving Hsi Jen
wave her hand and call her by name, she had to walk up to her.
“Our watering-pot is spoilt,” Hsi Jen smiled and said, “so go to Miss
Lin’s over there and find one for us to use.”
Hsiao Hung hastened on her way towards the Hsiao Hsiang Kuan.
When she got as far as the Ts’ui Yen bridge, she saw, on raising her
head and looking round, the mounds and lofty places entirely shut in by
screens, and she bethought herself that labourers were that day to plant
trees in that particular locality.
At a great distance off, a band of men were, in very deed, engaged in
digging up the soil, while Chia Yün was seated on a boulder on the hill,
superintending the works. The time came for Hsiao Hung to pass by, but
she could not muster the courage to do so. Nevertheless she had no other
course than to quietly proceed to the Hsiao Hsiang Kuan. Then getting
the watering-pot, she sped on her way back again. But being in low
spirits, she retired alone into her room and lay herself down. One and
all, however, simply maintained that she was out of sorts, so they did
not pay any heed to her.
A day went by. On the morrow fell, in fact, the anniversary of the birth
of Wang Tzu-t’eng’s spouse, and some one was despatched from his
residence to come and invite dowager lady Chia and Madame Wang. Madame
Wang found out however that dowager lady Chia would not avail herself of
the invitation, and neither would she go. So Mrs. Hsüeh went along with
lady Feng, and the three sisters of the Chia family, and Pao-ch’ai and
Pao-yü, and only returned home late in the evening.
Madame Wang was sitting in Mrs. Hsüeh’s apartments, whither she had just
crossed, when she perceived Chia Huan come back from school, and she
bade him transcribe incantations out of the Chin Kang Canon and intonate
them. Chia Huan accordingly came and seated himself on the stove-couch,
occupied by Madame Wang, and, directing a servant to light the candles,
he started copying in an ostentatious and dashing manner. Now he called
Ts’ai Hsia to pour a cup of tea for him. Now he asked Yu Ch’uan to take
the scissors and cut the snuff of the wick. “Chin Ch’uan!” he next
cried, “you’re in the way of the rays of the lamp.”
The servant-girls had all along entertained an antipathy for him, and
not one of them therefore worried her mind about what he said. Ts’ai
Hsia was the only one who still got on well with him, so pouring a cup
of tea, she handed it to him. But she felt prompted to whisper to him:
“Keep quiet a bit! what’s the use of making people dislike you?”
“I know myself how matters stand,” Chia Huan rejoined, as he cast a
steady glance at her; “so don’t you try and befool me! Now that you are
on intimate terms with Pao-yü, you don’t pay much heed to me. I’ve also
seen through it myself.”
Ts’ai Hsiao set her teeth together, and gave him a fillip on the head.
“You heartless fellow!” she cried. “You’re like the dog, that bit Lü
T’ung-pin. You have no idea of what’s right and what’s wrong!”
While these two nagged away, they noticed lady Feng and Madame Wang
cross together over to them. Madame Wang at once assailed him with
questions. She asked him how many ladies had been present on that day,
whether the play had been good or bad, and what the banquet had been
like.
But a brief interval over, Pao-yü too appeared on the scene. After
saluting Madame Wang, he also made a few remarks, with all decorum; and
then bidding a servant remove his frontlet, divest him of his long gown
and pull off his boots, he rushed head foremost, into his mother’s lap.
Madame Wang caressed and patted him. But while Pao-yü clung to his
mother’s neck, he spoke to her of one thing and then another.
“My child,” said Madame Wang, “you’ve again had too much to drink; your
face is scalding hot, and if you still keep on rubbing and scraping it,
why, you’ll by and bye stir up the fumes of wine! Don’t you yet go and
lie down quietly over there for a little!”
Chiding him the while, she directed a servant to fetch a pillow. Pao-yü
therefore lay himself down at the back of Madame Wang, and called Ts’ai
Hsia to come and stroke him.
Pao-yü then began to bandy words with Ts’ai Hsia. But perceiving that
Ts’ai Hsia was reserved, and, that instead of paying him any attention,
she kept her eyes fixed upon Chia Huan, Pao-yü eagerly took her hand.
“My dear girl!” he said; “do also heed me a little;” and as he gave
utterance to this appeal, he kept her hand clasped in his.
Ts’ai Hsia, however, drew her hand away and would not let him hold it.
“If you go on in this way,” she vehemently exclaimed, “I’ll shout out at
once.”
These two were in the act of wrangling, when verily Chia Huan overheard
what was going on. He had, in fact, all along hated Pao-yü; so when on
this occasion, he espied him up to his larks with Ts’ai Hsia, he could
much less than ever stifle feelings of resentment in his heart. After
some reflection, therefore, an idea suggested itself to his mind, and
pretending that it was by a slip of the hand, he shoved the candle,
overflowing with tallow, into Pao-yü’s face.
“Ai ya!” Pao-yü was heard to exclaim. Every one in the whole room was
plunged in consternation. With precipitate haste, the lanterns, standing
on the floor, were moved over; and, with the first ray of light, they
discovered that Pao-yü’s face was one mass of tallow.
Madame Wang gave way to anger as well as anxiety. At one time, she
issued directions to the servants to rub and wash Pao-yü clean. At
another, she heaped abuse upon Chia Huan.
Lady Feng jumped on to the stone-couch by leaps and bounds. But while
intent upon removing the stuff from Pao-yü’s face, she simultaneously
ejaculated: “Master Tertius, are you still such a trickster! I’ll tell
you what, you’ll never turn to any good account! Yet dame Chao should
ever correct and admonish him.”
This single remark suggested the idea to Madame Wang, and she lost no
time in sending for Mrs. Chao to come round.
“You bring up,” she berated her, “such a black-hearted offspring like
this, and don’t you, after all, advise and reprove him? Time and again I
paid no notice whatever to what happened, and you and he have become
more audacious, and have gone from worse to worse!”
Mrs. Chao had no alternative but to suppress every sense of injury,
silence all grumblings, and go herself and lend a hand to the others in
tidying Pao-yü. She then perceived that a whole row of blisters had
risen on the left side of Pao-yü’s face, but that fortunately no injury
had been done to his eyes.
When Madame Wang’s attention was drawn to them she felt her heart sore.
It fell a prey to fears also lest when dowager lady Chia made any
inquiries about them she should find it difficult to give her any
satisfactory reply. And so distressed did she get that she gave Mrs.
Chao another scolding. But while she tried to comfort Pao-yü, she, at
the same time, fetched some powder for counteracting the effects of the
virus, and applied it on his face.
“It’s rather sore,” said Pao-yü, “but it’s nothing to speak of. Tomorrow
when my old grandmother asks about it, I can simply explain that I
scalded it myself; that will be quite enough to tell her.”
“If you say that you scalded it yourself,” lady Feng observed, “why,
she’ll also call people to task for not looking out; and a fit of rage
will, beyond doubt, be the outcome of it all.”
Madame Wang then ordered the servants to take care and escort Pao-yü
back to his room. On their arrival, Hsi Jen and his other attendants saw
him, and they were all in a great state of flurry.
As for Lin Tai-yü, when she found that Pao-yü had gone out of doors, she
continued the whole day a prey to ennui. In the evening, she deputed
messengers two and three times to go and inquire about him. But when she
came to know that he had been scalded, she hurried in person to come and
see him. She then discovered Pao-yü all alone, holding a glass and
scanning his features in it; while the left side of his face was
plastered all over with some medicine.
Lin Tai-yü imagined that the burn was of an extremely serious nature,
and she hastened to approach him with a view to examine it. Pao-yü,
however, screened his face, and, waving his hand, bade her leave the
room; for knowing her usual knack for tidiness he did not feel inclined
to let her get a glimpse of his face. Tai-yü then gave up the attempt,
and confined herself to asking him: “whether it was very painful?”
“It isn’t very sore,” replied Pao-yü, “if I look after it for a day or
two, it will get all right.”
But after another short stay, Lin Tai-yü repaired back to her quarters.
The next day Pao-yü saw dowager lady Chia. But in spite of his
confession that he himself was responsible for the scalding of his face,
his grandmother could not refrain from reading another lecture to the
servants who had been in attendance.
A day after, Ma, a Taoist matron, whose name was recorded as Pao-yü’s
godmother, came on a visit to the mansion. Upon perceiving Pao-yü, she
was very much taken aback, and asked all about the circumstances of the
accident. When he explained that he had been scalded, she forthwith
shook her head and heaved a sigh; then while making with her fingers a
few passes over Pao-yü’s face, she went on to mutter incantations for
several minutes. “I can guarantee that he’ll get all right,” she added,
“for this is simply a sadden and fleeting accident!”
Turning towards dowager lady Chia: “Venerable ancestor,” she observed,
“Venerable Buddha! how could you ever be aware of the existence of the
portentous passage in that Buddhistic classic, ’to the effect that a son
of every person, who holds the dignity of prince, duke or high
functionary, has no sooner come into the world and reached a certain age
than numerous evil spirits at once secretly haunt him, and pinch him,
when they find an opportunity; or dig their nails into him; or knock his
bowl of rice down, during, meal-time; or give him a shove and send him
over, while he is quietly seated.’ So this is the reason why the
majority of the sons and grandsons of those distinguished families do
not grow up to attain manhood.”
Dowager lady Chia, upon hearing her speak in this wise, eagerly asked:
“Is there any Buddhistic spell, by means of which to check their
influence or not?”
“This is an easy job!” rejoined the Taoist matron Ma, “all one need do
is to perform several meritorious deeds on his account so as to
counteract the consequences of retribution and everything will then be
put right. That canon further explains: ’that in the western part of the
world there is a mighty Buddha, whose glory illumines all things, and
whose special charge is to cast his lustre on the evil spirits in dark
places; that if any benevolent man or virtuous woman offers him
oblations with sincerity of heart, he is able to so successfully
perpetuate the peace and quiet of their sons and grandsons that these
will no more meet with any calamities arising from being possessed by
malevolent demons.’”
“But what, I wonder,” inquired dowager lady Chia, “could be offered to
this god?”
“Nothing of any great value,” answered the Taoist matron, Ma. “Exclusive
of offerings of scented candles, several catties of scented oil can be
added, each day, to keep the lantern of the Great Sea alight. This
’Great Sea’ lantern is the visible embodiment and Buddhistic
representation of this divinity, so day and night we don’t venture to
let it go out!”
“For a whole day and a whole night,” asked dowager lady Chia, “how much
oil is needed, so that I too should accomplish a good action?”
“There is really no limit as to quantity. It rests upon the goodwill of
the donor,” Ma, the Taoist matron, put in by way of reply. “In my
quarters, for instance, I have several lanterns, the gifts of the
consorts of princes and the spouses of high officials living in various
localities. The consort of the mansion of the Prince of Nan Au has been
prompted in her beneficence by a liberal spirit; she allows each day
forty-eight catties of oil, and a catty of wick; so that her ’Great Sea’
lamp is only a trifle smaller than a water-jar. The spouse of the
marquis of Chin Hsiang comes next, with no more than twenty catties a
day. Besides these, there are several other families; some giving ten
catties; some eight catties; some three; some five; subject to no fixed
rule; and of course I feel bound to keep the lanterns alight on their
behalf.”
Dowager lady Chia nodded her head and gave way to reflection.
“There’s still another thing,” continued the Taoist matron, Ma. “If it
be on account of father or mother or seniors, any excessive donation
would not matter. But were you, venerable ancestor, to bestow too much
in your offering for Pao-yü, our young master won’t, I fear, be equal to
the gift; and instead of being benefited, his happiness will be snapped.
If you therefore want to make a liberal gift seven catties will do; if a
small one, then five catties will even be sufficient.”
“Well, in that case,” responded dowager lady Chia, “let us fix upon five
catties a day, and every month come and receive payment of the whole
lump sum!”
“O-mi-to-fu!” exclaimed Ma, the Taoist matron, “Oh merciful, and mighty
P’u Sa!”
Dowager lady Chia then called the servants and impressed on their minds
that whenever Pao-yü went out of doors in the future, they should give
several strings of cash to the pages to bestow on charity among the
bonzes and Taoist priests, and the poor and needy they might meet on the
way.
These directions concluded, the Taoist matron trudged into the various
quarters, and paid her respects, and then strolled leisurely about.
Presently, she entered Mrs. Chao’s apartments. After the two ladies had
exchanged salutations, Mrs. Chao bade a young servant-girl hand her
guest a cup of tea. While Mrs. Chao busied herself pasting shoes, Ma,
the Taoist matron, espied, piled up in a heap on the stove-couch, sundry
pieces of silks and satins. “It just happens,” she consequently
remarked, “that I have no facings for shoes, so my lady do give me a few
odd cuttings of silk and satin, of no matter what colour, to make myself
a pair of shoes with.”
Mrs. Chao heaved a sigh. “Look,” she said, “whether there be still among
them any pieces good for anything. But anything that’s worth anything
doesn’t find its way in here. If you don’t despise what’s worthless,
you’re at liberty to select any two pieces and to take them away, and
have done.”
The Taoist matron, Ma, chose with alacrity several pieces and shoved
them in her breast.
“The other day,” Mrs. Chao went on to inquire, “I sent a servant over
with five hundred cash; have you presented any offerings before the god
of medicine or not?”
“I’ve offered them long ago for you,” the Taoist matron Ma rejoined.
“O-mi-to-fu!” ejaculated Mrs. Chao with a sigh, “were I a little better
off, I’d also come often and offer gifts; but though my will be
boundless, my means are insufficient!”
“Don’t trouble your mind on this score,” suggested Ma, the Taoist
matron. “By and bye, when Mr. Huan has grown up into a man and obtained
some official post or other, will there be then any fear of your not
being able to afford such offerings as you might like to make?”
At these words Mrs. Chao gave a smile. “Enough, enough!” she cried.
“Don’t again refer to such contingencies! the present is a fair
criterion. For up to whom in this house can my son and I come? Pao-yü is
still a mere child; but he is such that he wins people’s love. Those big
people may be partial to him, and love him a good deal, I’ve nothing to
say to it; but I can’t eat humble pie to this sort of mistress!”
While uttering this remark, she stretched out her two fingers.
Ma, the Taoist matron, understood the meaning she desired to convey.
“It’s your lady Secunda, Lien, eh?” she forthwith asked.
Mrs. Chao was filled with trepidation. Hastily waving her hand, she got
to her feet, raised the portiere, and peeped outside. Perceiving that
there was no one about, she at length retraced her footsteps.
“Dreadful!” she then said to the Taoist matron. “Dreadful! But speaking
of this sort of mistress, I’m not so much as a human being, if she
doesn’t manage to shift over into her mother’s home the whole of this
family estate.”
“Need you tell me this!” Ma, the Taoist matron, at these words, remarked
with a view to ascertain what she implied. “Haven’t I, forsooth,
discovered it all for myself? Yet it’s fortunate that you don’t trouble
your minds about her; for it’s far better that you should let her have
her own way.”
“My dear woman,” rejoined Mrs. Chao, “Not let her have her own way! why,
is it likely that any one would have the courage to tell her anything?”
“I don’t mean to utter any words that may bring upon me retribution,"
added Ma, the Taoist matron, “but you people haven’t got the wits. But
it’s no matter of surprise. Yet if you daren’t openly do anything, why,
you could stealthily have devised some plan. And do you still tarry up
to this day?”
Mrs. Chao realised that there lurked something in her insinuation, and
she felt an inward secret joy. “What plan could I stealthily devise?"
she asked. “I’ve got the will right enough, but I’m not a person gifted
with this sort of gumption. So were you to impart to me some way or
other, I would reward you most liberally.”
When the Taoist matron, Ma, heard this, she drew near to her.
“O-mi-to-fu! desist at once from asking me!” she designedly exclaimed.
“How can I know anything about such matters, contrary as they are to
what is right?”
“There you are again!” Mrs. Chao replied. “You’re one ever most ready to
succour those in distress, and to help those in danger, and is it likely
that you’ll quietly look on, while some one comes and compasses my death
as well as that of my son? Are you, pray, fearful lest I shouldn’t give
you any reward?”
Ma, the Taoist matron, greeted this remark with a smile. “You’re right
enough in what you say,” she ventured, “of my being unable to bear the
sight of yourself and son receiving insult from a third party; but as
for your mention of rewards, why, what’s there of yours that I still
covet?”
This answer slightly reassured Mrs. Chao’s mind. “How is it,” she
speedily urged, “that an intelligent person like you should have become
so dense? If, indeed, the spell prove efficacious, and we exterminate
them both, is there any apprehension that this family estate won’t be
ours? and when that time comes, won’t you get all you may wish?”
At this disclosure, Ma, the Taoist matron, lowered her head for a long
time. “When everything,” she observed, “shall have been settled
satisfactorily, and when there’ll be, what’s more, no proof at all, will
you still pay any heed to me?”
“What’s there hard about this?” remarked Mrs. Chao. “I’ve saved several
taels from my own pin-money, and have besides a good number of clothes
and head-ornaments. So you can first take several of these away with
you. And I’ll further write an I.O.U., and entrust it to you, and when
that time does come, I’ll pay you in full.”
“That will do!” answered the Taoist matron, Ma.
Mrs. Chao thereupon dismissed even a young servant-girl, who happened to
be in the room, and hastily opening a trunk, she produced several
articles of clothing and jewelry, as well as a few odd pieces of silver
from her own pocket-money. Then also writing a promissory note for fifty
taels, she surrendered the lot to Ma, the Taoist matron. “Take these,"
she said, “in advance for presents in your temple.”
At the sight of the various articles and of the promissory note, the
Taoist matron became at once unmindful of what was right and what was
wrong; and while her mouth was full of assent, she stretched out her
arm, and first and foremost laid hold of the hard cash, and next
clutched the I.O.U. Turning then towards Mrs. Chao, she asked for a
sheet of paper; and taking up a pair of scissors, she cut out two human
beings and gave them to Mrs. Chao, enjoining her to write on the upper
part of them the respective ages of the two persons in question. Looking
further for a sheet of blue paper, she cut out five blue-faced devils,
which she bade her place together side by side with the paper men, and
taking a pin she made them fast. “When I get home,” she remarked, “I’ll
have recourse to some art, which will, beyond doubt, prove efficacious.”
When she however had done speaking, she suddenly saw Madame Wang’s
waiting-maid make her appearance inside the room. “What! my dame, are
you in here!” the girl exclaimed. “Why, our lady is waiting for you!”
The two dames then parted company.
But passing them over, we will now allude to Lin Tai-yµ. As Pao-yü had
scalded his face, and did not go out of doors very much, she often came
to have a chat with him. On this particular day she took up, after her
meal, some book or other and read a couple of pages out of it. Next, she
busied herself a little with needlework, in company with Tzu Chuan. She
felt however thoroughly dejected and out of sorts. So she strolled out
of doors along with her. But catching sight of the newly sprouted bamboo
shoots, in front of the pavilion, they involuntarily stepped out of the
entrance of the court, and penetrated into the garden. They cast their
eyes on all four quarters; but not a soul was visible. When they became
conscious of the splendour of the flowers and the chatter of the birds,
they, with listless step, turned their course towards the I Hung court.
There they found several servant-girls baling out water; while a bevy of
them stood under the verandah, watching the thrushes having their bath.
They heard also the sound of laughter in the rooms.
The fact is that Li Kung-ts’ai, lady Feng, and Pao-ch’ai were assembled
inside. As soon as they saw them walk in, they with one voice shouted,
smiling: “Now, are not these two more!”
“We are a full company to-day,” laughed Tai-yü, “but who has issued the
cards and invited us here?”
“The other day,” interposed lady Feng, “I sent servants with a present
of two caddies of tea for you, Miss Lin; was it, after all, good?”
“I had just forgotten all about it,” Tai-yü rejoined, “many thanks for
your kind attention!
“I tasted it,” observed Pao-yü. “I did not think it anything good. But I
don’t know how others, who’ve had any of it, find it.”
“Its flavour,” said Tai-yü, “is good; the only thing is, it has no
colour.”
“It’s tribute tea from the Laos Kingdom,” continued lady Feng. “When I
tried it, I didn’t either find it anything very fine. It’s not up to
what we ordinarily drink.”
“To my taste, it’s all right,” put in Tai-yü. “But what your palates are
like, I can’t make out.”
“As you say it’s good,” suggested Pao-yü, “you’re quite at liberty to
take all I have for your use.”
“I’ve got a great deal more of it over there,” lady Feng remarked.
“I’ll tell a servant-girl to go and fetch it,” Tai-yü replied.
“No need,” lady Feng went on. “I’ll send it over with some one. I also
have a favour to ask of you to-morrow, so I may as well tell the servant
to bring it along at the same time.”
When Lin Tai-yü heard these words, she put on a smile. “You just mark
this,” she observed. “I’ve had to-day a little tea from her place, and
she at once begins making a tool of me!”
“Since you’ve had some of our tea,” lady Feng laughed, “how is it that
you have not yet become a wife in our household?”
The whole party burst out laughing aloud. So much so, that they found it
difficult to repress themselves. But Tai-yü’s face was suffused with
blushes. She turned her head the other way, and uttered not a word.
“Our sister-in-law Secunda’s jibes are first-rate!” Pao-ch’ai chimed in
with a laugh.
“What jibes!” exclaimed Tai-yü; “they’re purely and simply the prattle
of a mean mouth and vile tongue! They’re enough to evoke people’s
displeasure!”
Saying this, she went on to sputter in disgust.
“Were you,” insinuated lady Feng, “to become a wife in my family, what
is there that you would lack?” Pointing then at Pao-yü, “Look here!” she
cried–"Is not this human being worthy of you? Is not his station in
life good enough for you? Are not our stock and estate sufficient for
you? and in what slight degree can he make you lose caste?”
Tai-yü rose to her feet, and retired immediately. But Pao-ch’ai shouted
out: “Here’s P’in Erh in a huff! Don’t you yet come back? when you’ve
gone, there will really be no fun!”
While calling out to her, she jumped up to pull her back. As soon,
however, as she reached the door of the room, she beheld Mrs. Chao,
accompanied by Mrs. Chou; both coming to look up Pao-yü. Pao-yü and his
companions got up in a body and pressed them into a seat. Lady Feng was
the sole person who did not heed them.
But just as Pao-ch’ai was about to open her lips, she perceived a
servant-girl, attached to Madame Wang’s apartments, appear on the scene.
“Your maternal uncle’s wife has come,” she said, “and she requests you,
ladies and young ladies, to come out and see her.”
Li Kung-ts’ai hurriedly walked away in company with lady Feng. The two
dames, Mrs. Chao and Mrs. Chou, in like manner took their leave and
quitted the room.
“As for me, I can’t go out,” Pao-yü shouted. “But whatever you do, pray,
don’t ask aunt to come in here.” “Cousin Lin,” he went on to say, “do
stay on a while; I’ve got something to tell you.”
Lady Feng overheard him. Turning her head towards Lin Tai-yü, “There’s
some one,” she cried; “who wants to speak to you.” And forthwith laying
hold of Lin Tai-yü, she pushed her back and then trudged away, along
with Li Kung-ts’ai.
During this time, Pao-yü clasped Tai-yü’s hand in his. He did nothing
than smile. But not a word did he utter. Tai-yü naturally, therefore,
got crimson in the face, and struggled to escape his importunities.
“Ai-ya!” exclaimed Pao-yü. “How my head is sore!”
“It should be!” rejoined Tai-yü. “O-mi-to-fu.”
Pao-yü then gave vent to a loud shout. His body bounced three or four
feet high from the ground. His mouth was full of confused shrieks. But
all he said was rambling talk.
Tai-yü and the servant-girls were full of consternation, and, with all
possible haste, they ran and apprised Madame Wang and dowager lady Chia.
Wang Tzu-t’eng’s wife was, at this time, also with them, so they all
came in a body to see him. Pao-yü behaved more and more as if determined
to clutch a sword or seize a spear to put an end to his existence. He
raged in a manner sufficient to subvert the heavens and upset the earth.
As soon as dowager lady Chia and Madame Wang caught sight of him, they
were struck with terror. They trembled wildly like a piece of clothing
that is being shaken. Uttering a shout of: “My son,” and another of: “My
flesh,” they burst out into a loud fit of crying. Presently, all the
inmates were seized with fright. Even Chia She, Madame Hsing, Chia
Cheng, Chia Chen, Chia Lien, Chia Jung, Chia Yün, Chia P’ing, Mrs.
Hsüeh, Hsüeh P’an, Chou Jui’s wife, and the various members of the
household, whether high or low, and the servant-girls and married women
too, rushed into the garden to see what was up.
The confusion that prevailed was, at the moment, like entangled flax.
Every one was at a loss what to do, when they espied lady Feng dash into
the garden, a glistening sword in hand, and try to cut down everything
that came in her way, ogle vacantly whomsoever struck her gaze, and make
forthwith an attempt to despatch them. A greater panic than ever broke
out among the whole assemblage. But placing herself at the head of a
handful of sturdy female servants, Chou Jui’s wife precipitated herself
forward, and clasping her tight, they succeeded in snatching the sword
from her grip, and carrying her back into her room.
P’ing Erh, Feng Erh, and the other girls began to weep. They invoked the
heavens and appealed to the earth. Even Chia Cheng was distressed at
heart. One and all at this stage started shouting, some, one thing;
some, another. Some suggested exorcists. Some cried out for the
posture-makers to attract the devils. Others recommended that Chang, the
Taoist priest, of the Yü Huang temple, should catch the evil spirits. A
thorough turmoil reigned supreme for a long time. The gods were
implored. Prayers were offered. Every kind of remedy was tried, but no
benefit whatever became visible.
After sunset, the spouse of Wang Tzu-t’eng said good-bye and took her
departure. On the ensuing day, Wang Tzu-t’eng himself also came to make
inquiries. Following closely upon him, arrived, in a body, messengers
from the young marquis Shih, Madame Hsing’s young brother, and their
various relatives to ascertain for themselves how (lady Feng and Pao-yü)
were progressing. Some brought charm-water. Some recommended bonzes and
Taoist priests. Others spoke highly of doctors. But that young fellow
and his elder brother’s wife fell into such greater and greater stupor
that they lost all consciousness. Their bodies were hot like fire. As
they lay prostrate on their beds, they talked deliriously. With the fall
of the shades of night their condition aggravated. So much so, that the
matrons and servant-girls did not venture to volunteer their attendance.
They had, therefore, to be both moved into Madame Wang’s quarters, where
servants were told off to take their turn and watch them.
Dowager lady Chia, Madame Wang, Madame Hsing and Mrs. Hsüeh did not
budge an inch or a step from their side. They sat round them, and did
nothing but cry. Chia She and Chia Cheng too were a prey, at this
juncture, to misgivings lest weeping should upset dowager lady Chia. Day
and night oil was burnt and fires were, mindless of expense, kept
alight. The bustle and confusion was such that no one, either master or
servant, got any rest.
Chia She also sped on every side in search of Buddhist and Taoist
priests. But Chia Cheng had witnessed how little relief these things
could afford, and he felt constrained to dissuade Chia She from his
endeavours. “The destiny,” he argued, “of our son and daughter is
entirely dependent upon the will of Heaven, and no human strength can
prevail. The malady of these two persons would not be healed, even were
every kind of treatment tried, and as I feel confident that it is the
design of heaven that things should be as they are, all we can do is to
allow it to carry out its purpose.”
Chia She, however, paid no notice to his remonstrances and continued as
hitherto to fuss in every imaginable way. In no time three days elapsed.
Lady Feng and Pao-yü were still confined to their beds. Their very
breaths had grown fainter. The whole household, therefore, unanimously
arrived at the conclusion that there was no hope, and with all despatch
they made every necessary preparation for the subsequent requirements of
both their relatives.
Dowager lady Chia, Madame Wang, Chia Lien, P’ing Erh, Hsi Jen and the
others indulged in tears with keener and keener anguish. They hung
between life and death. Mrs. Chao alone was the one who assumed an
outward sham air of distress, while in her heart she felt her wishes
gratified.
The fourth day arrived. At an early hour Pao-yü suddenly opened his eyes
and addressed himself to his grandmother Chia. “From this day forward,"
he said, “I may no longer abide in your house, so you had better send me
off at once!”
These words made dowager lady Chia feel as if her very heart had been
wrenched out of her. Mrs. Chao, who stood by, exhorted her. “You
shouldn’t, venerable lady,” she said, “indulge in excessive grief. This
young man has been long ago of no good; so wouldn’t it be as well to
dress him up and let him go back a moment sooner from this world. You’ll
also be thus sparing him considerable suffering. But, if you persist, in
not reconciling yourself to the separation and this breath of his is not
cut off, he will lie there and suffer without any respite....”
Her arguments were scarcely ended, when she was spat upon by dowager
lady Chia. “You rotten-tongued, good-for-nothing hag!” she cried
abusively. “What makes you fancy him of no good! You wish him dead and
gone; but what benefit will you then derive? Don’t give way to any
dreams; for, if he does die, I’ll just exact your lives from you! It’s
all because you’ve been continuously at him, inciting and urging him to
read and write, that his spirit has become so intimidated that, at the
sight of his father, he behaves just like a rat trying to get out of the
way of a cat! And is not all this the result of the bullying of such a
mean herd of women as yourselves! Could you now drive him to death, your
wishes would immediately be fulfilled; but which of you will I let off?”
Now she shed tears; now she gave vent to abuse.
Chia Cheng, who stood by, heard these invectives; and they so enhanced
his exasperation that he promptly shouted out and made Mrs. Chao
withdraw. He then exerted himself for a time to console (his senior) by
using kindly accents. But suddenly some one came to announce that the
two coffins had been completed. This announcement pierced, like a
dagger, dowager lady Chia to the heart; and while weeping with despair
more intense, she broke forth in violent upbraidings.
“Who is it,"–she inquired; “who gave orders to make the coffins? Bring
at once the coffin-makers and beat them to death!”
A stir ensued sufficient to convulse the heavens and to subvert the
earth. But at an unforeseen moment resounded in the air the gentle
rapping of a ’wooden fish’ bell. A voice recited the sentence: “Ave!
Buddha able to unravel retribution and dispel grievances! Should any
human being lie in sickness, and his family be solicitous on his
account; or should any one have met with evil spirits and come across
any baleful evils, we have the means to effect a cure.”
Dowager lady Chia and Madame Wang at once directed servants to go out
into the street and find out who it was. It turned out to be, in fact, a
mangy-headed bonze and a hobbling Taoist priest. What was the appearance
of the bonze?
  His nose like a suspended gall; his two eyebrows so long,
  His eyes, resembling radiant stars, possessed a precious glow,
  His coat in tatters and his shoes of straw, without a home;
  Rolling in filth, and, a worse fate, his head one mass of boils.
And the Taoist priest, what was he like?
  With one leg perchèd high he comes, with one leg low;
  His whole frame drenching wet, bespattered all with mud.
  If you perchance meet him, and ask him where’s his home,
  “In fairyland, west of the ’Weak Water,’ he’ll say.”
Chia Cheng ordered the servants to invite them to walk in. “On what
hill,” he asked those two persons, “do you cultivate the principles of
reason?
“Worthy official!” the bonze smiled, “you must not ask too many
questions! It’s because we’ve learnt that there are inmates of your
honourable mansion in a poor state of health that we come with the
express design of working a cure.”
“There are,” explained Chia Cheng, “two of our members, who have been
possessed of evil spirits. But, is there, I wonder, any remedy by means
of which they could he healed?”
“In your family,” laughingly observed the Taoist priest, “you have ready
at hand a precious thing, the like of which is rare to find in the
world. It possesses the virtue of alleviating the ailment, so why need
you inquire about remedies?”
Chia Cheng’s mind was forthwith aroused. “It’s true,” he consequently
rejoined, “that my son brought along with him, at the time of his birth,
a piece of jade, on the surface of which was inscribed that it had the
virtue of dispelling evil influences, but we haven’t seen any efficacy
in it.”
“There is, worthy officer,” said the bonze, “something in it which you
do not understand. That precious jade was, in its primitive state,
efficacious, but consequent upon its having been polluted by music,
lewdness, property and gain it has lost its spiritual properties. But
produce now that valuable thing and wait till I have taken it into my
hands and pronounced incantations over it, when it will become as full
of efficacy as of old!”
Chia Cheng accordingly unclasped the piece of jade from Pao-yü’s neck,
and handed it to the two divines. The Buddhist priest held it with
reverence in the palm of his hand and heaving a deep sigh, “Since our
parting,” he cried, “at the foot of the Ch’ing Keng peak, about thirteen
years have elapsed. How time flies in the mortal world! Thine earthly
destiny has not yet been determined. Alas, alas! how admirable were the
qualities thou did’st possess in those days!
 “By Heaven unrestrained, without constraint from Earth,
  No joys lived in thy heart, but sorrows none as well;
  Yet when perception, through refinement, thou did’st reach,
  Thou went’st among mankind to trouble to give rise.
  How sad the lot which thou of late hast had to hear!
  Powder prints and rouge stains thy precious lustre dim.
  House bars both day and night encage thee like a duck.
  Deep wilt thou sleep, but from thy dream at length thou’lt wake,
  Thy debt of vengeance, once discharged, thou wilt depart.”
At the conclusion of this recital, he again rubbed the stone for a
while, and gave vent to some nonsensical utterances, after which he
surrendered it to Chia Cheng. “This object,” he said, “has already
resumed its efficacy; but you shouldn’t do anything to desecrate it.
Hang it on the post of the door in his bed-room, and with the exception
of his own relatives, you must not let any outside female pollute it.
After the expiry of thirty-three days, he will, I can guarantee, be all
right.”
Chia Cheng then gave orders to present tea; but the two priests had
already walked away. He had, however, no alternative but to comply with
their injunctions, and lady Feng and Pao-yü, in point of fact, got
better from day to day. Little by little they returned to their senses
and experienced hunger. Dowager lady Chia and Madame Wang, at length,
felt composed in their minds. All the cousins heard the news outside.
Tai-yü, previous to anything else, muttered a prayer to Buddha; while
Pao-ch’ai laughed and said not a word.
“Sister Pao,” inquired Hsi Ch’un, “what are you laughing for?”
“I laugh,” replied Pao-ch’ai, “because the ’Thus-Come’ Joss has more to
do than any human being. He’s got to see to the conversion of all
mankind, and to take care of the ailments, to which all flesh is heir;
for he restores every one of them at once to health; and he has as well
to control people’s marriages so as to bring them about through his aid;
and what do you say, has he ample to do or not? Now, isn’t this enough
to make one laugh, eh?”
Lin Tai-yü blushed. “Ts’ui!” she exclaimed; “none of you are good
people. Instead of following the example of worthy persons, you try to
rival the mean mouth of that hussey Feng.”
As she uttered these words, she raised the portiere and made her exit.
But, reader, do you want to know any further circumstances? If so, the
next chapter will explain them to you.
Continue...

This eBook of “Hung Lou Meng, Book II” (Or, the Dream of the Red Chamber,
a Chinese Novel in Two Books - by Cao Xueqin - translated by H. Bencraft
Joly) belongs to the public domain.

All books:
Part I (A),
Part I (B),
Part II (A),
Part II (B).
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Hung Lou Meng: Book IIBy Cao XueqinAt Amazon
