


Boys delight in men who have had adventures, and when they are
privileged to read of such exploits in thrilling story form, that is the
“seventh heaven” for them. Such a “boys’ man” was Jack London, whose
whole life was one of stirring action on land and sea. Gifted as a story
teller, he wrote books almost without end. Some of them, “The Call of
the Wild,” “The Sea Wolf” and “White Fang,” have already been recognized
as fine books for boys. Others, volumes of short stories, contain many
of like interest, possessing the same qualities that have made the other
and longer stories so acceptable as juveniles.
Effort has been made by the editor to bring together in one volume a
number of such stories, not for the reason alone that there might be
another Jack London book for boys, but also in order to add to our
juvenile literature a volume likely “to be chewed and digested,” as
Bacon says, a book worthy “to be read whole, and with diligence and
attention.” For my belief is that boys read altogether too few of such
books. Or perhaps it would be more correct to say, have too few
opportunities to read such books, because so often we fail to see how
quick in their reading their minds are to grasp the more difficult, and
how keen and competent their conscience to draw the right conclusion
when situations are presented wherein men err so grievously.
It is hoped the stories presented will serve to exercise both the boy’s
mind and conscience; that seeing and feeling life and nature as Jack
London saw and felt it–the best and the worst in human nature, with the
Infinite always near and from whom there is no escape–seeing and
feeling such things boys will develop the emotional muscles of the
spirit, have opened up new windows to their imaginations, and withal add
some line or color to their life’s ideals.
Franklin K. Mathiews, Chief Scout Librarian, Boy Scouts of America.
Continue...

This eBook of “Brown Wolf and Other Jack London” by Jack London (chosen and Edited By Franklin K. Mathiews) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Brown Wolf And Other Jack London StoriesBy MathiewsAt Amazon
