
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





It must not be forgotten, in the history of this strange trial, that
the prisoner was brought from the other side of France expressly that
she might be among a people who were not of her own party, and who had
no natural sympathies with her, but a hereditary connection with
England, which engaged all its partialities on that side. For this
purpose it was that the venue, the town expected the coming of the
Witch, and all the dark revelations that might be extracted from her,
her spells, and the details of that contract with the devil which was
so entrancing to the popular imagination, with excitement and
eagerness. Such a Cause Célèbre had never taken place among them
before; and everybody no doubt looked forward to the pleasure of
seeing it proved that it was not by the will of Heaven, but by some
monstrous combination of black arts, that such an extraordinary result
as the defeat of the invincible English soldiers had been brought
about. The litigious and logical Normans no doubt looked forward to it
as to the most interesting entertainment, ending in the complete
vindication of their own side and the exposure of the nefarious arms
used by their adversaries.
But when the proceedings had been opened, and in place of some dark-
browed and termagant sorceress, with the mark of every evil passion in
her face, there appeared before the spectators crowding into every
available corner, the slim, youthful figure–was it boy or girl?–the
serene and luminous countenance of the Maid, the flower of youth
raising its whiteness and innocence in the midst of all those black-
robed, subtle Doctors, it is impossible but that the very first glance
must have given a shock and thrill of amazement and doubt to what may
be called the lay spectators, those who had no especial bias more than
common report, and whose credit or interest were not involved in
bringing this unlikely criminal to condemnation. “A girl! Like our own
Jeanne at home,” might many a father have said, dismayed and
confounded. She had, they all say, those eyes of innocence which it is
so impossible not to believe, and that virginal voice, assez femme,
which a sentimental Frenchman insists upon as belonging only to the
spotless. At all events she had the bearing of honesty, purity, and
truth. She was not afraid though all the powers of hell–or was it
only of the Church and the Law?–were arrayed against her: no guilty
mystery to be discovered, was in her countenance. But it must have
been plain to the keen and not too charitable Normans that such
semblances are not always to be trusted, and that the devil himself
even, on occasion, can take upon himself the appearance of an angel of
light; so that after the first shock of wonder they no doubt settled
themselves to listen, believing that soon they would have their
imaginations fed with tales of horror, and would discover the hoofs
and the horns and unveil with triumph the lurking demon. The French
historians never take into consideration the fact that it was the
belief of Rouen and Normandy, as well as of any similar town or
province in England, that the child Henry VI. was lawful king, and
that whatever was on the other side was a hateful adversary, to be
brought to such disaster and shame as was possible, without mercy and
without delay.
But after a few days of the examination which we have just reported,
public opinion was greatly staggered, and knew not how to turn.
Gradually the conviction must have been forced upon every mind which
had any candour left, that Jeanne, at that dreadful bar, with the
stake in sight, and all the learning of Paris–the entire power of one
great national and half of another, all England and half France
against–(many more than half France, for the other part had abandoned
her cause),–showed nothing of the demon, but all–if not of the
angel, yet of the Maid, the emblem of perfection to that rude world,
though often so barbarously handled. It might almost be said of the
age, notwithstanding its immorality and rampant viciousness, that in
its eyes a true virgin could do no harm. And hers was one if ever such
a thing existed on earth. The talk in the streets began to take a very
different tone. Massieu the clerical sheriff’s officer saw nothing in
her answers that was not good and right. Out of the midst of the crowd
of listeners would burst an occasional cry of “Well said!” An
Englishman, even a knight, overcome by his feelings, cried out: “Why
was not she English, this brave girl!” All these were ominous sounds.
Still more ominous was the utterance of Maître Jean Lohier, a lawyer
of Rouen, who declared loudly that the trial was not a legal trial for
the reasons which follow:
“In the first place because it was not in the form of an ordinary
trial; secondly, because it was not held in a public court, and those
present had not full and complete freedom to say what was their full
and unbiassed opinion; thirdly, because there was question of the
honour of the King of France of whose party Jeanne was, without
calling him, or any one for him; fourthly, because neither libel nor
articles were produced, and this woman who was only an uninstructed
girl, had no advocate to answer for her before so many Masters and
Doctors, on such grave matters, and especially those which touched
upon the revelations of which she spoke; therefore it seemed to him
that the trial was worth nothing. For these things Monseigneur de
Beauvais was very indignant against the said Maître Lohier, saying:
’Here is Lohier who is going to make a fine fuss about our trial; he
calumniates us all, and tells the world it is of no good. If one were
to go by him, one would have to begin everything over again, and all
that has been done would be of no use.’ Monseigneur de Beauvais said
besides: ’It is easy to see on which foot he halts [/de quel pied il
cloche/]. By St. John, we shall do nothing of the kind; we shall go on
with our trial as we have begun it.’”
A day or two later Manchon, the Clerk of the Court (he who refused to
take down Jeanne’s conversation with her Judas), met this same lawyer
Lohier at church, and asked him, as no doubt every man asked every
other whom he met, how did he think the trial was going? to which
Lohier answered: “You see the manner in which they proceed; they will
take her, if they can, in her words–that is to say, the assertions in
which she says I know for certain, things that concern her
apparitions. If she would say, ’It seems to me’ instead of ’I know for
certain,’ I do not see how any man could condemn her. It appears that
they proceed against her rather from hate than from any other cause,
and for this reason I shall not remain here. I will have nothing to do
with it.” This I think shows very clearly that Lohier, like the bulk
of the population, by no means thought at first that it was “from
hate” that the trial proceeded, but honestly believed that he had been
called to try Jeanne as a professor of the black arts; and that he had
discovered from her own testimony that she was not so, and that the
motive of the trial was entirely a different one from that of justice;
one in fact with which an honest man could have nothing to do.
It is very significant also that the number of judges present in court
on the sixth day, the last of the public examination, was only thirty-
eight, as against the sixty-two of the second day, which seems to
prove that a general disgust and alarm was growing in the minds of
those most closely concerned. Warwick and the soldiers, impatient of
all such business, striding in noisily from time to time to give a
careless glance at the proceedings, might not stay long enough to
share the impression–or might, who can say? Their business was to get
this pestilent woman, even if by chance she might be an innocent
fanatic, cleared off the face of the earth and out of their way.
After the sixth day, however, it would seem that the Bishop and his
tools had taken fright at the progress of public opinion. Before
dismissing the court on that occasion, Cauchon made an address to the
disturbed and anxious judges, informing them that he would not tire
them out with prolonged sittings, but that a few specially chosen
assistants would now examine into what further details were necessary.
In the meantime all would be put in writing; so that they might think
it over and deliberate within themselves, so as to be able each to
make a report either to himself, the Bishop, or to some one deputed by
him. The assessors, thus thrown out of work, were however forbidden to
leave Rouen without the Bishop’s permission–probably because of the
threat of Lohier. Repeated meetings were held in Cauchon’s house to
arrange the details of the proceedings to follow; and during this time
it was perhaps hoped that any excitement outside would quiet down. The
Bishop himself had in the meantime other work in hand. He had to
receive certain important visitors, one of them the man who held the
appointment of Chancellor of France on the English side, and who was
well acquainted with the mind of his masters. We have no information
whatever whether Cauchon ever himself wavered, or allowed the
possibility of acquitting Jeanne to enter his mind; but he must have
seen that it was of the last necessity to know what would satisfy the
English chiefs. No doubt he was confirmed and strengthened in the
conviction that by hook or by crook her condemnation must be
accomplished, by the conversation of these illustrious visitors. To
save Jeanne was impossible he must have been told. No English soldier
would strike a blow while she lived. England itself, the whole
country, trembled at her name. Till she was got rid of nothing could
be done.
There was of course great exaggeration in all this, for the English
had fought desperately enough in her presence except on the one
occasion of Patay, notwithstanding all the early prestige of Jeanne.
But at all events it was made perfectly clear that the foregoing
conclusion must be carried out, and that Jeanne must die: and, not
only so, but she must die with opprobrium and disgrace as a witch,
which almost everybody out of Rouen now believed her to be. The public
examination which lasted six days was concluded on the third of March,
1430. On the following days, the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth, and ninth of March, meetings were held, as we have said, in
the Bishop’s house to consider what it would be well to do next, at
one of which a select company of Inquisitors was chosen to carry on
the examination in private. These were Jean de la Fontaine, a lawyer
learned in canon law; Jean Beaupère, already her interrogator; Nicolas
Midi, a Doctor in Theology; Pierre Morice, Canon of Rouen and
Ambassador from the English King to the Council of Bâle; Thomas de
Courcelles, the learned and excellent young Doctor already described;
Nicolas l’Oyseleur, the traitor, also already sufficiently referred
to; and Manchon, the honest Clerk of the court: the names of Gerard
Feuillet, also a distinguished man, and Jean Fecardo, an advocate, are
likewise also mentioned. They seem to have served in their turn, three
or four at a time. This private session began on the 10th of March, a
week after the conclusion of the public trial, and was held in the
prison chamber inhabited by the Maid.
We shall not attempt to follow literally those private examinations,
which would take a great deal more space than we have at our command,
and would be fatiguing to the reader from the constant and prolonged
repetitions; we shall therefore quote only such parts as are new or so
greatly enlarged from Jeanne’s original statements as to seem so. At
the first day’s examination in her prison she was questioned about
Compiègne and her various proceedings before reaching that place.[1]
She was asked, for one thing, if her voices had bidden her make the
sally in which she was taken; to which she answered that had she known
the time she was to be taken she would not have gone out, unless upon
the express command of the saints. She was then asked about her
standard, her arms, and her horses, and replied that she had no coat-
of-arms, but her brothers had, who also had all her money, from ten to
twelve thousand francs, which was “no great treasure to make war
upon,” besides five chargers, and about seven other horses, all from
the King. The examiners then came to their principal object, and
having lulled her mind with these trifles, turned suddenly to a
subject on which they still hoped she might commit herself, the sign
which had proved her good faith to the King. It is scarcely possible
to avoid the feeling, grave as all the circumstances were, that a
little malice, a glance of mischievous pleasure, kindled in Jeanne’s
eye. She had refused to enter into further explanations again and
again. She had warned them that she would give them no true light on
the subjects that concerned the King. Now she would seem to have had
sudden recourse to the mystification that is dear to youth, to have
tossed her young head and said: “Have then your own way“; and
forthwith proceeded to romance, according to the indications given her
of what was wanted, without thought of preserving any appearance of
reality. Most probably indeed, her air and tone would make it apparent
to her persistent questioners how complete a fable, or at least
parable, it was.
Asked, what sign she gave to the King, she replied that it was a
beautiful and honourable sign, very creditable and very good, and rich
above all. Asked, if it still lasted; answered, “It would be good to
know; it will last a thousand years and more if well guarded,” adding
that it was in the treasure of the King. Asked, if it was of gold or
silver or of precious stones, or in the form of a crown; answered: “I
will tell you nothing more; but no man could devise a thing so rich as
this sign; but the sign that is necessary for you is that God should
deliver me out of your hands, and that is what He will do.” She also
said that when she had to go to the King it was said by her voices:
“Go boldly; and when you are before the King he will have a sign which
will make him receive and believe in you.” Asked, what reverence she
made when the sign came to the King, and if it came from God;
answered, that she had thanked God for having delivered her from the
priests of her own party who had argued against her, and that she had
knelt down several times; she also said that an angel from God, and
not from another, brought the sign to the King; and she had thanked
the Lord many times; she added that the priests ceased to argue
against when they had seen that sign. Asked, if the clergy of her
party (/de par delà) saw the above sign; answered yes, that her King
if he were satisfied; and he answered yes. And afterwards she went to
a little chapel close by, and heard them say that after she was gone
more than three hundred people saw the said sign. She said besides
that for love of her, and that they should give up questioning her,
God permitted those of her party to see the sign. Asked, if the King
and she made reverence to the angel when he brought the sign; answered
yes, for herself, that she knelt down and took off her hood.
What Jeanne meant by this strange romance can only, I think be
explained by this hypothesis. She was “dazed and bewildered,” say some
of the historians, evidently not knowing how to interpret so strange
an interruption to her narrative; but there is no other sign of
bewilderment; her mind was always clear and her intelligence complete.
Granting that the whole story was boldly ironical, its object is very
apparent. Honour forbade her to betray the King’s secret, and she had
expressly said she would not do so. But her story seems to say–/since
you will insist that there was a sign, though I have told you I could
give you no information, have it your own way; you shall have a sign
and one of the very best; it delivered me from the priests of my own
party (de par delà). Jeanne was no milk-sop; she was bold enough to
send a winged shaft to the confusion of the priests of the other side
who had tormented her in the same way. One can imagine a lurking smile
at the corner of her mouth. Let them take it since they would have it.
And we may well believe there was that in her eye, and in the details
heaped up so lightly to form the miraculous tale, which left little
doubt in the minds of the questioners, of the spirit in which she
spoke: though to us who only read the record the effect is of a more
bewildering kind.
Two days after, on Monday, the 12th of March, the Inquisitors began by
several additional questions concerning the angel who brought the sign
to the King; was it the same whom she first saw, or another? She
answered that it was the same, and no other was wanted. Asked, if this
angel had not deceived her since she had been taken prisoner;
answered, that she believed since it so pleased our lord that it was
best that she should be taken. Asked, if the angel had not failed her;
answered, “How could he have failed me, when he comforts me every
day?” This comfort is what she understands to come through St.
Catherine and St. Margaret. Asked, whether she called them, or they
came without being called, she answered, that they often came without
being called, and if they did not come soon enough, she asked our
Saviour to send them. Asked, if St. Denis had ever appeared to her;
answered, not that she knew. Asked, if when she promised to our Lord
to remain a virgin she spoke to Him; answered, that it ought to be
enough to speak to those who were sent by Him that is to say, St.
Catherine and St. Margaret. Asked, what induced her to summon a man to
Toul, in respect to marriage; answered, “I did not summon him; it was
he who summoned me"; and that on that occasion she had sworn before
the judge to speak the truth, which was that she had not made him any
promise. She also said that the first time she had heard the voices
she made a vow of virginity so long as it pleased God, being then
about the age of thirteen.
It was the object of the judges by these questions to prove that,
according to a fable which had obtained some credit, Jeanne during her
visit to La Rousse, the village inn-keeper at Neufchâteau, had acted
as servant in the house and tarnished her good fame–so that her
betrothed had refused to marry her: and that he had been brought
before the Bishop’s court at Toul for his breach of promise, as we
should say. Exactly the reverse was the case, as the reader will
remember.
Jeanne was further asked, if she had spoken of her visions to her curé
or to any ecclesiastic: and answered no, but only to Robert de
Baudricourt and to her King; but added that she was not bidden by her
voices to conceal them, but feared to reveal them lest the Burgundians
should hear of them and prevent her going. And especially she had much
doubt of her father, lest he should hinder her from going. Asked, if
she thought she did well to go away without the permission of her
father and mother, when it is certain we ought to honour our father
and mother; answered, that in every other thing she had fully obeyed
him, except in respect to her departure; but she had written to them,
and they had pardoned her. Asked, if when she left her father and
mother she did not think it was a sin; answered, that her voices were
quite willing that she should tell them, if it were not for the pain
it would have given them; but as for herself, she would not have told
them for any consideration; also that her voices left her to do as she
pleased, to tell or not.
Having gone so far the reverend fathers went to dinner, and Jeanne we
hope had her piece of bread and her eau rougie. In the afternoon
these indefatigable questioners returned, and the first few questions
throw a fuller light on the troubled cottage at Domremy, out of which
this wonderful maiden came like a being of another kind.
She was questioned as to the dreams of her father; and answered, that
while she was still at home her mother told her several times that her
father said he had dreamt that Jeanne his daughter had gone away with
the troopers, that her father and mother took great care of her and
held her in great subjection: and she obeyed them in every point
except that of her affair at Toul in respect to marriage. She also
said that her mother had told her what her father had said to her
brothers: “If I could think that the thing would happen of which I
have dreamed, I wish she might be drowned first; and if you would not
do it, I would drown her with my own hands"; and that he nearly lost
his senses when she went to Vaucouleurs.
How profound is this little village tragedy! The suspicious, stern,
and unhopeful peasant, never sure even that the most transparent and
pure may not be capable of infamy, distracted with that horror of
personal degradation which is involved in family disgrace, cruel in
the intensity of his pride and fear of shame! He has been revealed to
us in many lands, always one of the most impressive of human pictures,
with no trust of love in him but an overwhelming faith in every
vicious possibility. If there is no evidence to prove that, even at
the moment when Jeanne was supreme, when he was induced to go to
Rheims to see the coronation, Jacques d’Arc was still dark,
unresponsive, never more sure than any of the Inquisitors that his
daughter was not a witch, or worse, a shameless creature linked to the
captains and the splendid personages about her by very different ties
from those which appeared–there is at least not a word to prove that
he had changed his mind. She does not add anything to soften the
description here given. The sudden appearance of this dark remorseless
figure, looking on from his village, who probably in all Domremy–when
Domremy got to hear the news–would be the only person who would in
his desperation almost applaud that stake and devouring flame, is too
startling for words.
The end of this day’s examination was remarkable also for a sudden
light upon the method she had intended to adopt in respect to the Duke
of Orleans, then in prison in England, whom it was one of her most
cherished hopes to deliver.
Asked, how she meant to rescue the Duc d’Orléans: she answered, that
by that time she hoped to have taken English prisoners enough to
exchange for him: and if she had not taken enough she should have
crossed the sea, in power, to search for him in England. Asked, if St.
Catherine and St. Margaret had told her absolutely and without
condition that she should take enough prisoners to exchange for the
Duc d’Orléans, who was in England, or otherwise, that she should cross
the sea to fetch him and bring him back within three years; she
answered yes: and that she had told the King and had begged him to
permit her to make prisoners. She said further that if she had lasted
three years without hindrance, she should have delivered him.
Otherwise she said she had not thought of so long a time as three
years, although it should have been more than one; but she did not at
present recollect exactly.
There is a curious story existing, though we do not remember whence it
comes and there is not a scrap of evidence for it, which suggests a
rumour that Jeanne was not the child of the d’Arc family at all, but
in fact an abandoned and illegitimate child of the Queen, Isabel of
Bavaria, and that her real father was the murdered Duc d’Orléans. This
suggestion might explain the ease with which she fell into the way of
Courts, a sort of air à la Princesse which certainly was about her,
and her especial devotion to Orleans, both to the city and the duke. A
shadow of a supposed child of our own Queen Mary has also appeared in
history, quite without warrant or likelihood. It is a little
conventional and well worn even in the way of romance, yet there are
certain fanciful suggestions in the thought.
After the above, Jeanne was again questioned and at great length upon
the sign given to the King, upon the angel who brought it, the manner
of his coming and going, the persons who saw him, those who saw the
crown bestowed upon the King, and so on, in the most minute detail.
That the purpose of the sign was that “they should give up arguing and
so let her proceed on her mission,” she repeated again and again; but
here is a curious additional note.
She was asked how the King and the people with him were convinced that
it was an angel; and answered, that the King knew it by the
instruction of the ecclesiastics who were there, and also by the sign
of the crown. Asked, how the ecclesiastics (/gens d’église) knew it
was an angel she answered, “By their knowledge [science], and because
they were priests.”
Was this the keenest irony, or was it the wandering of a weary mind?
We cannot tell; but if the latter, it was the only occasion on which
Jeanne’s mind wandered; and there was method and meaning in the
strange tale.
She was further questioned whether it was by the advice of her voices
that she attacked La Charité, and afterwards Paris, her two points of
failure; the purpose of her examiners clearly being to convince her
that those voices had deceived her. To both questions she answered no.
To Paris she went at the request of gentlemen who wished to make a
skirmish, or assault of arms (/vaillance d’armes); but she intended
to go farther, and to pass the moats; that is, to force the fighting
and make the skirmish into a serious assault; the same was the case
before La Charité. She was asked whether she had no revelation
concerning Pont l’Evêque, and said that since it was revealed to her
at Melun that she should be taken, she had had more recourse to the
will of the captains than to her own; but she did not tell them that
it was revealed to her that she should be taken. Asked, if she thought
it was well done to attack Paris on the day of the Nativity of our
Lady, which was a festival of the Church; she answered, that it was
always well to keep the festivals of our Lady: and in her conscience
it seemed to her that it was and always would be a good thing to keep
the feasts of our Lady, from one end to the other.
In the afternoon the examiners returned to the attempt at escape or
suicide–they seemed to have preferred the latter explanation–made at
Beaurevoir; and as Jeanne expresses herself with more freedom as to
her personal motives in these prison examinations and opens her heart
more freely, there is much here which we give in full.
She was asked first what was the cause of her leap from the tower of
Beaurevoir. She answered that she had heard that all the people of
Compiègne, down to the age of seven, were to be put to the sword, and
that she would rather die than live after such a destruction of good
people; this was one of the reasons; the other was that she knew that
she was sold to the English and that she would rather die than fall
into the hands of the English, her enemies. Asked, if she made that
leap by the command of her voices; answered, that St. Catherine said
to her almost every day that she was not to leap, for that God would
help her, and also the people of Compiègne: and she, Jeanne, said to
St. Catherine that since God intended to help the people of Compiègne
she would fain be there. And St. Catherine said: “You must take it in
good part, but you will not be delivered till you have seen the King
of the English.” And she, Jeanne, answered: “Truly I do not wish to
see him. I would rather die than fall into the hands of the English."
Asked, if she had said to St. Catherine and St. Margaret, “Will God
leave the good people of Compiègne to die so cruelly?” answered, that
she did not say “so cruelly,” but said it in this way: “Will God leave
these good people of Compiègne to die, who have been and are so loyal
to their lord?” She added that after she fell there were two or three
days that she would not eat; and that she was so hurt by the leap that
she could not eat; but all the time she was comforted by St.
Catherine, who told her to confess and ask pardon of God for that act,
and that without doubt the people of Compiègne would have succour
before Martinmas. And then she took pains to recover and began to eat,
and shortly was healed.
Asked, whether, when she threw herself down, she wished to kill
herself, she answered no; but that in throwing herself down she
commended herself to God, and hoped by means of that leap to escape
and to avoid being delivered to the English. Asked, if, when she
recovered the power of speech, she had denied and blasphemed God and
the saints, as had been reported; answered, that she remembered
nothing of the kind, and that, as far as she knew, she had never
denied and blasphemed God and His saints there nor anywhere else, and
did not confess that she had done so, having no recollection of it.
Asked, if she would like to see the information taken on the spot,
answered: “I refer myself to God, and not another, and to a good
confession.” Asked, if her voices ever desired delay for their
replies; answered, that St. Catherine always answered her at once, but
sometimes she, Jeanne, could not hear because of the tumult round her
(/turbacion des personnes) and the noise of her guards; but that when
she asked anything of St. Catherine, sometimes she, and sometimes St.
Margaret asked of our Lord, and then by the command of our Lord an
answer was given to her. Asked, if, when they came, there was always
light accompanying them, and if she did not see that light when she
heard the voice in the castle without knowing whether it was in her
chamber or not: answered, that there was never a day that they did not
come into the castle, and that they never came without light: and that
time she heard the voice, but did not remember whether she saw the
light, or whether she saw St. Catherine. Also she said she had asked
from her voices three things: one, her release: the other, that God
would help the French, and keep the town faithful: and the other the
salvation of her soul. Afterwards she asked that she might have a copy
of these questions and her answers if she were to be taken to Paris,
that she may give them to the people in Paris, and say to them, “This
is how I was questioned in Rouen, and here are my replies,” that she
might not be exhausted by so many questions.
Asked, what she meant when she said that Monseigneur de Beauvais put
himself in danger by bringing her to trial, and why Monseigneur de
Beauvais more than others, she answered, that this was and is what she
said to Monseigneur de Beauvais: “You say that you are my judge. I
know not whether you are so; but take care that you judge well, or you
will put yourself in great danger. I warn you, so that if our Lord
should chastise you for it, I may have done my duty in warning you."
Asked, what was that danger? she answered, that St. Catherine had said
that she should have succour, but that she knew not whether this meant
that she would be delivered from prison, or that, when she was before
the tribunal, there might come trouble by which she should be
delivered; she thought, however, it would be the one or the other. And
all the more that her voices told her that she would be delivered by a
great victory; and afterwards they said to her: “Take everything
cheerfully, do not be disturbed by this martyrdom: thou shalt thence
come at last to the kingdom of Heaven.” And this the voices said
simply and absolutely–that is to say, without fail; she explained
that she called It martyrdom because of all the pain and adversity
that she had suffered in prison; and she knew not whether she might
have still more to suffer, but waited upon our Lord. She was then
asked whether, since her voices had said that she should go to
Paradise, she felt assured that she should be saved and not damned in
hell; she answered, that she believed firmly what her voices said
about her being saved, as firmly as if she were so already. And when
it was said to her that this answer was of great weight, she answered
that she herself held it as a great treasure.
We have said that Jeanne’s answers to the Inquisitors in prison had a
more familiar form than in the public examination; which seem to prove
that they were not unkind to her, further, at least, than by the
persistence and tediousness of their questions. The Bishop for one
thing was seldom present; the sittings were frequently presided over
by the Deputy Inquisitor, who had made great efforts to be free of the
business altogether, and had but very recently been forced into it; so
that we may at least imagine, as he was so reluctant, that he did what
he could to soften the proceedings. Jean de la Fontaine, too, was a
milder man than her former questioners, and in so small an assembly
she could not be disturbed and interrupted by Frère Isambard’s well-
meant signs and whispers. She speaks at length and with a self-
disclosure which seems to have little that was painful in it, like one
matured into a kind of age by long weariness and trouble, who regards
the panorama of her life passing before her with almost a pensive
pleasure. And it is clear that Jeanne’s ear, still so young and keen,
notwithstanding that attitude of mind, was still intent upon sounds
from without, and that Jeanne’s heart still expected a sudden assault,
a great victory for France, which should open her prison doors–or
even a rising in the very judgment hall to deliver her. How could they
keep still outside, Dunois, Alençon, La Hire, the mighty men of
valour, while they knew that she was being racked and tortured within?
She who could not bear to be out of the conflict to serve her friends
at Compiègne, even when succour from on high had been promised, how
was it possible that these gallant knights could live and let her die,
their gentle comrade, their dauntless leader? In those long hours,
amid the noise of the guards within and the garrison around, how she
must have thought, over and over again, where were they? when were
they coming? how often imagined that a louder clang of arms than
usual, a rush of hasty feet, meant that they were here!
But honour and love kept Jeanne’s lips closed. Not a word did she say
that could discredit King, or party, or friends; not a reproach to
those who had abandoned her. She still looked for the great victory in
which Monseigneur, if he did not take care, might run the risk of
being roughly handled, or of a sudden tumult in his own very court
that would pitch him form his guilty seat. It was but the fourteenth
of March still, and there were six weary weeks to come. She did not
know the hour or the day, but yet she believed that this great
deliverance was on its way.
And there was a great deliverance to come: but not of this kind. The
voices of God–how can we deny it?–are often, though in a loftier
sense, like those fantastic voices that keep the word of promise to
the ear but break it to the heart. They promised her a great victory:
and she had it, and also the fullest deliverance: but only by the
stake and the fire, which were not less dreadful to Jeanne than to any
other girl of her age. They did not speak to deceive her, but she was
deceived; they kept their promise, but not as she understood it.
“These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having
seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them."
Jeanne too was persuaded of them, but was not to receive them–except
in the other way.
On the afternoon of the same day (it was still Lent, and Jeanne
fasted, whatever our priests may have done), she was again closely
questioned on the subject, this time, of Franquet d’Arras, who, as has
been above narrated, was taken by her in the course of some
indiscriminate fighting in the north. She was asked if it was not
mortal sin to take a man as prisoner of war and then give him up to be
executed. There was evidently no perception of similarities in the
minds of the judges, for this was precisely what had been done in the
case of Jeanne herself; but even she does not seem to have been struck
by the fact. Their object, apparently, was by proving that she was in
a state of sin, to prove also that her voices were of no authority, as
being unable to discover so simple a principle as this.
When they spoke to her of “one named Franquet d’Arras, who was
executed at Lagny,” she answered that she consented to his death, as
he deserved it, for he had confessed to being a murderer, a thief, and
a traitor. She said that his trial lasted fifteen days, the Bailli de
Senlis and the law officers of Lagny being the judges; and she added
that she had wished to have Franquet, to exchange him for a man of
Paris, Seigneur de Lours (corrected, innkeeper at the sign of l’Ours);
but when she heard that this man was dead, and when the Bailli told
her that she would go very much against justice if she set Franquet
free, she said to the Bailli: “Since my man is dead whom I wished to
deliver, do with this one whatever justice demands.” Asked, if she
took the money or allowed it to be taken by him who had taken
Franquet, she answered, that she was not a money changer or a
treasurer of France, to deal with money.
She was then reminded that having assaulted Paris on a holy day,
having taken the horse of Monseigneur de Senlis, having thrown herself
down from the tower of Beaurevoir, having consented to the death of
Franquet d’Arras, and being still dressed in the costume of a man, did
she not think that she must be in a state of mortal sin? She answered
to the first question about Paris: “I do not think I was guilty of
mortal sin, and if I have sinned it is to God that I would make it
known, and in confession to God by the priest.” To the second
question, concerning the horse of Senlis, she answered, that she
believed firmly that there was not mortal sin in this, seeing it was
valued, and the Bishop had due notice of it, and at all events it was
sent back to the Seigneur de la Trémouille to give it back to
Monseigneur de Senlis. The said horse was of no use to her; and, on
the other hand, she did not wish to keep it because she heard that the
Bishop was displeased that his horse should have been taken. And as
for the tower of Beaurevoir: “I did it not to destroy myself, but in
the hope of saving myself and of going to the aid of the good people
who were in need.” But after having done it, she had confessed her
sin, and asked pardon of our Lord, and had pardon of Him. And she
allowed that it was not right to have made that leap, but that she did
wrong.
The next day an important question was introduced, the only one as yet
which Jeanne does not seem to have been able to answer with
understanding. On points of fact or in respect to her visions she was
always quite clear, but questions concerning the Church were beyond
her knowledge. It is only indeed after some time has elapsed that we
perceive why such a question was introduced.
After admonitions made to her she was required, if she had done
anything contrary to the faith, to submit herself to the decision of
the Church. She replied, that her answers had all been heard and seen
by clerks, and that they could say whether there was anything in them
against the faith: and that if they would point out to her where any
error was, afterwards she would tell them what was said by her
counsellors. At all events if there was anything against the faith
which our Lord had commanded, she would not sustain it, and would be
very sorry to go against that. Here it was shown to her that there was
a Church militant and a Church triumphant, and she was asked if she
knew the difference between them. She was also required to put herself
under the jurisdiction of the Church, in respect to what she had done,
whether it was good or evil, but replied, “I will answer no more on
this point for the present.”
Having thrown in this tentative question which she did not understand,
they returned to the question of her dress, which holds such an
important place in the entire interrogatory. If she were allowed to
hear mass as she wished, having been all this time deprived of
religious ordinances, did not she think it would be more honest and
befitting that she should go in the dress of a woman? To this she
replied vaguely, that she would much rather go to mass in the dress of
a woman than to retain her male costume and not to hear mass; and that
if she were certified that she should hear mass, she would be there in
a woman’s dress. “I certify you that you shall hear mass,” the
examiner replied, “but you must be dressed as a woman.” “What would
you say,” she answered as with a momentary doubt, “if I had sworn to
my King never to change?” but she added: “Anyhow I answer for it. Find
me a dress, long, touching the ground, without a train, and give it to
me to go to mass; but I will return to my present dress when I come
back.” She was then asked why she would not have all the parts of a
female dress to go to mass in; she said, “I will take counsel upon
that, and answer you,” and begged again for the honour of God and our
Lady that she might be allowed to hear mass in this good town.
Afterwards she was again recommended to assume the whole dress of a
woman and gave a conditional assent: “Get me a dress like that of a
young bourgeoise, that is to say, a long houppelande; I will wear
that and a woman’s hood to go to mass.” After having promised,
however, she made an appeal to them to leave her free, and to think no
more of her garb, but to allow her to hear mass without changing it.
This would seem to have been refused, and all at once without warning
the jurisdiction of the Church was suddenly introduced again.
She was asked, whether in all she did and said she would submit
herself to the Church, and replied: “All my deeds and works are in the
hands of God, and I depend only on Him; and I certify that I desire to
do nothing and say nothing against the Christian faith; and if I have
done or said anything in the body that was against the Christian faith
which our Lord has established, I should not defend it but cast it
forth from me.” Asked again, if she would not submit to the laws of
the Church she replied: “I can answer no more to-day on this point;
but on Saturday send the clerk to me, if you do not come, and I will
answer by the grace of God, and it can be put in writing.”
A great many questions followed as to her visions, but chiefly what
had been asked before. One thing only we may note, since it was one of
the special sayings all her own, which fell from the lips of Jeanne,
during this private and almost sympathetic examination. After being
questioned closely as to how she knew her first visitor to be St.
Michael, etc., she was asked, how she would have known had he been
“l’Anemy” himself (a Norman must surely have used this word), taking
the form of an angel: and finally, what doctrine he taught her?
She answered; above all things he said that she was to be a good child
and that God would help her: and among other things that she was to go
to the succour of the King of France. But the greater part of what the
angel taught her, she continued, was already in their book; and
the angel showed her the great pity there was of the kingdom of France.
The pity of it! That which has always gone most to the tender heart: a
country torn in pieces, brother fighting against brother, the invader
seated at the native hearth, and blood and fire making the smiling
land a desert: “la pitie qui estoit au royaume de France.”
Did the Inquisitor break down here? Could no one go on? or was it mere
human incompetence to feel the divine touch? Some one broke into a
foolish question about the height of the angel, and the sitting was
hurriedly concluded. Monseigneur might well be on his mettle; that
very pity, was it not stealing into the souls of his private committee
deputed for so different a use?
Next day the questions about St. Michael’s personal appearance were
resumed, as a little feint we can only suppose, for the great question
of the Church was again immediately introduced; but in the meantime
Jeanne had described her visitor in terms which it is pleasant to
dwell on. “He was in the form of a très vrai prud’ homme.” The term
is difficult to translate, as is the Galantuomo of Italy. The “King-
Honest Man,” we used to say in English in the days of his late Majesty
Victor Emmanuel of Italy; but that is not all that is meant–/un vrai
prud’ homme, a man good, honest, brave, the best man, is more like
it. The girl’s honest imagination thought of no paraphernalia of wings
or shining plumes. It was not the theatrical angel, not even the angel
of art whom she saw–whom it would have been so easy to invent, nay to
take quite truthfully from the first painted window, radiating colour
and brightness through the dim, low-roofed church. But even with such
material handy, Jeanne was not led into the conventional. She knew
nothing about wings or emblematic scales. He was in the form of a
brave and gentle man. She knew not anything greater, nor would she be
seduced into fable however sacred. Then once more the true assault
began.
She was asked, if she would submit all her sayings and doings, good or
evil, to the judgment of our Holy Mother, the Church. She replied,
that as for the Church, she loved it and would sustain it with all her
might for our Christian faith; and that it was not she whom they ought
to disturb and hinder from going to church or from hearing mass. As to
the good things she had done, and that had happened, she must refer
all to the King of Heaven, who had sent her to Charles, King of
France; and it should be seen that the French would soon gain a great
advantage which God would send them, so great that all the kingdom of
France would be shaken. And this, she said, that when it came to pass,
they might remember that she had said it. She was again asked, if she
would submit to the jurisdiction of the Church, and answered, “I refer
everything to our Lord who sent me, to our Lady, and to the blessed
Saints of Paradise"; and added her opinion was that our Lord and the
Church meant the same thing, and that difficulties should not be made
concerning this, when there was no difficulty, and they were both one.
She was then told that there was the Church triumphant, in which are
God, the saints, the angels, and all saved souls. The Church militant
is our Holy Father the Pope, vicar of God on earth, the cardinals, the
prelates of the Church, and the clergy and all good Christians and
Catholics, which Church properly assembled cannot err, but is guided
by the Holy Spirit. And this being the case she was asked if she would
refer her cause to the Church militant thus explained to her. She
replied that she had come to the King of France on the part of God, on
the part of the Virgin Mary, the blessed Saints of Paradise, and the
Church victorious in Heaven, and at their commandment; and to that
Church she submitted all her good deeds, and all that she had done and
might do. And if they asked her whether she would submit to the Church
militant, answered, that she would now answer no more than this.
Here again the argument strayed back to the futile subject of dress,
always at hand to be taken up again, one would say, when the judges
were non-plussed. Her first reply on this subject is remarkable and
shows that dark and terrible forebodings were already beginning to
mingle with her hopes.
Asked, what she had to say about the woman’s dress that had been
offered to her, to hear mass in: she answered, that she would not take
it yet, not until the Lord pleased; but that if it were necessary to
lead her out to be executed, and if she should then have to be
undressed, she required of the Lords of the Church that they would
give her the grace to have a long chemise, and a kerchief for her
head; that she would prefer to die rather than to alter what our Lord
had directed her to do, and that she firmly believed our Lord would
not let her descend so low, but that she should soon be helped by God
and by a miracle. She was then asked, if what she did in respect to
the man’s costume was by command of God, why she asked for a woman’s
chemise in case of death? answered, It is enough that it should be
long.
The effect of these words in which so much was implied, must have made
a supreme sensation among the handful of men gathered round the
helpless girl in her prison, bringing the stake in all its horror
before the eyes of the judges as before her own. No other thing could
have been suggested by that piteous prayer. The stake, the scaffold,
the fire–and the shrinking figure all maidenly, helpless, exposed to
every evil gaze, must have showed themselves at least for a moment
against that dark background of prison wall. It was enough that it
should be long–to hide her as much as was possible from those
dreadful staring eyes.
The interrogatory goes on wildly after this about the age and the
dress of the saints. But a tone of fate had come into it, and Jeanne
herself, it was evident, was very serious; her mind turned to more
weighty thoughts. Presently they asked if the saints hated the
English, to which she replied that they hated what God hated and loved
what He loved. She was then asked if God hated the English. She
replied that of the love or hate that God had for the English, or what
God did for their souls, she knew nothing; but she knew well that they
should be driven out of France, except those who died there; and that
God would send victory to the French against the English. Asked, if
God was for the English so long as they were prosperous in France: she
answered, that she knew not whether God hated the French, but believed
He had allowed them to be beaten because of their sins.
Jeanne was then brought to a test which, had she been a great
statesman or a learned doctor, would have been as dangerous, as the
question concerning John the Baptist was to the priests and scribes.
“If we shall say: From heaven, he will say, Why then believed ye him
not? but if we shall say of men we fear the people.” And she was only
a peasant girl and the event of which they spoke had been before her
little time.
Asked, if she thought and believed firmly that her King did well to
kill Monseigneur de Bourgogne, she answered that IT WAS A GREAT
MISFORTUNE FOR THE KINGDOM OF FRANCE: but that however it might be
among themselves, God had sent her to the succour of the King.
One or two other questions of some importance followed amid perpetual
changes of the subject: one of which called forth as follows her last
deliverance on the subject of the Pope.
Asked, if she had said to Monseigneur de Beauvais that she would
answer as exactly to him and to his clerks as she would have done
before our Holy Father the Pope, although at several points in the
trial she would have had to refuse to answer, if she did not answer
more plainly than before Monseigneur de Beauvais–she said that she
had answered as much as she knew, and that if anything came to her
memory that she had forgotten to say, she would say it willingly.
Asked, if it seemed to her that she would be bound to answer the plain
truth to the Pope, the vicar of God, in all he asked her touching the
faith and her conscience, she replied that she desired to be taken
before him, and then she would answer all that she ought to answer.
Here we seem to perceive dimly that there was beginning to be a second
party among those examiners, one of which was covertly but earnestly
attempting to lead Jeanne into an appeal to the Pope, which would have
conveyed her out of the hands of the English at least, and gained
time, probably deliverance for her, could Jeanne have been made to
understand it.
This, however, was by no means the wish of Cauchon, whose spy and
whisperer, L’Oyseleur, was working against it in the background.
Jeanne evidently failed to take up what they meant. She did not
understand the distinction between the Church militant and the Church
triumphant: that God alone was her judge, and that no tribunal could
decide upon the questions which were between her Lord and herself, was
too firmly fixed in her mind: and again and again the men whose desire
was to make her adopt this expedient, were driven back into the ever
repeated questions about St. Catherine and St. Margaret.
One other of her distinctive sayings fell from her in the little
interval that remained, in a series of useless questions about her
standard. Was it true that this standard had been carried into the
Cathedral at Rheims when those of the other captains were left behind?
“It had been through the labour and the pain,” she said, “there was
good reason that it should have the honour.”
This last movement of a proud spirit, absolutely disinterested and
without thought of honour or advancement in the usual sense of the
word, gives a sort of trumpet note at the end of these wonderful
wranglings in prison, in which, however, there is a softening of tone
visible throughout, and evident effect of human nature bringing into
immediate contact divers human creatures day after day. Jeanne is
often at her best, and never so frequently as during these less formal
sittings utters those flying words, simple and noble and of absolute
truth to nature, which are noted everywhere, even in the most rambling
records.
The private examination, concluding with that last answer about the
banner, came to an end on the 17th March, the day before Passion
Sunday. Several subsequent days were occupied with repeated
consultations in the Bishop’s palace, and the reading over of the
minutes of the examinations, to the judges first and afterwards to
Jeanne, who acknowledged their correctness, with one or two small
amendments. It is only now that Cauchon reappears in his own person.
On the morning of the following Sunday, which was Palm Sunday, he and
four other doctors with him had a conversation with Jeanne in her
prison, very early in the morning, touching her repeated application
to be allowed to hear mass and to communicate. The Bishop offered her
his ultimatum: if she consented to resume her woman’s dress, she might
hear mass, but not otherwise; to which Jeanne replied, sorrowfully,
that she would have done so before now if she could; but that it was
not in her power to do so. Thus after the long and bitter Lent her
hopes of sharing in the sacred feast were finally taken from her. It
remains uncertain whether she considered that her change of dress
would be direct disobedience to God, which her words seem often to
imply; or whether it would mean renunciation of her mission, which she
still hoped against hope to be able to resume; or if the fear of
personal insult weighed most with her. The latter reason had evidently
something to do with it, but, as evidently, not all.
The background to these curious sittings, afterwards revealed to us,
casts a hazy side-light upon them. Probably the Bishop, never present,
must have been made aware by his spies of an intention on the part of
those most favourable to Jeanne to support an appeal to the Pope; and
L’Oyseleur, the traitor, who was all this time admitted to her cell by
permission of Cauchon, and really as his tool and agent, was actively
employed in prejudicing her mind against them, counselling her not to
trust to those clerks, not to yield to the Church. How he managed to
explain his own appearance on the other side, his official connection
with the trial, and constant presence as one of her judges, it is hard
to imagine. Probably he gave her to believe that he had sought that
position (having got himself liberated from the imprisonment which he
had represented himself as sharing) for her sake, to be able to help
her.
On the other hand her friends, whose hearts were touched by her
candour and her sufferings, were not inactive. Jean de la Fontaine and
the two monks–l’Advenu and Frère Isambard–also succeeded in gaining
admission to her, and pressed upon her the advantage of appealing to
the Church, to the Council of Bâle about to assemble, or to the Pope
himself, which would have again changed the venue, and transferred
her into less prejudiced hands. It is very likely that Jeanne in her
ignorance and innocence might have held by her reference to the
supreme tribunal of God in any case; and it is highly unlikely that of
the English authorities, intent on removing the only thing in France
of which their forces were afraid, should have given her up into the
hands of the Pope, or allowed her to be transferred to any place of
defence beyond their reach; but at least it is a relief to the mind to
find that all these men were not base, as appears on the face of
things, but that pity and justice and human feeling sometimes existed
under the priest’s gown and the monk’s cowl, if also treachery and
falsehood of the blackest kind. The Bishop, who remained withdrawn, we
know not why, from all these private sittings in the prison (probably
busy with his ecclesiastical duties as Holy Week was approaching),
heard with fury of this visit and advice, and threatened vengeance
upon the meddlers, not without effect, for Jean de la Fontaine, we are
told–who had been deep in his councils, and indeed his deputy, as
chief examiner–disappeared from Rouen immediately after, and was
heard of no more.

[1] Compiègne was a strong point. Had she proclaimed a promise from
    St. Catherine, of victory? Chastelain says so, long after date and
    with errors in fact. Two Anglo-Compiègnais were at her trial. The
    Rehabilitation does not go into this question.–(From Mr. Lang.)
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] Compiègne was a strong point. Had she proclaimed a promise from
    St. Catherine, of victory? Chastelain says so, long after date and
    with errors in fact. Two Anglo-Compiègnais were at her trial. The
    Rehabilitation does not go into this question.–(From Mr. Lang.)
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
