
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





The natural burst of remorse which follows such an event is well known
in history; and is as certainly to be expected as the details of the
great catastrophe itself. We feel almost as if, had there not been
fact and evidence for such a revulsion of feeling, it must have been
recorded all the same, being inevitable. The executioner, perhaps the
most innocent of all, sought out Frère Isambard, and confessed to him
in an anguish of remorse fearing never to be pardoned for what he had
done. An Englishman who had sworn to add a faggot to the flames in
which the witch should be burned, when he rushed forward to keep his
word was seized with sudden compunction–believed that he saw a white
dove flutter forth from amid the smoke over her head, and, almost
fainting at the sight, had to be led by his comrades to the nearest
tavern for refreshment, a life-like touch in which we recognise our
countryman; but he too found his way that afternoon to Frère Isambard
like the other. A horrible story is told by the Bourgeois de Paris,
whose contemporary journal is one of the authorities for this period,
that “the fire was drawn aside” in order that Jeanne’s form, with all
its clothing burned away, should be visible by one last act of
shameless insult to the crowd. The fifteenth century believed, as we
have said, everything that is cruel and horrible, as indeed the vulgar
mind does at all ages; but such brutal imaginings have seldom any
truth to support them, and there is no such suggestion in the actual
record. Isambard and Massieu heard from one of the officials that when
every other part of her body was destroyed the heart was found intact,
but was, by the order of Winchester, flung into the Seine along with
all the ashes of that sacrifice. It was wise no doubt that no relics
should be kept.
Other details were murmured abroad amid the excited talk that followed
this dreadful scene. “When she was enveloped by the smoke, she cried
out for water, holy water, and called to St. Michæl; then hung her
head upon her breast and breathing forth the name of Jesus, gently
died.” “Being in the flame her voice never ceased repeating in a loud
voice the holy name of Jesus, and invoking without cease the saints of
paradise, she gave up her spirit, bowing her head and saying the name
of Jesus in sign of the fervour of her faith.” One of the Canons of
Rouen, standing sobbing in the crowd, said to another: “Would that my
soul were in the same place where the soul of that woman is at this
moment"; which indeed is not very different from the authorised saying
of Pierre Morice in the prison. Guillaume Manchon, the reporter, he
who wrote superba responsio on his margin, and had written down
every word of her long examination–his occupation for three months,–
says that he “never wept so much for anything that happened to
himself, and that for a whole month he could not recover his calm."
This man adds a very characteristic touch, to wit, that “with part of
the pay which he had for the trial, he bought a missal, that he might
have a reason for praying for her.” Jean Tressat, “secretary to the
King of England” (whatever that office may have been), went home from
the execution crying out, “We are all lost, for we have burned a
saint.” A priest, afterwards bishop, Jean Fabry, “did not believe that
there was any man who could restrain his tears.”
The modern historians speak of the mockeries of the English, but none
are visible in the record. Indeed, the part of the English in it is
extraordinarily diminished on investigation; they are the supposed
inspirers of the whole proceedings; they are believed to be
continually pushing on the inquisitors; still more, they are supposed
to have bought all that large tribunal, the sixty or seventy judges,
among whom were the most learned and esteemed Doctors in France; but
of none of this is there any proof given. That they were anxious to
procure Jeanne’s condemnation and death, is very certain. Not one
among them believed in her sacred mission, almost all considered her a
sorceress, the most dangerous of evil influences, a witch who had
brought shame and loss to England by her incantations and evil spells.
On that point there could be no doubt whatever. She alone had stopped
the progress of the invaders, and broken the charm of their invariable
success. But all that she had done had been in favour of Charles, who
made no attempt to serve or help her, and who had thwarted her plans,
and hindered her work so long as it was possible to do so, even when
she was performing miracles for his sake. And Alençon, Dunois, La
Hire, where were they and all the knights? Two of them at least were
at Louvins, within a day’s march, but never made a step to rescue her.
We need not ask where were the statesmen and clergy on the French
side, for they were unfeignedly glad to have the burden of condemning
her taken from their hands. No one in her own country said a word or
struck a blow for Jeanne. As for the suborning of the University of
Paris en masse, and all its best members in particular, that is a
general baseness in which it is impossible to believe. There is no
appearance even of any particular pressure put upon the judges. Jean
de la Fontaine disappeared, we are told, and no one ever knew what
became of him: but it was from Cauchon he fled. And nothing seems to
have happened to the monks who attended the Maid to the scaffold, nor
to the others who sobbed about the pile. On the other side, the
Doctors who condemned her were in no way persecuted or troubled by the
French authorities when the King came to his own. There was at the
time a universal tacit consent in France to all that was done at Rouen
on the 31st of May, 1431.
One reason for this was not far to seek. We have perhaps already
sufficiently dwelt upon it. It was that France was not France at that
dolorous moment. It was no unanimous nation repulsing an invader. It
was two at least, if not more countries, one of them frankly and
sympathetically attaching itself to the invader, almost as nearly
allied to him in blood, and more nearly by other bonds, than any tie
existing between France and Burgundy. This does not account for the
hostile indifference of southern France and of the French monarch to
Jeanne, who had delivered them; but it accounts for the hostility of
Paris and the adjacent provinces, and Normandy. She was as much
against them as against the English, and the national sentiment to
which she, a patriot before her age, appealed,–bidding not only the
English go home, or fight and be vanquished, which was their only
alternative–but the Burgundians to be converted and to live in peace
with their brothers,–did not exist. Neither to Burgundians, Picards,
or Normans was the daughter of far Champagne a fellow countrywoman.
There was neither sympathy nor kindness in their hearts on that score.
Some were humane and full of pity for a simple woman in such terrible
straits; but no more in Paris than in Rouen was the Maid of Orleans a
native champion persecuted by the English; she was to both an enemy, a
sorceress, putting their soldiers and themselves to shame.
I have no desire to lessen our[1] guilt, whatever cruelty may have
been practised by English hands against the Heavenly Maid. And much
was practised–the iron cage, the chains, the brutal guards, the final
stake, for which may God and also the world, forgive a crime fully and
often confessed. But it was by French wits and French ingenuity that
she was tortured for three months and betrayed to her death. A
prisoner of war, yet taken and tried as a criminal, the first step in
her downfall was a disgrace to two chivalrous nations; but the shame
is greater upon those who sold than upon those who bought; and
greatest of all upon those who did not move Heaven and earth, nay, did
not move a finger, to rescue. And indeed we have been the most
penitent of all concerned; we have shrived ourselves by open
confession and tears. We have quarrelled with our Shakespeare on
account of the Maid, and do not know how we could have forgiven him,
but for the notable and delightful discovery that it was not he after
all, but another and a lesser hand that endeavoured to befoul her
shining garments. France has never quarrelled with her Voltaire for a
much fouler and more intentional blasphemy.
The most significant and the most curious after-scene, a pendant to
the remorse and pity of so many of the humbler spectators, was the
assembly held on the Thursday after Jeanne’s death, how and when we
are not told. It consisted of “nos judices antedicti,” but neither is
the place of meeting named, nor the person who presided. Its sole
testimonial is that the manuscript is in the same hand which has
written the previous records: but whereas each page in that record was
signed at the bottom by responsible notaries, Manchon and his
colleagues, no name whatever certifies this. Seven men, Doctors and
persons of high importance, all judges on the trial, all concerned in
that last scene in the prison, stand up and give their report of what
happened there–part of which we have quoted–their object being to
establish that Jeanne at the last acknowledged herself to be deceived.
According to their own showing it was exactly such an acknowledgment
as our Lord might have been supposed to make in the moment of his
agony when the words of the psalm, “My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?” burst from his lips. There seems no reason that we can
see, why this evidence should not be received as substantially true.
The inference that any real recantation on Jeanne’s part was then
made, is untrue, and not even asserted. She was deceived in respect to
her deliverance, and felt it to the bottom of her heart. It was to her
the bitterness of death. But the flames of her burning showed her the
truth, and with her last breath she proclaimed her renewed conviction.
The scene at the stake would lose something of its greatness without
that momentary cloud which weighed down her troubled soul.
Twenty years after the martyrdom of Jeanne, long after he had,
according to her prophecy, regained Paris and all that had been lost,
it became a danger to the King of France that it should be possible to
imagine that his kingdom had been recovered for him by means of
sorcery; and accordingly a great new trial was appointed to revise the
decisions of the old. In the same palace of the Archbishop at Rouen,
which had witnessed so many scenes of the previous tragedy, the
depositions of witnesses collected with the minutest care, and which
it had taken a long time to gather from all quarters, were submitted
for judgment, and a full and complete reversal of the condemnation was
given. The procès was a civil one, instituted (nominally) by the
mother and brothers of Jeanne, one of the latter being now a knight,
Pierre de Lys, a gentleman of coat armour–against the heirs and
representatives of Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, and Lemaître, the
Deputy Inquisitor–with other persons chiefly concerned in the
judgment. Some of these men were dead, some, wisely, not to be found.
The result was such a mass of testimony as put every incident of the
life of the Maid in the fullest light from her childhood to her death,
and in consequence secured a triumphant and full acquittal of herself
and her name from every reproach. This remarkable and indeed unique
occurrence does not seem, however, to have roused any enthusiasm.
Perhaps France felt herself too guilty: perhaps the extraordinary calm
of contemporary opinion which was still too near the catastrophe to
see it fully: perhaps that difficulty in the diffusion of news which
hindered the common knowledge of a trial–a thing too heavy to be
blown upon the winds,–while it promulgated the legend, a thing so
much more light to carry: may be the cause of this. But it is an
extraordinary fact that Jeanne’s name remained in abeyance for many
ages, and that only in this century has it come to any sort of glory,
in the country of which Jeanne is the first and greatest of patriots
and champions, a country, too, to which national glory is more dear
than daily bread.
In the new and wonderful spring of life that succeeded the revolution
of 1830, the martyr of the fifteenth century came to light as by a
revelation. The episode of the Pucelle in Michelet’s History of
France touched the heart of the world, and remains one of the finest
efforts of history and the most popular picture of the saint. And
perhaps, though so much less important in point of art, the maiden
work of another maiden of Orleans–the little statue of Jeanne, so
pure, so simple, so spiritual, made by the Princess Marie of that
house, the daughter of the race which the Maid held in visionary love,
and which thus only has ever attempted any return of that devotion–
had its part in reawakening her name and memory. It fell again,
however, after the great work of Quicherat had finally given to the
country the means of fully forming its opinion on the subject which
Fabre’s translation, though unfortunately not literal and adorned with
modern decorations, was calculated to render popular. A great crop of
statues and some pictures not of any great artistic merit have since
been dedicated to the memory of the Maid: but yet the public
enthusiasm has never risen above the tide mark of literary applause.
There has been, however, a great movement of enthusiasm lately to gain
for Jeanne the honour of canonisation[2]; but it seems to have failed,
or at least to have sunk again for the moment into silence. Perhaps
these honours are out of date in our time. One of the most recent
writers on the subject, M. Henri Blaze de Bury, suggests that one
reason which retards this final consecration is “England, certainly
not a negligible quantity to a Pope of our time.” Let no such illusion
move any mind, French or ecclesiastical. Canonisation means to us, I
presume, and even to a great number of Catholics, simply the highest
honour that can be paid to a holy and spotless name. In that sense
there is no distinction of nation, and the English as warmly as the
French, both being guilty towards her, and before God on her account–
would welcome all honour that could be paid to one who, more truly
than any princess of the blood, is Jeanne of France, the Maid, alone
in her lofty humility and valour, and in everlasting fragrance of
modesty and youth.

[1] The writer must add that personally, as a Scot, she has no right
    to use this pronoun. Scotland is entirely guiltless of this crime.
    The Scots were fighting on the side of France through all these
    wars, a little perhaps for love of France, but much more out of
    natural hostility to the English. Yet at this time of day, except
    to state that fact, it is scarcely necessary to throw off the
    responsibility. The English side is now our side, though it was
    not so in the fifteenth century: and a writer of the English
    tongue must naturally desire that there should at least be fair
    play.
[2] I am informed, however, that she is already “Venerable,” not a
    very appropriate title–the same, I presume, as Bienheureuse,
    which is prettier,–and may therefore be addressed by the faithful
    in prayer, though her rank is only, as it were, brevet rank, and
    her elevation incomplete.
  Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.  • 
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] The writer must add that personally, as a Scot, she has no right
    to use this pronoun. Scotland is entirely guiltless of this crime.
    The Scots were fighting on the side of France through all these
    wars, a little perhaps for love of France, but much more out of
    natural hostility to the English. Yet at this time of day, except
    to state that fact, it is scarcely necessary to throw off the
    responsibility. The English side is now our side, though it was
    not so in the fifteenth century: and a writer of the English
    tongue must naturally desire that there should at least be fair
    play.
[2] I am informed, however, that she is already “Venerable,” not a
    very appropriate title–the same, I presume, as Bienheureuse,
    which is prettier,–and may therefore be addressed by the faithful
    in prayer, though her rank is only, as it were, brevet rank, and
    her elevation incomplete.
 

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
