
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





It is not necessary to be a good man in order to divine what in
certain circumstances a good and pure spirit will do. The Bishop of
Beauvais had entertained no doubt as to what would happen. He knew
exactly, with a perspicuity creditable to his perceptions at least,
that, notwithstanding the effect which his theatrical mise en scène
had produced upon the imagination of Jeanne, no power in heaven or
earth would induce that young soul to content itself with a lie. He
knew it, though lies were his daily bread; the children of this world
are wiser in their generation than the children of light. He had
bidden his English patrons to wait a little, and now his predictions
were triumphantly fulfilled. It is hard to believe of any man that on
such a certainty he could have calculated and laid his devilish plans;
but there would seem to have existed in the mediæval churchman a
certain horrible thirst for the blood of a relapsed heretic which was
peculiar to their age and profession, and which no better principle in
their own minds could subdue. It was their appetite, their delight of
sensation, in distinction from the other appetites perhaps scarcely
less cruel which other men indulged with no such horrified
denunciation from the rest of the world. Others, it is evident, shared
with Cauchon that sharp sensation of dreadful pleasure in finding her
out; young Courcelles, so modest and unassuming and so learned, among
the rest; not L’Oyseleur, it appears by the sequel. That Judas, like
the greater traitor, was struck to the heart; but the less bad man who
had only persecuted, not betrayed, stood high in superior virtue, and
only rejoiced that at last the victim was ready to drop into the
flames which had been so carefully prepared.
The next morning, Tuesday after Trinity Sunday, the witnesses hurried
with their news to the quickly summoned assembly in the chapel of the
Archbishop’s house; thirty-three of the judges, having been hastily
called together, were there to hear. Jeanne had relapsed; the sinner
escaped had been re-caught; and what was now to be done? One by one
each man rose again and gave his verdict. Once more Egidius, Abbot of
Fécamp, led the tide of opinion. There was but one thing to be done:
to give her up to the secular justice, “praying that she might be
gently dealt with.” Man after man added his voice “to that of Abbot of
Fécamp aforesaid"–that she might be gently dealt with! Not one of
them could be under any doubt what gentle meaning would be in the
execution; but apparently the words were of some strange use in
salving their consciences.
The decree was pronounced at once without further formalities. In
point of view of the law, there should have followed another trial,
more evidence, pleadings, and admonitions. We may be thankful to
Monseigneur de Beauvais that he now defied law, and no longer
prolonged the useless ceremonials of that mockery of justice. It is
said that in coming out of the prison, through the courtyard full of
Englishmen, where Warwick was in waiting to hear what news, the Bishop
greeted them with all the satisfaction of success, laughing and
bidding them “Make good cheer, the thing is done.” In the same spirit
of satisfaction was the rapid action of the further proceedings. On
Tuesday she was condemned, summoned on Wednesday morning at eight
’clock to the Old Market of Rouen to hear her sentence, and there,
without even that formality, the penalty was at once carried out. No
time, certainly, was lost in this last stage.
All the interest of the heart-rending tragedy now turns to the prison
where Jeanne woke in the early morning without, as yet, any knowledge
of her fate. It must be remembered that the details of this wonderful
scene, which we have in abundance, are taken from reports made twenty
years after by eye-witnesses indeed, but men to whom by that time it
had become the only policy to represent Jeanne in the brightest
colours, and themselves as her sympathetic friends. There is no doubt
that so remarkable an occurrence as her martyrdom must have made a
deep impression on the minds of all those who were in any way actors
in or spectators of that wonderful scene. And every word of all these
different reports is on oath; but notwithstanding, a touch of
unconscious colour, a more favourable sentiment, influenced by the
feeling of later days, may well have crept in. With this warning we
may yet accept these depositions as trustworthy, all the more for the
atmosphere of truth, perfectly realistic, and in no way idealised,
which is in every description of the great catastrophe; in which
Jeanne figures as no supernatural heroine, but as a terrified,
tormented, and often trembling girl.
On the fatal morning very early, Brother Martin l’Advenu appeared in
the cell of the Maid. He had a mingled tale to tell–first “to
announce to her her approaching death, and to lead her to true
contrition and penitence; and also to hear her confession, which the
said l’Advenu did very carefully and charitably.” Jeanne on her part
received the news with no conventional resignation or calm. Was it
possible that she had been deceived and really hoped for mercy? She
began to weep and to cry at the sudden stroke of fate. Notwithstanding
the solemnity of her last declaration, that she would rather bear her
punishment all at once than to endure the long punishment of her
prison, her heart failed before the imminent stake, the immediate
martyrdom. She cried out to heaven and earth: “My body, which has
never been corrupted, must it be burned to ashes to-day!” No one but
Jeanne knew at what cost she had kept her perfect purity; was it good
for nothing but to be burned, that young body not nineteen years old?
“Ah,” she said, “I would rather be beheaded seven times than burned! I
appeal to God against all these great wrongs they do me.” But after a
while the passion wore itself out, the child’s outburst was stilled;
calming herself, she knelt down and made her confession to the
compassionate friar, then asked for the sacrament, to “receive her
Saviour” as she had so often prayed and entreated before. It would
appear that this had not been within Friar Martin’s commission. He
sent to ask the Bishop’s leave, and it was granted “anything she asked
for"–as they give whatever he may wish to eat to a condemned convict.
But the Host was brought into the prison without ceremony, without
accompanying candles or vestment for the priest. There are always some
things which are insupportable to a man. Brother Martin could bear the
sight of the girl’s anguish, but not to administer to her a diminished
rite. He sent again to demand what was needful, out of respect for the
Holy Sacrament and the present victim. And his request had come, it
would seem, to some canon or person in authority whose heart had been
touched by the wonderful Maid in her long martyrdom. This nameless
sympathiser did all that a man could do. He sent the Host with a train
of priests chanting litanies as they went through the streets, with
torches burning in the pure early daylight; some of these exhorted the
people who knelt as they passed, to pray for her. She must have heard
in her prison the sound of the bell, the chant of the clergy, the
pause of awe, and then the rising, irregular murmur of the voices,
that sound of prayer never to be mistaken. Pray for her! At last the
city was touched to its heart. There is no sign that it had been
sympathetic to Jeanne before; it was half English or more. But she was
about to die: she had stood bravely against the world and answered
like a true Maid; and they had now seen her led through their streets,
a girl just nineteen. The popular imagination at least was subjugated
for the time.
Thus Jeanne for the first time, after all the feasts were over,
received at last “her Saviour” as she said, the consecration of that
rite which He himself had instituted before He died. But she was not
permitted to receive it in simplicity and silence as becomes the
sacred commemoration. All the time she was still preschée and
admonished by the men about her. A few days after her death the Bishop
and his followers assembled, and set down in evidence their different
parts in that scene. How far it is to be relied upon, it is difficult
to say. The speakers did not testify under oath; there is no formal
warrant for their truth, and an anxious attempt to prove her change of
mind is evident throughout; still there seem elements of truth in it,
and a certain glimpse is afforded of Jeanne in the depths, when hope
and strength were gone. The general burden of their testimony is that
she sadly allowed herself to have been deceived, as to the liberation
for which all along she had hoped. Peter Morice, often already
mentioned, importuning her on the subject of the spirits, endeavouring
to get from her an admission that she had not seen them at all, and
was herself a deceiver: or if not that, at least that they were evil
spirits, not good,–drew from her the impatient exclamation: “Be they
good spirits, or be they evil, they appeared to me.” Even in the act
of giving her her last communion, Brother Martin paused with the
consecrated Host in his hands.
“Do you believe,” he said, “that this is the body of Christ?” Jeanne
answered: “Yes, and He alone can free me; I pray you to administer."
Then this brother said to Jeanne: “Do you believe as fully in your
voices?” Jeanne answered: “I believe in God alone and not in the
voices, which have deceived me.” L’Advenu himself, however, does not
give this deposition, but another of the persons present, Le Camus,
who did not live to revise his testimony at the Rehabilitation.
The rite being over, the Bishop himself bustled in with an air of
satisfaction, rubbing his hands, one may suppose from his tone. “So,
Jeanne,” he said, “you have always told us that your ’voices’ said you
were to be delivered, and you see now they have deceived you. Tell us
the truth at last.” Then Jeanne answered: “Truly I see that they have
deceived me.” The report is Cauchon’s, and therefore little to be
trusted; but the sad reply is at least not unlike the sentiment that,
even in records more trustworthy, seems to have breathed forth in her.
The other spectators all report another portion of this conversation.
“Bishop, it is by you I die,” are the words with which the Maid is
said to have met him. “Oh Jeanne, have patience,” he replied. “It is
because you did not keep your promise.” “If you had kept yours, and
sent me to the prison of the Church, and put me in gentle hands, it
would not have happened,” she replied. “I appeal from you to God."
Several of the attendants, also according to the Bishop’s account,
heard from her the same sad words: “They have deceived me"; and there
seems no reason why we should not believe it. Her mind was weighed
down under this dreadful unaccountable fact. She was forsaken–as a
greater sufferer was; and a horror of darkness had closed around her.
“Ah, Sieur Pierre,” she said to Morice, “where shall I be to-night?"
The man had condemned her as a relapsed heretic, a daughter of
perdition. He had just suggested to her that her angels must have been
devils. Nevertheless perhaps his face was not unkindly, he had not
meant all the harm he did. He ought to have answered, “In Hell, with
the spirits you have trusted"; that would have been the only logical
response. What he did say was very different. “Have you not good faith
in the Lord?” said the judge who had doomed her. Amazing and notable
speech! They had sentenced her to be burned for blasphemy as an envoy
of the devil; they believed in fact that she was the child of God, and
going straight in that flame to the skies. Jeanne, with the sound,
clear head and the “sane mind” to which all of them testified, did she
perceive, even at that dreadful moment, the inconceivable
contradiction? “Ah,” she said, “yes, God helping me, I shall be in
Paradise.”
There is one point in the equivocal report which commends itself to
the mind, which several of these men unite in, but which was carefully
not repeated at the Rehabilitation: and this was that Jeanne allowed
“as if it had been a thing of small importance,” that her story of the
angel bearing the crown at Chinon was a romance which she neither
expected nor intended to be believed. For this we have to thank
L’Oyseleur and the rest of the reverend ghouls assembled on that
dreadful morning in the prison.
Jeanne was then dressed, for her last appearance in this world, in the
long white garment of penitence, the robe of sacrifice: and the mitre
was placed on her head which was worn by the victims of the Holy
Office. She was led for the last time down the echoing stair to the
crowded courtyard where her “chariot” awaited her. It was her
confessor’s part to remain by her side, and Frère Isambard and
Massieu, the officer, both her friends, were also with her. It is said
that L’Oyseleur rushed forward at this moment, either to accompany her
also, or, as many say, to fling himself at her feet and implore her
pardon. He was hustled aside by the crowd and would have been killed
by the English, it is said, but for Warwick. The bystanders would seem
to have been seized with a sudden disgust for all the priests about,
thinking them Jeanne’s friends, the historians insinuate–more likely
in scorn and horror of their treachery. And then the melancholy
procession set forth.
The streets were overflowing as was natural, crowded in every part:
eight hundred English soldiers surrounded and followed the cortège, as
the car rumbled along over the rough stones. Not yet had the Maid
attained to the calm of consent. She looked wildly about her at all
the high houses and windows crowded with gazers, and at the throngs
that gaped and gazed upon her on every side. In the midst of the
consolations of the confessor who poured pious words in her ears,
other words, the plaints of a wondering despair fell from her lips,
“Rouen! Rouen!” she said; “am I to die here?” It seemed incredible to
her, impossible. She looked about still for some sign of disturbance,
some rising among the crowd, some cry of “France! France!” or glitter
of mail. Nothing: but the crowds ever gazing, murmuring at her, the
soldiers roughly clearing the way, the rude chariot rumbling on.
“Rouen, Rouen! I fear that you shall yet suffer because of this,” she
murmured in her distraction, amid her moanings and tears.
At last the procession came to the Old Market, an open space
encumbered with three erections–one reaching up so high that the
shadow of it seemed to touch the sky, the horrid stake with wood piled
up in an enormous mass, made so high, it is said, in order that the
executioner himself might not reach it to give a merciful blow, to
secure unconsciousness before the flames could touch the trembling
form. Two platforms were raised opposite, one furnished with chairs
and benches for Winchester and his court, another for the judges, with
the civil officers of Rouen who ought to have pronounced sentence in
their turn. Without this form the execution was illegal: what did it
matter? No sentence at all was read to her, not even the
ecclesiastical one which was illegal also. She was probably placed
first on the same platform with her judges, where there was a pulpit
from which she was to be preschée for the last time. Of all Jeanne’s
sufferings this could scarcely be the least, that she was always
preschée, lectured, addressed, sermonised through every painful step
of her career.
The moan was still unsilenced on her lips, and her distracted soul
scarcely yet freed from the sick thought of a possible deliverance,
when the everlasting strain of admonishment, and re-enumeration of her
errors, again penetrated the hum of the crowd. The preacher was
Nicolas Midi, one of the eloquent members of that dark fraternity; and
his text was in St. Paul’s words: “If any of the members suffer, all
the other members suffer with it.” Jeanne was a rotten branch which
had to be cut off from the Church for the good of her own soul, and
that the Church might not suffer by her sin; a heretic, a blasphemer,
an impostor, giving forth false fables at one time, and making a false
penitence the next. It is very unlikely that she heard anything of
that flood of invective. At the end of the sermon the preacher bade
her “Go in peace.” Even then, however, the fountain of abuse did not
cease. The Bishop himself rose, and once more by way of exhorting her
to a final repentance, heaped ill names upon her helpless head. The
narrative shows that the prisoner, now arrived at the last point in
her career, paid no attention to the tirade levelled at her from the
president’s place. “She knelt down on the platform showing great signs
and appearance of contrition, so that all those who looked upon her
wept. She called on her knees upon the blessed Trinity, the blessed
glorious Virgin Mary, and all the blessed saints of Paradise.” She
called specially–was it with still a return towards the hoped for
miracle? was it with the instinctive cry towards an old and faithful
friend?–"St. Michael, St. Michael, St. Michael, help!” There would
seem to have been a moment in which the hush and silence of a great
crowd surrounded this wonderful stage, where was that white figure on
her knees, praying, speaking–sometimes to God, sometimes to the
saintly unseen companions of her life, sometimes in broken phrases to
those about her. She asked the priests, thronging all round, those who
had churches, to say a mass for her soul. She asked all whom she might
have offended to forgive her. Through her tears and prayers broke
again and again the sorrowful cry of “Rouen, Rouen! Is it here truly
that I must die?” No reason is given for the special pang that seems
to echo in this cry. Jeanne had once planned a campaign in Normandy
with Alençon. Had there been perhaps some special hope which made this
conclusion all the more bitter, of setting up in the Norman capital
her standard and that of her King?
There have been martyrs more exalted above the circumstances of their
fate than Jeanne. She was no abstract heroine. She felt every pang to
the depth of her natural, spontaneous being, and the humiliation and
the deep distress of having been abandoned in the sight of men,
perhaps the profoundest pang of which nature is capable. “He trusted
in God that he would deliver him: let him deliver him if he will have
him.” That which her Lord had borne, the little sister had now to
bear. She called upon the saints, but they did not answer. She was
shamed in the sight of men. But as she knelt there weeping, the
Bishop’s evil voice scarcely silenced, the soldiers waiting impatient
–the entire crowd, touched to its heart with one impulse, broke into
a burst of weeping and lamentation, “à chaudes larmes” according to
the graphic French expression. They wept hot tears as in the keen
personal pang of sorrow and fellow-feeling and impotence to help.
Winchester–withdrawn high on his platform, ostentatiously separated
from any share in it, a spectator merely–wept; and the judges wept.
The Bishop of Boulogne was overwhelmed with emotion, iron tears flowed
down the accursed Cauchon’s cheeks. The very world stood still to see
that white form of purity, and valour, and faith, the Maid, not
shouting triumphant on the height of victory, but kneeling, weeping,
on the verge of torture. Human nature could not bear this long. A
hoarse cry burst forth: “Will you keep us here all day; must we dine
here?” a voice perhaps of unendurable pain that simulated cruelty. And
then the executioner stepped in and seized the victim.
It has been said that her stake was set so high, that there might be
no chance of a merciful blow, or of strangulation to spare the victim
the atrocities of the fire; perhaps, let us hope, it was rather that
the ascending smoke might suffocate her before the flame could reach
her: the fifteenth century would naturally accept the most cruel
explanation. There was a writing set over the little platform which
gave footing to the attendants below the stake, upon which were
written the following words:
  JEANNE CALLED THE MAID, LIAR, ABUSER OF THE PEOPLE, SOOTHSAYER,
  BLASPHEMER OF GOD, PERNICIOUS, SUPERSTITIOUS, IDOLATROUS, CRUEL,
  DISSOLUTE, INVOKER OF DEVILS, APOSTATE, SCHISMATIC, HERETIC.
This was how her countrymen in the name of law and justice and
religion branded the Maid of France–one half of her countrymen: the
other half, silent, speaking no word, looking on.
Before she began to ascend the stake, Jeanne, rising from her knees,
asked for a cross. No place so fit for that emblem ever was: but no
cross was to be found. One of the English soldiers who kept the way
seized a stick from some one by, broke it across his knee in unequal
parts, and bound them hurriedly together; so, in the legend and in all
the pictures, when Mary of Nazareth was led to her espousals, one of
her disappointed suitors broke his wand. The cross was rough with its
broken edges which Jeanne accepted from her enemy, and carried,
pressing it against her bosom. One would rather have that rude cross
to preserve as a sacred thing, than the highest effort of art in gold
and silver. This was her ornament and consolation as she trod the few
remaining steps and mounted the pile of the faggots to her place high
over all that sea of heads. When she was bound securely to her stake,
she asked again for a cross, a cross blessed and sacred from a church,
to be held before her as long as her eyes could see. Frère Isambard
and Massieu, following her closely still, sent to the nearest church,
and procured probably some cross which was used for processional
purposes on a long staff which could be held up before her. The friar
stood upon the faggots holding it up, and calling out broken words of
encouragement so long that Jeanne bade him withdraw, lest the fire
should catch his robes. And so at last, as the flames began to rise,
she was left alone, the good brother always at the foot of the pile,
painfully holding up with uplifted arms the cross that she might still
see it, the soldiers crowding, lit up with the red glow of the fire,
the horrified, trembling crowd like an agitated sea around. The wild
flames rose and fell in sinister gleams and flashes, the smoke blew
upwards, by times enveloping that white Maid standing out alone
against a sky still blue and sweet with May–Pandemonium underneath,
but Heaven above. Then suddenly there came a great cry from among the
black fumes that began to reach the clouds: “My voices were of God!
They have not deceived me!” She had seen and recognised it at last.
Here it was, the miracle: the great victory that had been promised–
though not with clang of swords and triumph of rescuing knights, and
“St. Denis for France!"–but by the sole hand of God, a victory and
triumph for all time, for her country a crown of glory and ineffable
shame.
Thus died the Maid of France–with “Jesus, Jesus,” on her lips–till
the merciful smoke breathing upwards choked that voice in her throat;
and one who was like unto the Son of God, who was with her in the
fire, wiped all memory of the bitter cross, wavering uplifted through
the air in the good monk’s trembling hands–from eyes which opened
bright upon the light and peace of that Paradise of which she had so
long thought and dreamed.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
