
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





In the year 1424, the year in which, after the battle of Agincourt,
France was delivered over to Henry V., an extraordinary event occurred
in the life of this little French peasant. We have not the same horror
of that treaty, naturally, as have the French. Henry V. is a favourite
of our history, probably not so much for his own merit as because of
that master-magician, Shakespeare, who of his supreme good pleasure,
in the exercise of that voluntary preference, which even God himself
seems to show to some men, has made of that monarch one of the best
beloved of our hearts. Dear to us as he is, in Eastcheap as at
Agincourt, and more in the former than the latter, even our sense of
the disgraceful character of that bargain, le traité infâme of
Troyes, by which Queen Isabeau betrayed her son, and gave her daughter
and her country to the invader, is softened a little by our high
estimation of the hero. But this is simple national prejudice;
regarded from the French side, or even by the impartial judgment of
general humanity, it was an infamous treaty, and one which might well
make the blood boil in French veins.
We look at it at present, however, through the atmosphere of the
nineteenth century, when France is all French, and when the royal
house of England has no longer any French connection. If George III.,
much more George II., on the basis of his kingdom of Hanover, had
attempted to make himself master of a large portion of Germany, the
situation would have been more like that of Henry V. in France than
anything we can think of now. It is true the kings of England were no
longer dukes of Normandy–but they had been so within the memory of
man: and that noble duchy was a hereditary appanage of the family of
the Conqueror; while to other portions of France they had the link of
temporary possession and inheritance through French wives and mothers;
added to which is the fact that Jean sans Peur of Burgundy, thirsting
to avenge his father’s blood upon the Dauphin, would have been
probably a more dangerous usurper than Henry, and that the actual
sovereign, the unfortunate, mad Charles VI., was in no condition to
maintain his own rights.
There is little evidence, however, that this treaty, or anything so
distinct in detail, had made much impression on the outlying borders
of France. What was known there, was only that the English were
victorious, that the rightful King of France was still uncrowned and
unacknowledged, and that the country was oppressed and humiliated
under the foot of the invader. The fact that the new King was not yet
the Lord’s anointed, and had never received the seal of God, as it
were, to his commission, was a fact which struck the imagination of
the village as of much more importance than many greater things–being
at once more visible and matter-of-fact, and of more mystical and
spiritual efficacy than any other circumstance in the dreadful tale.
Jeanne was in the garden as usual, seated, as we should say in
Scotland, at “her seam,” not quite thirteen, a child in all the
innocence of infancy, yet full of dreams, confused no doubt and vague,
with those impulses and wonderings–impatient of trouble, yearning to
give help–which tremble on the chaos of a young soul like the first
lightening of dawn upon the earth. It was summer, and afternoon, the
time of dreams. It would be easy in the employment of legitimate fancy
to heighten the picturesqueness of that quiet scene–the little girl
with her favourite bells, the birds picking up the crumbs of brown
bread at her feet. She was thinking of nothing, most likely, in a
vague suspense of musing, the wonder of youth, the awakening of
thought, as yet come to little definite in her child’s heart–looking
up from her work to note some passing change of the sky, a something
in the air which was new to her. All at once between her and the
church there shone a light on the right hand, unlike anything she had
ever seen before; and out of it came a voice equally unknown and
wonderful. What did the voice say? Only the simplest words, words fit
for a child, no maxim or mandate above her faculties–”Jeanne, sois
bonne et sage enfant; va souvent à l’église.” Jeanne, be good! What
more could an archangel, what less could the peasant mother within
doors, say? The little girl was frightened, but soon composed herself.
The voice could be nothing but sacred and blessed which spoke thus. It
would not appear that she mentioned it to anyone. It is such a secret
as a child, in that wavering between the real and unreal, the world
not realised of childhood, would keep, in mingled shyness and awe,
uncertain, rapt in the atmosphere of vision, within her own heart.
It is curious how often this wonderful scene has been repeated in
France, never connected with so high a mission, but yet embracing the
same circumstances, the same situation, the same semi-angelic nature
of the woman-child. The little Bernadette of Lourdes is almost of our
own day; she, too is one who puts the scorner to silence. What her
visions and her voices were, who can say? The last historian of them
is not a man credulous of good or moved towards the ideal; yet he is
silent, except in a wondering impression of the sacred and the true,
before the little Bearnaise in her sabots; and, notwithstanding the
many sordid results that have followed and all that sad machinery of
expected miracle through which even, repulsive as it must always be, a
something breaks forth from time to time which no man can define and
account for except in ways more incredible than miracle–so is the
rest of the world. Why has this logical, sceptical, doubting country,
so able to quench with an epigram, or blow away with a breath of
ridicule the finest vision–become the special sphere and birthplace
of these spotless infant-saints? This is one of the wonders which
nobody attempts to account for. Yet Bernadette is as Jeanne, though
there are more than four hundred years between.
After what intervals the vision returned we are not told, nor in what
circumstances. It seems to have come chiefly out-of-doors, in the
silence and freedom of the fields or garden. Presently the heavenly
radiance shaped itself into some semblance of forms and figures, one
of which, clearer than the others, was like a man, but with wings and
a crown on his head and the air “d’un vrai prud’ homme“; a noble
apparition before whom at first the little maid trembled, but whose
majestic, honest regard soon gave her confidence. He bade her once
more to be good, and that God would help her; then he told her the sad
story of her own suffering country, la pitié qui estoit au royaume de
France. Was it the pity of heaven that the archangel reported to the
little trembling girl, or only that which woke with the word in her
own childish soul? He has chosen the small things of this world to
confound the great. Jeanne’s young heart was full of pity already, and
of yearning over the helpless mother-country which had no champion to
stand for her. “She had great doubts at first whether it was St.
Michael, but afterwards when he had instructed her and shown her many
things, she believed firmly that it was he.”
It was this warrior-angel who opened the matter to her, and disclosed
her mission. “Jeanne,” he said, “you must go to the help of the King
of France; and it is you who shall give him back his kingdom.” Like a
still greater Maid, trembling, casting in her mind what this might
mean, she replied, confused, as if that simple detail were all:
“Messire, I am only a poor girl; I cannot ride or lead armed men.” The
vision took no notice of this plea. He became minute in his
directions, indicating exactly what she was to do. “Go to Messire de
Baudricourt, captain of Vaucouleurs, and he will take you to the King.
St. Catherine and St. Margaret will come and help you.” Jeanne was
overwhelmed by this exactness, by the sensation of receiving direct
orders. She cried, weeping and helpless, terrified to the bottom of
her soul–What was she that she should do this? a little girl, able to
guide nothing but her needle or her distaff, to lend her simple aid in
nursing a sick child. But behind all her fright and hesitation, her
heart was filled with the emotion thus suggested to her–the
immeasurable pitié que estoit au royaume de France. Her heart became
heavy with this burden. By degrees it came about that she could think
of nothing else; and her little life was confused by expectations and
recollections of the celestial visitant, who might arrive upon her at
any moment, in the midst perhaps of some innocent play, or when she
sat sewing in the garden before her father’s humble door.
After a while the vrai prud’ homme came seldom; other figures more
like herself, soft forms of women, white and shining, with golden
circlets and ornaments, appeared to her in the great halo of the
light; they bowed their heads, naming themselves, as to a sister
spirit, Catherine, and the other Margaret. Their voices were sweet and
soft with a sound that made you weep. They were both martyrs,
encouraging and strengthening the little martyr that was to be. “A
lady is there in the heavens who loves thee”: Virgil could not say
more to rouse the flagging strength of Dante. When these gentle
figures disappeared, the little maid wept in an anguish of tenderness,
longing if only they would take her with them. It is curious that
though she describes in this vague rapture the appearance of her
visitors, it is always as “mes voix” that she names them–the sight
must always have been more imperfect than the message. Their outlines
and their lovely faces might shine uncertain in the excess of light;
but the words were always plain. The pity for France that was in their
hearts spread itself into the silent rural atmosphere, touching every
sensitive chord in the nature of little Jeanne. It was as if her
mother lay dying there before her eyes.
Curious to think how little anyone could have suspected such meetings
as these, in the cottage hard by, where the weary ploughmen from the
fields would come clamping in for their meal, and Dame Isabeau would
call to the child, even sharply perhaps now and then, to leave that
all-absorbing needlework and come in and help, as Martha called Mary
fourteen hundred years before; and where the priest, mumbling his mass
of a cold morning in the little church, would smile indulgent on the
faithful little worshipper when it was done, sure of seeing Jeanne
there whoever might be absent. She was a shy girl, blushing and
drooping her head when a stranger spoke to her, red and shame-faced
when they laughed at her in the village as a dévote before her time;
but with nothing else to blush about in all her simple record.
Neither to her parents, nor to the curé when she made her confession,
does she seem to have communicated these strange experiences, though
they had lasted for some time before she felt impelled to act upon
them, and could keep silence no longer. She was but thirteen when the
revelations began and she was seventeen when at last she set forth to
fulfil her mission. She had no guidance from her voices, she herself
says, as to whether she should tell or not tell what had been
communicated to her; and no doubt was kept back by her shyness, and by
the dreamy confusion of childhood between the real and unreal. One
would have thought that a life in which these visions were of constant
recurrence would have been rapt altogether out of wholesome use and
wont, and all practical service. But this does not seem for a moment
to have been the case. Jeanne was no hysterical girl, living with her
head in a mist, abstracted from the world. She had all the enthusiasms
even of youthful friendship, other girls surrounding her with the
intimacy of the village, paying her visits, staying all night, sharing
her room and her bed. She was ready to be sent for by any poor woman
that needed help or nursing, she was always industrious at her needle;
one would love to know if perhaps in the Trésor at Rheims there was
some stole or maniple with flowers on it, wrought by her hands. But
the Trésor at Rheims is nowadays rather vulgar if truth must be
told, and the bottles and vases for the consecration of Charles X.,
that pauvre sire, are more thought of than relics of an earlier age.
At length, however, one does not know how, the secret of her double
life came out. No doubt long brooding over these voices, long
intercourse with such celestial visitors, and the mission continually
pressed upon her–meaningless to the child at first, a thing only to
shed terrified tears over and wonder at–ripened her intelligence so
that she came at last to perceive that it was practicable, a thing to
be done, a charge to be obeyed. She had this before her, as a girl in
ordinary circumstances has the new developments of life to think of,
and how to be a wife and mother. And the news brought by every passer-
by would prove doubly interesting, doubly important to Jeanne, in her
daily growing comprehension of what she was called upon to do. As she
felt the current more and more catching her feet, sweeping her on,
overcoming all resistance in her own mind, she must have been more and
more anxious to know what was going on in the distracted world, more
and more touched by that great pity which had awakened her soul. And
all these reports were of a nature to increase that pity till it
became overwhelming. The tales she would hear of the English must have
been tales of cruelty and horror; not so many years ago what tales did
not we hear of German ferocity in the French villages, perhaps not
true at all, yet making their impression always; and it was more
probable in that age that every such story should be true. Then the
compassion which no one can help feeling for a young man deprived of
his rights, his inheritance taken from him, his very life in danger,
threatened by the stranger and usurper, was deepened in every
particular by the fact that it was the King, the very impersonation of
France, appointed by God as the head of the country, who was in
danger. Everything that Jeanne heard would help to swell the stream.
Thus she must have come step by step–this extraordinary, impossible
suggestion once sown in her dreaming soul–to perceive a kind of
miraculous reasonableness in it, to see its necessity, and how
everything pointed towards such a deliverance. It would have seemed
natural to believe that the prophecies of the countryside which
promised a virgin from an oak grove, a maiden from Lorraine, to
deliver France, might have affected her mind, did we not have it from
her own voice that she had never heard that prophecy[1]; but the word
of the blessed Michael, so often repeated, was more than an old wife’s
tale; and the child’s alarm would seem to have died away as she came
to her full growth. And Jeanne was no ethereal spirit lost in visions,
but a robust and capable peasant girl, fearing little, and full of
sense and determination, as well as of an inspiration so far above the
level of the crowd. We hear with wonder afterwards that she had the
making of a great general in her untutored female soul,–which is
perhaps the most wonderful thing in her career,–and saw with the eye
of an experienced and able soldier, as even Dunois did not always see
it, the fit order of an attack, the best arrangement of the forces at
her command. This I honestly avow is to me the most incredible point
in the story. I am not disturbed by the apparition of the saints;
there is in them an ineffable appropriateness and fitness against
which the imagination, at least, has not a word to say. The wonder is
not, to the natural mind, that such interpositions of heaven come, but
that they come so seldom. But that Jacques d’Arc’s daughter, the
little girl over her sewing, whose only fault was that she went to
church too often, should have the genius of a soldier, is too
bewildering for words to say. A poet, yes, an inspiring influence
leading on to miraculous victory; but a general, skilful with the rude
artillery of the time, divining the better way in strategy,–this is a
wonder beyond the reach of our faculties; yet according to Alençon,
Dunois, and other military authorities, it was true.
We have little means of finding out how it was that Jeanne’s long
musings came at last to a point at which they could be hidden no
longer, nor what it was which induced her at last to select the
confidant she did. No doubt she must have been considering and
weighing the matter for a long time before she fixed upon the man who
was her relation, yet did not belong to Domremy, and was safer than a
townsman for the extraordinary revelations she had to make. One of her
neighbours, her gossip, Gerard of Epinal, to whose child she was
godmother, had perhaps at one moment seemed to her a likely helper.
But he belonged to the opposite party. “If you were not a Burgundian,"
she said to him once, “there is something I might tell you.” The
honest fellow took this to mean that she had some thought of marriage,
the most likely and natural supposition. It was at this moment, when
her heart was burning with her great secret, the voices urging her on
day by day, and her power of self-constraint almost at an end, that
Providence sent Durand Laxart, her uncle by marriage, to Domremy on
some family visit. She would seem to have taken advantage of the
opportunity with eagerness, asking him privately to take her home with
him, and to explain to her father and mother that he wanted her to
take care of his wife. No doubt the girl, devoured with so many
thoughts, would have the air of requiring “a change” as we say, and
that the mother would be very ready to accept for her an invitation
which might bring back the brightness to her child. Laxart was a
peasant like the rest, a prud’ homme well thought of among his
people. He lived in Burey le Petit, near to Vaucouleurs, the chief
place of the district, and Jeanne already knew that it was to the
captain of Vaucouleurs that she was to address herself. Thus she
secured her object in the simplest and most natural way.
Yet the reader cannot but hold his breath at the thought of what that
amazing revelation must have been to the homely, rustic soul, her
companion, communicated as they went along the common road in the
common daylight. “She said to the witness that she must go to France
to the Dauphin, to make him to be crowned King.” It must have been as
if a thunderbolt had fallen at his feet when the girl whom he had
known in every development of her little life, thus suddenly disclosed
to him her secret purpose and determination. All her simple excellence
the good man knew, and that she was no fantastic chatterer, but truly
une bonne douce fille, bold in nothing but kindness, with nothing to
blush for but the fault of going too often to church. “Did you never
hear that France should be made desolate by a woman and restored by a
maid?” she said; and this would seem to have been an unanswerable
argument. He had, henceforth, nothing to do but to promote her purpose
as best he could in every way.
It would not seem at all unlikely to this good man that the Archangel
Michael, if Jeanne’s revelation to him went so far, should have named
Robert de Baudricourt, the chief of the district, captain of the town
and its forces, the principal personage in all the neighbourhood, as
the person to whom Jeanne’s purpose was to be revealed, but rather a
guarantee of St. Michael himself, familiar with good society; and the
Seigneur must have been more or less in good intelligence with his
people, not too alarming to be referred to, even on so insignificant a
subject as the vagaries of a country girl–though these by this time
must have begun to seem something more than vagaries to the half-
convinced peasant. And it was no doubt a great relief to his mind thus
to put the decision of the question into the hands of a man better
informed than himself. Laxart proceeded to Vaucouleurs upon his
mission, shyly yet with confidence. He would seem to have had a
preliminary interview with Baudricourt before introducing Jeanne. The
stammering countryman, the bluff, rustic noble and soldier, cheerfully
contemptuous, receiving, with a loud laugh into all the echoes, the
extraordinary demand that he should send a little girl from Domremy to
the King, to deliver France, come before us like a picture in the
countryman’s simple words. Robert de Baudricourt would scarcely hear
the story out. “Box her ears,” he said, “and send her home to her
mother.” The little fool! What did she know of the English, those
brutal, downright fighters, against whom no élan was sufficient, who
stood their ground and set up vulgar posts around their lines, instead
of trusting to the rush of sudden valour, and the tactics of the
tournament! She deliver France! On a much smaller argument and to put
down a less ambition, the half serious, half amused adviser has bidden
a young fanatic’s ears to be boxed on many an unimportant occasion,
and has often been justified in so doing. There would be a half hour
of gaiety after poor Laxart, crestfallen, had got his dismissal. The
good man must have turned back to Jeanne, where she waited for him in
courtyard or antechamber, with a heavy heart. No boxing of ears was
possible to him. The mere thought of it was blasphemy. This was on
Ascension Day the 13 May, 1428.
Jeanne, however, was not discouraged by M. de Baudricourt’s joke, and
her interview with him changed his views completely. She appears
indeed from the moment of setting out from her father’s house to have
taken a new attitude. These great personages of the country before
whom all the peasants trembled, were nothing to this village maid,
except, perhaps, instruments in the hand of God to speed her on her
way if they could see their privileges–if not, to be swept out of it
like straws by the wind. It had no doubt been hard for her to leave
her father’s house; but after that disruption what did anything
matter? And she had gone through five years of gradual training of
which no one knew. The tears and terror, the plea, “I am a poor girl;
I cannot even ride,” of her first childlike alarm had given place to a
profound acquaintance with the voices and their meaning. They were now
her familiar friends guiding her at every step; and what was the
commonplace burly Seigneur, with his roar of laughter, to Jeanne? She
went to her audience with none of the alarm of the peasant. A certain
young man of Baudricourt’s suite, Bertrand de Poulengy, another young
D’Artagnan seeking his fortune, was present in the hall and witnessed
the scene. The joke would seem to have been exhausted by the time
Jeanne appeared, or her perfect gravity and simplicity, and beautiful
manners–so unlike her rustic dress and village coif–imposed upon the
Seigneur and his little court. This is how the story is told, twenty-
five years after, by the witness, then an elderly knight, recalling
the story of his youth.
“She said that she came to Robert on the part of her Lord, that he
should send to the Dauphin, and tell him to hold out, and have no
fear, for the Lord would send him succour before the middle of Lent.
She also said that France did not belong to the Dauphin but to her
Lord; but her Lord willed that the Dauphin should be its King, and
hold it in command, and that in spite of his enemies she herself would
conduct him to be consecrated. Robert then asked her who was this
Lord? She answered, ’The King of Heaven.’ This being done [the witness
adds] she returned to her father’s house with her uncle, Durand Laxart
of Burey le Petit.”
This brief and sudden preface to her career passed over and had no
immediate effect; indeed but for Bertrand we should have been unable
to separate it from the confused narrative to which all these
witnesses brought what recollection they had, often without sequence
or order, Durand himself taking no notice of any interval between this
first visit to Vaucouleurs and the final one.[2] The episode of
Ascension Day appears like the formal sommation of French law, made
as a matter of form before the appellant takes action on his own
responsibility; but Baudricourt had probably more to do with it than
appears to be at all certain from the after evidence. One of the
persons present, at all events, young Poulengy above mentioned, bore
it in mind and pondered it in his heart.
Meantime, Jeanne returned home–the strangest home-going,–for by this
time her mission and her aspirations could no longer be hid, and
rumour must have carried the news almost as quickly as any modern
telegraph, to startle all the echoes of the village, heretofore
unaware of any difference between Jeanne and her companions save the
greater goodness to which everybody bears testimony. No doubt, it must
have reached Jacques d’Arc’s cottage even before she came back with
the kind Durand, a changed creature, already the consecrated Maid of
France, La Pucelle, apart from all others. The French peasant is a
hard man, more fierce in his terror of the unconventional, of having
his domestic affairs exposed to the public eye, or his family
disgraced by an exhibition of anything unusual either in act or
feeling, than almost any other class of beings. And it is evident that
he took his daughter’s intention according to the coarsest
interpretation, as a wild desire for adventure and intention of
joining herself to the roving troopers, the soldiers always hated and
dreaded in rural life. He suddenly appears in the narrative in a fever
of apprehension, with no imaginative alarm or anxiety about his girl,
but the fiercest suspicion of her, and dread of disgrace to ensue. We
do not know what passed when she returned, further than that her
father had a dream, no doubt after the first astounding explanation of
the purpose that had so long been ripening in her mind. He dreamed
that he saw her surrounded by armed men, in the midst of the troopers,
the most evident and natural interpretation of her purpose, for who
could divine that she meant to be their leader and general, on a level
not with the common men-at-arms, but of princes and nobles? In the
morning he told his dream to his wife and also to his sons. “If I
could think that the thing would happen that I dreamed, I would wish
that she should be drowned; and if you would not do it, I should do it
with my own hands.” The reader remembers with a shudder the Meuse
flowing at the foot of the garden, while the fierce peasant, mad with
fear lest shame should be coming to his family, clenched his strong
fist and made this outcry of dismay.
No doubt his wife smoothed the matter over as well as she could, and,
whatever alarms were in her own mind, hastily thought of a feminine
expedient to mend matters, and persuaded the angry father that to
substitute other dreams for these would be an easier way. Isabeau most
probably knew the village lad who would fain have had her child, so
good a housewife, so industrious a workwoman, and always so friendly
and so helpful, for his wife. At all events there was such a one, too
willing to exert himself, not discouraged by any refusal, who could be
egged up to the very strong point of appearing before the bishop at
Toul and swearing that Jeanne had been promised to him from her
childhood. So timid a girl, they all thought, so devout a Catholic,
would simply obey the bishop’s decision and would not be bold enough
even to remonstrate, though it is curious that with the spectacle of
her grave determination before them, and sorrowful sense of that
necessity of her mission which had steeled her to dispense with their
consent, they should have expected such an expedient to arrest her
steps. The affair, we must suppose, had gone through all the more
usual stages of entreaty on the lover’s part, and persuasion on that
of the parents, before such an attempt was finally made. But the shy
Jeanne had by this time attained that courage of desperation which is
not inconsistent with the most gentle nature; and without saying
anything to anyone, she too went to Toul, appeared before the bishop,
and easily freed herself from the pretended engagement, though whether
with any reference to her very different destination we are not
told.[3]
These proceedings, however, and the father’s dreams and the
remonstrances of the mother, must have made troubled days in the
cottage, and scenes of wrath and contradiction, hard to bear. The
winter passed distracted by these contentions, and it is difficult to
imagine how Jeanne could have borne this had it not been that the
period of her outset had already been indicated, and that it was only
in the middle of Lent that her succour was to reach the King. The
village, no doubt, was almost as much distracted as her father’s house
to hear of these strange discussions and of the incredible purpose of
the bonne douce fille, whose qualities everybody knew and about whom
there was nothing eccentric, nothing unnatural, but only simple
goodness, to distinguish her above her neighbours. In the meantime her
voices called her continually to her work. They set her free from the
ordinary yoke of obedience, always so strong in the mind of a French
girl. The dreadful step of abandoning her home, not to be thought of
under any other circumstances, was more and more urgently pressed upon
her. Could it indeed be saints and angels who ordained a step which
was outside of all the habits and first duties of nature? But we have
no reason to believe that this nineteenth-century doubt of her
visitors, and of whether their mandates were right, entered into the
mind of a girl who was of her own period and not of ours. She went on
steadfastly, certain of her mission now, and inaccessible either to
remonstrance or appeal.
It was towards the beginning of Lent, as Poulengy tells us, that the
decision was made, and she left home finally, to go “to France” as is
always said. But it seems to have been in January that she set out
once more for Vaucouleurs, accompanied by her uncle, who took her to
the house of some humble folk they knew, a carter and his wife, where
they lodged. Jeanne wore her peasant dress of heavy red homespun, her
rude heavy shoes, her village coif. She never made any pretence of
ladyhood or superiority to her class, but was always equal to the
finest society in which she found herself, by dint of that simple good
faith, sense, and seriousness, without excitement or exaggeration, and
radiant purity and straightforwardness which were apparent to all
seeing eyes. By this time all the little world about knew something of
her purpose and followed her every step with wonder and quickly rising
curiosity: and no doubt the whole town was astir, women gazing at
their doors, all on her side from the first moment, the men half
interested, half insolent, as she went once more to the chateau to
make her personal appeal. Simple as she was, the bonne douce fille
was not intimidated by the guard at the gates, the lounging soldiers,
the no doubt impudent glances flung at her by these rude companions.
She was inaccessible to alarms of that kind–which, perhaps, is one of
the greatest safeguards against them even in more ordinary cases. We
find little record of her second interview with Baudricourt. The
Journal du Siège d’Orleans and the Chronique de la Pucelle both
mention it as if it had been one of several, which may well have been
the case, as she was for three weeks in Vaucouleurs. It is almost
impossible to arrange the incidents of this interval between her
arrival there and her final departure for Chinon on the 23d February,
during which time she made a pilgrimage to a shrine of St. Nicolas and
also a visit to the Duke of Lorraine. It is clear, however, that she
must have repeated her demand with such stress and urgency that the
Captain of Vaucouleurs was a much perplexed man. It was a very natural
idea then, and in accordance with every sentiment of the time that he
should suspect this wonderful girl, who would not be daunted, of being
a witch and capable of bringing an evil fate on all who crossed her.
All thought of boxing her ears must ere this have departed from his
mind. He hastened to consult the curé, which was the most reasonable
thing to do. The curé was as much puzzled as the Captain. The Church,
it must be said, if always ready to take advantage afterwards of such
revelations, has always been timid, even sceptical about them at
first. The wisdom of the rulers, secular and ecclesiastic, suggested
only one thing to do, which was to exorcise, and perhaps to overawe
and frighten, the young visionary. They paid a joint and solemn visit
to the carter’s house, where no doubt their entrance together was
spied by many eager eyes; and there the priest solemnly taking out his
stole invested himself in his priestly robes and exorcised the evil
spirits, bidding them come out of the girl if they were her
inspiration. There seems a certain absurdity in this sudden assault
upon the evil one, taking him as it were by surprise: but it was not
ridiculous to any of the performers, though Jeanne no doubt looked on
with serene and smiling eyes. She remarked afterwards to her hostess,
that the curé had done wrong, as he had already heard her in
confession.
Outside, the populace were in no uncertainty at all as to her mission.
A little mob hung about the door to see her come and go, chiefly to
church, with her good hostess in attendance, as was right and seemly,
and a crowd streaming after them who perhaps of their own accord might
have neglected mass, but who would not, if they could help it, lose a
look at the new wonder. One day a young gentleman of the neighbourhood
was passing by, and amused by the commotion, came through the crowd to
have a word with the peasant lass. “What are you doing here, ma
mie?” the young man said. “Is the King to be driven out of the
kingdom, and are we all to be made English?” There is a tone of banter
in the speech, but he had already heard of the Maid from his friend,
Bertrand, and had been affected by the other’s enthusiasm. “Robert de
Baudricourt will have none of me or my words,” she replied,
“nevertheless before Mid-Lent I must be with the King, if I should
wear my feet up to my knees; for nobody in the world, be it king,
duke, or the King of Scotland’s daughter, can save the kingdom of
France except me alone: though I would rather spin beside my poor
mother, and this is not my work: but I must go and do it, because my
Lord so wills it.” “And who is your Seigneur?” he asked. “God,” said
the girl. The young man was moved, he too, by that wind which bloweth
where it listeth. He stretched out his hands through the gaping crowd
and took hers, holding them between his own, to give her his pledge:
and so swore by his faith, her hands in his hands, that he himself
would conduct her to the King. “When will you go?” he said. “Rather
to-day than to-morrow,” answered the messenger of God.
This was the second convert of La Pucelle. The peasant bonhomme
first, the noble gentleman after him; not to say all the women
wherever she went, the gazing, weeping, admiring crowd which now
followed her steps, and watched every opening of the door which
concealed her from their eyes. The young gentleman was Jean de
Novelonpont, “surnamed Jean de Metz”: and so moved was he by the
fervour of the girl, and by her strong sense of the necessity of
immediate operations, that he proceeded at once to make preparations
for the journey. They would seem to have discussed the dress she ought
to wear, and Jeanne decided for many obvious reasons to adopt the
costume of a man–or rather boy. She must, one would imagine have been
tall, for no remark is ever made on this subject, as if her dress had
dwarfed her, which is generally the case when a woman assumes the
habit of a man: and probably with her peasant birth and training, she
was, though slim, strongly made and well knit, besides being at the
age when the difference between boy and girl is sometimes but little
noticeable.
In the meantime Baudricourt had not been idle. He must have been moved
by the sight of Jeanne, at least to perceive a certain gravity in the
business for which he was not prepared; and her composure under the
curé’s exorcism would naturally deepen the effect which her own
manners and aspect had upon all who were free of prejudice. Another
singular event, too, added weight to her character and demand. One day
after her return from Lorraine, February 12th, 1429, she intimated to
all her surroundings and specially to Baudricourt, that the King had
suffered a defeat near Orleans, which made it still more necessary
that she should be at once conducted to him. It was found when there
was time for the news to come, that this defeat, the Battle of the
Herrings, so-called, had happened as she said, at the exact time; and
such a strange fact added much to the growing enthusiasm and
excitement. Baudricourt is said by Michelet to have sent off a secret
express to the Court to ask what he should do; but of this there seems
to be no direct evidence, though likelihood enough. The Court at
Chinon contained a strong feminine element, behind the scenes. And it
might be found that there were uses for the enthusiast, even if she
did not turn out to be inspired. No doubt there were many comings and
goings at this period which can only be traced confusedly through the
depositions of Jeanne’s companions twenty-five years after. She had at
least two interviews with Baudricourt before the exorcism of the curé
and his consequent change of procedure towards her. Then, escorted by
her uncle Laxart, and apparently by Jean de Metz, she had made a
pilgrimage to a shrine of St. Nicolas, as already mentioned, on which
occasion, being near Nancy, she was sent for by the Duke of Lorraine,
then lying ill at his castle in that city, who had a fancy to consult
the young prophetess, sorceress–who could tell what she was?–on the
subject apparently of his illness. He was the son of Queen Yolande of
Anjou, who was mother-in-law to Charles VII., and it would no doubt be
thought of some importance to secure his good opinion. Jeanne gave the
exalted patient no light on the subject of his health, but only the
(probably unpleasing) advice to flee from the wrath of God and to be
reconciled with his wife, from whom he was separated. He too, however,
was moved by the sight of her and her straightforward, undeviating
purpose. He gave her four francs, Durand tells us,–not much of a
present,–which she gave to her uncle, and which helped to buy her
outfit. Probably he made a good report of her to his mother, for
shortly after her return to Vaucouleurs (I again follow Michelet who
ought to be well informed) a messenger from Chinon arrived to take her
to the King.[4] In the councils of that troubled Court, perhaps, the
idea of a prodigy and miraculous leader, though she was nothing but a
peasant girl, would be not without attraction, a thing to conjure
withal, so far as the multitude were concerned.
Anyhow from any point of view, in the hopeless condition of affairs,
it was expedient that nothing which gave promise of help, either real
or visionary, should lightly be rejected. There was much anxiety no
doubt in the careless Court still dancing and singing in the midst of
calamity, but the reception of the ambitious peasant would form an
exciting incident at least, if nothing more important and notable.
Thus the whole anxious world of France stirred round that youthful
figure in the little frontier town, repeating with many an alteration
and exaggeration the sayings of Jeanne, and those popular
superstitions about the Maid from Lorraine which might be so naturally
applied to her. It would seem, indeed, that she had herself attached
some importance to this prophecy, for both her uncle Laxart and her
hostess at Vaucouleurs report that she asked them if they had heard
it: which question “stupefied” the latter, whose mind evidently jumped
at once to the conviction that the prophecy was fulfilled. Not in
Domremy itself, however, were these things considered with the same
awe-stricken and admiring faith. Nothing had softened the mood of
Jacques d’Arc. It was a shame to the village prud’ homme to think of
his daughter away from all the protection of home, living among men,
encountering the young Seigneurs who cared for no maiden’s reputation,
hearing the soldiers’ rude talk, exposed to their insults, or worse
still to their kindness. Probably even now he thought of her as
surrounded by troopers and men-at-arms, instead of the princes and
peers with whom henceforth Jeanne’s lot was to be cast; but in the
former case there would have perhaps been less to fear than in the
latter. Anyhow, Jeanne’s communications with her family were more
painful to her than had been the jeers of Baudricourt or the exorcism
of the curé. They sent her angry orders to come back, threats of
parental curses and abandonment. We may hope that the mother, grieved
and helpless, had little to do with this persecution. The woman who
had nourished her children upon saintly legend and Scripture story
could scarcely have been hard upon the child, of whom she, better than
any, knew the perfect purity and steadfast resolution. One of the
little household at least, revolted by the stern father’s fury,
perhaps secretly encouraged by the mother, broke away and joined his
sister at a later period. But we hear, during her lifetime, little or
nothing of Pierre.
Much time, however, was passed in these preliminaries. The final start
was not made till the 23d February, 1429, when the permission is
supposed to have come by the hands of Colet de Vienne, the King’s
messenger, who attended by a single archer, was to be her escort. It
is possible that he had no mission to this effect, but he certainly
did escort her to Chinon. The whole town gathered before the house of
Baudricourt to see her depart. Baudricourt, however, does not seem to
have provided any guard for her. Jean de Metz, who had so chivalrously
pledged himself to her service, with his friend De Poulengy, equally
ready for adventure, each with his servant, formed her sole
protectors.[5] Jean de Metz had already sent her the clothes of one of
his retainers, with the light breastplate and partial armour that
suited it; and the townspeople had subscribed to buy her a further
outfit, and a horse which seems to have cost sixteen francs–not so
small a sum in those days as now. Laxart declares himself to have been
responsible for this outlay, though the money was afterwards paid by
Baudricourt, who gave Jeanne a sword, which some of her historians
consider a very poor gift: none, however, of her equipments would seem
to have been costly. The little party set out thus, with a sanction of
authority, from the Captain’s gate, the two gentlemen and the King’s
messenger at the head of the party with their attendants, and the Maid
in the midst. “Go: and let what will happen,” was the parting
salutation of Baudricourt. The gazers outside set up a cry when the
decisive moment came, and someone, struck with the feeble force which
was all the safeguard she had for her long journey through an agitated
country–perhaps a woman in the sudden passion of misgiving which
often follows enthusiasm,–called out to Jeanne with an astonished
outcry to ask how she could dare to go by such a dangerous road. “It
was for that I was born,” answered the fearless Maid. The last thing
she had done had been to write a letter to her parents, asking their
pardon if she obeyed a higher command than theirs, and bidding them
farewell.
The French historians, with that amazement which they always show when
they find a man behaving like a gentleman towards a woman confided to
his honour, all pause with deep-drawn breath to note that the awe of
Jeanne’s absolute purity preserved her from any unseemly overture, or
even evil thought, on the part of her companions. We need not take up
even the shadow of so grave a censure upon Frenchmen in general,
although in the far distance of the fifteenth century. The two young
men, thus starting upon a dangerous adventure, pledged by their honour
to protect and convey her safely to the King’s presence, were noble
and generous cavaliers, and we may well believe had no evil thoughts.
They were not, however, without an occasional chill of reflection when
once they had taken the irrevocable step of setting out upon this wild
errand. They travelled by night to escape the danger of meeting bands
of Burgundians or English on the way, and sometimes had to ford a
river to avoid the town, where they would have found a bridge.
Sometimes, too, they had many doubts, Bertrand says, perhaps as to
their reception at Chinon, perhaps even whether their mission might
not expose them to the ridicule of their kind, if not to unknown
dangers of magic and contact with the Evil One, should this wonderful
girl turn out no inspired virgin but a pretender or sorceress. Jean de
Metz informs us that she bade them not to fear, that she had been sent
to do what she was now doing; that her brothers in paradise would tell
her how to act, and that for the last four or five years her brothers
in paradise and her God had told her that she must go to the war to
save the kingdom of France. This phrase must have struck his ear, as
he thus repeats it. Her brothers in paradise! She had not apparently
talked of them to anyone as yet, but now no one could hinder her more,
and she felt herself free to speak. A great calm seems to have been in
her soul. She had at last begun her work. How it was all to end for
her she neither foresaw nor asked; she knew only what she had to do.
When they ventured into a town she insisted on stopping to hear mass,
bidding them fear nothing. “God clears the way for me,” she said; “I
was born for this,” and so proceeded safe, though threatened with many
dangers. There is something that breathes of supreme satisfaction and
content in her repetition of those words.

She was, however, acquainted with the simpler byword, that France
    should be destroyed by a woman and afterwards redeemed by a
    virgin, which she quoted to several persons on her first setting
    out.
[2] I have to thank Mr. Andrew Lang for making the course of these
    events quite clear to myself.
[3] Mr. Andrew Lang thinks that this appearance at Toul was made after
    she had finally left Domremy, and when she was already accompanied
    by the escort which was to attend her to Chinon.
[4] Mr. Andrew Lang will not hear of this. He thinks the man was a
    mere King’s messenger with news, probably charged with the
    melancholy tidings of the loss at Rouvray (Battle of the
    Herrings): and that the fact he did accompany Jeanne and her
    little part was entirely accidental.
[5] Her brother Pierre is said by some to have been of the party. La
    Chronique de la Pucelle says two of her brothers. Mr. Andrew
    Lang, however, tells us that Pierre did not join his sister’s
    party till much later–in the beginning of June: and this is the
    statement of Jean de Metz. But Quicherat is also of opinion that
    they both fought in the relief of Orleans.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
She was, however, acquainted with the simpler byword, that France
    should be destroyed by a woman and afterwards redeemed by a
    virgin, which she quoted to several persons on her first setting
    out.
[2] I have to thank Mr. Andrew Lang for making the course of these
    events quite clear to myself.
[3] Mr. Andrew Lang thinks that this appearance at Toul was made after
    she had finally left Domremy, and when she was already accompanied
    by the escort which was to attend her to Chinon.
[4] Mr. Andrew Lang will not hear of this. He thinks the man was a
    mere King’s messenger with news, probably charged with the
    melancholy tidings of the loss at Rouvray (Battle of the
    Herrings): and that the fact he did accompany Jeanne and her
    little part was entirely accidental.
[5] Her brother Pierre is said by some to have been of the party. La
    Chronique de la Pucelle says two of her brothers. Mr. Andrew
    Lang, however, tells us that Pierre did not join his sister’s
    party till much later–in the beginning of June: and this is the
    statement of Jean de Metz. But Quicherat is also of opinion that
    they both fought in the relief of Orleans.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
