
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





The name of Pierre Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, appears to us at this
long distance as arising out of the infernal mists, into which, when
his ministry of shame was accomplished, he disappeared again, bearing
with him nothing but hatred and ill fame. Yet in his own day and to
his contemporaries, he was not an inconsiderable man. He was of
Rheims, a great student, and excellent scholar, the friend of many
good men, highly esteemed among the ranks of the learned, a good man
of business, which is not always the attribute of a scholar, and at
the same time a Burgundian of pronounced sentiments, holding for his
Duke, against the King. When Beauvais was summoned by Charles, after
his coronation, at that moment of universal triumph when all seemed
open for him to march upon Paris if he would, the city had joyfully
thrown open its doors to the royal army, and in doing so had driven
out its Bishop, who was hot on the other side. He would not seem to
have been wanted in Paris at that moment. The “triste Bedford,” as
Michelet calls him, had no means of employing an ambitious priest, no
dirty work for the moment to give him. It is natural to suppose that a
man so admirably adapted for that employment went in search of it to
the ecclesiastical court, not beloved of England, which the Cardinal
Bishop of Winchester held there. Winchester was the only one of the
House of Lancaster who had money to carry on the government either at
home or abroad. The two priests, as the historians are always pleased
to insinuate in respect to ecclesiastics, soon understood each other,
and Winchester became aware that he had in Cauchon a tool ready for
any shameful enterprise. It is not, however, necessary to assume so
much as this, for we have not the least reason to believe that either
one or the other of them had the slightest doubt on the subject of
Jeanne, or as to her character. She was a pernicious witch, filling a
hitherto invincible army with that savage fright which is but too well
understood among men, and which produces cruel outrages as well as
cowardly panic. The air of this very day, while I write, is ringing
with the story of a woman burnt to death by her own family under the
influence of that same horrible panic and terror. Cauchon was the
countryman, almost the pays–an untranslatable expression,–of
Jeanne; but he did not believe in her any more than the loftier
ecclesiastics of France believed in Bernadette of Lourdes, who was of
the spiritual lineage of Jeanne, nor than we should believe to-day in
a similar pretender. It seems unnecessary then to think of dark plots
hatched between these two dark priests against the white, angelic
apparition of the Maid.
What services Cauchon had done to recommend him to the favour of
Winchester we are not told, but he was so much in favour that the
Cardinal had recommended him to the Pope for the vacant archbishopric
of Rouen a few months before there was any immediate question of
Jeanne. The appointment was opposed by the clergy of Rouen, and the
Pope had not come to any decision as yet on the subject. But no doubt
the ambition of Cauchon made him very eager, with such a tempting
prize before him, to recommend himself to his English patron by every
means in his power. And he it was who undertook the office of
negotiating the ransom of Jeanne from the hands of Jean de Luxembourg.
We doubt whether after all it would be just even to call this a
nefarious bargain. To the careless seigneur it would probably be very
much a matter of course. The ransom offered–six thousand francs–was
as good as if she had been a prince. The ladies at home might be
indignant, but what was their foolish fancy for a high-flown girl in
comparison with these substantial crowns in his pocket; and to be free
from the responsibility of guarding her would be an advantage too. And
if her own party did not stir on her behalf, why should he? A most
pertinent question. Cauchon, on the other hand, could assure all
objectors that no summary vengeance was to be taken on the Maid. She
was to be judged by the Church, and by the best men the University
could provide, and if she were found innocent, no doubt would go free.
They must have been sanguine indeed who hoped for a triumphant
acquittal of Jeanne; but still it may have been hoped that a trial by
her countrymen would in every case be better for her than to languish
in prison or to be seized perhaps by the English on some after
occasion, and to perish by their hands. Let us therefore be fair to
Cauchon, if possible, up to the beginning of the Procès. He was no
Frenchman, but a Burgundian; his allegiance was to his Duke, not to
the King of England; but his natural sovereign did so, and many, very
many men of note and importance were equally base, and did not esteem
it base at all. Had the inhabitants of Rheims, his native town, or of
Rouen, in which his trial and downfall took place as well as
Jeanne’s, pronounced for the King of Prussia in the last war, and
proclaimed themselves his subjects, the traitors would have been hung
with infamy from their own high towers, or driven into their river
headlong. But things were very different in the fifteenth century.
There has never been a moment in our history when either England or
Scotland has pronounced for a foreign sway. Scotland fought with
desperation for centuries against the mere name of suzerainty, though
of a kindred race. There have been terrible moments of forced
subjugation at the point of the sword; but never any such phenomena as
appeared in France, so far on in the world’s history as was that
brilliant and highly cultured age. Such a state of affairs is to our
minds impossible to understand or almost to believe: but in the
interests of justice it must be fully acknowledged and understood.
Cauchon arises accordingly, not at first with any infamy, out of the
obscurity. He had been expelled and dethroned from his See, but this
only for political reasons. He was ecclesiastically Bishop of Beauvais
still; it was within his diocese that the Maid had taken prisoner, and
there also her last acts of magic, if magic there was, had taken
place. He had therefore a legal right to claim the jurisdiction, a
right which no one had any interest in taking from him. If Paris was
disappointed at not having so interesting a trial carried on before
its courts, there was compensation in the fact that many doctors of
the University were called to assist Cauchon in his examination of the
Maid, and to bring her, witch, sorceress, heretic, whatever she might
be, to question. These doctors were not undistinguished or unworthy
men. A number of them held high office in the Church; almost all were
honourably connected with the University, the source of learning in
France. “With what art were they chosen!” exclaims M. Blaze de Bury.
“A number of theologians, the élite of the time, had been named to
represent France at the council of Bâle; of these Cauchon chose the
flower.” This does not seem on the face of it to be a fact against,
but rather in favour of, the tribunal, which the reader naturally
supposes must have been the better, the more just, for being chosen
among the flower of learning in France. They were not men who could be
imagined to be the tools of any Bishop. Quicherat, in his moderate and
able remarks on this subject, selects for special mention three men
who took a very important part in it, Guillame Érard, Nicole Midi, and
Tomas de Courcelles. They were all men who held a high place in the
respect of their generation. Érard was a friend of Machet, the
confessor of Charles VII., who had been a member of the tribunal at
Poitiers which first pronounced upon the pretensions of Jeanne; yet
after the trial of the Maid Machet still describes him as a man of the
highest virtue and heavenly wisdom. Nicole Midi continued to hold an
honourable place in his University for many years, and was the man
chosen to congratulate Charles when Paris finally became again the
residence of the King. Courcelles was considered the first theologian
of the age. “He was an austere and eloquent young man,” says
Quicherat, “of a lucid mind, though nourished on abstractions. He was
the first of theologians long before he had attained the age at which
he could assume the rank of doctor, and even before he had finished
his studies he was considered as the successor of Gerson. He was the
light of the council of Bâle. Eneas Piccolomini (Pope Pius II.) speaks
with admiration of his capacity and his modesty. In him we recognise
the father of the freedom of the Gallican Church. His
disinterestedness is shown by the simple position with which he
contented himself. He died with no higher rank than that of Dean of
the Chapter of Paris.”
Did this in Cæsar seem ambitious? Was this the man to be used for
their vile ends by a savage English party thirsting for the blood of
an innocent victim, and by the vile priest who was its tool? It does
not seem so to our eyes across the long level of the centuries which
clear away so many mists. And no more dreadful accusation can be
brought against France than the suggestion that men like these, her
best and most carefully trained, were willing to act as blood-hounds
for the advantage and the pay of the invader. But there are many
French historians to whom the mere fact of a black gown or at least an
ecclesiastical robe, confounds every testimony, and to whom even the
name of Frenchman does not make it appear possible that a priest
should retain a shred of honour or of honesty. We should have said by
the light of nature and probability that had every guarantee been
required for the impartiality and justice of such a tribunal, they
could not have been better secured than by the selection of such men
to conduct its proceedings. They made a great and terrible mistake, as
the wisest of men have made before now. They did much worse, they
behaved to an unfortunate girl who was in their power with
indescribable ferocity and cruelty; but we must hope that this was
owing to the period at which they lived rather than to themselves.
It is not perhaps indeed from the wise and learned, the Stoics and
Pundits of a University, that we should choose judges for the divine
simplicity of those babes and sucklings out of whose mouth praise is
perfected. At the same time to choose the best men is not generally
the way adopted to procure a base judgement. Cauchon might have been
subject to this blame had he filled the benches of his court with
creatures of his own, nameless priests and dialecticians, knowing
nothing but their own poor science of words. He did not do so. There
were but two Englishmen in the assembly, neither of them men of any
importance or influence although there must have been many English
priests in the country and in the train of Winchester. There were not
even any special partisans of Burgundy, though some of the assessors
were Burgundian by birth. We should have said, had we known no more
than this, that every precaution had been taken to give the Maid the
fairest trial. But at the same time a trial which is conducted under
the name of the Inquisition is always suspect. The mere fact of that
terrible name seems to establish a foregone conclusion; few are the
prisoners at that bar who have ever escaped. This fact is almost all
that can be set against the high character of the individuals who
composed the tribunal. At all events it is no argument against the
English that they permitted the best men in France to be chosen as
Jeanne’s judges. It is the most bewildering and astonishing of
historical facts that they were so, and yet came to the conclusion
they did, by the means they did, and that without falling under the
condemnation, or scorn, or horror of their fellow-men.
This then was the assembly which gathered in Rouen in the beginning of
1431. Quicherat will not venture to affirm even that intimidation was
directly employed to effect their decision. He says that the evidence
“tends to prove” that this was the case, but honestly allows that, “it
is well to remark that the witnesses contradict each other.” “In all
that I have said,” he adds, “my intention has been to prove that the
judges of the Maid had in no way the appearance of partisans hotly
pursuing a political vengeance; but that, on the contrary, their known
weight, the consideration which most of them enjoyed, and the nature
of the tribunal for which they were assembled, were all calculated to
produce generally an expectation full of confidence and respect.”
Meanwhile there is not a word to be said for the treatment to which
Jeanne herself was subjected, she being, so far as is apparent,
entirely in English custody. She had been treated with tolerable
gentleness it would seem in the first part of her captivity while in
the hands of Jean de Luxembourg, the Count de Ligny. The fact that the
ladies of the house were for her friends must have assured this, and
there is no complaint made anywhere of cruelty or even unkindness.
When she arrived in Rouen she was confined in the middle chamber of
the donjon, which was the best we may suppose, neither a dungeon under
the soil, nor a room under the leads, but one to which there was
access by a short flight of steps from the courtyard, and which was
fully lighted and not out of reach or sight of life. But in this
chamber was an iron cage,[1] within which she was bound, feet, and
waist and neck, from the time of her arrival until the beginning of
the trial, a period of about six weeks. Five English soldiers of the
lowest class watched her night and day, three in the room itself, two
at the door. It is enough to think for a moment of the probable
manners and morals of these troopers to imagine what torture must have
been inflicted by their presence upon a young woman who had always
been sensitive above all things to the laws of personal modesty and
reserve. Their course jests would no doubt be unintelligible to her,
which would be an alleviation; but their coarse laughter, their
revolting touch, their impure looks, would be an endless incessant
misery. We are told that she indignantly bestowed a hearty buffet on
the cheek of a tailor who approached her too closely when it was
intended to furnish her with female dress; but she was helpless to
defend herself when in her irons, and had to endure as she best could
–the bars of her cage let us hope, if cage there was, affording her
some little protection from the horror of the continual presence of
these rude attendants, with whom it was a shame to English gentlemen
and knights to surround a helpless woman.
When her trial began Jeanne was released from her cage, but was still
chained by one foot to a wooden beam during the day, and at night to
the posts of her bed. Sometimes her guards would wake her to tell her
that she had been condemned and was immediately to be led forth to
execution; but that was a small matter. Attempts were also made to
inflict the barest insult and outrage upon her, and on one occasion
she is said to have been saved only by the Earl of Warwick, who heard
her cries and went to her rescue. By night as by day she clung to her
male garb, tightly fastened by the innumerable “points” of which
Shakespeare so often speaks. Such were the horrible circumstances in
which she awaited her public appearance before her judges. She was
brought before them every day for months together, to be badgered by
the keenest wits in France, coming back and back with artful questions
upon every detail of every subject, to endeavour to shake her firmness
or force her into self-contradiction. Imagine a cross-examination
going on for months, like those–only more cruel than those–to which
we sometimes see an unfortunate witness exposed in our own courts of
law. There is nothing more usual than to see people break down
entirely after a day or two of such a tremendous ordeal, in which
their hearts and lives are turned inside out, their minds so
bewildered that they know not what they are saying, and everything
they have done in their lives exhibited in the worst, often in an
entirely fictitious, light, to the curiosity and amusement of the
world.
But all our processes are mercy in comparison with those to which
French prisoners at the bar are still exposed. It is unnecessary to
enter into an account of these which are so well known; but they show
that even such a trial as that of Jeanne was by no means so contrary
to common usage, as it would be, and always would have been in
England. In England we warn the accused to utter no rash word which
may be used against him; in France the first principle is to draw from
him every rash word that he can be made to bring forth. This was the
method employed with Jeanne. Her judges were all Churchmen and
dialecticians of the subtlest wit and most dexterous faculties in
France; they had all, or almost all, a strong prepossession against
her. Though we cannot believe that men of such quality were suborned,
there was, no doubt, enough of jealous and indignant feeling among
them to make the desire of convicting Jeanne more powerful with them
than the desire for pure justice. She was a true Christian, but not
perhaps the soundest of Church-women. Her visions had not the sanction
of any priest’s approval, except indeed the official but not warm
affirmation of the Council at Poitiers. She had not hastened to take
the Church into her confidence nor to put herself under its
protection. Though her claims had been guaranteed by the company of
divines at Poitiers, she herself had always appealed to her private
instructions, through her saints, rather than to the guiding of any
priest. The chief ecclesiastical dignitary of her own party had just
held her up to the reprobation of the people for this cause: she was
too independent, so proud that she would take no advice but acted
according to her own will. The more accustomed a Churchman is to
experience the unbounded devotion and obedience of women, the more
enraged he is against those who judge for themselves or have other
guides on whom they rely. Jeanne was, beside all other sins alleged
against her, a presumptuous woman: and very few of these men had any
desire to acquit her. They were little accustomed to researches which
were solely intended to discover the truth: their principle rather
was, as it has been the principle of many, to obtain proofs that their
own particular way of thinking was the right one. It is not perhaps
very good even for a system of doctrine when this is the principle by
which it is tested. It is more fatal still, on this principle, to
judge an individual for death or for life. It will be abundantly
proved, however, by all that is to follow, that in face of this
tribunal, learned, able, powerful, and prejudiced, the peasant girl of
nineteen stood like a rock, unmoved by all their cleverness, undaunted
by their severity, seldom or never losing her head, or her temper, her
modest steadfastness, or her high spirit. If they hoped to have an
easy bargain of her, never were men more mistaken. Not knowing a from
b, as she herself said, untrained, unaided, she was more than a match
for them all.
Round about this centre of eager intelligence, curiosity, and
prejudice, the cathedral and council chamber teeming with Churchmen,
was a dark and silent ring of laymen and soldiers. A number of the
English leaders were in Rouen, but they appear very little.
Winchester, who had very lately come from England with an army, which
according to some of the historians would not budge from Calais, where
it had landed, “for fear of the Maid"–was the chief person in the
place, but did not make any appearance at the trial, curiously enough;
the Duke of Bedford we are informed was visible on one shameful
occasion, but no more. But Warwick, who was the Governor of the town,
appears frequently and various other lords with him. We see them in
the mirror held up to us by the French historians, pressing round in
an ever narrowing circle, closing up upon the tribunal in the midst,
pricking the priests with perpetual sword points if they seem to
loiter. They would have had everything pushed on, no delay, no
possibility of escape. It is very possible that this was the case, for
it is evident that the Witch was deeply obnoxious to the English, and
that they were eager to have her and her endless process out of the
way; but the evidence for their terror and fierce desire to expedite
matters is of the feeblest. A canon of Rouen declared at the trial
that he had heard it said by Maître Pierre Morice, and Nicolas
l’Oyseleur, judges assessors, and by other whose names he does not
recollect, “that the said English were so afraid of her that they did
not dare to begin the siege of Louviers until she was dead; and that
it was necessary if one would please them, to hasten the trial as much
as possible and to find the means of condemning her.” Very likely this
was quite true: but it cannot at all be taken for proved by such
evidence. Another contemporary witness allows that though some of the
English pushed on her trial for hate, some were well disposed to her;
the manner of Jeanne’s imprisonment is the only thing which inclines
the reader to believe every evil thing that is said against them.
Such were the circumstances in which Jeanne was brought to trail. The
population, moved to pity and to tears as any population would have
been, before the end, would seem at the beginning to have been
indifferent and not to have taken much interest one way or another:
the court, a hundred men and more with all their hangers-on, the
cleverest men in France, one more distinguished and impeccable than
the others: the stern ring of the Englishmen outside keeping an eye
upon the tedious suit and all its convolutions: these all appear
before us, surrounding as with bands of iron the young lonely victim
in the donjon, who submitting to every indignity, and deprived of
every aid, feeling that all her friends had abandoned her, yet stood
steadfast and strong in her absolute simplicity and honesty. It was
but two years in that same spring weather since she had left
Vaucouleurs to seek the fortune of France, to offer herself to the
struggle which now was coming to an end. Not a soul had Jeanne to
comfort or stand by her. She had her saints who–one wonders if such a
thought ever entered into her young visionary head–had lured her to
her doom, and who still comforted her with enigmatical words, promises
which came true in so sadly different a sense from that in which they
were understood.

[1] We are glad to add that the learned Quicherat has doubts on the
    subject of the cage.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] We are glad to add that the learned Quicherat has doubts on the
    subject of the cage.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
