
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





Upon all these contentions followed the calm of Palm Sunday, a great
and touching festival, the first break upon the gloom of Lent, and a
forerunner of the blessedness of Easter. We have already told how–a
semblance of charity with which the reader might easily be deceived–
the Bishop and four of his assessors had gone to the prison to offer
to the Maid permission to receive the sacrament if she would do so in
a woman’s dress: and how after pleading that she might be allowed that
privilege as she was, in her male costume, and with a pathetic
statement that she would have yielded if she could, but that it was
impossible–she finally refused; and was so left in her prison to pass
that sacred day unsuccoured and alone. The historian Michelet, in the
wonderful sketch in which he rises superior to himself, and which
amidst all after writings remains the most beautiful and touching
memorial of Jeanne d’Arc, has made this day a central point in his
tale, using with the skill of genius the service of the Church
appropriate to the day, in heart-rending contrast with those doors of
the prison which did not open, and the help of God which did not come
to the young and solitary captive. Le beau jour fleuri passed over
her in darkness and desertion: her agony and passion lay before her
like those of the Divine Sufferer, to whom every day of the succeeding
week is specially consecrated. There is almost indeed a painful
following of the Saviour’s steps in these dark days, the circumstances
lending themselves in a wonderful way to the comparison which French
writers love to make, but which many of us must always feel, however
spotless the sufferer, to have a certain irreverence in them. But if
ever martyr were worthy of being called a partaker of the sufferings
of Christ it was surely this girl, free, if ever human creature was,
from self-seeking, or thought of reward, or ambitious hope, in whose
heart there had never been any motive but the service of God and the
deliverance of her country, who had neither looked before nor after,
nor put her own interests into consideration in any way. Silently the
feast passed with no holy privileges of religion, no blessed token of
the spring, no remembrance of the waving palms and scattered blossoms
over which her Lord rode into Jerusalem to die. She had not that sweet
fallacious triumph; but the darker ordeal remained for her to follow.
On Tuesday the 27th of March, her troubles began again. Before Palm
Sunday, the report of the trial had been read to her. She had now to
hear the formal reading of the articles founded upon it, to give a
final response if she had any to give, or explanation, or addition, if
she thought proper. The sitting was held in the great hall of the
Castle of Rouen before a band of more than forty, all assembled for
this final test. The Bishop made a prefactory speech to the prisoner,
pointing out to her how benign and merciful were the judges now
assembled, that they had no wish to punish, but rather to instruct and
lead her in the right way; and requesting her at this late period in
the proceedings to choose one or more from among them to help her. To
which Jeanne replied; “In the first place concerning my good and our
faith, I thank you and all the company. As for the counsellor you
offer me I thank you also, but I have no need to depart from our Lord
as my counsellor.”
The articles, in which the former questions put to her and answered by
her, were now repeated in the form of accusations, were then read to
her one by one; her sorcery, sacrilege, etc., being taken as facts. To
a few she repeated, with various forcible and fine turns of phrase,
her previous answers, with here and there a new explanation; but to
the great majority she referred simply to her former replies, or
denied the charge, as follows: “The second article concerning
sortilège, superstitious acts and divination, she denied, and in
respect to adoration (i.e. allowing herself to be adored) said: If any
kissed her hands or her garments, it was not by her will, and that she
kept herself from it as much as she could; and the rest of the article
she denies.” This is a specimen of the manner in which she responded,
with a clear-headed and undisturbed intelligence, point after point–
ipsa Johanna negat, is the usual refrain: or else she referred with
dignity to previous replies as her sole answer. But sometimes the girl
was moved to indignation, sometimes added a word in her own defence:
“As for fairies she knew not what they were, and as for her education
she had been well and duly instructed what to believe, as a good child
should.” This was her answer to the article in which all the folk-lore
of Domremy, all the fairy tales, had been collected into a solemn
statement of heresy. The matter of dress was once more treated in
endless detail, with many interjected questions and reports of what
she had already said: and at the end, answering the statement that
woman’s dress was most fit for woman’s work, Jeanne added the quick
mot/: “As for the usual work of women, there are enough of other
women to do it.” On another occasion when the report ran that she
claimed to have done all things by the counsel of God, she interrupted
and said “that it ought to be, all that I have done well.” To her
former answer that she had yielded to the desire of the French knights
in attacking Paris, she added the fine words, “It seemed to me that it
was their duty to attack their adversaries.” In respect to her visions
she added to her former answer, “that she had not asked advice of
bishop, curé, or any other before believing her revelations, but had
many times prayed God to reveal them to others of her party.” About
calling her saints when she required their aid she added, that she
asked God and Our Lady to send her council and comfort, and
immediately her heavenly visitors came; and that this was the prayer
she made:
 “Gentle God, in honour of Your[1] passion, I pray You, if You love
  me, that You would reveal to me how I ought to answer these people
  of the Church. I know well by what command it was that I took this
  dress, but I know not in what manner I ought to give it up. For
  this may it please You to teach me.”
In respect to the reproach that she had been a general in the war
(/chef de guerre), she explained that if she were, it was to drive
out the English, repelling the accusation that she had assumed this
title in pride; and to that which accused her of preferring to live
among men, she explained that when she was in a lodging she generally
had a woman with her; but that when engaged in war she lived in her
clothes whenever there was not a woman present. In respect to her hope
of escaping from prison, she was asked if her council had thrown any
light on that question, and replied, “I have yet to tell you."
Manchon, the clerk, makes a note upon his margin at these words,
“Proudly answered"–/superbe responsum.
This re-examination lasted for two long days, the 27th and 28th of
March. On several points Jeanne requested that she might be allowed to
give an answer on Saturday, and accordingly, on Saturday, the last day
of March, Easter Eve, she was visited in prison by the Bishop and
seven or eight assessors. She was then asked if she would submit to
the judgment of the Church on earth all that she had done and said,
specially in things that concerned her trial. She answered that she
would submit to the judgment of the Church militant, provided that it
did not enforce anything that was impossible. She explained that what
she called impossible was to acknowledge that the visions and
revelations came otherwise than from God, or that what she had done
was not on the part of God: these she would never deny or revoke for
any power on earth: and that which our Lord had commanded or should
command, she would not give up for any living man, and this would be
impossible to her. And in case the Church should command her to do
anything contrary to the command given her by God she would not do it
for any reason whatsoever. Asked whether she would submit to the
Church if the Church militant pronounced that her revelations were
delusions or from the devil, or superstitious, or evil things, she
answered that she would refer everything to our Lord, whose command
she always obeyed; and that she knew well that everything had come to
her by the commandment of God; and that what she had affirmed during
this trial to have been done by the commandment of God it would be
impossible for her to deny. And in case the Church militant commanded
her to go against God, she would submit herself to no man in this
world but to our Lord, whose good commandment she had always obeyed.
She was asked if she did not believe that she was subject to the
Church on earth, that is, to our Holy Father the Pope, the Cardinals,
Bishops, and other prelates of the Church. She answered, “Yes, our
Lord being served first.” Asked if she had directions from her voices
not to submit to the Church militant which is on earth, nor to its
judgment, she replied that she does not answer according to what comes
into her head, but that when she replies it is by commandment; and
that she has never been told not to obey the Church, our Lord being
served first (/noster Sire premier servi).
Other less formal particulars come to us long after, from various
witnesses at the procès de rehabilitation, in which a lively picture
is given of this scene. Frère Isambard had apparently managed, as was
his wont, to get close to the prisoner, and to whisper to her to
appeal to the Council of Bâle. “What is this Council of Bâle?” she
asked in the same tone. Isambard replied that it was the “congregation
of the whole Church, Catholic and Universal, and that there would be
as many there on her side as on that of the English.” “Ah!” she cried,
“since there will be some of our party in that place, I will willingly
yield and submit to the Council of Bâle, to our Holy Father the Pope,
and to the sacred Council."[2] And immediately–continues the
deposition–the Bishop of Beauvais cried out, “Silence, in the devil’s
name!” and told the notary to take no notice of what she said, that
she would submit herself to the Council of Bâle; whereupon a second
cry burst from the bosom of Jeanne, “You write what is against me, but
you will not write what is for me.” “Because of these things, the
English and their officers threatened terribly the said Frère
Isambard, warning him that if he did not hold his peace he would be
thrown in the Seine.” No notice whatever is taken of any such
interruption in the formal record. It must have been before this time
that Jean de la Fontaine disappeared. He left Rouen secretly and never
returned, nor does he ever appear again. Frère Isambard is said to
have taken temporary refuge in his convent; they scattered, de par
l’diable, according to the Christian adjuration of Mgr. De Beauvais;
though l’Advenu would seem to have held his ground, and served as
Confessor to Jeanne in her agony, at which Frère Isambard was also
present. We are told that the Deputy Inquisitor Lemâitre, he who had
been got to lend the aid of his presence with such difficulty,
fiercely warned the authorities that he would have no harm done to
those two friars, from which we may infer that he too had leanings
towards the Maid; and these honest and loyal men, well deserving of
their country and of mankind, should not lose their record when the
tragic story of so much human treachery and baseness has to be told.
After this there came a long pause, full of much business to the
judges, councillors, and clerks who had to reduce the seventy articles
to twelve, in order to forward a summary of the case to the University
of Paris for their judgment. Jeanne in the meantime had been left, but
not neglected, in her prison. The great Feast of Easter had passed
without any sacred consolation of the Church; but Monseigneur de
Beauvais, in his kindness, sent her a carp to keep the feast withal,
if not any spiritual food. It was quite congenial to the spirit of the
time to imagine that the carp had been poisoned, and such a thought
seems to have crossed the mind of Jeanne, who was very ill after
eating of it, and like to die. But it was not thus, poisoned in
prison, that it would have suited any of her persecutors to let her
die. As a matter of fact, as soon as it was known that she was ill,
the best doctors procurable were sent to the prison with peremptory
orders to prolong her life and cure her at any cost. But for a little
time we lose sight of the sick-bed on which the unfortunate Maid lay
fully dressed, never relinquishing the garb which was her protection,
with her feet chained to her uneasy couch. Even at the moment when her
life hung in the balance we read of no indulgence granted in this
respect, no unlocking of the infamous chain, nor substitution of a
gentler nurse for the attendant houspillers, who were her guards
night and day.
When the Bishop and his court had completed their business and sent
off to Paris the important document on which so much depended, they
found themselves at leisure to return to Jeanne, to inquire after her
health and to make her “a charitable admonition.” It was on the 18th
of April, after the silence of more than a fortnight, that their visit
was made with this benevolent purpose. Seven of her judges attended
the Bishop into the sick-chamber. They had come, he assured her,
charitably and familiarly, to visit her in her sickness and to carry
her comfort and consolation. Most of these men were indeed familiar
enough: she had seen their faces already through many a dreadful day,
though there were one or two which were new and strange, come to stare
at her in the depths of her distress. Cauchon reminded her how much
and how carefully she had been questioned by the most wise and learned
men; and that those there present were ready to do anything for the
salvation of her soul and body in every possible way, by instructing
or advising her. He added, however, that if she still refused to
accept advice, and to act according to the counsel of the Church, she
was in the greatest danger–to which she replied:
“It seems to me, being so ill as I am, that I am in great danger of
death. And if it is thus that God pleases to decide for me, I ask of
you to be allowed to confess and receive my Saviour, and to be laid in
holy ground.”
“If you desire to have the rites and sacraments of the Church,” said
Cauchon, “you must do as good Catholics ought to do, submit to Holy
Church.” She answered, “I can say no other thing to you.” She was then
told that if she was in fear of death through sickness she ought all
the more to amend her life; but that she could not have the privileges
of the Church as a Catholic, if she did not submit to the Church. She
answered: “If my body dies in prison, I hope that you will bury me in
consecrated ground: yet if not, I still hope in our Lord.”
She was then reminded that she had said in her trial–if anything had
been said or done by her against our Christian faith ordained by our
Lord, that she would not stand by it. She answered, “I refer to the
answer I made, and to our Lord.”
It was then asked of her, since she believed herself to have had many
revelations from God by St. Michael, St. Catherine, and St. Margaret,
whether if there should appear some good creature (/sic) who
professed to have had a revelation from God in respect to her, she
would believe that? She answered that there was no Christian in the
world who could come to her professing to have had a revelation, of
whom she should not know whether he spoke the truth or not: she would
know it through St. Catherine and St. Margaret.
Asked, if she could not imagine that God might reveal something to a
good creature who might be unknown to her, she answered: “Yes; but I
would not believe either man or woman without a sign.”
Asked, if she believed that the Holy Scripture was revealed by God,
she answered, “You know that I do, and it is good to know.”
The last answer she made in respect to submission to Holy Church was
this, “Whatever may happen to me I will neither do nor say anything
else, for I have answered before, during the trial.”
She was then “exhorted powerfully by the venerable doctors present"
(four are mentioned by name) to submit to our Mother the Church, with
many authorities and examples drawn from the Holy Scriptures; and
finally, Magister Nicolas Midi made her an exhortation from Matthew
xviii.: “If your brother trespass against you,” and what follows, “If
he will not hear the Church, let him be to you as a heathen man and a
publican.” This was expounded to Jeanne in the French tongue and,
finally, she was told that if she would not obey and submit to the
Church she must be given up as if she was a Saracen. To which Jeanne
replied that she was a good Christian and well baptised, and that she
desired to die as a Christian. She was then asked whether, since she
begged leave of the Church to receive her Saviour, she would submit to
the Church if it were promised to her that she should receive. She
answered that she would say no more than she had said; that she loved
God, served Him, and was a good Christian, and would aid and uphold
the Holy Church with all her power. Asked if she wished that a
beautiful procession should be made for her to restore her to health,
she answered that she would be glad if the Church and the Catholics
would pray for her.
For another fortnight Jeanne was sent back into the silence, and to
her own thoughts, which must have grown heavier and heavier as the
weary days went on, and no sound of approaching deliverance came, no
rumour of help at hand. All was quiet and safe at Rouen; amid the
babble of the courtyard which she might hear fitfully when her
guardians were quieter than usual, there was not one word which
brought the hope of a French army at hand, or of any movement to
rescue her. All was silent in the world around, not a breath of hope,
not the whisper of a friend. It was not till the 2d of May that the
dreadful blank was again broken, and she was called to the great hall
of the castle for another interview with her tormentors. When she was
led into the hall it was full, as in the first sitting, sixty-three
judges in all being present. The interest had flagged or the pity had
grown as the trial dragged its slow length along; but now, when every
day the verdict was expected from Paris, the interest had risen again.
On her way from her prison to the hall, it was necessary to pass the
door of the castle chapel: and here once or twice Massieu, the officer
of the court, had permitted her to pause and kneel down as she passed.
This was all the celebration of the Paschal Feast that was permitted
to Jeanne. The compassionate official, however, was discovered in this
small service of charity, and sternly reprimanded and threatened.
Henceforward she had to pass without even a longing look through the
door at the altar on which was the holy sacrament.
She came in on the renewed sitting of the 2d May to find the assembled
priests settling themselves, after the address which had been made to
them, to hear another address which John de Chasteillon, Archdeacon,
had prepared for herself, in which he said much that was good both for
body and soul, to which she consented. He had a list of twelve
articles in his hands, and explained and expounded them to her, as
they were the occasion of the sitting. He then “admonished her in
charity,” explaining that those who were faithful to Christ hold
firmly and closely to the Christian creed, and adjuring her to consent
and to amend her ways. To this Jeanne answered: “Read your book,"
meaning the schedule held by Monseigneur the Archdeacon, “and then I
will answer you. I refer myself to God my master in all things; and I
love Him with all my heart.”
To read this book, however, was precisely what Monseigneur the
Archdeacon had no intention of doing. She was never allowed to hear
the twelve articles upon which the verdict against her was founded;
but the speaker gave her a long discourse by way of explanation,
following more or less the schedule which he held. This “monition
general,” however, elicited no detailed reply from Jeanne, who
answered briefly with some impatience, “I refer myself to my judge,
who is the King of Heaven and earth.” The “Lord Archdeacon” then
proceeded to “monitions particulares.”
It was then once more explained to her that this reference to God
alone was a refusal to submit to the Church militant, and she was
instructed in the authority of the Church, which it was the duty of
every Christian to believe–/unam sanctam Ecclesiam always guided by
the Holy Spirit and which could not err, to the judgment of which
every question should be referred. She answered: “I believe in the
Church here below; but my doings and sayings, as I have already said,
I refer and submit to God. I believe that the Church militant cannot
err or fail; but as for my deeds and words I put them all before God,
who has made me do that which I have done"; she also said that she
submitted herself to God, her Creator, who had made her do everything,
and referred everything to Him, and to Him alone.
She was then asked, if she would have no judge on earth and if our
Holy Father the Pope were not her judge; she answered: “I will tell
you nothing more. I have a good master, that is our Lord, on whom I
depend for everything, and not an any other.”
She was then told that if she would not believe the Church and the
article Ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam, that she might be reckoned as
a heretic and punished by burning: to which she answered: “I can say
nothing else to you; and if I saw the fire before me, I should say
only that which I say, and could do nothing else.” (Once more at this
point the clerk writes on his margin, “Proud reply"–/Superba
responsio–but whether in admiration or in blame it would be hard to
say.)
Asked, if the Council General, or the Holy Father, Cardinals, etc.,
were there–whether she would submit to them. “You shall have no
other answer from me,” she said.
Asked, if she would submit to our Holy Father the Pope: she answered,
“Take me to him and I will answer him,” but would say no more.
Questioned in respect to her dress, she answered, that she would
willingly accept a long dress and a woman’s hood to go to church to
receive her Saviour, provided that, as she had already said, she were
allowed to wear it on that occasion only, and then to take back that
which she at present wore. Further, when it was set before her that
she wore that dress without any need, being in prison, she answered,
“When I have done that for which I was sent by God, I will then take
back a woman’s dress.” Asked, if she thought she did well in being
dressed like a man, she answered, “I refer every thing to our Lord.”
Again, after the exhortation made to her, namely, that in saying that
she did well and did not sin in wearing that dress, and in the
circumstances which concerned her assuming and wearing it, and in
saying that God and the saints made her do so–she blasphemed, and as
is contained in this schedule, erred and did evil: she answered that
she never blasphemed God or the saints.
She was then admonished to give up that dress, and no longer to think
it was right, and to return to the garb of a woman; but answered that
she would make no change in this respect.
Concerning her revelations: she replied in regard to them, that she
referred everything to her judge, that is God, and that her
revelations were from God, without any other medium.
Asked concerning the sign given to the King if she would refer to the
Archbishop of Rheims, the Sire de Boussac, Charles de Bourbon, La
Tremouille, and La Hire, to them or to any one of them, who, according
to what she formerly said, had seen the crown, and were present when
the angel brought it, and gave it to the Archbishop; or if she would
refer to any others of her party who might write under their seals
that it was so; she answered, “Send a messenger, and I will write to
them about the whole trial”: but otherwise she was not disposed to
refer to them.
In respect to her presumption in divining the future, etc., she
answered, “I refer everything to my judge who is God, and to what I
have already answered, which is written in the book.”
Asked, if two or three or four knights of her party were to be brought
here under a safe conduct, whether she would refer to them her
apparitions and other things contained in this trial; answered, “Let
them come and then I will answer:” but otherwise she was not willing
to refer to anyone.
Asked whether, at the Church of Poitiers where she was examined, she
had submitted to the Church, she answered, “Do you hope to catch me in
this way, and by that draw advantage to yourselves?”
In conclusion, “afresh and abundantly,” she was admonished to submit
herself to the Church, on pain of being abandoned by the Church; for
if the Church left her she would be in great danger of body and of
soul; and she might well put herself in peril of eternal fire for the
soul, as well as of temporal fire for the body, by the sentence of
other judges. “You will not do this which you say against me, without
doing injury to your own bodies and souls,” she said.
Asked, whether she could give a reason why she would not submit to the
Church: but to this she would make no additional reply.
Again a week passed in busy talk and consultation without, in silence
and desertion within. On the 9th of May the prisoner was again led,
this time to the great tower, apparently the torture chamber of the
castle, where she found nine of her judges awaiting her, and was once
more adjured to speak the truth, with the threat of torture if she
continued to refuse. Never was her attitude more calm, more dignified
and lofty in its simplicity, than at this grim moment.
“Truly,” she replied, “if you tear the limbs from my body, and my soul
out of it, I can say nothing other than what I have said; or if I said
anything different, I should afterwards say that you had compelled me
to do it by force.” She added that on the day of the Holy Cross, the
3d of May past, she had been comforted by St. Gabriel. She believed
that it was St. Gabriel: and she knew by her voices that it was St.
Gabriel. She had asked counsel of her voices whether she should submit
to the Church, because the priests pressed her so strongly to submit:
but it had been said to her that if she desired our Lord to help her
she must depend upon Him for everything. She added that she knew well
that our Lord had always been the master of all she did, and that the
Enemy had nothing to do with her deeds. Also she had asked her voices
if she should be burned, and the said voices had replied to her that
she was to wait for the Lord and He would help her.
Afterwards in respect to the crown which had been handed by the angel
to the Archbishop of Rheims, she was asked if she would refer to him.
She answered: “Bring him here, that I may hear what he says, and then
I shall answer you; he will not dare to say the contrary of that which
I have said to you.”
The Archbishop of Rheims had been her constant enemy; all the
hindrances that had occurred in her active life, and the constant
attempts made to balk her even in her brief moment of triumph, came
from him and his associate La Trémouille. He was the last person in
the world to whom Jeanne naturally would have appealed. Perhaps that
was the admirable reason why he was suggested in this dreadful crisis
of her fate.
A few days later, it was discussed among those dark inquisitors
whether the torture should be applied or not. Finally, among thirteen
there were but two (let not the voice of sacred vengeance be silent on
their shame though after four centuries and more), Thomas de
Courcelles, first of theologians, cleverest of ecclesiastical lawyers,
mildest of men, and Nicolas L’Oyseleur, the spy and traitor, who voted
for the torture. One man most reasonably asked why she should be put
to torture when they had ample material for judgment without it? One
cannot but feel that the proceedings on this occasion were either
intended to beguile the impatience of the English authorities, eager
to be done with the whole business, or to add a quite gratuitous pang
to the sufferings of the heroic girl. As the men were not devils,
though probably possessed by this time, the more cruel among them, by
the horrible curiosity, innate alas! in human nature, of seeing how
far a suffering soul could go, it is probable that the first motive
was the true one. The English, Warwick especially, whose every
movement was restrained by this long-pending affair, were exceedingly
impatient, and tempted at times to take the matter into their own
hands, and spoil the perfectness of this well constructed work of art,
conducted according to all the rules, the beautiful trial which was
dear to the Bishop’s heart–and destined to be, though perhaps in a
sense somewhat different to that which he hoped, his chief title to
fame.
Ten days after, the decision of the University of Paris arrived, and a
great assembly of counsellors, fifty-one in all, besides the permanent
presidents, collected together in the chapel of the Archbishop’s
house, to hear that document read, along with many other documents,
the individual opinions of a host of doctors and eminent authorities.
After an explanation of the solemn care given by the University to the
consideration of every one of the twelve articles of the indictment,
that learned tribunal pronounced its verdict upon each. The length of
the proceedings makes it impossible to reproduce these. First as to
the early revelations given to Jeanne, described in the first and
second articles, they are denounced as “murderous, seductive, and
pernicious fictions,” the apparitions those of “malignant spirits and
devils, Belial, Satan, and Behemoth.” The third article, which
concerned her recognition of the saints, was described more mildly as
containing errors in faith; the fourth, as to her knowledge of future
events, was characterised as “superstitious and presumptuous
divination.” The fifth, concerning her dress, declared her to be
“blasphemous and contemptuous of God in His Sacraments.” The sixth, by
which she was accused of loving bloodshed, because she made war
against those who did not obey the summons in her letters bearing the
name Jhesus Maria, was declared to prove that she was cruel, “seeking
the shedding of blood, seditious, and a blasphemer of God.” The tenor
is the same to the end: Blasphemy, superstition, pernicious doctrine,
impiety, cruelty, presumption, lying; a schismatic, a heretic, an
apostate, an idolator, an invoker of demons. These are the conclusions
drawn by the most solemn and weighty tribunal on matters of faith in
France. The precautions taken to procure a full and trustworthy
judgment, the appeal to each section in turn, the Faculty of Theology,
the Faculty of Law, the “Nations,” all separately and than all
together passing every item in review–are set forth at full length.
Every formality had been fulfilled, every rule followed, every detail
was in the fullest order, signed and sealed and attested by solemn
notaries, bristling with well-known names. A beautiful judgment, equal
to the trial, which was beautiful too–not a rule omitted except those
of justice, fairness, and truth! The doctors sat and listened with
every fine professional sense satisfied.
 “If the beforesaid woman, charitably exhorted and admonished by
  competent judges, does not return spontaneously to the Catholic
  faith, publicly abjure her errors, and give full satisfaction to
  her judges, she is hereby given up to the secular judge to receive
  the reward of her deeds.”
The attendant judges, each in his place, now added their adhesion.
Most of them simply stated their agreement with the judgment of the
University, or with that of the Bishop of Fecamp, which was a similar
tenor; a few wished that Jeanne should be again “charitably
admonished"; many desired that on this selfsame day the final sentence
should be pronounced. One among them, a certain Raoul Sauvage
(Radulphus Silvestris), suggested that she should be brought before
the people in a public place, a suggestion afterwards carried out.
Frère Isambard desired that she should be charitably admonished again
and have another chance, and that her final fate should still be in
the hands of “us her judges.” The conclusion was that one more
“charitable admonition” should be given to Jeanne, and that the law
should then take its course. The suggestion that she should make a
public appearance had only one supporter.
This dark scene in the chapel is very notable, each man rising to
pronounce what was in reality a sentence of death,–fifty of them
almost unanimous, filled no doubt with a hundred different motives, to
please this man or that, to win favour, to get into the way of
promotion,–but all with a distinct consciousness of the great yet
horrible spectacle, the stake, the burning:–though perhaps here and
there was one with a hope that perpetual imprisonment, bread of sorrow
and water of anguish, might be substituted for that terrible death.
Finally, it was decided that–always on the side of mercy, as every
act proved–the tribunal should once more “charitably admonish” the
prisoner for the salvation of her soul and body, and that after all
this “good deliberation and wholesome counsel” the case should be
concluded.
Again there follows a pause of four days. No doubt the Bishop and his
assessors had other things to do, their ecclesiastical functions,
their private business, which could not always be put aside because
one forsaken soul was held in suspense day after day. Finally on the
24th of May, Jeanne again received in her prison a dignified company,
some quite new and strange to her (indeed the idea may cross the
reader’s mind that it was perhaps to show off the interesting prisoner
to two new and powerful bishops, the first, Louis of Luxembourg, a
relative of her first captor, that this last examination was held),
nine men in all, crowding her chamber–/exponuntur Johannæ defectus
sui, says the record–to expound to Jeanne her faults. It was
Magister Peter Morice to whom this office was confided. Once more the
“schedule” was gone over, and an address delivered laden with all the
bad words of the University. “Jeanne, dearest friend,” said the orator
at last, “it is now time, at the end of the trial, to think well what
words these are.” She would seem to have spoken during this address,
at least once–to say that she held to everything she had said during
the trial. When Morice had finished she was once more questioned
personally.
She was asked if she still thought and believed that it was not her
duty to submit her deeds and words to the Church militant, or to any
other except God, upon which she replied, “What I have always said and
held to during the trial, I maintain to this moment"; and added that
if she were in judgment and saw the fire lighted, the faggots burning,
and the executioner ready to rake the fire, and she herself within the
fire, she could say nothing else, but would sustain what she had said
in her trial, to death.
Once more the scribe has written on his margin the words Responsio
Johannæ superba–the proud answer of Jeanne. Her raised head, her
expanded breast, something of a splendour of indignation about her,
must have moved the man, thus for the third time to send down to us
his distinctly human impression of the worn out prisoner before her
judges. “And immediately the promoter and she refusing to say more,
the cause was concluded,” says the record, so formal, sustained within
such purely abstract limits, yet here and there with a sort of throb
and reverberation of the mortal encounter. From the lips of the
Inquisitor too all words seemed to have been taken. It is as when amid
the excited crowd in the Temple the officers of the Pharisees
approaching to lay hands on a greater than Jeanne, fell back, not
knowing why, and could not do their office. This man was silenced
also. Two bishops were present, and one a great man full of patronage;
but not for the richest living in Normandy could Peter Morice find any
more to say.
These are in one sense the words of Jeanne; the last we have from her
in her prison, the last of her consistent and unbroken life. After,
there was a deeper horror to go through, a moment when all her forces
failed. Here on the verge of eternity she stands heroic and
unyielding, brave, calm, and steadfast as at the outset of her career,
the Maid of France. Were the fires lighted and the faggots burning,
and she herself within the fire, she had no other word to say.

[1] It is correct in French to use the second person plural in
    addressing God, thou being a more intimate and less respectful
    form of speech. Such a difference is difficult to remember, and
    troubles the ear. The French, even those who ought to know better,
    sometimes speak of it as a supreme profanity on the part of the
    profane English, that they address God as thou.
[2] The French report goes on, “et requiert ––,” but no more. It is
    not in the Latin. The scribe was stopped by the Bishop’s profane
    outcry, and forbidden to register the fact she was about to make a
    direct appeal to the Pope.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] It is correct in French to use the second person plural in
    addressing God, thou being a more intimate and less respectful
    form of speech. Such a difference is difficult to remember, and
    troubles the ear. The French, even those who ought to know better,
    sometimes speak of it as a supreme profanity on the part of the
    profane English, that they address God as thou.
[2] The French report goes on, “et requiert ––,” but no more. It is
    not in the Latin. The scribe was stopped by the Bishop’s profane
    outcry, and forbidden to register the fact she was about to make a
    direct appeal to the Pope.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
