
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





We have not, however, sufficiently described the horror of the prison,
and the treatment to which Jeanne was exposed, though the picture is
already dark enough. It throws a horrible yet also a grotesque light
upon the savage manners of the time to find that the chamber in which
she was confined, had secret provision for an espionnage of the most
base kind, openings made in the walls through which everything that
took place in the room, every proceeding of the unfortunate prisoner,
could be spied upon and every word heard. The idea of such a secret
watch has always been attractive to the vulgar mind, and no doubt it
has been believed to exist many times when there was little or no
justification for such an infernal thought. From the “ear” of
Dionysius, down to the Trou Judas, which early tourists on the
Continent were taught to fear in every chamber door, the idea has
descended to our own times. It would seem, however, to be beyond doubt
that this odious means of acquiring information was in full operation
during the trial of Jeanne, and various spies were permitted to peep
at her, and to watch for any unadvised word she might say in her most
private moments. We are told that the Duke of Bedford made use of the
opportunity in a still more revolting way, and was present, a secret
spectator, at the fantastic scene when Jeanne was visited by a
committee of matrons who examined her person to prove or to disprove
one of the hateful insinuations which were made about her. The
imagination, however, refuses to conceive that a man of serious age
and of high functions should have degraded himself to the level of a
Peeping Tom in this way; all the French historians, nevertheless,
repeat the story though on the merest hearsay evidence. And they also
relate, with more apparent truth, how a double treachery was committed
upon the unfortunate prisoner by stationing two secretaries at these
openings, to take down her conversation with a spy who had been sent
to her in the guise of a countryman of her own; and that not only
Cauchon but Warwick also was present on this occasion, listening,
while their plot was carried out by the vile traitor inside. The
clerks, we are glad to say, are credited with a refusal to act: but
Warwick did not shrink from the ignominy. The Englishmen indeed shrank
from no ignominy; nor did the great French savants assembled under the
presidency of the Bishop. It is necessary to grant to begin with that
they were neither ignorant nor base men, yet from the beginning of the
trial almost every step taken by them appears base, as well as marked,
in the midst of all their subtlety and diabolical cunning, by the
profoundest ignorance of human nature. The spy of whom we have spoken,
L’Oyseleur (bird-snarer, a significant name), was sent, and consented
to be sent, to Jeanne in her prison, as a fellow prisoner, a pays,
like herself from Lorraine, to invite her confidence: but his long
conversations with the Maid, which were heard behind their backs by
the secretaries, elicited nothing from her that she did not say in the
public examination. She had no secret devices to betray to a traitor.
She would not seem, indeed, to have suspected the man at all, not even
when she saw him among her judges taking part against her. Jeanne
herself suspected no falsehood, but made her confession to him, when
she found that he was a priest, and trusted him fully. The bewildering
and confusing fact, turning all the contrivances of her judges into
foolishness, was, that she had nothing to confess that she was not
ready to tell in the eye of day.
The adoption of this abominable method of eliciting secrets from the
candid soul which had none, was justified, it appears, by the manner
of her trial, which was after the rules of the Inquisition–by which
even more than by those which regulate an ordinary French trial the
guilt of the accused is a foregone conclusion for which proof is
sought, not a fair investigation of facts for abstract purposes of
justice. The first thing to be determined by the tribunal was the
counts of the indictment against Jeanne; was she to be tried for
magical arts, for sorcery and witchcraft? It is very probable that the
mission of L’Oyseleur was to obtain evidence that would clear up this
question by means of recalling to her the stories of her childhood, of
the enchanted tree, and the Fairies’ Well; from which sources, her
accusers anxiously hoped to prove that she derived her inspiration.
But it is very clear that no such evidence was forthcoming, and that
it seemed to them hopeless to attribute sorcery to her; therefore the
accusation was changed to that of heresy alone. The following mandate
from the University authorising her prosecution will show what the
charge was; and the reader will note that one of its darkest items is
the costume, which for so many good and sufficient reasons she wore.
Here is the official description of the accused:
“A woman, calling herself the Maid, leaving the dress and habit of her
sex against the divine law, a thing abominable to God, clothed and
armed in the habit and condition of a man, has done cruel deeds of
homicide, and as is said has made the simple people believe, in order
to abuse and lead them astray, that she was sent by God, and had
knowledge of His divine secrets; along with several other doctrines
(/dogmatisations), very dangerous, prejudicial, and scandalous to our
holy Catholic faith, in pursuing which abuses, and exercising
hostility against us and our people, she has been taken in arms,
before Compiègne, and brought as a prisoner before us.”
According to French law the indictment ought to have been founded upon
a preliminary examination into the previous life of the accused,
which, as it does not appear in the formal accusations, it was
supposed had never been made. Recent researches, however, have proved
that it was made, but was not of a nature to strengthen or justify any
accusation. All that the examiners could discover was that Jeanne
d’Arc was a good and honest maid who left a spotless reputation behind
her in her native village, and that not a suspicion of
dogmatisations, nor worship of fairies, nor any other unseemly thing
was associated with her name. Other things less favourable, we are
told, were reported of her: the statement, for instance, made in
apparent good faith by Monstrelet the Burgundian chronicler, that she
had been for some time a servant in an auberge, and there had
learned to ride, and to consort with men–a statement totally without
foundation, which was scarcely referred to in the trial.
The skill of M. Quicherat discovered the substance of those inquiries
among the many secondary papers, but they were not made use of in the
formal proceedings. This also we are told, though contrary to the
habit of French law, was justified by the methods of the Inquisition,
which were followed throughout the trial. One breach of law and
justice, however, is permitted by no code. It is expressly forbidden
by French, and even by inquisitorial law, that a prisoner should be
tried by his enemies–that is by judges avowedly hostile to him: an
initial difficulty which it would have been impossible to get over and
which had therefore to be ignored. One brave and honest man, Nicolas
de Houppeville, had the courage to make this observation in one of the
earliest sittings of the assembly:
“Neither the Bishop of Beauvais” (he said) “nor the other members of
the tribunal ought to be judges in the matter; and it did not seem to
him a good mode of procedure that those who were of the opposite party
to the accused should be her judges–considering also that she had
been examined already by the clergy of Poitiers, and by the Archbishop
of Rheims, who was the metropolitan of the said Bishop of Beauvais.”
Nicolas de Houppeville was a lawyer and had a right to be heard on
such a point; but the reply of the judges was to throw him into
prison, not without threats on the part of the civil authorities to
carry the point further by throwing him into the Seine. This was the
method by which every honest objection was silenced. That the
examination at Poitiers, where the judges, as has been seen, were by
no means too favourable to Jeanne, should never have been referred to
by her present examiners, though there was no doubt it ought to have
been one of the most important sources of the preliminary information
–is also very remarkable. It was suggested indeed to Jeanne at a late
period of the trial, that she might appeal to the Archbishop; but he
was, as she well knew, one of her most cruel enemies.
Still more important was the breach of all justice apparent in the
fact that she had no advocate, no counsel on her side, no one to speak
to her and conduct her defence. It was suggested to her near the end
of the proceedings that she might choose one of her judges to fill
this office; but even if the proposal had been a genuine one or at all
likely to be to her advantage, it was then too late to be of any use.
These particulars, we believe, were enough to invalidate any process
in strict law; but the name of law seems ridiculous altogether as
applied to this rambling and cruel cross-examination in which was
neither sense nor decorum. The reader will understand that there were
no witnesses either for or against her, the answers of the accused
herself forming the entire evidence.
One or two particulars may still be added to make the background at
least more clear. The prison of Jeanne, as we have seen, was not left
in the usual silence of such a place; the constant noise with which
the English troopers filled the air, jesting, gossiping, and carrying
on their noisy conversation, if nothing worse and more offensive–
sometimes, as Jeanne complains, preventing her from hearing (her sole
solace) the soft voices of her saintly visitors–was not her only
disturbance. Her solitude was broken by curious and inquisitive
visitors of various kinds. L’Oyseleur, the abominable detective, who
professed to be her countryman and who beguiled her into talk of her
childhood and native place, was the first of these; and it is possible
that at first his presence was a pleasure to her. One other visitor of
whom we hear accidentally, a citizen of Rouen, Pierre Casquel, seems
to have got in private interest and with a more or less good motive
and no evil meaning. He warned her to answer with prudence the
questions put to her, since it was a matter of life and death. She
seemed to him to be “very simple” and still to believe that she might
be ransomed. Earl Warwick, the commander of the town, appears on
various occasions. He probably had his headquarters in the Castle, and
thus heard her cry for help in her danger, executing, let us hope,
summary vengeance on her brutal assailant; but he also evidently took
advantage of his power to show his interesting prisoner to his friends
on occasion. And it was he who took her original captor, Jean de
Luxembourg, now Comte de Ligny, by whom she had been given up, to see
her, along with an English lord, sometimes named as Lord Sheffield.
The Belgian who had put so many good crowns in his pocket for her
ransom, thought it good taste to enter with a jesting suggestion that
he had come to buy her back.
“Jeanne, I will have you ransomed if you will promise never to bear
arms against us again,” he said. The Maid was not deceived by this
mocking suggestion. “It is well for you to jest,” she said, “but I
know you have no such power. I know that the English will kill me,
believing, after I am dead, that they will be able to win all the
kingdom of France: but if there were a hundred thousand more Goddens
than there are, they shall never win the kingdom of France.” The
English lord drew his dagger to strike the helpless girl, all the
stories say, but was prevented by Warwick. Warwick, however, we are
told, though he had thus saved her twice, “recovered his barbarous
instincts” as soon as he got outside, and indignantly lamented the
possibility of Jeanne’s escape from the stake.
Such incidents as these alone lightened or darkened her weary days in
prison. A traitor or spy, a prophet of evil shaking his head over her
danger, a contemptuous party of jeering nobles; afterwards
inquisitors, for ever repeating in private their tedious questions:
these all visited her–but never a friend. Jeanne was not afraid of
the English lord’s dagger, or of the watchful eye of Warwick over her.
Even when spying through a hole, if the English earl and knight,
indeed permitted himself that strange indulgence, his presence and
inspection must have been almost the only defence of the prisoner. Our
historians all quote, with an admiration almost as misplaced as their
horror of Warwick’s “barbarous instincts,” the vrai galant homme of
an Englishman who in the midst of the trial cried out “Brave femme!"
(it is difficult to translate the words, for brave means more than
brave)–"why was she not English?” However we are not concerned to
defend the English share of the crime. The worst feature of all is
that she never seems to have been visited by any one favourable and
friendly to her, except afterwards, the two or three pitying priests
whose hearts were touched by her great sufferings, though they
remained among her judges, and gave sentence against her. No woman
seems ever to have entered that dreadful prison except those “matrons"
who came officially as has been already said. The ladies de Ligny had
cheered her in her first confinement, the kind women of Abbeville had
not been shut out even from the gloomy fortress of Le Crotoy. But here
no woman ever seems to have been permitted to enter, a fact which must
either be taken to prove the hostility of the population, or the very
vigorous regulations of the prison. Perhaps the barbarous watch set
upon her, the soldiers ever present, may have been a reason for the
absence of any female visitor. At all events it is a very distinct
fact that during the whole period of her trial, five months of misery,
except on the one occasion already referred to, no woman came to
console the unfortunate Maid. She had never before during all her
vicissitudes been without their constant ministrations.
One woman, the only one we ever hear of who was not the partisan and
lover of the Maid, does, however, make herself faintly seen amid the
crowd. Catherine of La Rochelle–the woman who had laid claim to
saintly visitors and voices like those of Jeanne, and who had been for
a time received and fêted at the Court of Charles with vile
satisfaction, as making the loss of the Maid no such great thing–had
by this time been dropped as useless, on the appearance of the
shepherd boy quoted by the Archbishop of Rheims, and had fallen into
the hands of the English: was not she too a witch, and admirably
qualified to give evidence as to the other witch, for whose blood all
around her were thirsting? Catherine was ready to say anything that
was evil of her sister sorceress. “Take care of her,” she said; “if
you lose sight of her for one moment, the devil will carry her away."
Perhaps this was the cause of the guard in Jeanne’s room, the
ceaseless scrutiny to which she was exposed. The vulgar slanderer was
allowed to escape after this valuable testimony. She comes into
history like a will-o’-the-wisp, one of the marsh lights that mean
nothing but putrescence and decay, and then flickers out again with
her false witness into the wastes of inanity. That she should have
been treated so leniently and Jeanne so cruelly! say the historians.
Reason good: she was nothing, came of nothing, and meant nothing. It
is profane to associate Jeanne’s pure and beautiful name with that of
a mountebank. This is the only woman in all her generation, so far as
appears to us, who was not the partisan and devoted friend of the
spotless Maid.
The aspect of that old-world city of Rouen, still so old and
picturesque to the visitor of to-day, though all new since that time
except the churches, is curious and interesting to look back upon. It
must have hummed and rustled with life through every street; not only
with the English troops, and many a Burgundian man-at-arms, swaggering
about, swearing big oaths and filling the air with loud voices,–but
with all the polished bands of the doctors, men first in fame and
learning of the famous University, and beneficed priests of all
classes, canons and deans and bishops, with the countless array that
followed them, the cardinal’s tonsured Court in addition, standing by
and taking no share in the business: but all French and English alike,
occupied with one subject, talking of the trial, of the new points
brought out, of the opinions of this doctor and that, of Maître
Nicolas who had presumed on his lawyership to correct the bishop, and
had suffered for it: of the bold canon who ventured to whisper a
suggestion to the prisoner, and who ever since had had the eye of the
governor upon him: of Warwick, keeping a rough shield of protection
around the Maid but himself fiercely impatient of the law’s delay,
anxious to burn the witch and be done with her. And Jeanne herself,
the one strange figure that nobody understood; was she a witch? Was
she an angelic messenger? Her answers so simple, so bold, so full of
the spirit and sentiment of truth, must have been reported from one to
another. This is what she said; does that look like a deceiver? could
the devils inspire that steadfastness, that constancy and quiet? or
was it not rather the angels, the saints as she said? Never, we may be
sure, had there been in Rouen a time of so much interest, such a theme
for conversations, such a subject for all thoughts. The eager court
sat with their tonsured heads together, keen to seize every weak
point. Did you observe how she hesitated on this? Let us push that,
we’ll get an admission on that point to-morrow. It is impossible to
believe that in such an assembly every man was a partisan, much less
that each one of them was thinking of the fee of the English, the
daily allowance which it was the English habit to make. That were to
imagine a France, base indeed beyond the limits of human baseness. All
the Norman dignitaries of the Church, all the most learned doctors of
the University–no! that is too great a stretch of our faith. The
greater part no doubt believed as an indisputable fact, that Jeanne
was either a witch or an impostor, as we should all probably do now.
And the vertigo of Inquisition gained upon them; they became day by
day more exasperated with her seeming innocence, with what must have
seemed to them the cunning and cleverness, impossible to her age and
sex, of her replies. Who could have kept the girl so cool, so
dauntless, so embarrassing in her straight-forwardness and sincerity?
The saints? the saints were not dialecticians; far more likely the
evil one himself, in whom the Church has always such faith. “He hath a
devil and by Beelzebub casteth out devils.” It was all like a play,
only more exciting than any play, and going on endlessly, the
excitement always getting stronger till it became the chief stimulus
and occupation of life.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
