
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





It was on the 7th September that Jeanne and her immediate followers
reached the village of La Chapelle, where they encamped for the night.
The next day was the day of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, a
great festival of the Church. It could scarcely be a matter of choice
on the part of so devout a Catholic as Jeanne to take this day of all
others, when every church bell was tinkling forth a summons to the
faithful, for the day of assault. In all probability she was not now
acting on her own impulse but on that of the other generals and
nobles. Had she refused, might it not have been alleged against her
that after all her impatience it was she who was the cause of delay?
The forces with Jeanne were not very large, a great proportion of the
army remaining with Charles no one seems to know where, either at St.
Denis or at some intermediate spot, possibly to form a reserve force
which could be brought up when wanted. The best informed historian
only knows that Charles was not with the active force. But Alençon was
at the head of the troops, along with many other names well known to
us, La Hire, and young Guy de Laval, and Xantrailles, all mighty men
of valour and the devoted friends of Jeanne. There is a something, a
mist, an incertitude in the beginning of the assault which was unlike
the previous achievements of Jeanne, a certain want of precaution or
knowledge of the difficulties which does not reflect honour upon the
generals with her. Absolutely new to warfare as she was before Orleans
she had ridden out at once on her arrival there to inspect the
fortifications of the besiegers. But probably the continual
skirmishing of which we are told made this impossible here, so that,
though the Maid studied the situation of the town in order to choose
the best point for attack, it was only when already engaged that the
army discovered a double ditch round the walls, the inner one of which
was full of water. By sheer impetuosity the French took the gate of
St. Honoré and its “boulevard” or tower, driving its defenders back
into the city: but their further progress was arrested by that
discovery. It was on this occasion that Jeanne is supposed to have
seized from a Burgundian in the mêlée, a sword, of which she boasted
afterwards that it was a good sword capable of good blows, though we
have no certain record that in all her battles she ever gave one blow,
or shed blood at all.
It would seem to have been only after the taking of this gate that the
discovery was made as to the two deep ditches, one dry, the other
filled with water. Jeanne, whose place had always been with her
standard at the immediate foot of the wall, from whence to direct and
cheer on her soldiers, pressed forward to this point of peril,
descending into the first fosse, and climbing up again on the second,
the dos d’ane, which separated them, where she stood in the midst of
a rain of arrows, fully exposed to all the enraged crowd of archers
and gunners on the ramparts above, testing with her lance the depth of
the water. We seem in the story to see her all alone or with her
standard-bearer only by her side making this investigation; but that
of course is only a pictorial suggestion, though it might for a moment
be the fact. She remained there, however, from two in the afternoon
till night, when she was forced away. The struggle must have raged
around while she stood on the dark edge of the ditch probing the muddy
water to see where it could best be crossed, shouting directions to
her men in that voice assez femme, which penetrated the noise of
battle, and summoning the active and desperate enemy overhead.
“Renty! Renty!” she cried as she had done at Orleans–”surrender to
the King of France!“
We hear nothing now of the white armour; it must have been dimmed and
worn by much fighting, and the banner torn and glorious with the
chances of the war; but it still waved over her head, and she still
stood fast, on the ridge between the two ditches, shouting her
summons, cheering the men, a spot of light still, amid all the steely
glimmering of the mail-coats and the dark downpour of that iron rain.
Half a hundred war cries rending the air, shrieks from the walls of
“Witch, Devil, Ribaude,” and names still more insulting to her purity,
could not silence that treble shout, the most wonderful, surely, that
ever ran through such an infernal clamour, so prodigious, the
chronicler says, that it was a marvel to hear it. De par Dieu, Rendez
vous, rendez vous, au roy de France. If as we believe she never
struck a blow, the aspect of that wonderful figure becomes more
extraordinary still. While the boldest of her companions struggled
across to fling themselves and what beams and ladders they could drag
with them against the wall, she stood without even such shelter as
close proximity to it might have given, cheering them on, exposed to
every shot.
The fight was desperate, and though there was no marked success on the
part of the besiegers, yet there seems to have been nothing to
discourage them, as the fight raged on. Few were wounded,
notwithstanding the noise of the cannons and culverins, “by the grace
of God and the good luck of the Maid.” But towards the evening Jeanne
herself suddenly swayed and fell, an arrow having pierced her thigh;
she seems, however, to have struggled to her feet again, undismayed,
when a still greater misfortune befell: her standard-bearer was hit,
first in the foot, and then, as he raised his visor to pull the arrow
from the wound, between his eyes, falling dead at her feet. What
happened to the banner, we are not told; Jeanne most likely herself
caught it as it fell. But at this stroke, more dreadful than her own
wound, her strength failed her, and she crept behind a bush or heap of
stones, where she lay, refusing to quit the place. Some say she
managed to slide into the dry ditch where there was a little shelter,
but resisted all attempts to carry her away, and some add that while
she lay there she employed herself in a vain attempt to throw faggots
into the ditch to make it passable. It is said that she kept calling
out to them to persevere, to go on and Paris would be won. She had
promised, they say, to sleep that night within the conquered city; but
this promise comes to us with no seal of authority. Jeanne knew that
it had taken her eight days to free Orleans, and she could scarcely
have promised so sudden a success in the more formidable achievement.
But she was at least determined in her conviction that perseverance
only was needed. She must have lain for hours on the slope of the
outer moat, urging on the troops with such force as her dauntless
voice could give, repeating again and again that the place could be
taken if they but held on. But when night came Alençon and some other
of the captains overcame her resistance, and there being clearly no
further possibility for the moment, succeeded in setting her upon her
horse, and conveyed her back to the camp. While they rode with her,
supporting her on her charger, she did nothing but repeat “Quel
dommage!” Oh, what a misfortune, that the siege of Paris should fail,
all for want of constancy and courage. “If they had but gone on till
morning,” she cried, “the inhabitants would have known.” It is evident
from this that she must have expected a rising within, and could not
yet believe that no such thing was to be looked for. “Par mon
martin, the place would have been taken,” she said in the hearing one
cannot but feel of the chronicler, who reports so often those homely
words.
Thus Jeanne was led back after the first day’s attack. Her wound was
not serious, and she had been repulsed during one of the day’s
fighting at Orleans without losing courage. But something had changed
her spirit as well as the spirit of the army she led. There is a
curious glimpse given us into her camp at this point, which indeed
comes to us through the observation of an enemy, yet seems to have in
it an unmistakable gleam of truth. It comes from one of the parties
which had been granted a safe-conduct to carry away the dead of the
English and Burgundian side. They tell us, among other circumstances,
–such as that the French burnt their dead, a manifest falsehood, but
admirably calculated to make them a horror to their neighbours,–that
many in the ranks cursed the Maid who had promised that they should
without any doubt sleep that night in Paris and plunder the wealthy
city. The men with their safe-conduct creeping among the dead, to
recover those bodies which had fallen on their own side, and furtively
to count the fallen on the other–who were delighted to bring a report
that the Maid was no longer the fountain of strength and blessing, but
secretly cursed by her own forces–are sinister figures groping their
way through the darkness of the September night.
Next morning, however, her wound being slight, Jeanne was up early and
in conference with Alençon, begging him to sound his trumpets and set
forth once more. “I shall not budge from here, till Paris is taken,"
she said. No doubt her spirit was up, and a determination to recover
lost ground strong in her mind. While the commanders consulted
together, there came a band of joyful augury into the camp, the
Seigneur of Montmorency with sixty gentlemen, who had left the party
of Burgundy in order to take service under the banner of the Maid. No
doubt this important and welcome addition to their number exhilarated
the entire camp, in the commotion of the reveillé, while each man
looked to his weapons, wiping off from breastplate and helmet the
heavy dew of the September morning, greeting the new friends and
brothers-in-arms who had come in, and arranging, with a better
knowledge of the ground than that of yesterday, the mode of attack.
Jeanne would not confess that she felt her wound, in her eagerness to
begin the assault a second time. And all were in good spirits, the
disappointment of the night having blown away, and the determination
to do or die being stronger than ever. Were the men-at-arms perhaps
less amenable? Were they whispering to each other that Jeanne had
promised them Paris yesterday, and for the first time had not kept her
word? It would almost require such a fact as this to explain what
follows. For as they began to set out, the whole field in movement,
there was suddenly seen approaching another party of cavaliers–
perhaps another reinforcement like that of Montmorency? This new band,
however, consisted but of two gentlemen and their immediate
attendants, the Duc de Bar and the Comte de Clermont,[1] always a bird
of evil omen, riding hot from St. Denis with orders from the King.
These orders were abrupt and peremptory–to turn back. Jeanne and her
companions were struck dumb for the moment. To turn back, and Paris at
their feet! There must have burst forth a storm of remonstrance and
appeal. We cannot tell how long the indignant parley lasted; the
historians do not enlarge upon the disastrous incident. But at last
the generals yielded to the orders of the King–Jeanne humiliated,
miserable, and almost in despair. We cannot but feel that on no former
occasion would she have given way so completely; she would have rushed
to the King’s presence, overwhelmed him with impetuous prayers,
extorted somehow the permission to go on. But Charles was safe at
seven miles’ distance, and his envoys were imperious and peremptory,
like men able to enforce obedience if it were not given. She obeyed at
last, recovering courage a little in the hope of being able to
persuade Charles to change his mind, and sanction another assault on
Paris from the other side, by means of a bridge over the Seine towards
St. Denis, which Alençon had constructed. Next morning it appears that
without even asking that permission a portion of the army set out very
early for this bridge: but the King had divined their project, and
when they reached the river side the first thing they saw was their
bridge in ruins. It had been treacherously destroyed in the night, not
by their enemies, but by their King.
It is natural that the French historians should exhaust themselves in
explanation of this fatal change of policy. Quicherat, who was the
first to bring to light all the most important records of this period
of history, lays the entire blame upon La Tremoïlle, the chief adviser
of Charles. But that Charles himself was at heart equally guilty no
one can doubt. He was a man who proved himself in the end of his
career to possess both sense and energy, though tardily developed. It
was to him that Jeanne had given that private sign of the truth of her
mission, by which he was overawed and convinced in the first moment of
their intercourse. Within the few months which had elapsed since she
appeared at Chinon every thing that was wonderful had been done for
him by her means. He was then a fugitive pretender, not even very
certain of his own claim, driven into a corner of his lawful
dominions, and fully prepared to abandon even that small standing
ground, to fly into Spain or Scotland, and give up the attempt to hold
his place as King of France. Now he was the consecrated King, with the
holy oil upon his brows, and the crown of his ancestors on his head,
accepted and proclaimed, all France stirring to her old allegiance,
new conquests falling into his hands every day, and the richest
portion of his kingdom secure under his sway. To check thus
peremptorily the career of the deliverer who had done so much for him,
degrading her from her place, throwing more than doubt upon her
inspiration, falsifying by force the promises which she had made–
promises which had never failed before,–was a worse and deeper sin on
the part of a young man, by right of his kingly office the very head
of knighthood and every chivalrous undertaking, than it could be on
the part of an old and subtle diplomatist who had never believed in
such wild measures, and all through had clogged the steps and
endeavoured to neutralise the mission of the warrior Maid. It is very
clear, however, that between them it was the King and his chamberlain
who made this assault upon Paris so evident and complete a failure.
One day’s repulse was nothing in a siege. There had been one great
repulse and several lesser ones at Orleans. Jeanne, even though
weakened by her wound, had sprung up that morning full of confidence
and courage. In no way was the failure to be laid to her charge.
But this could never, perhaps, have been explained to the whole body
of the army, who had believed her word without a doubt and taken her
success for granted. If they had been wavering before, which seems
possible–for they must have been, to a considerable extent, new
levies, the campaigners of the Loire having accomplished their period
of feudal service,–this sudden downfall must have strengthened every
doubt and damped every enthusiasm. The Maid of whom such wonderful
tales had been told, she who had been the angel of triumph, the
irresistible, before whom the English fled, and the very walls fell
down–was she after all only a sorceress, as the others called her, a
creature whose incantations had failed after the flash of momentary
success? Such impressions are too apt to come like clouds over every
popular enthusiasm, quenching the light and chilling the heart.
Jeanne was thus dragged back to St. Denis against her will and every
instinct of her being, and there ensued three days of passionate
debate and discussion. For a moment it appeared as if she would have
thrown off the bonds of loyal obedience and pursued her mission at all
hazards. Her “voices,” if they had previously given her uncertain
sound, promising only the support and succour of God, but no success,
now spoke more plainly and urged the continuance of the siege; and the
Maid was torn in pieces between the requirements of her celestial
guardians and the force of authority around her. If she had broken out
into open rebellion who would have followed her? She had never yet
done so; when the King was against her she had pleaded or forced an
agreement, and received or snatched a consent from the malevolent
chamberlain, as at Jargeau and Troyes. Never yet had she set herself
in public opposition to the will of her sovereign. She had submitted
to all kinds of tests and trials rather than this. And to have lain
half a day wounded outside Paris and to stand there pleading her cause
with her wound still unhealed were not likely things to strengthen her
powers of resistance. “The Voices bade me remain at St. Denis,” she
said afterwards at her trial, “and I desired to remain; but the
seigneurs took me away in spite of myself. If I had not been wounded I
should never have left.” Added to the force of these circumstances, it
was no doubt apparent to all that to resume operations after that
forced retreat, and the betrayal it gave of divided counsels, would be
less hopeful than ever. These arguments even convinced the bold La
Hire, who for his part, being no better than a Free Lance, could move
hither and thither as he would; and thus the first defeat of the Maid,
a disaster involving all the misfortunes that followed in its train,
was accomplished.
Jeanne’s last act in St. Denis was one to which perhaps the modern
reader gives undue significance, but which certainly must have had a
certain melancholy meaning. Before she left, dragged almost a captive
in the train of the King, we are told that she laid on the altar of
the cathedral the armour she had worn on that evil day before Paris.
It was not an unusual act for a warrior to do this on his return from
the wars. And if she had been about to renounce her mission it would
have been easily comprehensible. But no such thought was in her mind.
Was it a movement of despair, was it with some womanish fancy that the
arms in which she had suffered defeat should not be borne again?–or
was it done in some gleam of higher revelation made to her that
defeat, too, was a part of victory, and that not without that
bitterness of failure could the fame of the soldier of Christ be
perfected? I have remarked already that we hear no more of the white
armour, inlaid with silver and dazzling like a mirror, in which she
had begun her career; perhaps it was the remains of that panoply of
triumph which she laid out before the altar of the patron saint of
France, all dim now with hard work and the shadow of defeat. It must
have marked a renunciation of one kind or another, the sacrifice of
some hope. She was no longer Jeanne the invincible, the triumphant,
whose very look made the enemy tremble and flee, and gave double force
to every Frenchman’s arm. Was she then and there abdicating, becoming
to her own consciousness Jeanne the champion only, honest and true,
but no longer the inspired Maid, the Envoy of God? To these questions
we can give no answer; but the act is pathetic, and fills the mind
with suggestions. She who had carried every force triumphantly with
her, and quenched every opposition, bitter and determined though that
had been, was now a thrall to be dragged almost by force in an
unworthy train. It is evident that she felt the humiliation to the
bottom of her heart. It is not for human nature to have the triumph
alone: the humiliation, the overthrow, the chill and tragic shadow
must follow. Jeanne had entered into that cloud when she offered the
armour, that had been like a star in front of the battle, at the
shrine of St. Denis.[2] Hers was now to be a sadder, a humbler,
perhaps a still nobler part.
It is enough to trace the further movements of the King to perceive
how at every step the iron must have entered deeper and deeper into
the heart of the Maid. He made his arrangements for the government of
each of the towns which had acknowledged him: Beauvais, Compiègne,
Senlis, and the rest. He appointed commissioners for the due
regulation of the truce with Philip of Burgundy. And then the
retreating army took its march southward towards the mild and wealthy
country, all fertility and quiet, where a recreant prince might feel
himself safe and amuse himself at his leisure–by Lagny, by Provins,
by Bercy-sur Seine, where he had been checked before in his retreat
and almost forced to the march on Paris–by Sens, and Montargis: until
at last on the 29th of September, no doubt diminished by the
withdrawal of many a local troop and knight whose service was over,
the forces arrived at Gien, whence they had set forth at the end of
June for a series of victories. It is to be supposed that the King was
well enough satisfied with the conquests accomplished in three months.
And, indeed, in ordinary circumstances they would have formed a
triumphant list. Charles must have felt himself free to play after the
work which he had not done; and to leave his good fortune and the able
negotiators, who hoped to get Paris and other good things from Philip
of Burgundy without paying anything for them, to do the rest.
We can imagine nothing more dreadful for the Maid than the months that
followed. The Court was not ungrateful to her; she received the
warmest welcome from the Queen; she had a maison arranged for her
like the household of a noble chief, with the addition of women and
maidens of rank to her existing staff, and everything which could
serve to show that she was one whom the King delighted to honour. And
Charles would have her apparelled gloriously like the king’s daughter
in the psalm. “He gave her a mantle of cloth of gold, open at both
sides, to wear over her armour,” and apparently did his best to make
her, if not a noble lady, yet into the semblance of a noble young
chevalière, one the glories of his Court, with all the distinction of
her achievements and all the complacences of a carpet knight. It was
said afterwards, in the absence of any graver possibility of
accusation, that she liked her fine clothes. The tears rise to the
eyes at such a suggestion. She was so natural that let us hope she
did, the martyr Maid whose torture had already begun. If that mantle
of gold gave her a moment of pleasure, it is something to be thankful
for in the midst of the dismal shadows that were already closing round
her. They were ready to give her any shining mantle, any beautiful
dress, even a title and a noble name if she would; but what the King
and his counsellors were determined on, was, that she should no more
have the fame of individual triumph, or do anything save under their
orders.
Alençon, the gentle duke, with whom she had taken so much trouble, and
who had grown into a true and noble comrade, made one effort to free
his friend and leader. He planned an expedition into Normandy, where,
with the help of Jeanne, he hoped to inflict upon the English a loss
so tremendous, the destruction of their base of operations, that they
would be compelled to abandon the centre of France altogether, and
leave the way open to Paris and to the recovery of the entire kingdom;
but the King, or La Tremoïlle, as the historians prefer to say, would
not permit Jeanne to accompany him, and this hope came to nothing.
Alençon disbanded his troops, everything in the form of an army was
broken up–the short period of feudal service making this inevitable,
unless new levies were made–and no forces were left under arms except
those bands which formed the body-guard of the King. Nevertheless,
there was plenty of work to be done still, and the breaking up of the
French forces encouraged many a little garrison of English partisans,
which would have yielded naturally and easily to a strong national
party.
In the midst of the winter, however, it seemed appropriate to the
Court to launch forth an expedition against some of the unsubdued
towns, perhaps on account of the mortal languishment of Jeanne
herself, perhaps for some other reason of its own. The first necessity
was to collect the necessary forces, and for this reason Jeanne came
to Bourges, where she was lodged in one of the great houses of the
city, that of Raynard de Bouligny, conseiller de roi, and his wife,
Marguerite, one of the Queen’s ladies. She was there for three weeks
collecting her men, and the noble gentlewoman, who was her hostess,
was afterwards in the Rehabilitation trial, one of the witnesses to
the purity of her life.
From this lady and others we have a clear enough view of what the Maid
was in this second chapter of her history. She spent her time in the
most intimate intercourse with Madam Marguerite, sharing even her
room, so that nothing could be more complete than the knowledge of her
hostess of every detail of her young guest’s life. And wonderful as
was the difference between the peasant maiden of Domremy and the most
famous woman in France, the life of Jeanne, the Deliverer of her
country, is as the life of Jeanne, the cottage sempstress,–as simple,
as devout, and as pure. She loved to go to church for the early
matins, but as it was not fit that she should go out alone at that
hour, she besought Madame Marguerite to go with her. In the evening
she went to the nearest church, and there with all her old childish
love for the church bells, she had them rung for half an hour, calling
together the poor, the beggars who haunt every Catholic church, the
poor friars and bedesmen, the penniless and forlorn from all the
neighbourhood. This custom would, no doubt, soon become known, and not
only her poor pensioners, but the general crowd would gather to gaze
at the Maid as well as to join in her prayers. It was her great
pleasure to sing a hymn to the Virgin, probably one of the litanies
which the unlearned worshipper loves, with its choruses and constant
repetitions, in company with all those untutored voices, in the
dimness of the church, while the twilight sank into night, and the
twinkling stars of candles on the altar made a radiance in the middle
of the gloom. When she had money to give she divided it, according to
the liberal custom of her time, among her poor fellow-worshippers.
These evening services were her recreation. The days were full of
business, of enrolling soldiers, and regulating the “lances,” groups
of retainers, headed by their lord, who came to perform their feudal
service.
The ladies of the town who had the advantage of knowing Madame
Marguerite did not fail to avail themselves of this privilege, and
thronged to visit her wonderful guest. They brought her their sacred
medals and rosaries to bless, and asked her a hundred questions. Was
she afraid of being wounded; or was she assured that she would not be
wounded? “No more than others,” she said; and she put away their
religious ornaments with a smile, bidding Madame Marguerite touch
them, or the visitors themselves, which would be just as good as if
she did it. She would seem to have been always smiling, friendly,
checking with a laugh the adulation of her visitors, many of whom wore
medals with her own effigy (if only one had been saved for us!) as
there were many banners made after the pattern of hers. But cheerful
as she was, a prevailing tone of sadness now appears to run through
her life. On several occasions she spoke to her confessor and
chaplain, who attended her everywhere, of her death. “If it should be
my fate to die soon, tell the King our master on my part to build
chapels where prayer may be made to the Most High for the salvation of
the souls of those who shall die in the wars for the defence of the
kingdom.” This was the one thing she seemed anxious for, and it
returned again and again to her mind. Her thoughts indeed were heavy
enough. Her larger enterprises had been cruelly put a stop to: her
companions-in-arms had been dispersed: she had been separated from
her lieutenant Alençon, and from all the friends between whom and
herself great mutual confidence had sprung up. Even the commission
which had at last been put in her hands was a trifling one and led to
nothing, bringing the King no nearer to any satisfactory end: and the
troops were under command of a new captain whom she scarcely knew,
d’Albert, who was the son-in-law of La Tremoïlle, and probably little
inclined to be a friend to Jeanne. In these circumstances there was
little of an exhilarating or promising kind.
Nevertheless as an episode, few things had happened to Jeanne more
memorable than the siege of St. Pierre-le-Moutier. The first assault
upon the town was unsuccessful; the retreat had sounded and the troops
were streaming back from the point of attack, when Jean d’Aulon, the
faithful friend and brave gentleman who was at the head of the Maid’s
military household, being himself wounded in the heel and unable to
stand or walk, saw the Maid almost alone before the stronghold, four
or five men only with her. He dragged himself up as well as he could
upon his horse, and hastened towards her, calling out to her to ask
what she did there, and why she did not retire with the rest. She
answered him, taking off her helmet to speak, that she would leave
only when the place was taken–and went on shouting for faggots and
beams to make a bridge across the ditch. It is to be supposed that
seeing she paid no attention, nor budged a step from that dangerous
point, this brave man, wounded though he was, must have made an effort
to rally the retiring besiegers: but Jeanne seems to have taken no
notice of her desertion nor ever to have paused in her shout for
planks and gabions. “All to the bridge,” she shouted, “aux fagots et
aux claies tout le monde! every one to the bridge.” “Jeanne,
withdraw, withdraw! You are alone,” some one said to her. Bareheaded,
her countenance all aglow, the Maid replied: “I have still with me
fifty thousand of my men.” Were those the men whom the prophet’s
servant saw when his eyes were opened and he beheld the innumerable
company of angels that surrounded his master? But Jeanne, rapt in the
trance and ecstasy of battle, gave no explanation. “To work, to work!"
her clear voice went on, ringing over the startled head of the good
knight who knew war, but not any rapture like this. History itself,
awe-stricken, would almost have us believe that alone with her own
hand the Maid took the city, so entirely does every figure disappear
but that one, and the perplexed and terrified spectator vainly urging
her to give up so desperate an attempt. But no doubt the shouts of a
voice so strange to every such scene, the vox infantile, the amazing
and clear voice, silvery and womanly, assez femme, and the efforts
of d’Aulon to bring back the retreating troops were successful, and
Jeanne once more, triumphantly kept her word. The place was strongly
fortified, well provisioned, and full of people. Therefore the whole
narrative is little less than miraculous, though very little is said
of it. Had they but persevered, as she had said, a few hours longer
before Paris, who could tell that the same result might not have been
obtained?
She was not successful, however, with La Charité, which after a siege
of a month’s duration still held out, and had to be abandoned. These
long operations of regular warfare were not in Jeanne’s way; and her
coadjutor in command, it must be remembered, was in this case
commissioned by her chief enemy. We are told that she was left without
supplies, and in the depths of winter, in cold and rain and snow, with
every movement hampered, and the ineffective government ever ready to
send orders of retreat, or to cause bewildering and confusing delays
by the want of every munition of war. Finally, at all events, the
French forces withdrew, and again an unsuccessful enterprise was added
to the record of the once victorious Maid. That she went on
continually promising victory as in her early times, is probably the
mere rumour spread by her detractors who were now so many, for there
is no real evidence that she did so. Everything rather points to
discouragement, uncertainty, and to a silent rage against the coercion
which she could not overcome.

[1] Clermont it was who deserted the Scots at the Battle of the
    Herrings.
[2] Jeanne’s arms, offered at St. Denis, were afterwards taken by the
    English and sent to the King of England (all except the sword with
    its ornaments of gold) without giving anything to the church in
    return: “qui est pur sacrilege et manifeste,” says Jean Chartier.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] Clermont it was who deserted the Scots at the Battle of the
    Herrings.
[2] Jeanne’s arms, offered at St. Denis, were afterwards taken by the
    English and sent to the King of England (all except the sword with
    its ornaments of gold) without giving anything to the church in
    return: “qui est pur sacrilege et manifeste,” says Jean Chartier.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
