
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





The epic so brief, so exciting, so full of wonder had now reached its
climax. Whatever we may think on the question as to whether Jeanne had
now reached the limit of her commission, it is at least evident that
she had reached the highest point of her triumph, and that her short
day of glory and success came to an end in the great act which she had
always spoken of as her chief object. She had crowned her King; she
had recovered for him one of the richest of his provinces, and
established a strong base for further action on his part. She had
taught Frenchmen how not to fly before the English, and she had filled
those stout-hearted English, who for a time had the Frenchmen in their
powerful steel-clad grip, with terror and panic, and taught them how
to fly in their turn. This was, from the first, what she had said she
was appointed to do, and not one of her promises had been broken. Her
career had been a short one, begun in April, ending in July, one brief
continuous course of glory. But this triumphant career had come to its
conclusion. The messenger of God had done her work; the servant must
not desire to be greater than his Lord. There have been heroes in this
world whose career has continued a glorious and a happy one to the
end. Our hearts follow them in their noble career, but when the strain
and pain are over they come into their kingdom and reap their reward
the interest fails. We are glad, very glad, that they should live
happy ever after, but their happiness does not attract us like their
struggle.
It is different with those whose work and whose motives are not those
of this world. When they step out of the brilliant lights of triumph
into sorrow and suffering, all that is most human in us rises to
follow the bleeding feet, our hearts swell with indignation, with
sorrow and love, and that instinctive admiration for the noble and
pure, which proves that our birthright too is of Heaven, however we
may tarnish or even deny that highest pedigree. The chivalrous romance
of that age would have made of Jeanne d’Arc the heroine of human
story. She would have had a noble lover, say our young Guy de Laval,
or some other generous and brilliant Seigneur of France, and after her
achievements she would have laid by her sword, and clothed herself
with the beautiful garments of the age, and would have grown to be a
noble lady in some half regal chateau, to which her name would have
given new lustre. The young reader will probably long that it should
be so; he will feel it an injustice, a wrong to humanity that so
generous a soul should have no reward; it will seem to him almost a
personal injury that there should not be a noble chevalier at hand to
snatch that devoted Maid out of the danger that threatened her, out of
the horrible fate that befell her; and we can imagine a generous boy,
and enthusiastic girl, ready to gnash their teeth at the terrible and
dishonouring thought that it was by English hands that this noble
creature was tied to the stake and perished in the flames. For the
last it becomes us[1] to repent, for it was to our everlasting shame;
but not more to us than to France who condemned her, who lifted no
finger to help her, who raised not even a cry, a protest, against the
cruelty and wrong. But for her fate in itself let us not mourn over-
much. Had the Maid become a great and honoured lady should not we all
have said as Satan says in the Book of Job: Did Jeanne serve God for
nought? We should say: See what she made by it. Honour and fame and
love and happiness. She did nobly, but nobly has she been rewarded.
But that is not God’s way. The highest saint is born to martyrdom. To
serve God for nought is the greatest distinction which He reserves for
His chosen. And this was the fate to which the Maid of France was
consecrated from the moment she set out upon her mission. She had the
supreme glory of accomplishing that which she believed herself to be
sent to do, and which I also believe she was sent to do, miraculously,
by means undreamed of, and in which no one beforehand could have
believed. But when that was done a higher consecration awaited her.
She had to drink of the cup of which our Lord drank, and to be
baptised with the baptism with which He was baptised. It was involved
in every step of the progress that it should be so. And she was
herself aware of it, vaguely, at heart, as soon as the object of her
mission was attained. What else could have put the thought of dying
into the mind of a girl of eighteen in the midst of the adoring crowd,
to whom to see her, to touch her, was a benediction? When she went
forth from those gates she was going to her execution, though the end
was not to be yet. There was still a long struggle before her,
lingering and slow, more bitter than death, the preface of
discouragement, of disappointment, of failure when she had most hoped
to succeed.
She was on the threshold of this second period when she rode out of
Rheims all brilliant in the summer weather, her banner faded now, but
glorious, her shining armour bearing signs of warfare, her end
achieved–yet all the while her heart troubled, uncertain, and full of
unrest. And it is impossible not to note that from this time her plans
were less defined than before. Up to the coronation she had known
exactly what she meant to do, and in spite of all obstructions had
done it, keeping her genial humour and her patience, steering her
simple way through all the intrigues of the Court, without bitterness
and without fear. But now a vague mist seems to fall about the path
which was so open and so clear. Paris! Yes, the best policy, the true
generalship would have been to march straight upon Paris, to lose no
time, to leave as little leisure as possible to the intriguers to
resume their old plots. So the generals thought as well as Jeanne: but
the courtiers were not of that mind. The weak and foolish notion of
falling back upon what they had gained, and of contenting themselves
with that, was all they thought of; and the un-French, unpatriotic
temper of Paris which wanted no native king, but was content with the
foreigner, gave them a certain excuse. We could not even imagine
London as being ever, at any time, contented with an alien rule. But
Paris evidently was so, and was ready to defend itself to the death
against its lawful sovereign. Jeanne had never before been brought
face to face with such a complication. It had been a straightforward
struggle, each man for his own side, up to this time. But now other
things had to be taken into consideration. Here was no faithful
Orleans holding out eager arms to its deliverer, but a crafty, self-
seeking city, deaf to patriotism, indifferent to freedom, calculating
which was most to its profit–and deciding that the stranger, with
Philip of Burgundy at his back, was the safer guide. This was enough
of itself to make a simple mind pause in astonishment and dismay.
There is no evidence that the supernatural leaders who had shaped the
course of the Maid failed her now. She still heard her “voices.” She
still held communion with the three saints who, she believed devoutly,
came out of Heaven to aid her. The whole question of this supernatural
guidance is one which is of course open to discussion. There are many
in these days who do not believe in it at all, who believe in the
exaltation of Jeanne’s brain, in the excitement of her nerves, in some
strange complication of bodily conditions, which made her believe she
saw and heard what she did not really see or hear. For our part, we
confess frankly that these explanations are no explanation at all so
far as we are concerned; we are far more inclined to believe that the
Maid spoke truth, she who never told a lie, she who fulfilled all the
promises she made in the name of her guides, than that those people
are right who tell us on their own authority that such interpositions
of Heaven are impossible. Nobody in Jeanne’s day doubted that Heaven
did interpose directly in human affairs. The only question was, Was it
Heaven in this instance? Was it not rather the evil one? Was it
sorcery and witchcraft, or was it the agency of God? The English
believed firmly that it was witchcraft; they could not imagine that it
was God, the God of battles, who had always been on their side, who
now took the courage out of their hearts and taught their feet to fly
for the first time. It was the devil, and the Maid herself was a
wicked witch. Neither one side nor the other believed that it was from
Jeanne’s excited nerves that these great things came. There were
plenty of women with excited nerves in France, nerves much more
excited than those of Jeanne, who was always reasonable at the height
of her inspiration; but to none of them did it happen to mount the
breach, to take the city, to drive the enemy–up to that moment
invincible,–flying from the field.
But it would seem as if these celestial visitants had no longer a
clear and definite message for the Maid. Their words, which she
quotes, were now promises of support, vague warnings of trouble to
come. “Fear not, for God will stand by you.” She thought they meant
that she would be delivered in safety as she had been hitherto, her
wounds healing, her sacred person preserved from any profane touch.
But yet such promises have always something enigmatical in them, and
it might be, as proved to be the case, that they meant rather
consolation and strength to endure than deliverance. For the first
time the Maid was often sad; she feared nothing, but the shadow was
heavy on her heart. Orleans and Rheims had been clear as daylight, her
“voices” had said to her “Do this” and she had done it. Now there was
no definite direction. She had to judge for herself what was best, and
to walk in darkness, hoping that what she did was what she was meant
to do, but with no longer any certainty. This of itself was a great
change, and one which no doubt she felt to her heart. M. Fabre tells
(alone among the biographers of Jeanne) that there were symptoms of
danger to her sound and steady mind, in her words and ways during the
moment of triumph. Her chaplain Pasquerel wrote a letter in her name
to the Hussites, against whom the Pope was then sending crusades, in
which “I, the Maid,” threatened, if they were not converted, to come
against them and give them the alternative of death or amendment.
Quicherat says that to the Count d’Armagnac who had written to her,
whether in good faith or bad, to ask which of the three then existent
Popes was the real one, she is reported to have answered that she
would tell him as soon as the English left her free to do so. But this
is a perverted account of what she really did say, and M. Fabre seems
to be, like the rest of us, a little confused in his dates: and the
documents themselves on which he builds are not of unquestioned
authority. These, however, would be but small speck upon the sunshine
of her perfect humility and sobriety; if indeed they are to be
depended upon as authentic at all.
The day of Jeanne, her time of glory and success, was but a short one
–Orleans was delivered on the 8th of May, the coronation of Charles
took place on the 17th of July; before the earliest of these dates she
had spent nearly two months in an anxious yet hopeful struggle of
preparation, before she was permitted to enter upon her career. The
time of her discouragement was longer. It was ten months from the day
when she rode out of Rheims, the 25th of July, 1429, till the 23d of
May, 1430, when she was taken. She had said after the deliverance of
Orleans that she had but a year in which to accomplish her work, and
at a later period, Easter, 1430, her “voices” told her that “before
the St. Jean” she would be in the power of her enemies. Both these
statements came true. She rose quickly but fell more slowly,
struggling along upon the downward course, unable to carry out what
she would, hampered on every hand, and not apparently followed with
the same fervour as of old. It is true that the principal cause of all
seems to have been the schemes of the Court and the indolence of
Charles; but all these hindrances had existed before, and the King and
his treacherous advisers had been unwillingly dragged every mile of
the way, though every step made had been to Charles’s advantage. But
now though the course is still one of victory the Maid no longer seems
to be either the chief cause or the immediate leader. Perhaps this may
be partly due to the fact that little fighting was necessary, town
after town yielding to the King, which reduced the part of Jeanne to
that of a spectator; but there is a change of atmosphere and tone
which seems to point to something more fundamental than this. The
historians are very unwilling to acknowledge, except Michelet who does
so without hesitation, that she had herself fixed the term of her
commission as ending at Rheims; it is certain that she said many
things which bear this meaning, and every fact of her after career
seems to us to prove it: but it is also true that her conviction
wavered, and other sayings indicate a different belief or hope. She
did no wrong in following the profession of arms in which she had made
so glorious a beginning; she had many gifts and aptitudes for it of
which she was not herself at first aware: but she was no longer the
Envoy of God. Enough had been done to arouse the old spirit of France,
to break the spell of the English supremacy; it was right and fitting
that France should do the rest for herself. Perhaps Jeanne was not
herself very clear on this point, and after her first statement of it,
became less assured. It is not necessary that the servant should know
the designs of the master. It did not after all affect her. Her
business was to serve God to the best of her power, not to take the
management out of His hands.
The army went forth joyously upon its way, directing itself towards
Paris. There was a pilgrimage to make, such as the Kings of France
were in the habit of making after their coronation; there were
pleasant incidents, the submission of a village, the faint resistance,
instantly overcome, of a small town, to make the early days pleasant.
Laon and Soissons both surrendered. Senlis and Beauvais received the
King’s envoys with joy. The independent captains of the army made
little circles about, like parties of pleasure, bringing in another
and another little stronghold to the allegiance of the King. When he
turned aside, taking as he passed through, without as yet any serious
deflection, the road rather to the Loire than to Paris, success still
attended him. At Château-Thierry resistance was expected to give zest
to the movement of the forces, but that too yielded at once as the
others had done. The dates are very vague and it seems difficult to
find any mode of reconciling them. Almost all the historians while
accusing the King of foolish dilatoriness and confusion of plans give
us a description of the undefended state of Paris at the moment, which
a sudden stroke on the part of Charles might have carried with little
difficulty, during the absence of all the chiefs from the city and the
great terror of the inhabitants; but a comparison of dates shows that
the Duke of Bedford re-entered Paris with strong reinforcements on the
very day on which Charles left Rheims three days only after his
coronation, so that he scarcely seems so much to blame as appears. But
the general delay, inefficiency, and hesitation existing at
headquarters, naturally lead to mistakes of this kind.
The great point was that Paris itself was by no means disposed to
receive the King. Strange as it seems to say so Paris was bitterly,
fiercely English at that extraordinary moment, a fact which ought to
be taken into account as the most important in the whole matter. There
was no answering enthusiasm in the capital of France to form an
auxiliary force behind its ramparts and encourage the besiegers
outside. The populace perhaps might be indifferent: at the best it had
no feeling on the subject; but there was no welcome awaiting the King.
During the time of Bedford’s absence the city felt itself to have “no
lord"–/ceux de Paris avoit grand peur car nul seigneur n’ y avoit.
It was believed that Charles would put all the inhabitants to the
sword, and their desperation of feeling was rather that which leads to
a wild and hopeless defence than to submission. The Duke of Bedford,
governing in the name of the infant Henry VI. Of England, was their
seigneur, instead of their natural sovereign. It is a fact which to us
seems scarcely credible, but it was certainly true. There seems to
have been no feeling even, on the subject, no general shame as of a
national betrayal; nothing of the kind. Paris was English, holding by
the English kings who had never lost a certain hold on France, and
thinking no shame of its party. It was a hostile town, the chief of
the English possessions. In the Journal du Bourgeois de Paris–who
was no bourgeois but a distinguished member of that university which
held the Maid and all her ways in horror–Jeanne the deliverer, the
incarnation of patriotism and of France is spoken of as “a creature in
the form of a woman.” How extraordinary is this evidence of a state of
affairs in which it is almost impossible to believe! Paris is France
nowadays to many people, though no doubt this is but a superficial
judgment; but in the early part of the fifteenth century, she was
frankly English, not by compulsion even, but by habit and policy.
Perhaps the delays, the hesitation, the terrors of Charles and his
counsellors are thus rendered more excusable than by any other
explanation.
In the meantime it is almost impossible to follow the wanderings of
this vacillating army without a map. If the reader should trace its
movements, he would see what a stumbling and devious course it took as
of a man blundering in the dark. From Rheims to Soissons the way was
clear; then there came a sudden move southward to Château-Thierry from
which indeed there was still a straight line to Paris but which still
more clearly indicated the highroad leading to the Orleannais, the
faithful districts of the Loire. This retrograde movement was not made
without a great outcry from the generals. Their opinion was that the
King ought to press on to conquer everything while the English forces
were still depressed and discouraged. In their mind this deflection
towards the south was an abandonment at once of honour and safety. An
unimportant check on the way, however, gave an argument to the leaders
of the army, and Charles permitted himself to be dragged back. They
then made their way by La Ferté-Milon, Crépy, and Daumartin, and on
this road the English troops which had been led out from Paris by
Bedford to intercept them came twice within fighting distance of the
French army. The English, as all the French historians are eager to
inform us, invariably entrenched themselves in their positions,
surrounding their lines with sharp-pointed posts by which the equally
invariable rush of the French could be broken. But the French on these
occasions were too wise to repeat the impetuous charge which had
ruined them at Crécy and Agincourt, and the consequence was that the
two forces remained within sight of each other, with a few skirmishes
going on at the flanks, but without any serious encounter.
It will be more satisfactory, however, to copy the following
itineraire of Charles’s movements from the Chronicle of Perceval de
Cagny who was a member of the household of the Duc d’Alençon, and
probably present, certainly at all events bound to have the best and
most correct information. He informs us that the King left Rheims on
Thursday the 21st of July, and dined, supped, and lay at the Abbey of
St. Nanuol that night, where were brought to him the keys of the city
of Laon. He then set out on le voyage à venir devant Paris.
“And on Saturday the 23d of the same month the King dined, supped and
lay at Soissons, and was there received the most honourably that the
churchmen, burghers and other people of the town were capable of: for
they had all great fear because of the destruction of the town which
had been taken by the Burgundians and made to rebel against the King.
“Friday the 29th day of July the King and his company were all day
before Château-Thierry in order of battle, hoping that the Duke of
Bedford would appear to fight. The place surrendered at the hour of
vespers, and the King lodged there till Monday the first of August. On
that day the King lay at Monmirail in Brie.
“Tuesday the 2d of August he passed the night in the town of Provins,
and had the best possible reception there, and remained till the
Friday following, the 5th August. Sunday the 7th the King lay at the
town of Coulommièrs in Brie. Wednesday the 10th he lay at La Ferté-
Milon, Thursday at Crespy in Valois–Friday at Laigny-le-Sec. The
following Saturday the 13th the King held the field near Dammartin-en-
Gouelle, for the whole day looking out for the English: but they came
not.
“On Sunday the 14th August the Maid, the Duc d’Alençon, the Count de
Vendosme, the Marshals and other captains accompanied by six or seven
thousand combatants were at the hour of vespers lodged in the fields
near Montépilloy, nearly two leagues from the town of Senlis–The Duke
of Bedford and other English captains with between eight and ten
thousand English lying half a league from Senlis between our people
and the said city on a little stream, in a village called Notre Dame
de la Victoire. That evening our people skirmished with the English
near to their camp and in this skirmish were people taken on each
side, and of the English Captain d’Orbec and ten or twelve others, and
people wounded on both sides: when night fell each retired to their
own quarters.”
The same writer records an appeal in the true tone of chivalry
addressed to the English by Jeanne and Alençon desiring them to come
out from their entrenchments and fight: and promising to withdraw to a
sufficient distance to permit the enemy to place himself in the open
field. The French troops had first “put themselves in the best state
of conscience that could possibly be, hearing mass at an early hour
and then to horse.” But the English would not come out. Jeanne, with
her standard in her hand rode up to the English entrenchments, and
some one says (not de Cagny) struck the posts with her banner,
challenging the force within to come out and fight; while they on
their side waved at the French in defiance, a standard copied from
that of Jeanne, on which was depicted a distaff and spindle. But
neither host approached any nearer. Finally, Charles made his way to
Compiègne.
At Château-Thierry there was concluded an arrangement with Philip of
Burgundy for a truce of fifteen days, before the end of which time the
Duke undertook to deliver Paris peaceably to the French. That this was
simply to gain time and that no idea of giving up Paris had ever been
entertained is evident; perhaps Charles was not even deceived. He, no
more than Philip, had any desire to encounter the dangers of such a
siege. But he was able at least to silence the clamours of the army
and the representations of the persistent Maid by this truce. To wait
for fifteen days and receive the prize without a blow struck, would
not that be best? The counsellors of the King held thus a strong
position, though the delay made the hearts of the warriors sick.
The figure of Jeanne appears during these marchings and counter-
marchings like that of any other general, pursuing a skilful but not
unusual plan of campaign. That she did well and bravely there can be
no doubt, and there is a characteristic touch which we recognise, in
the fact that she and all of her company “put themselves in the best
state of conscience that could be,” before they took to horse; but the
skirmishes and repulses are such as Alençon himself might have made.
“She made much diligence,” the same chronicler tells us, “to reduce
and place many towns in the obedience of the King,” but so did many
others with like success. We hear no more her vigorous knock at the
door of the council chamber if the discussion there was too long or
the proceedings too secret. Her appearances are those of a general
among many other generals, no longer with any special certainty in her
movements as of a person inspired. We are reminded of a story told of
a previous period, after the fight at Patay, when blazing forth in the
indignation of her youthful purity at the sight of one of the camp
followers, a degraded woman with some soldiers, she struck the wanton
with the flat of her sword, driving her forth from the camp, where was
no longer that chastened army of awed and reverent soldiers making
their confession on the eve of every battle, whom she had led to
Orleans. The sword she used on this occasion, was, it is said, the
miraculous sword which had been found under the high altar of St.
Catharine at Fierbois; but at the touch of the unclean the maiden
brand broke in two. If this was an allegory[2] to show that the work
of that weapon was over, and the common sword of the soldier enough
for the warfare that remained, it could not be more clearly realised
than in the history of this campaign. The only touch of our real Maid
in her own distinct person comes to us in a letter written in a field
on that same wavering road to Paris, dated as early as the 5th of
August and addressed to the good people of Rheims, some of whom had
evidently written to her to ask what was the meaning of the delay, and
whether she had given up the cause of the country. There is a terse
determination in its brief, indignant sentences which is a relief to
the reader weary of the wavering and purposeless campaign:
 “Dear and good friends, good and loyal Frenchmen of the town of
  Rheims. Jeanne, the Maid, sends you news of her. It is true that
  the King has made a truce of fifteen days with the Duke of
  Burgundy, who promises to render peaceably the city of Paris in
  that time. Do not, however, be surprised if I enter there sooner,
  for I like not truces so made, and know not whether I will keep
  them, but if I keep them, it will be only because of the honour of
  the King.”
While Jeanne and her army thus played with the unmoving English,
advancing and retiring, attempting every means of drawing them out,
the enemy took advantage of one of these seeming withdrawals to march
out of their camp suddenly and return to Paris, which all this time
had been lying comparatively defenceless, had the French made their
attack sooner. At the same time Charles moved on to Compiègne where he
gave himself up to fresh intrigues with Philip of Burgundy, this time
for a truce to last till Christmas. The Maid was grievously troubled
by this step, moult marrie, and by the new period of delay and
negotiation on which the Court had entered. Paris was not given up,
nor was there any appearance that it ever would be, and to all the
generals as well as to the Maid it was very evident that this was the
next step to be taken. Some of the leaders wearied with inaction had
pushed on to Normandy where four great fortresses–greatest of all the
immense and mysterious stronghold on the high cliffs of the Seine,
that imposing Château Gaillard which Richard Cur-de-lion had built,
the ruins of which, white and mystic, still dominate, like some
Titanic ghost, above the course of the river–had yielded to them. So
great was the danger of Normandy, the most securely English of all
French provinces, that Bedford had again been drawn out of Paris to
defend it. Here then was another opportunity to seize the capital. But
Charles could not be induced to move. He found many ways of amusing
himself at Compiègne, and the new treaty was being hatched with
Burgundy which gave an excuse for doing nothing. The pause which
wearied them all out, both captains and soldiers, at last became more
than flesh and blood could bear.
Jeanne once more was driven to take the initiative. Already on one
occasion she had forced the hand of the lingering Court, and resumed
the campaign of her own accord, an impatient movement which had been
perfectly successful. No doubt again the army itself was becoming
demoralised, and showing symptoms of falling to pieces. One day she
sent for Alençon in haste during the absence of the ambassadors at
Arras. “Beau duc,” she cried, “prepare your troops and the other
captains. En mon Dieu, par mon martin,[3] I will see Paris nearer
than I have yet seen it.” She had seen the towers from afar as she
wandered over the country in Charles’s lingering train. Her sudden
resolution struck like fire upon the impatient band. They set out at
once, Alençon and the Maid at the head of their division of the army,
and all rejoiced to get to horse again, to push their way through
every obstacle. They started on the 23d August, nearly a month after
the departure from Rheims, a month entirely lost, though full of
events, lost without remedy so far as Paris was concerned. At Senlis
they made a pause, perhaps to await the King, who, it was hoped, would
have been constrained to follow; then carrying with them all the
forces that could be spared from that town, they spurred on to St.
Denis where they arrived on the 27th: St. Denis, the other sacred town
of France, the place of the tomb, as Rheims was the place of the
crown.
The royalty of France was Jeanne’s passion. I do not say the King,
which might be capable of malinterpretation, but the kings, the
monarchy, the anointed of the Lord, by whom France was represented,
embodied and made into a living thing. She had loved Rheims, its
associations, its triumphs, the rejoicing of its citizens. These had
been the accompaniments of her own highest victory. She came to St.
Denis in a different mood, her heart hot with disappointment and the
thwarting of all her plans. From whatever cause it might spring, it
was clear that she was no longer buoyed up by that certainty which
only a little while before had carried her through every danger and
over every obstacle. But to have reached St. Denis at least was
something. It was a place doubly sacred, consecrated to that royal
House for which she would so willingly have given her life. And at
last she was within sight of Paris, the greatest prize of all. Up to
this time she had known in actual warfare nothing but victory. If her
heart for the first time wavered and feared, there was still no
certain reason that, de par Dieu, she might not win the day again.
At St. Denis there was once more a cruel delay. Nearly a fortnight
passed and there was no news of the King. The Maid employed the time
in skirmishes and reconnoissances, but does not seem to have ventured
on an attack without the sanction of Charles, whom Alençon, finally,
going back on two several occasions, succeeded in setting in motion.
Charles had remained at Compiègne to carry out his treaty with
Burgundy, and the last thing he desired was this attack; but when he
could resist no longer he moved on reluctantly to St. Denis, where his
arrival was hailed with great delight. This was not until the 5th of
September, and the army, wrought up to a high pitch of excitement and
expectation, was eager for the fight. “There was no one of whatever
condition, who did not say, ’She will lead the King into Paris, if he
will let her,’” says the chronicler.
In the meantime the authorities in Paris were at work, strengthening
its fortifications, frightening the populace with threats of the
vengeance of Charles, persuading every citizen of the danger of
submission.
The Bourgeois tells us that letters came from “les Arminoz,” that
is, the party of the King, sealed with the seal of the Duc d’Alençon,
and addressed to the heads of the city guilds and municipality
inviting their co-operation as Frenchmen. “But,” adds the Parisian,
“it was easy to see through their meaning, and an answer was returned
that they need not throw away their paper as no attention was paid to
it.” There is no sign at all that any national feeling existed to
respond to such an appeal. Paris–its courts of law, Parliaments
(salaried by Bedford), University, Church–every department, was
English in the first place, Burgundian in the second, dependent on
English support and money. There was no French party existing. The
Maid was to them an evil sorceress, a creature in the form of a woman,
exercising the blackest arts. Perhaps there was even a breath of
consciousness in the air that Charles himself had no desire for the
fall of the city. He had left the Parisians full time to make every
preparation, he had held back as long as was possible. His favour was
all on the side of his enemies; for his own forces and their leaders,
and especially for the Maid, he had nothing but discouragement,
distrust, and auguries of evil.
Nevertheless, these oppositions came to an end, and Jeanne, though
less ready and eager for the assault, found herself under the walls of
Paris at last.

[1] “The English, not US,” says Mr. Andrew Lang: and it is pleasant to
    a Scot to know that this is true. England and Scotland were then
    twain, and the Scots fought in the ranks of our auld Ally. But for
    the present age the distinction lasts no longer, and to the writer
    of an English book on English soil it would be ungenerous to take
    the advantage.
[2] It is taken as a miraculous sign by another chronicler, Jean
    Chartier, who tells us that when this fact came to the knowledge
    of the King the sword was given by him to the workmen to be re-
    founded–"but they could not do it, nor put the pieces together
    again: which is a great proof (/grant approbation) that the sword
    came to her divinely. And it is notorious that since the breaking
    of that sword, the said Jeanne neither prospered in arms to the
    profit of the King nor otherwise as she had done before.”
[3] “It was her oath,” adds the chronicler; no one is quite sure what
    it means, but Quicherat is of opinion that it was her baton, her
    stick or staff. Perceval de Cagny puts in this exclamation in
    almost all the speeches of the Maid. It must have struck him as a
    curious adjuration. Perhaps it explains why La Hire, unable to do
    without something to swear by, was permitted by Jeanne in their
    frank and humorous camaraderie to swear by his stick, the same
    rustic oath.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] “The English, not US,” says Mr. Andrew Lang: and it is pleasant to
    a Scot to know that this is true. England and Scotland were then
    twain, and the Scots fought in the ranks of our auld Ally. But for
    the present age the distinction lasts no longer, and to the writer
    of an English book on English soil it would be ungenerous to take
    the advantage.
[2] It is taken as a miraculous sign by another chronicler, Jean
    Chartier, who tells us that when this fact came to the knowledge
    of the King the sword was given by him to the workmen to be re-
    founded–"but they could not do it, nor put the pieces together
    again: which is a great proof (/grant approbation) that the sword
    came to her divinely. And it is notorious that since the breaking
    of that sword, the said Jeanne neither prospered in arms to the
    profit of the King nor otherwise as she had done before.”
[3] “It was her oath,” adds the chronicler; no one is quite sure what
    it means, but Quicherat is of opinion that it was her baton, her
    stick or staff. Perceval de Cagny puts in this exclamation in
    almost all the speeches of the Maid. It must have struck him as a
    curious adjuration. Perhaps it explains why La Hire, unable to do
    without something to swear by, was permitted by Jeanne in their
    frank and humorous camaraderie to swear by his stick, the same
    rustic oath.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
