
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





We have here to remark a complete suspension of all the ordinary laws
at once of chivalry and of honest warfare. Jeanne had been captured as
a general at the head of her forces. She was a prisoner of war. Such a
prisoner ordinarily, even in the most cruel ages, is in no bodily
danger. He is worth more alive than dead–a great ransom perhaps–
perhaps the very end of the warfare, and the accomplishment of
everything it was intended to gain: at least he is most valuable to
exchange for other important prisoners on the opposite side. It was
like taking away so much personal property to kill a prisoner, an
outrage deeply resented by his captor and unjustified by any law. It
was true that Jeanne herself had transgressed this universal custom
but a little while before, by giving up Franquet d’Arras to his
prosecutors. But Franquet was beyond the courtesies of war, a noted
criminal, robber, and destroyer: yet she ought not perhaps to have
departed from the military laws of right and wrong while everything in
the country was under the hasty arbitration of war. No one, however,
so far as we know, produces this matter of Franquet as a precedent in
her own case. From the first moment of her seizure there was no
question of the custom and privilege of warfare. She was taken as a
wild animal might have been taken, the only doubt being how to make
the most signal example of her. Vengeance in the gloomy form of the
Inquisition claimed her the first day. No such word as ransom was
breathed from her own side, none was demanded, none was offered. Her
case is at once separated from every other.
Yet the reign of chivalry was at its height, and women were supposed
to be the objects of a kind of worship, every knight being sworn to
succour and help them in need and trouble. There was perhaps something
of the subtle jealousy of sex so constantly denied on the stronger
side, but yet always existing, in the abrogation of every law of
chivalry as well as of warfare, in respect to the Maid. That man is
indeed of the highest strain of generosity who can bear to be beaten
by a woman. And all the seething, agitated world of France had been
beaten by this girl. The English and Burgundians, in the ordinary
sense of the word, had been overcome in fair field, forced to fly
before her; the French, her own side, had experienced an even more
penetrating downfall by having the honours of victory taken from them,
she alone winning the day where they had all failed. This is bitterer,
perhaps, than merely to be compelled to raise a siege or to fail in a
fight. The Frenchmen fought like lions, but the praise was to Jeanne
who never struck a blow. Such great hearts as Dunois, such a courteous
prince as Alençon, were too magnanimous to feel, or at least to
resent, the grievance; they seconded her and fought under her with a
nobility of mind and disinterestedness beyond praise; but it was not
to be supposed that the common mass of the French captains were like
these; she had wronged and shamed them by taking the glory from them,
as much as she had shamed the English by making those universal
victors fly before her. The burghers whom she had rescued, the poor
people who were her brethren and whom she sought everywhere, might
weep and cry out to Heaven, but they were powerless at such a moment.
And every law that might have helped her was pushed aside.
On the 25th the news was known in Paris, and immediately there appears
in the record a new adversary to Jeanne, the most bitter and
implacable of all; the next day, May 26, 1430, without the loss of an
hour, a letter was addressed to the Burgundian camp from the capital.
Quicherat speaks of it as a letter from the Inquisitor or vicar-
general of the Inquisition, written by the officials of the
University; others tell us that an independent letter was sent from
the University to second that of the Inquisitor. The University we may
add was not a university like one of ours, or like any existing at the
present day. It was an ecclesiastical corporation of the highest
authority in every cause connected with the Church, while gathering
law, philosophy, and literature under its wing. The first theologians,
the most eminent jurists were collected there, not by any means always
in alliance with the narrower tendencies and methods of the
Inquisition. It is notable, however, that this great institution lost
no time in claiming the prisoner, whose chief offence in its eyes was
less her career as a warrior than her position as a sorceress. The
actual facts of her life were of secondary importance to them.
Orleans, Rheims, even her attack upon Paris were nothing in comparison
with the black art which they believed to be her inspiration. The
guidance of Heaven which was not the guidance of the Church was to
them a claim which meant only rebellion of the direst kind. They had
longed to seize her and strip her of her presumptuous pretensions from
the first moment of her appearance. They could not allow a day of her
overthrow to pass by without snatching at this much-desired victim.
No one perhaps will ever be able to say what it is that makes a trial
for heresy and sorcery, especially in the days when fire and flame,
the rack and the stake, stood at the end, so exciting and horribly
attractive to the mind. Whether it is the revelations that are hoped
for, of these strange commerces between earth and the unknown, into
which we would all fain pry if we could, in pursuit of some better
understanding than has ever yet fallen to the lot of man; whether it
is the strange and dreadful pleasure of seeing a soul driven to
extremity and fighting for its life through all the subtleties of
thought and fierce attacks of interrogation–or the mere love of
inflicting torture, misery, and death, which the Church was prevented
from doing in the common way, it is impossible to tell; but there is
no doubt that a thrill like the wings of vultures crowding to the
prey, a sense of horrible claws and beaks and greedy eyes is in the
air, whenever such a tribunal is thought of. The thrill, the stir, the
eagerness among those black birds of doom is more evident than usual
in the headlong haste of that demand. Sous l’influence de
l’Angleterre, say the historians; the more shame for them if it was
so; but they were clearly under influence wider and more infallible,
the influence of that instinct, whatever it may be, which makes a
trial for heresy ten thousand times more cruel, less restrained by any
humanities of nature, than any other kind of trial which history
records.
That is what the Inquisitor demanded after a long description of
Jeanne, “called the Maid,” as having “dogmatised, sown, published, and
caused to be published, many and diverse errors from which have ensued
great scandals against the divine honour and our holy faith.” “Using
the rights of our office and the authority committed to us by the Holy
See of Rome we instantly command, and enjoin you in the name of the
Catholic faith, and under penalty of the law: and all other Catholic
persons of whatsoever condition, pre-eminence, authority, or estate,
to send or to bring as prisoner before us with all speed and surety
the said Jeanne, vehemently suspected of various crimes springing from
heresy, that proceedings may be taken against her before us in the
name of the Holy Inquisition, and with the favour and aid of the
doctors and masters of the University of Paris, and other notable
counsellors present there.”
It was the English who put it into the heads of the Inquisitor and the
University to do this, all the anxious Frenchmen cry. We can only
reply again, the more shame for the French doctors and priests! But
there was very little time to bring that influence to bear; and there
is an eagerness and precipitation in the demand which is far more like
the headlong natural rush for a much desired prize than any course of
action suggested by a third party. Nor is there anything to lead us to
believe that the movement was not spontaneous. It is little likely,
indeed, that the Sorbonne nowadays would concern itself about any
inspired maid, any more than the enlightened Oxford would do so. But
the ideas of the fifteenth century were widely different, and
witchcraft and heresy were the most enthralling and exciting of
subjects, as they are still to whosoever believes in them, learned or
unlearned, great or small.
It must be added that the entire mind of France, even of those who
loved Jeanne and believed in her, must have been shaken to its depths
by this catastrophe. We have no sympathy with those who compare the
career of any mortal martyr with the far more mysterious agony and
passion of our Lord. Yet we cannot but remember what a tremendous
element the disappointment of their hopes must have been in the misery
of the first disciples, the Apostles, the mother, all the spectators
who had watched with wonder and faith the mission of the Messiah. Had
it failed? had all the signs come to nothing, all those divine words
and ways, to our minds so much more wonderful than any miracles? Was
there no meaning in them? Were they mere unaccountable delusions,
deceptions of the senses, inspirations perhaps of mere genius–not
from God at all except in a secondary way? In the three terrible days
that followed the Crucifixion the burden of a world must have lain on
the minds of those who had seen every hope fail: no legions of angels
appearing, no overwhelming revelation from heaven, no change in a
moment out of misery into the universal kingship, the triumphant
march. That was but the self-delusion of the earth which continually
travesties the schemes of Heaven; yet the most terrible of all
despairs is such a pause and horror of doubt lest nothing should be
true.
But in the case of this little Maiden, this handmaid of the Lord, the
deception might have been all natural and perhaps shared by herself.
Were her first triumphs accidents merely, were her “voices” delusions,
had she been given up by Heaven, of which she had called herself the
servant? It was a stupor which quenched every voice–a great silence
through the country, only broken by the penitential psalms at Tours.
The Compiègne people, writing to Charles two days after May 23d, do
not mention Jeanne at all. We need not immediately take into account
the baser souls always plentiful, the envious captains and the rest
who might be secretly rejoicing. The entire country, both friends and
foes, had come to a dreadful pause and did not know what to think. The
last circumstance of which we must remind the reader, and which was of
the greatest importance, is, that it was only a small part of France
that knew anything personally of Jeanne. From Tours it is a far cry to
Picardy. All her triumphs had taken place in the south. The captive of
Beaulieu and Beaurevoir spent the sad months of her captivity among a
population which could have heard of her only by flying rumours coming
from hostile quarters. From the midland of France to the sea, near to
which her prison was situated, is a long way, and those northern
districts were as unlike the Orleannais as if they had been in two
different countries. Rouen in Normandy no more resembled Rheims, than
Edinburgh resembled London: and in the fifteenth century that was
saying a great deal. Nothing can be more deceptive than to think of
these separate and often hostile duchies as if they bore any
resemblance to the France of to-day.
The captor of Jeanne was a vassal of Jean de Luxembourg and took her
as we have seen to the quarters of his master at Margny, into whose
hands she thenceforward passed. She was kept in the camp three or four
days and then transferred to the castle of Beaulieu, which belonged to
him; and afterwards to the more important stronghold of Beaurevoir,
which seems to have been his principal residence. We know very few
details of her captivity. According to one chronicler, d’Aulon, her
faithful friend and intendant, was with her at least in the former of
those prisons, where at first she would appear to have been hopeful
and in good spirits, if we may trust to the brief conversation between
her and d’Aulon, which is one of the few details which reach us of
that period. While he lamented over the probable fate of Compiègne she
was confident. “That poor town of Compiègne that you loved so much,"
he said, “by this time it will be in the hands of the enemies of
France.” “No,” said the Maid, “the places which the king of Heaven
brought back to the allegiance of the gentle King Charles by me, will
not be retaken by his enemies.” In this case at least the prophecy
came true.
And perhaps there might have been at first a certain relief in
Jeanne’s mind, such as often follows after a long threatened blow has
fallen. She had no longer the vague tortures of suspense, and probably
believed that she would be ransomed as was usual: and in this silence
and seclusion her “voices” which she had not obeyed as at first, but
yet which had not abandoned her, nor shown estrangement, were more
near and audible than amid the noise and tumult of war. They spoke to
her often, sometimes three times a day, as she afterwards said, in the
unbroken quiet of her prison. And though they no longer spoke of new
enterprises and victories, their words were full of consolation. But
it was not long that Jeanne’s young and vigorous spirit could content
itself with inaction. She was no mystic; willingly giving herself over
to dreams and visions is more possible to the old than to the young.
Her confidence and hope for her good friends of Compiègne gave way
before the continued tale of their sufferings, and the inveterate
siege which was driving them to desperation. No doubt the worst news
was told to Jeanne, and twice over she made a desperate attempt to
escape, in hope of being able to succour them, but without any
sanction, as she confesses, from her spiritual instructors. At
Beaulieu the attempt was simple enough: the narrative seems to imply
that the doorway, or some part of the wall of her room, had been
closed with laths or planks nailed across an opening: and between
these she succeeded in slipping, “as she was very slight,” with the
hope of locking the door to an adjoining guard-room upon the men who
had charge of her, and thus getting free. But alas! The porter of the
château, who had no business there, suddenly appeared in the corridor,
and she was discovered and taken back to her chamber. At Beaurevoir,
which was farther off, her attempt was a much more desperate one, and
indicates a despair and irritation of mind which had become
unbearable. At this place her own condition was much alleviated; the
castle was the residence of Jean de Luxembourg’s wife and aunt, ladies
who visited Jeanne continually, and soon became interested and
attached to her; but as the master of the house was himself in the
camp before Compiègne, they had the advantage or disadvantage, as far
as the prisoner was concerned, of constant news, and Jeanne’s trouble
for her friends grew daily.
She seems, indeed, after the assurance she had expressed at first, to
have fallen into great doubt and even carried on within herself a
despairing argument with her spiritual guides on this point, battling
with these saintly influences as in the depths of the troubled heart
many have done with the Creator Himself in similar circumstances.
“How,” she cried, “could God let them perish who had been so good and
loyal to their King?” St. Catherine replied gently that He would
Himself care for these bons amis, and even promised that “before the
St. Martin" relief would come. But Jeanne had probably by this time–
in her great disappointment and loneliness, and with the sense in her
of so much power to help were she only free–got beyond her own
control. They bade her to be patient. One of them, amid their
exhortations to accept her fate cheerfully, and not to be astonished
at it, seems to have conveyed to her mind the impression that she
should not be delivered till she had seen the King of England. “Truly
I will not see him! I would rather die than fall into the hands of the
English,” cried Jeanne in her petulance. The King of England is spoken
of always, it is curious to note, as if he had been a great, severe
ruler like his father, never as the child he really was. But Jeanne in
her helplessness and impotence was impatient even with her saints. Day
by day the news came in from Compiègne, all that was favourable to the
Burgundians received with joy and thanksgiving by the ladies of
Luxembourg, while the captive consumed her heart with vain
indignation. At last Jeanne would seem to have wrought herself up to
the most desperate of expedients. Whether her room was in the donjon,
or whether she was allowed sufficient freedom in the house to mount to
the battlements there, we are not informed–probably the latter was
the case: for it was from the top of the tower that the rash girl at
last flung herself down, carried away by what sudden frenzy of alarm
or sting of evil tidings can never be known. Probably she had hoped
that a miracle would be wrought on her behalf, and that faith was all
that was wanted, as on so many other occasions. Perhaps she had heard
of the negotiations to sell her to the English, which would give a
keener urgency to her determination to get free; all that appears in
the story, however, is her wild anxiety about Compiègne and her bons
amis. How she escaped destruction no one knows. She was rescued for a
more tremendous and harder fate.
The Maid was taken up as dead from the foot of the tower (the height
is estimated at sixty feet); but she was not dead, nor even seriously
hurt. Her frame, so slight that she had been able to slip between the
bars put up to secure her, had so little solidity that the shock would
seem to have been all that ailed her. She was stunned and unconscious
and remained so far some time; and for three days neither ate nor
drank. But though she was so humbled by the effects of the fall, “she
was comforted by St. Catherine, who bade her confess and implore the
mercy of God” for her rash disobedience–and repeated the promise that
before Martinmas Compiègne should be relieved. Jeanne did not perhaps
in her rebellion deserve this encouragement; but the heavenly ladies
were kind and pitiful and did not stand upon their dignity. The
wonderful thing was that Jeanne recovered perfectly from this
tremendous leap.
The earthly ladies, though so completely on the other side, were
scarcely less kind to the Maid. They visited her daily, carried their
news to her, were very friendly and sweet: and no doubt other visitors
came to make the acquaintance of a prisoner so wonderful. There was
one point on which they were very urgent, and this was about her
dress. It shamed and troubled them to see her in the costume of a man.
Jeanne had her good reasons for that, which perhaps she did not care
to tell them, fearing to shock the ears of a demoiselle of Luxembourg
with the suggestion of dangers of which she knew nothing. No doubt it
was true that while doing the serious work of war, as she said
afterwards, it was best that she should be dressed as a man; but
Jeanne had reason to know besides, that it was safer, among the rough
comrades and gaolers who now surrounded her, to wear the tight-fitting
and firmly fastened dress of a soldier. She answered the ladies and
their remonstrances with all the grace of a courtier. Could she have
done it she would rather have yielded the point to them, she said,
than to any one else in France, except the Queen. The women wherever
she went were always faithful to this young creature, so pure-womanly
in her young angel-hood and man-hood. The poor followed to kiss her
hands or her armour, the rich wooed her with tender flatteries and
persuasions. There is not record in all her career of any woman who
was not her friend.
For the last dreary month of that winter she was sent to the fortress
of Crotoy on the Somme, for what reason we are not told, probably to
be more near the English into whose hands she was about to be given
up: again another shameful bargain in which the guilt lies with the
Burgundians and not with the English. If Charles I. was sold as we
Scots all indignantly deny, the shame of the sale was on our nation,
not on England, whom nobody has ever blamed for the transaction. The
sale of Jeanne was brutally frank. It was indeed a ransom which was
paid to Jean of Luxembourg with a share to the first captor, the
archer who had secured her; but it was simple blood-money as everybody
knew. At Crotoy she had once more the solace of female society, again
with much pressing upon her of their own heavy skirts and hanging
sleeves. A fellow-prisoner in the dungeon of Crotoy, a priest, said
mass every day and gave her the holy communion. And her mind seems to
have been soothed and calmed. Compiègne was relieved; the saints had
kept their word: she had that burden the less upon her soul: and over
the country there were against stirrings of French valour and success.
The day of the Maid was over, but it began to bear the fruit of a
national quickening of vigour and life.
It was at Crotoy, in December, that she was transferred to English
hands. The eager offer of the University of Paris to see her speedy
condemnation had not been accepted, and perhaps the Burgundians had
been willing to wait, to see if any ransom was forthcoming from
France. Perhaps too, Paris, which sang the Te Deum when she was
taken prisoner, began to be a little startled by its own enthusiasm
and to ask itself the question what there was to be so thankful about?
–a result which has happened before in the history of that impulsive
city:–and Paris was too near the centre of France, where the balance
seemed to be turning again in favour of the national party, to have
its thoughts distracted by such a trial as was impending. It seemed
better to the English leaders to conduct their prisoner to a safer
place, to the depths of Normandy where they were most strong. They
seem to have carried her away in the end of the year, travelling
slowly along the coast, and reaching Rouen by way of Eu and Dieppe, as
far away as possible from any risk of rescue. She arrived in Rouen in
the beginning of the year 1431, having thus been already for nearly
eight months in close custody. But there were no further ministrations
of kind women for Jeanne. She was now distinctly in the hands of her
enemies, those who had no sympathy or natural softening of feeling
towards her.
The severities inflicted upon her in her new prison at Rouen were
terrible, almost incredible. We are told that she was kept in an iron
cage (like the Countess of Buchan in earlier days by Edward I.), bound
hands, and feet, and throat, to a pillar, and watched incessantly by
English soldiers–the latter being an abominable and hideous method of
torture which was never departed from during the rest of her life.
Afterwards, at the beginning of her trial she was relieved from the
cage, but never from the presence and scrutiny of this fierce and
hateful bodyguard. Such detestable cruelties were in the manner of the
time, which does not make us the less sicken at them with burning
indignation and the rage of shame. For this aggravation of her
sufferings England alone was responsible. The Burgundians at their
worst had not used her so. It is true that she was to them a piece of
valuable property worth so much good money; which is a powerful
argument everywhere. But to the English she meant no money: no one
offered to ransom Jeanne on the side of her own party, for whom she
had done so much. Even at Tours and Orleans, so far as appears, there
was no subscription–to speak in modern terms,–no cry among the
burghers to gather their crowns for her redemption–not a word, not an
effort, only a barefooted procession, a mass, a Miserere, which had no
issue. France stood silent to see what would come of it; and her
scholars and divines swarmed towards Rouen to make sure that nothing
but harm should come of it to the ignorant country lass, who had set
up such pretences of knowing better than others. The King
congratulated himself that he had another prophetess as good as she,
and a Heaven-sent boy from the mountains who would do as well and
better than Jeanne. Where was Dunois? Where was La Hire,[1] a soldier
bound by no conventions, a captain whose troop went like the wind
where it listed, and whose valour was known? Where was young Guy de
Laval, so ready to sell his lands that his men might be fit for
service? All silent; no man drawing a sword or saying a word. It is
evident that in this frightful pause of fate, Jeanne had become to
France as to England, the Witch whom it was perhaps a danger to have
had anything to do with, whose spells had turned the world upside down
for a moment: but these spells had become ineffectual or worn out as
is the nature of sorcery. No explanation, not even the well-worn and
so often valid one of human baseness, could explain the terrible
situation, if not this.

[1] La Hire was at Louvain, which we hear a little later the new
    English levies would not march to besiege till the Maid was dead,
    and where Dunois joined him in March of this fatal year. These two
    at Louvain within a few leagues of Rouen and not a sword drawn for
    Jeanne!–the wonder grows.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] La Hire was at Louvain, which we hear a little later the new
    English levies would not march to besiege till the Maid was dead,
    and where Dunois joined him in March of this fatal year. These two
    at Louvain within a few leagues of Rouen and not a sword drawn for
    Jeanne!–the wonder grows.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
