
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





Jeanne and her little party were eleven days on the road, but do not
seem to have encountered any special peril. They lodged sometimes in
the security of a convent, sometimes in a village hostel, pursuing the
long and tedious way across the great levels of midland France, which
has so few features of beauty except in the picturesque towns with
their castles and churches, which the escort avoided. At length they
paused in the village of Fierbois not far from Chinon where the Court
was, in order to announce their arrival and ask for an audience, which
was not immediately accorded. Charles held his Court with incredible
gaiety and folly, in the midst of almost every disaster that could
overtake a king, in the castle of Chinon on the banks of the Vienne.
The situation and aspect of this noble building, now in ruins, is
wonderfully like that of Windsor Castle. The great walls, interrupted
and strengthened by huge towers, stretch along a low ridge of rocky
hill, with the swift and clear river, a little broader and swifter
than the Thames, flowing at its foot. The red and high-pitched roofs
of the houses clustered between the castle hill and the stream, give a
point of resemblance the more. The large and ample dwelling,
defensible, but with no thought of any need of defence, a midland
castle surrounded by many a level league of wealthy country, which no
hostile force should ever have power to get through, must have looked
like the home of a well-established royalty. There was no sound or
sight of war within its splendid enclosure. Noble lords and gentlemen
crowded the corridors; trains of gay ladies, attendant upon two
queens, filled the castle with fine dresses and gay voices. There had
been but lately a dreadful and indeed shameful defeat, inflicted by a
mere English convoy of provisions upon a large force of French and
Scottish soldiers, the former led by such men as Dunois, La Hire,
Xaintrailles, etc., the latter by the Constable of Scotland, John
Stuart–which defeat might well have been enough to subdue every sound
of revelry: yet Charles’s Court was ringing with music and pleasantry,
as if peace had reigned around.
It may be believed that there were many doubts and questions how to
receive this peasant from the fields, which prevented an immediate
reply to her demand for an audience. From the first, de la Tremoille,
Charles’s Prime Minister and chief adviser, was strongly against any
encouragement of the visionary, or dealings with the supernatural; but
there would no doubt be others, hoping if not for a miraculous maid,
yet at least for a passing wonder, who might kindle enthusiasm in the
country and rouse the ignorant with hopes of a special blessing from
Heaven. The gayer and younger portion of the Court probably expected a
little amusement, above all, a new butt for their wit, or perhaps a
soothsayer to tell their fortunes and promise good things to come.
They had not very much to amuse them, though they made the best of it.
The joys of Paris were very far off; they were all but imprisoned in
this dull province of Touraine; nobody knew at what moment they might
be forced to leave even that refuge. For the moment here was a new
event, a little stir of interest, something to pass an hour. Jeanne
had to wait two days in Chinon before she was granted an audience, but
considering the carelessness of the Court and the absence of any
patron that was but a brief delay.
The chamber of audience is now in ruins. A wild rose with long,
arching, thorny branches and pale flowers, straggles over the
greensward where once the floor was trod by so many gay figures. From
the broken wall you look sheer down upon the shining river; one great
chimney, which at that season must have been still the most pleasant
centre of the large, draughty hall, shows at the end of the room, with
a curious suggestion of warmth and light which makes ruin more
conspicuous. The room must have been on the ground floor almost level
with the soil towards the interior of the castle, but raised to the
height of the cliffs outside. It was evening, an evening of March, and
fifty torches lighted up the ample room; many noble personages, almost
as great as kings, and clothed in the bewildering splendour of the
time, and more than three hundred cavaliers of the best names in
France filled it to overflowing. The peasant girl from Domremy in the
hose and doublet of a servant, a little travel-worn after her tedious
journey, was led in by one of those splendid seigneurs, dazzled with
the grandeur she had never seen before, looking about her in wonder to
see which was the King–while Charles, perhaps with boyish pleasure in
the mystification, perhaps with a little half-conviction stealing over
him that there might be something more in it, stood among the smiling
crowd.
The young stranger looked round upon all those amused, light-minded,
sceptical faces, and without a moment’s hesitation went forward and
knelt down before him. “Gentil Dauphin,” she said, “God give you good
life.” “But it is not I that am the King; there is the King,” said
Charles. “Gentil Prince, it is you and no other,” she said; then
rising from her knee: “Gentil Dauphin, I am Jeanne the Maid. I am sent
to you by the King of Heaven to tell you that you shall be consecrated
and crowned at Rheims, and shall be lieutenant of the King of Heaven,
who is King of France.” The little masquerade had failed, the jest was
over. There would be little more laughing among the courtiers, when
they saw the face of Charles grow grave. He took the new-comer aside,
perhaps to that deep recess of the window where in the darkening night
the glimmer of the clear, flowing river, the great vault of sky would
still be visible dimly, outside the circle of the blazing interior
with all its smoky lights.
Charles VII. of France was, like many of his predecessors, a pauvre
Sire enough. He had thought more of his amusements than of the
troubles of his country; but a wild and senseless gaiety will
sometimes spring from despair as well as from lightness of heart; and
after all, the dread responsibility, the sense that in all his
helplessness and inability to do anything he was still the man who
ought to do all, would seem to have moved him from time to time. A
secret doubt in his heart, divulged to no man, had added bitterness to
the conviction of his own weakness. Was he indeed the heir of France?
Had he any right to that sustaining confidence which would have borne
up his heart in the midst of every discouragement? His very mother had
given him up and set him aside. He was described as the so-called
Dauphin in treaties signed by Charles and Isabeau his parents. If
anyone knew, she knew; and was it possible that more powerful even
than the English, more cruel than the Burgundians, this stain of
illegitimacy was upon him, making all effort vain? There is no telling
where the sensitive point is in any man’s heart, and little worthy as
was this King, the story we are here told has a thrill of truth in it.
It is reported by a certain Sala, who declares that he had it from the
lips of Charles’s favourite and close follower, the Seigneur de Boisi,
a courtier who, after the curious custom of the time, shared even the
bed of his master. This was confided to Boisi by the King in the
deepest confidence, in the silence of the wakeful night:
“This was in the time of the good King Charles, when he knew not what
step to take, and did nothing but think how to redeem his life: for as
I have told you he was surrounded by enemies on all sides. The King in
this extreme thought, went in one morning to his oratory all alone;
and there he made a prayer to our Lord, in his heart, without
pronouncing any words, in which he asked of Him devoutly that if he
were indeed the true heir, descended from the royal House of France,
and that justly the kingdom was his, that He would be pleased to guard
and defend him, or at the worst to give him grace to escape into Spain
or Scotland, whose people, from all antiquity, were brothers-in-arms,
friends and allies of the kings of France, and that he might find a
refuge there.”
Perhaps there is some excuse for a young man’s endeavour to forget
himself in folly or even in dissipation when his secret thoughts are
so despairing as these.
It was soon after this melancholy moment that the arrival of Jeanne
took place. The King led her aside, touched as all were, by her look
of perfect sincerity and good faith; but it is she herself, not
Charles, who repeats what she said to him. “I have to tell you,” said
the young messenger of God, “on the part of my Lord (/Messire) that
you are the true heir of France and the son of the King; He has sent
me to conduct you to Rheims that you may receive your consecration and
your crown,"–perhaps here, Jeanne caught some look which she did not
understand in his eyes, for she adds with, one cannot but think a
touch of sternness–"if you will.”
Was it a direct message from God in answer to his prayer, uttered
within his own heart, without words, so that no one could have guessed
that secret? At least it would appear that Charles thought so: for how
should this peasant maid know the secret fear that had gnawed at his
heart? “When thou wast in the garden under the fig-tree I saw thee."
Great was the difference between the Israelite without guile and the
troubled young man, with whose fate the career of a great nation was
entangled; but it is not difficult to imagine what the effect must
have been on the mind of Charles when he was met by this strange,
authoritative statement, uttered like all that Jeanne said, de la
part de Dieu.
The impression thus made, however, was on Charles alone, and he was
surrounded by councillors, so much the more pedantic and punctilious
as they were incapable, and placed amidst pressing necessities with
which in themselves they had no power to cope. It may easily be
allowed, also, that to risk any hopes still belonging to the hapless
young King on the word of a peasant girl was in itself, according to
every law of reason, madness and folly. She would seem to have had the
women on her side always and at every point. The Church did not stir,
or else was hostile; the commanders and military men about, regarded
with scornful disgust the idea that an enterprise which they
considered hopeless should be confided to an ignorant woman–all with
perfect reason we are obliged to allow. Probably it was to gain time–
yet without losing the aid of such a stimulus to the superstitious
among the masses–and to retard any rash undertaking–that it was
proposed to subject Jeanne to an examination of doctors and learned
men touching her faith and the character of her visions, which all
this time had been of continual recurrence, yet charged with no
further revelation, no mystic creed, but only with the one simple,
constantly repeated command.
Accordingly, after some preliminary handling by half a dozen bishops,
Jeanne was taken to Poitiers–where the university and the local
parliament, all the learning, law, and ecclesiastical wisdom which
were on the side of the King, were assembled–to undergo this
investigation. It is curious that the entire history of this wildest
and strangest of all visionary occurrences is to be found in a series
of processes at law, each part recorded and certified under oath; but
so it is. The village maid was placed at the bar, before a number of
acute legists, ecclesiastics, and statesmen, to submit her to a not-
too-benevolent cross-examination. Several of these men were still
alive at the time of the Rehabilitation and gave their recollections
of this examination, though its formal records have not been
preserved. A Dominican monk, Aymer, one of an order she loved,
addressed her gravely with the severity with which that institution is
always credited. “You say that God will deliver France; if He has so
determined, He has no need of men-at-arms.” “Ah!” cried the girl, with
perhaps a note of irritation in her voice, “the men must fight; it is
God who gives the victory.” To another discomfited Brother, Jeanne,
exasperated, answered with a little roughness, showing that our Maid,
though gentle as a child to all gentle souls, was no piece of subdued
perfection, but a woman of the fields, and lately much in the company
of rough-spoken men. He was of Limoges, a certain Brother Seguin,
“bien aigre homme,” and disposed apparently to weaken the trial by
questions without importance: he asked her what language her celestial
visitors spoke? “Better than yours,” answered the peasant girl. He
could not have been, as we say in Scotland, altogether “an ill man,"
for he acknowledged that he spoke the patois of his district, and
therefore that the blow was fair. But perhaps for the moment he was
irritated too. He asked her, a question equally unnecessary, “do you
believe in God?” to which with more and more impatience she made a
similar answer: “Better than you do.” There was nothing to be made of
one so well able to defend herself. “Words are all very well,” said
the monk, “but God would not have us believe you, unless you show us
some sign.” To this Jeanne made an answer more dignified, though still
showing signs of exasperation, “I have not come to Poitiers to give
signs,” she said; “but take me to Orleans–I will then show the signs
I am sent to show. Give me as small a band as you please, but let me
go.”
The situation of Orleans was at the time a desperate one. It was
besieged by a strong army of English, who had built a succession of
towers round the city, from which to assail it, after the manner of
the times. The town lies in the midst of the plain of the Loire, with
not so much as a hillock to offer any advantage to the besiegers.
Therefore these great works were necessary in face of a very strenuous
resistance, and the possibility of provisioning the besieged, which
their river secured. The English from their high towers kept up a
disastrous fire, which, though their artillery was of the rudest kind,
did great execution. The siege was conducted by eminent generals. The
works were of themselves great fortifications, the assailants
numerous, and strengthened by the prestige of almost unbroken success;
there seemed no human hope of the deliverance of the town unless by an
overwhelming army, which the King’s party did not possess, or by some
wonderful and utterly unexpected event. Jeanne had always declared the
destruction of the English and the relief of Orleans to be the first
step in her mission.
Besides the formal and official examination of her faith and
character, held at Poitiers, private inquests of all kinds were made
concerning of the claims of the miraculous maid. She was visited by
every curious person, man or woman, in the neighbourhood, and plied
with endless questions, so that her simple personal story, and that of
her revelations–/mes voix, as she called them–became familiarly
known from her own report, to the whole country round about. The women
pressed a question specially interesting–for no doubt, many a good
mother half convinced otherwise, shook her head at Jeanne’s costume–
Why she wore the dress of a man? for which the Maid gave very good
reasons: in the first place because it was the only dress for
fighting, which, though so far from her desires or from the habits of
her life, was henceforward to be her work; and also because in her
strange circumstances, constrained as she was to live among men, she
considered it safest for herself–statements which evidently convinced
the minds of the questioners. It was, no doubt, good policy to make
her thus widely and generally known, and the result was a daily
growing enthusiasm for her and belief in her, in all classes. The
result of the formal process was that the doctors could find nothing
against her, and they reluctantly allowed that the King might lawfully
take what advantage he could of her offered services.
Jeanne was then brought back to Chinon, where she was lodged in one of
the great towers still standing, though no special room is pointed out
as hers. And there she was subjected to another process, more
penetrating still than the interrogations of the graver tribunals. The
Queens and their ladies and all the women of the Court took her in
hand. They inquired into her history in every subtle and intimate
feminine way, testing her innocence and purity; and once more she came
out triumphant. The final judgment was given as follows: “After
hearing all these reports, the King taking into consideration the
great goodness that was in the Maid, and that she declared herself to
be sent by God, it was by the said Seigneur and his council determined
that from henceforward he should make use of her for his wars, since
it was for this that she was sent.”
It was now necessary to equip Jeanne for her service. She had a
maison, an état majeur, or staff, formed for her, the chief of
which, Jean d’Aulon, already distinguished and worthy of such a trust
never left her thenceforward until the end of her active career. Her
chaplain, Jean Pasquerel, also followed her fortunes faithfully.
Charles would have given her a sword to replace the probably
indifferent weapon given her by Baudricourt at Vaucouleurs; but Jeanne
knew where to find the sword destined for her. She gave orders that
someone should be sent to Fierbois, the village at which she had
paused on her way to Chinon, to fetch a sword which would be found
there buried behind the high altar of the church of St. Catherine. To
make this as little miraculous as possible, we are told by some
historians that it was common for knights to be buried with their
arms, and that Jeanne, in her visit to this church, where she heard
three masses in succession to make up for the absence of constant
religious services on her journey–had probably seen some tomb or
other token that such an interment had taken place. However, as we are
compelled to receive the far greater miracle of Jeanne herself and her
work, without explanation, it is foolish to take the trouble to
attempt any explanation of so small a matter as this. The sword in
fact was found, by the clergy of the church, and was by them cleaned
and polished and put in a scabbard of crimson velvet, scattered over
with fleur-de-lys in gold, for her use. Her standard, which she
considered of the greatest importance was made apparently at Tours. It
was of white linen, fringed with silk and embroidered with a figure of
the Saviour holding a globe in His hands, while an angel knelt at
either side in adoration. Jhesus’ Maria was inscribed at the foot. A
repetition of this banner, which must have been re-copied from age to
age is to be seen now at Tours. Having indicated the exact device to
be emblazoned upon the banner, as dictated to her by her saints,–
Margaret and Catherine–Jeanne announced her intention of carrying it
herself, a somewhat surprising office for one who was to act as a
general. But it was the command of her heavenly guides. “Take the
standard on the part of God, and carry it boldly,” they had said. She
had, besides, a simple, half-childish intention of her own in this,
which she explained shame-faced–she had no wish to use her sword
though she loved it, and would kill no man. The banner was a more safe
occupation, and saved her from all possibility of blood-shedding; it
must however, have required the robust arm of a peasant to sustain the
heavy weight.
It will show how long a time all these examinations and preparations
had taken when we read that Jeanne set out from Blois, where she had
passed some time in military preparations, only on the 27th day of
April; nearly two whole months had thus been taken up in testing her
truth, and arranging details, trifling and unnecessary in her eyes:–a
period which had been passed in great anxiety by the people of
Orleans, with the huge bastilles of the English–three of which were
named Paris, Rouen, and London–towering round them, their provisions
often intercepted, all the business of life come to a standstill, and
the overwhelming responsibility upon them of being almost the last
barrier between the invader and the final subjugation of France. It is
strange to add that, judging by ordinary rules, the garrison of
Orleans ought to have been quite sufficient in itself in numbers and
science of war, to have beaten and dispersed the English force which
had thus succeeded in shutting them in; there were many notable
captains among them, with Dunois, known as the Bastard of Orleans, one
of the most celebrated and brave of French generals, at their head.
Dunois was in no way inferior to the generals of the English army; he
was popular, beloved by the people and soldiers alike, and though
illegitimate, of the House of Orleans, one of the native seigneurs of
the place. The wonder is how he and his officers permitted the
building of these towers, and the shutting in of the town which they
were quite strong enough to protect. But it was a losing game which
they were playing, a part which does not suit the genius of the
nation; and the superstition in favour of the English who had won so
many battles with all the disadvantages on their side,–cutting the
finest armies to pieces–was strong upon the imagination of the time.
It seemed a fate which no valour or skill upon the side of the French
could avert. Dunois, himself an unlikely person, one would have
thought, to yield the honour of the fight to a woman, seems to have
perceived that without a strong counter-motive, not within the range
of ordinary methods, the situation was beyond hope.
Accordingly, on the 27th or 28th of April, Jeanne set out at the head
of her little army, accompanied by a great number of generals and
captains. She had been equipped by the Queen of Sicily (with a touch
of that keen sense of decorative effect which belonged to the age) in
white armour inlaid with silver–all shining like her own St. Michael
himself, a radiance of whiteness and glory under the sun–armed de
toutes pièces sauve la teste, her uncovered head rising in full
relief from the dazzling breastplate and gorget. This is the
description given of her by an eye-witness a little later. The country
is flat as the palm of one’s hand. The white armour must have flashed
back the sun for miles and miles of the level road, to the eyes which
from the height of any neighbouring tower watched the party setting
out. It is all fertile now, the richest plain, and even then, corn and
wine must have been in full bourgeon, the great fresh greenness of the
big leaves coming out upon such low stumps of vine as were left in the
soil; but the devastated country was in those days covered with a wild
growth like the macchia of Italian wilds, which half hid the
movements of the expedition. They went by the Loire to Tours, where
Jeanne had been assigned a dwelling of her own, with the estate of a
general; and from thence to Blois, where they had to wait for some
days while the convoy of provisions, which they were to convey to
Orleans, was being prepared. And there Jeanne fulfilled one of the
preliminary duties of her mission. She had informed her examiners at
Poitiers that she had been commanded to write to the English generals
before attacking them, appealing to them de la part de Dieu, to give
up their conquests, and leave France to the French. The letter which
we quote would seem to have been dictated by her at Poitiers, probably
to the confessor who now formed part of her suite and who attended her
wherever she went:
  JHESUS MARIA.
  King of England, and you Duke of Bedford calling yourself Regent
  of France, you, William de la Poule, Comte de Sulford, John, Lord
  of Talbot, and you Thomas, Lord of Scales, who call yourself
  lieutenants of the said Bedford, listen to the King of Heaven:
  Give back to the Maid who is here sent on the part of God the King
  of Heaven, the keys of all the good towns which you have taken by
  violence in His France. She is ready to make peace if you will
  hear reason and be just towards France and pay for what you have
  taken. And you archers, brothers-in-arms, gentles and others who
  are before the town of Orleans, go in peace on the part of God; if
  you do not so you will soon have news of the Maid who will see you
  shortly to your great damage. King of England, if you do not this,
  I am captain in this war, and in whatsoever place in France I find
  your people I will make them go away. I am sent here on the part
  of God the King of Heaven to push you all forth of France. If you
  obey I will be merciful. And be not strong in your own opinion,
  for you do not hold the kingdom from God the Son of the Holy Mary,
  but it is held by Charles the true heir, for God, the King of
  Heaven so wills, and it is revealed by the Maid who shall enter
  Paris in good company. If you will not believe this news on the
  part of God and the Maid, in whatever place you may find
  yourselves we shall make our way there, and make so great a
  commotion as has not been in France for a thousand years, if you
  will not hear reason. And believe this, that the King of Heaven
  will send more strength to the Maid than you can bring against her
  in all your assaults, to her and to her good men-at-arms. You,
  Duke of Bedford, the Maid prays and requires you to destroy no
  more. If you act according to reason you may still come in her
  company where the French shall do the greatest work that has ever
  been done for Christianity. Answer then if you will still continue
  against the city of Orleans. If you do so you will soon recall it
  to yourself by great misfortunes. Written the Saturday of Holy
  Week (22 March, 1429).[1]
Jeanne had by this time made a wonderful moral revolution in her
little army; most likely she had not been in the least aware what an
army was, until this moment; but frank and fearless, she had
penetrated into every corner, and it was not in her to permit those
abuses at which an ordinary captain has to smile. The pernicious and
shameful crowd of camp followers fled before her like shadows before
the day. She stopped the big oaths and unthinking blasphemies which
were so common, so that La Hire, one of the chief captains, a rough
and ready Gascon, was reduced to swear by his bâton, no more sacred
name being permitted to him. Perhaps this was the origin of the
harmless swearing which abounds in France, meaning probably just as
much and as little as bigger oaths in careless mouths; but no doubt
the soldiers’ language was very unfit for gentle ears. Jeanne moved
among the wondering ranks, all radiant in her silver armour and with
her virginal undaunted countenance, exhorting all those rude and noisy
brothers to take thought of their duties here, and of the other life
that awaited them. She would stop the march of the army that a
conscience-stricken soldier might make his confession, and desired the
priests to hear it if necessary without ceremony, or church, under the
first tree. Her tender heart was such that she shrank from any man’s
death, and her hair rose up on her head, as she said, at the sight of
French blood shed–although her mission was to shed it on all sides
for a great end. But the one thing she could not bear was that either
Frenchmen or Englishmen should die unconfessed, “unhouseled,
disappointed, unannealed.” The army went along attended by songs of
choristers and masses of priests, the grave and solemn music of the
Church accompanied strangely by the fanfares and bugle notes. What a
strange procession to pass along the great Loire in its spring
fulness, the raised banners and crosses, and that dazzling white
figure, all effulgence, reflected in the wayward, quick flowing
stream!
La Hire, who is like a figure out of Dumas, and indeed did service as
a model to that delightful romancer, had come from Orleans to escort
Jeanne upon her way, and Dunois met her as she approached the town.
There could not be found more unlikely companions than these two, to
conduct to a great battle the country maid who was to carry the
honours of the day from them both, and make men fight like heroes, who
under them did nothing but run away. The candour and true courage of
such leaders in circumstances so extraordinary, are beyond praise, for
it was an offence both to their pride and skill in their profession,
had she been anything less than the messenger of God which she claimed
to be; and these rude soldiers were not men to be easily moved by
devout imaginations. There would seem, however, even in the case of
the greater of the two, to have arisen a strange friendship and mutual
understanding between the famous man of war and the peasant girl.
Jeanne, always straightforward and simple, speaks to him, not with the
downcast eyes of her humility, but as an equal, as if the great Dunois
had been a prud’ homme of her own degree. There is no appearance
indeed that the Maid allowed herself to be overborne now by any
shyness or undue humility. She speaks loudly, so as to be heard by
those fighting men, taking something of their own brief and decisive
tone, often even impatient, as one who would not be put aside either
by cunning or force.
Her meeting with Dunois makes this at once evident. She had been
deceived in the manner of her approach to Orleans, her companions,
among whom there were several field-marshals and distinguished
leaders, taking advantage of her ignorance of the place to lead her by
the opposite bank of the river instead of that on which the English
towers were built, which she desired to attack at once. This was the
beginning of a long series of deceits and hostile combinations, by
which at every step of her way she was met and retarded; but it
turned, as these devices generally did, to the discomfiture of the
adverse captains. She crossed the river at Chécy above Orleans, to
meet Dunois who had come so far to meet her. It will be seen by the
conversation which she held with him on his first appearance, how
completely Jeanne had learnt to assert herself, and how much she had
overcome any fear of man. “Are you the Bastard of Orleans?” she said.
“I am; and glad of your coming,” he replied. “Is it you who have had
me led to this side of the river and not to the bank on which Talbot
is and his English?” He answered that he and the wisest of the leaders
had thought it the best and safest way. “The counsel of God, our Lord,
is more sure and more powerful than yours,” she replied. The
expedition, as a matter of fact, had to turn back, and to lose
precious time, there being, it is to be presumed, no means of
transporting so large a force across the river. The large convoy of
provisions which Jeanne brought was embarked in boats while the
majority of the army returned to Blois, in order to cross by the
bridge.
Jeanne, however, having freely expressed her opinion, adapted herself
to the circumstances, though extremely averse to separate herself from
her soldiers, good men who had confessed and prepared their souls for
every emergency. She finally consented, however, to ride on with
Dunois and La Hire. The wind was against the convoy, so that the heavy
boats, deeply laden with beeves and corn, had a dangerous and slow
voyage before them. “Have patience,” cried Jeanne; “by the help of God
all will go well"; and immediately the wind changed, to the
astonishment and joy of all, and the boats arrived in safety “in spite
of the English, who offered no hindrance whatever,” as she had
predicted. The little party made their way along the bank, and in the
twilight of the April evening, about eight o’clock, entered Orleans.
The Deliverer, it need not be said, was hailed with joy indescribable.
She was on a white horse, and carried, Dunois says, the banner in her
hand, though it was carried before her when she entered the town. The
white figure in the midst of those darkly gleaming mailed men, would
in itself throw a certain glory through the dimness of the night, as
she passed the gates and came into view by the blaze of all the
torches, and the lights in the windows, over the dark swarming crowds
of the citizens. Her white banner waving, her white armour shining, it
was little wonder that the throng that filled the streets received the
Maid “as if they had seen God descending among them.” “And they had
good reason,” says the Chronicle, “for they had suffered many
disturbances, labours, and pains, and, what is worse, great doubt
whether they ever should be delivered. But now all were comforted, as
if the siege were over, by the divine strength that was in this simple
Maid whom they regarded most affectionately, men, women, and little
children. There was a marvellous press around her to touch her or the
horse on which she rode, so much so that one of the torchbearers
approached too near and set fire to her pennon; upon which she touched
her horse with her spurs, and turning him cleverly, extinguished the
flame, as if she had long followed the wars.”
There could have been nothing she resembled so much as St. Michael,
the warrior-angel, who, as all the world knew, was her chief
counsellor and guide, and who, no doubt, blazed, a familiar figure,
from some window in the cathedral to which this his living picture
rode without a pause, to give thanks to God before she thought of
refreshment or rest. She spoke to the people who surrounded her on
every side as she went on through the tumultuous streets, bidding them
be of good courage and that if they had faith they should escape from
all their troubles. And it was only after she had said her prayers and
rendered her thanksgiving, that she returned to the house selected for
her–the house of an important personage, Jacques Boucher, treasurer
to the Duke of Orleans, not like the humble places where she had
formerly lodged. The houses of that age were beautiful, airy and
light, with much graceful ornament and solid comfort, the arched and
vaulted Gothic beginning to give place to those models of domestic
architecture which followed the Renaissance, with their ample windows
and pleasant space and breadth. There the table was spread with a
joyous meal in honour of this wonderful guest, to which, let us hope,
Dunois and La Hire and the rest did full justice. But Jeanne was
indifferent to the feast. She mixed with water the wine poured for her
into a silver cup, and dipped her bread in it, five or six small
slices. The visionary peasant girl cared for none of the dainty meats.
And then she retired to the comfort of a peaceful chamber, where the
little daughter of the house shared her bed: strange return to the
days when Hauvette and Mengette in Domremy lay by her side and talked
as girls love to do, through half the silent night. Perhaps little
Charlotte, too, lay awake with awe to wonder at that other young head
on the pillow, a little while ago shut into the silver helmet, and
shining like the archangel’s. The état majeur, the Chevalier
d’Aulon, Jean de Metz, and Bertrand de Poulengy, who had never left
her, first friends and most faithful, and her brother Pierre d’Arc,
were lodged in the same house. It was the last night of April, 1429.


[1] The dates must of course be reckoned by the old style.–This
    letter was dispatched from Tours, during her pause there.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] The dates must of course be reckoned by the old style.–This
    letter was dispatched from Tours, during her pause there.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
