
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





The rescue of Orleans and the defeat of the invincible English were
news to move France from one end to the other, and especially to raise
the spirits and restore the courage of that part of France which had
no sympathy with the invaders and to which the English yoke was
unaccustomed and disgraceful. The news flew up and down the Loire from
point to point, arousing every village, and breathing new heart and
encouragement everywhere; while in the meantime Jeanne, partially
healed of her wound (on May 9th she rode out in a maillet, a light
coat of chain-mail), after a few days’ rest in the joyful city which
she had saved with all its treasures, set out on her return to Chinon.
She found the King at Loches, another of the strong places on the
Loire where there was room for a Court, and means of defence for a
siege should such be necessary, as is the case with so many of these
wonderful castles upon the great French river. Hot with eagerness to
follow up her first great success and accomplish her mission, Jeanne’s
object was to march on at once with the young Prince, with or without
his immense retinue, to Rheims where he should be crowned and anointed
King as she had promised. Her instinctive sense of the necessities of
the position, if we use that language–more justly, her boundless
faith in the orders which she believed had been give her from Heaven,
to accomplish this great act without delay, urged her on. She was
straitened, if we may quote the most divine of words, till it should
be accomplished.
But the Maid, flushed with victory, with the shouts of Orleans still
ringing in her ears, the applause of her fellow-soldiers, the sound of
the triumphant bells, was plunged all at once into the indolence, the
intrigues, the busy nothingness of the Court, in which whispering
favourites surrounded a foolish young prince, beguiling him into
foolish amusements, alarming him with coward fears. Wise men and
buffoons alike dragged him down into that paltry abyss, the one always
counselling caution, the other inventing amusements. “Let us eat and
drink for to-morrow we die.” Was it worth while to lose everything
that was enjoyable in the present moment, to subject a young sovereign
to toils and excitement, and probable loss, for the uncertain
advantage of a vain ceremony, when he might be enjoying himself safely
and at his ease, throughout the summer months, on the cheerful banks
of the Loire? On the other hand, the Chancellor, the Chamberlains, the
Church, all his graver advisers (with the exception of Gerson, the
great theologian to whom has been ascribed the authorship of the
Imitation of Christ, who is reported to have said, “If France
deserts her, and she fails, she is none the less inspired”) shook
their hands and advised that the way should be quite safe and free of
danger before the King risked himself upon it. It was thus that Jeanne
was received when, newly alighted from her charger, her shoulder still
but half healed, her eyes scarcely clear of the dust and smoke, she
found herself once more in the ante-chamber, wasting the days, waiting
in vain behind closed doors, tormented by the lutes and madrigals, the
light women and lighter men, useless and contemptible, of a foolish
Court. The Maid, in all the energy and impulse of a success which had
proved all her claims, had also a premonition that her own time was
short, if not a direct intimation, as some believe, to that effect:
and mingled her remonstrances and appeals with the cry of warning: “I
shall only last a year: take the good of me as long as it is
possible.”
No doubt she was a very great entertainment to the idle seigneurs and
ladies who would try to persuade her to tell them what was to happen
to them, she who had prophesied the death of Glasdale and her own
wound and so many other things. The Duke of Lorraine on her first
setting out had attempted to discover from Jeanne what course his
illness would take, and whether he should get better; and all the
demoiselles and demoiseaux, the flutterers of the ante-chamber, would
be still more likely to surround with their foolish questions the
stout-hearted, impatient girl who had acquired a little of the
roughness of her soldier comrades, and had never been slow at any time
in answering a fool according to his folly; for Jeanne was no meek or
sentimental maiden, but a robust and vigorous young woman, ready with
a quick response, as well as with a ready blow did any one touch her
unadvisedly, or use any inappropriate freedom. At last, one day while
she waited vainly outside the cabinet in which the King was retired
with a few of his councillors, Jeanne’s patience failed her
altogether. She knocked at the door, and being admitted threw herself
at the feet of the King. To Jeanne he was no king till he had received
the consecration necessary for every sovereign of France. “Noble
Dauphin,” she cried, “why should you hold such long and tedious
councils? Rather come to Rheims and receive your worthy crown.”
The Bishop of Castres, Christopher de Harcourt, who was present, asked
her if she would not now in the presence of the King describe to them
the manner in which her council instructed her, when they talked with
her. Jeanne reddened and replied: “I understand that you would like to
know, and I would gladly satisfy you.” “Jeanne,” said the King in his
turn, “it would be very good if you could do what they ask, in the
presence of those here.” She answered at once and with great feeling:
“When I am vexed to find myself disbelieved in the things I say from
God, I retire by myself and pray to God, complaining and asking of Him
why I am not listened to. And when I have prayed I hear a voice which
says, ’Daughter of God, go, go, go! I will help thee, go!’ And when I
hear that voice I feel a great joy.” Her face shone as she spoke,
“lifting her eyes to heaven,” like the face of Moses while still it
bore the reflection of the glory of God, so that the men were dazzled
who sat, speechless, looking on.
The result was that Charles kindly promised to set out as soon as the
road between him and Rheims should be free of the English, especially
the towns on the Loire in which a great part of the army dispersed
from Orleans had taken refuge, with the addition of the auxiliary
forces of Sir John Fastolfe, a name so much feared by the French, but
at which the English reader can scarcely forbear a smile. That the
young King did not think of putting himself at the head of the troops
or of taking part in the campaign shows sufficiently that he was
indeed a pauvre sire, unworthy his gallant people. Jeanne, however,
nothing better being possible, seems to have accepted this mission
with readiness, and instantly began her preparations to carry it out.
It is here that the young Seigneur Guy de Laval comes in with his
description of her already quoted. He was no humble squire but a great
personage to whom the King was civil and pleased to show courtesy. The
young man writes to ses mères, that is, it seems, his mother and
grandmother, to whom, in their distant château, anxiously awaiting
news of the two youths gone to the wars, their faithful son makes his
report of himself and his brother. The King, he says, sent for the
Maid, in order, Sir Guy believes, that he might see her. And
afterwards the young man went to Selles where she was just setting out
on the campaign.
From Selles, he writes on the 8th June, exactly a month after the
deliverance of Orleans:
 “I went to her lodging to see her, and she sent for wine and told
  me we should soon drink wine in Paris. It was a miraculous thing
  (/toute divine) to see her and hear her. She left Selles on
  Monday at the hour of vespers for Romorantin, the Marshal de
  Boussac and a great many armed men with her. I saw her mount her
  horse, all in white armour excepting the head, a little axe in her
  hand. The great black charger was very restive at her door and
  would not let her mount. ’Lead him,’ she said, ’to the cross which
  is in front of the church,’ and there she mounted, the horse
  standing still as if he had been bound. Then turning towards the
  church which was close by she said in a womanly voice (/assez voix
  de femme), ’You priests and people of the Church, make
  processions and prayers to God for us’; then turning to the road,
  ’Forward,’ she said. Her unfolded standard was carried by a page;
  she had her little axe in her hand, and by her side rode a brother
  who had joined her eight days before. The Maid told me in her
  lodging that she had sent you, grandmother, a small gold ring,
  which was indeed a very small affair, and that she would fain have
  sent you something better, considering your recommendation. To-day
  M. d’Alençon, the Bastard of Orleans, and Gaucourt were to leave
  Selles, following the Maid. And men are arriving from all parts
  every day, all with good hope in God who I believe will help us.
  But money there is none at the Court, so that for the present I
  have no hope of any help or assistance. Therefore I desire you,
  Madame ma mère, who have my seal, spare not the land neither in
  sale nor mortgage . . . . My much honoured ladies and mothers, I
  pray the blessed Son of God that you have a good life and long;
  and both of us recommend ourselves to our brother Louis. And we
  send our greetings to the reader of this letter. Written from
  Selles, Wednesday, 8th June, 1429. This afternoon are arrived M.
  de Vendôme, M. de Boussac, and others, and La Hire has joined the
  army, and we shall soon be at work (/on besognera bientôt)–May
  God grant that it should be according to your desire.”
It was with difficulty that the Duc d’Alençon had been got to start,
his wife consenting with great reluctance. He had been long a prisoner
in England, and had lately been ransomed for a great sum of money;
“Was not that a sufficient sacrifice?” the Duchess asked indignantly.
To risk once more a husband so costly was naturally a painful thing to
do, and why could not Jeanne be content and stay where she was? Jeanne
comforted the lady, perhaps with a little good-humoured contempt.
“Fear nothing, Madame,” she said; “I will bring him back to you safe
and sound.” Probably Alençon himself had no great desire to be second
in command to this country lass, even though she had delivered
Orleans; and if he set out at all he would have preferred to take
another direction and to protect his own property and province. The
gathering of the army thus becomes visible to us; parties are
continually coming in; and no doubt, as they marched along, many a
little château–and they abound through the country each with its
attendant hamlet–gave forth its master or heir, poor but noble,
followed by as many men-at-arms, perhaps only two or three, as the
little property could raise, to swell the forces with the best and
surest of material, the trained gentlemen with hearts full of chivalry
and pride, but with the same hardy, self-denying habits as the sturdy
peasants who followed them, ready for any privation; with a proud
delight to hear that on besognera bientôt–with that St. Michael at
their head, and no longer any fear of the English in their hearts.
The first besogne on which this army entered was the siege of
Jargeau, June 11th, into which town Suffolk had thrown himself and his
troops when the siege of Orleans was raised. The town was strong and
so was the garrison, experienced too in all the arts of war, and
already aware of the wild enthusiasm by which Jeanne was surrounded.
She passed through Orleans on the 10th of June, and had there been
joined by various new detachments. The number of her army was now
raised, we are told, to twelve hundred lances, which means, as each
“lance” was a separate party, about three thousand six hundred men,
though the Journal du Siège gives a much larger number; at all
events it was a small army with which to decide a quarrel between the
two greatest nations of Christendom. Her associates in command were
here once more seized by the prevailing sin of hesitation, and many
arguments were used to induce her to postpone the assault. It would
seem that this hesitation continued until the very moment of attack,
and was only put an end to when Jeanne herself impatiently seized her
banner from the hand of her squire, and planting herself at the foot
of the walls let loose the fervour of the troops and cheered them on
to the irresistible rush in which lay their strength. For it was with
the commanders, not with the followers, that the weakness lay. The
Maid herself was struck on the head by a stone from the battlements
which threw her down; but she sprang up again in a moment unhurt.
“Sus! Sus! Our Lord has condemned the English–all is yours!” she
cried. She would seem to have stood there in her place with her
banner, a rallying-point and centre in the midst of all the confusion
of the fight, taking this for her part in it, and though she is always
in the thick of the combat, never, so far as we are told, striking a
blow, exposed to all the instruments of war, but injured by none. The
effect of her mere attitude, the steadiness of her stand, under the
terrible rain of stone bullets and dreadful arrows, must of itself
have been indescribable.
In the midst of the fiery struggle, there is almost a comic point in
her watch over Alençon, for whose safety she had pledged herself, now
dragging him from a dangerous spot with a cry of warning, now pushing
him forward with an encouraging word. On the first of these occasions
a gentleman of Anjou, M. de Lude, who took his place in the front was
killed, which seems hard upon the poor gentleman, who was probably
quite as well worth caring for as Alençon. “Avant, gentil duc,” she
cried at another moment, “forward! Are you afraid? you know I promised
your wife to bring you safe home.” Thus her voice keeps ringing
through the din, her white armour gleams. “Sus! Sus!” the bold cry
is almost audible, sibilant, whistling amid the whistling of the
arrows.
Suffolk, the English Bayard, the most chivalrous of knights, was at
last forced to yield. One story tells us that he would give up his
sword only to Jeanne herself,[1] but there is a more authentic
description of his selection of one youth among his assailants whom
the quick perceptions of the leader had singled out. “Are you noble?"
Suffolk asks in the brevity of such a crisis. “Yes; Guillame Regnault,
gentleman of Auvergne.” “Are you a knight?” “Not yet.” The victor put
a knee to the ground before his captive, the vanquished touched him
lightly on the shoulder with the sword which he then gave over to him.
Suffolk was always the finest gentleman, the most perfect gentle
knight of his time.
“Now let us go and see the English of Meung,” cried Jeanne,
unwearying, as soon as this victory was assured. That place fell
easily; it is called the bridge of Meung, in the Chronicle, without
further description, therefore presumably the fortress was not
attacked–and they proceeded onward to Beaugency. These towns still
shine over the plain, along the line of the Loire, visible as far as
the eye will carry over the long levels, the great stream linking one
to another like pearls on a thread. There is nothing in the landscape
now to give even a moment’s shelter to the progress of a marching army
which must have been seen from afar, wherever it moved; or to veil the
shining battlements, and piled up citadels rising here and there,
concentrated points and centres of life. The great white Castle of
Blois, the darker tower of Beaugency, still stand where they stood
when Jeanne and her men drew near, as conspicuous in their elevation
of walls and towers as if they had been planted on a mountain top. On
more than one occasion during this wonderful progress from victory to
victory, the triumphant leaders returned for a day or two to Orleans
to tell their good tidings, and to celebrate their success.
And there is but one voice as to the military skill which she
displayed in these repeated operations. The reader sees her, with her
banner, posted in the middle of the fight, guiding her men with a sort
of infallible instinct which adds force to her absolute quick
perception of every difficulty and advantage, the unhesitating
promptitude, attending like so many servants upon the inspiration
which is the soul of all. These are things to which a writer ignorant
of war is quite unable to do justice. What was almost more wonderful
still was the manner in which the Maid held her place among the
captains, most of whom would have thwarted her if they could, with a
consciousness of her own superior place, in which there is never the
slightest token of presumption or self-esteem. She guarded and guided
Alençon with a good-natured and affectionate disdain; and when there
was risk of a great quarrel and a splitting of forces she held the
balance like an old and experienced guide of men.
This latter crisis occurred before Beaugency on the 15th of June, when
the Comte de Richemont, Constable of France, the brother of the Duc de
Bretagne, a great nobleman and famous leader, but in disgrace with the
King and exiled from the Court, suddenly appeared with a considerable
army to join himself to the royalist forces, probably with the hope of
securing the leading place. Richemont was no friend to Jeanne; though
he apparently asked her help and influence to reconcile him with the
King. He seems indeed to have thought it a disgrace to France that her
troops should be led, and victories gained by no properly appointed
general, but by a woman, probably a witch, a creature unworthy to
stand before armed men. It must not be forgotten that even now this
was the general opinion of her out of the range of her immediate
influence. The English held it like a religion. Bedford, in his
description of the siege of Orleans and its total failure, reports to
England that the discomfiture of the hitherto always triumphant army
was “caused in great part by the fatal faith and vain fear that the
French had, of a disciple and servant of the enemy of man, called the
Maid, who uses many false enchantments, and witchcraft, by which not
only is the number of our soldiers diminished but their courage
marvellously beaten down, and the boldness of our enemies increased."
Richemont was a sworn enemy of all such. “Never man hated more, all
heresies, sorcerers, and sorceresses, than he; for he burned more in
France, in Poitou, and Bretagne, than any other of his time.” The
French generals were divided as to the merits of Richemont and the
advantages to be derived from his support. Alençon, the nominal
commander, declared that he would leave the army if Richemont were
permitted to join it. The letters of the King were equally hostile to
him; but on the other hand there were some who held that the accession
of the Constable was of more importance than all the Maids in France.
It was a moment which demanded very wary guidance. Jeanne, it would
seem, did not regard his arrival with much pleasure; probably even the
increase of her forces did not please her as it would have pleased
most commanders, holding so strongly as she did, to the miraculous
character of her own mission and that it was not so much the strength
of her troops as the help of God that got her the victory. But it was
not her part to reject or alienate any champion of France. We have an
account of their meeting given by a retainer of Richemont, which is
picturesque enough. “The Maid alighted from her horse, and the
Constable also. ’Jeanne,’ he said, ’they tell me that you are against
me. I know not if you are from God (/de la part de Dieu) or not. If
you are from God I do not fear you; if you are of the devil, I fear
you still less.’ ’Brave Constable,’ said Jeanne, ’you have not come
here by any will of mine; but since you are here you are welcome.’”
Armed neutrality but suspicion on one side, dignified indifference but
acceptance on the other, could not be better shown.
These successes, however, had been attended by various escarmouches
going on behind. The English, who had been driven out of one town
after another, had now drawn together under the command of Talbot, and
a party of troops under Fastolfe, who came to relieve them, had turned
back as Jeanne proceeded, making various unsuccessful attempts to
recover what had been lost. Failing in all their efforts they returned
across the country to Genville, and were continuing their retreat to
Paris when the two enemies came within reach of each other. An
encounter in open field was a new experience of which Jeanne as yet
had known nothing. She had been successful in assault, in the
operations of the siege, but to meet the enemy hand to hand in battle
was what she had never been required to do; and every tradition, every
experience, was in favour of the English. From Agincourt to the Battle
of the Herrings at Rouvray near Orleans, which had taken place in the
beginning of the year (a fight so named because the field of battle
had been covered with herrings, the conquerors in this case being
merely the convoy in charge of provisions for the English, which
Fastolfe commanded), such a thing had not been known as that the
French should hold their own, much less attain any victory over the
invaders. In these circumstances there was much talk of falling back
upon the camp near Beaugency and of retreating or avoiding an
engagement; anything rather than hazard one of those encounters which
had infallibly ended in disaster. But Jeanne was of the same mind as
always, to go forward and fear nothing. “Fall upon them! Go at them
boldly,” she cried. “If they were in the clouds we should have them.
The gentle King will now gain the greatest victory he has ever had.”
It is curious to hear that in that great plain of the Beauce, so flat,
so fertile, with nothing but vines and cornfields now against the
horizon, the two armies at last almost stumbled upon each other by
accident, in the midst of the brushwood by which the country was
wildly overgrown. The story is that a stag roused by the French scouts
rushed into the midst of the English, who were advantageously placed
among the brushwood to arrest the enemy on their march; the wild
creature terrified and flying before an army blundered into the midst
of the others, was fired at and thus betrayed the vicinity of the foe.
The English had no time to form or set up their usual defences. They
were so taken by surprise that the rush of the French came without
warning, with a suddenness which gave it double force. La Hire made
the first attack as leader of the van, and there was thus emulation
between the two parties, which should be first upon the enemy. When
Alençon asked Jeanne what was to be the issue of the fight, she said
calmly, “Have you good spurs?” “What! You mean we shall turn our backs
on our enemies?” cried her questioner. “Not so,” she replied. “The
English will not fight, they will fly, and you will want good spurs to
pursue them.” Even this somewhat fantastic prophecy put heart into the
men, who up to this time had been wont to fly and not to fight.
And this was what happened, strange as it may seem. Talbot himself was
with the English forces, and many a gallant captain beside: but the
men and their leaders were alike broken in spirit and filled with
superstitious terrors. Whether these were the forces of hell or those
of heaven that came against them no one could be sure; but it was a
power beyond that of earth. The dazzled eyes which seemed to see
flights of white butterflies fluttering about the standard of the
Maid, could scarcely belong to one who thought her a servant of the
enemy of men. But she was a pernicious witch to Talbot, and strangely
enough to Richemont also, who was on her own side. The English force
was thrown into confusion, partly, we may suppose, from the broken
ground on which they were discovered, the undergrowth of the wood
which hid both armies from each other. But soon that disorder turned
into the wildest panic and flight. It would almost seem as if between
these two hereditary opponents one must always be forced into this
miserable part. Not all the chivalry of France had been able to
prevent it at the long string of battles in which they were, before
the revelation of the Maid; and not the desperate and furious valour
of Talbot could preserve his English force from the infection now.
Fastolfe, with the philosophy of an old soldier, deciding that it was
vain to risk his men when the field was already lost, rode off with
all his band. Talbot fought with desperation, half mad with rage to be
thus a second time overcome by so unlikely an adversary, and finally
was taken prisoner; while the whole force behind him fled and were
killed in their flight, the plain being scattered with their dead
bodies.
Jeanne herself made use of those spurs concerning which she had
enquired, and carried away by the passion of battle, followed in the
pursuit, we are told, until she met a Frenchman brutally ill-using a
prisoner whom he had taken, upon which the Maid, indignant, flung
herself from her horse, and, seating herself on the ground beside the
unfortunate Englishman, took his bleeding head upon her lap and,
sending for a priest, made his departure from life at least as easy as
pity and spiritual consolation could make it on such a disastrous
field. In all the records there is no mention of any actual fighting
on her part. She stands in the thick of the flying arrows with her
banner, exposing herself to every danger; in moments of alarm, when
her forces seem flagging, she seizes and places a ladder against the
wall for an assault, and climbs the first as some say; but we never
see her strike a blow. On the banks of the Loire the fate of the mail-
clad Glasdale, hopeless in the strong stream underneath the ruined
bridge, brought tears to her eyes, and now all the excitement of the
pursuit vanished in an instant from her mind, when she saw the English
man-at-arms dying without the succour of the Church. Pity was always
in her heart; she was ever on the side of the angels, though an angel
of war and not of peace.
It is perhaps because the numbers engaged were so few that this flight
or “Chasse de Patay,” has not taken a more important place in the
records of French historians. In general it is only by means of
Fontenoy that the amour propre of the French nation defends itself
against the overwhelming list of battles in which the English have had
the better of it. But this was probably the most complete victory that
has ever been gained over the stubborn enemy whom French tactics are
so seldom able to touch; and the conquerors were purely French without
any alloy of alien arms, except a few Scots, to help them. The entire
campaign on the Loire was one of triumph for the French arms, and of
disaster for the English. They–it is perhaps a point of national
pride to admit it frankly–were as well beaten as heart of Frenchman
could desire, beaten not only in the result, but in the conduct of the
campaign, in heart and in courage, in skill and in genius. There is no
reason in the world why it should not be admitted. But it was not the
French generals, not even Dunois, who secured these victories. It was
the young peasant woman, the dauntless Maid, who underneath the white
mantle of her inspiration, miraculous indeed, but not so miraculous as
this, had already developed the genius of a soldier, and who in her
simplicity, thinking nothing but of her “voices” and the counsel they
gave her, was already the best general of them all.
When Talbot stood before the French generals, no less a person than
Alençon himself is reported to have made a remark to him, of that
ungenerous kind which we call in feminine language “spiteful,” and
which is not foreign to the habit of that great nation. “You did not
think this morning what would have happened to you before sunset,"
said the Duc d’Alençon to the prisoner. “It is the fortune of war,"
replied the English chief.
Once more, however it is like a sudden fall from the open air and
sunshine when the victorious army and its chiefs turned back to the
Court where the King and his councillors sat idle, waiting for news of
what was being done for them. A battle-field is no fine sight; the
excitement of the conflict, the great end to be served by it, the
sense of God’s special protection, even the tremendous uproar of the
fight, the intoxication of personal action, danger, and success have,
we do not doubt a rapture and passion in them for the moment, which
carry the mind away; but the bravest soldier holds his breath when he
remembers the after scene, the dead and dying, the horrible injuries
inflicted, the loss and misery. However, not even the miserable scene
of the Chasse de Patay is so painful as the reverse of the dismal
picture, the halls of the royal habitation where, while men died for
him almost within hearing of the fiddling and the dances, the young
King trifled away his useless days among his idle favourites, and the
musicians played, the assemblies were held, and all went on as in the
Tuileries. We feel as if we had fallen fathoms deep into the
meannesses of mankind when we come back from the bloodshed and the
horror outside, to the King’s presence within. The troops which had
gone out in uncertainty, on an enterprise which might well have proved
too great for them, had returned in full flush of triumph, having at
last fully broken the spell of the English superiority–which was the
greatest victory that could have been achieved: besides gaining the
substantial advantage of three important towns brought back to the
King’s allegiance–only to find themselves as little advanced as
before, coming back to the self-same struggle with indolent
complaining, indifference, and ingratitude.
Jeanne had given the signs that had been demanded from her. She had
delivered Orleans, she cleared the King’s road toward the north. She
had filled the French forces with an enthusiasm and transport of
valour which swept away all the traditions of ill fortune. From every
point of view the instant march upon Rheims and the accomplishment of
the great object of her mission had not only become practicable, but
was the wisest and most prudent thing to do.
But this was not the opinion of the Chancellor of France, the
Archbishop of Rheims, and La Tremouille, or of the indolent young King
himself, who was very willing to rejoice in the relief from all
immediate danger, the restoration of the surrounding country, and even
the victory itself, if only they would have left him in quiet where he
was, sufficiently comfortable, amused, and happy, without forcing
necessary dangers. Jeanne’s successes and her unseasonable zeal and
the commotion that she and her train of captains made, pouring in, in
all the excitement of their triumph, into the midst of the madrigals–
seem to have been anything but welcome. Go to Rheims to be crowned?
yes, some time when it was convenient, when it was safe. But in the
meantime what was more important was to forbid Richemont, whom the
Chancellor hated and the King did not love, to come into the presence
or to have any share either in warfare or in pageant. This was not
only in itself an extremely foolish thing to do, which is always a
recommendation, but it was at the same time an excuse for wasting a
little precious time. When this was at last accomplished, and
Richemont, though deeply wounded and offended, proved himself so much
a man of honour and a patriot, that though dismissed by the King he
still upheld, if languidly, his cause–there was yet a great deal of
resistance to be overcome. Paris though so far off was thrown into
great excitement and alarm by the flight at Patay, and the whole city
was in commotion fearing an immediate advance and attack. But in
Loches, or wherever Charles may have been, it was all taken very
easily. Fastolfe, the fugitive, had his Garter taken from him as the
greatest disgrace that could be inflicted, for his shameful flight,
about the time when Richemont, one of the victors, was being sent off
and disgraced on the other side for the crime of having helped to
inflict, without the consent of the King, the greatest blow which had
yet been given to the English domination! So the Court held on its
ridiculous and fatal course.
However the force of public feeling which must have been very frankly
expressed by many important voices was too much for Charles and he was
at length compelled to put himself in motion. The army had assembled
at Gien, where he joined it, and the great wave of enthusiasm awakened
by Jeanne, and on which he now moved forth as on the top of the wave,
was for the time triumphant. No one dared say now that the Maid was a
sorceress, or that it was by the aid of Beelzebub that she cast out
devils; but a hundred jealousies and hatreds worked against her behind
backs, among the courtiers, among the clergy, strange as that may
sound, in sight of the absolute devotion of her mind, and the saintly
life she led. So much was this the case still, notwithstanding the
practical proofs she had given of her claims, that even persons of
kindred mind, partially sharing her inspirations, such as the famous
Brother Richard of Troyes, looked upon her with suspicion and alarm–
fearing a delusion of Satan. It is more easy perhaps to understand why
the archbishops and bishops should have been inclined against her,
since, though perfectly orthodox and a good Catholic, Jeanne had been
independent of all priestly guidance and had sought no sanction from
the Church to her commission, which she believed to be given by
Heaven. “Give God the praise; but we know that this woman is a
sinner.” This was the best they could find to say of her in the moment
of her greatest victories; but indeed it is no disparagement to Jeanne
or to any saint that she should share with her Master the opprobrium
of such words as these.
At last however a reluctant start was made. Jeanne with her “people,"
her little staff, in which, now, were two of her brothers, a second
having joined her after Orleans, left Gien on the 28th of June; and
the next day the King very unwillingly set out. There is given a long
list of generals who surrounded and accompanied him, three or four
princes of the blood, the Bastard of Orleans, the Archbishop of
Rheims, marshals, admirals, and innumerable seigneurs, among whom was
our young Guy de Laval who wrote the letter to his “mothers” which we
have already quoted and whose faith in the Maid we thus know; and our
ever faithful La Hire, the big-voiced Gascon who had permission to
swear by his bâton, the d’Artagnan of this history. We reckon these
names as those of friends: Dunois the ever-brave, Alençon the gentil
Duc for whom Jeanne had a special and protecting kindness, La Hire
the rough captain of Free Lances, and the graceful young seigneur, Sir
Guy as we should have called him had he been English, who was so ready
to sell or mortgage his land that he might convey his troop
befittingly to the wars. This little group brightens the march for us
with their friendly faces. We know that they have but one thought of
the warrior maiden in whose genius they had begun to have a wondering
confidence as well as in her divine mission. While they were there we
feel that she had at least so many who understood her, and who bore
her the affection of brothers. We are told that in the progress of the
army Jeanne had no definite place. She rode where she pleased,
sometimes in the front, sometimes in the rear. One imagines with
pleasure that wherever her charger passed along the lines it would be
accompanied by one or other of those valiant and faithful companions.
The first place at which a halt was made was Auxerre, a town occupied
chiefly by Burgundians, which closed its gates, but by means of
bribes, partly of provisions to be supplied, partly of gifts to La
Tremouille, secured itself from the attack which Jeanne longed to
lead. Other smaller strongholds on the road yielded without
hesitation. At last they came to Troyes, a large and strong place,
well garrisoned and confident in its strength, the town distinguished
in the history of the time by the treaty made there, by which the
young King had been disinherited–and by the marriage of Henry of
England with the Princess Catherine of France, in whose right he was
to succeed to the throne. It was an ill-omened place for a French king
and the camp was torn with dissensions. Should the army march by,
taking no notice of it and so get all the sooner to Rheims? or should
they pause first, to try their fortune against those solid walls? But
indeed it was not the camp that debated this question. The camp was of
Jeanne’s mind whichever side she took, and her side was always that of
the promptest action. The garrison made a bold sortie, the very day of
the arrival of Charles and his forces, but had been beaten back: and
the King encamped under the walls, wavering and uncertain whether he
might not still depart on the morrow, but sending a repeated summons
to surrender, to which no attention was paid.
Once more there was a pause of indecision; the King was not bold
enough either to push on and leave the city, or to attack it. Again
councils of war succeeded each other day after day, discussing the
matter over and over, leaving the King each time more doubtful, more
timid than before. From these debates Jeanne was anxiously held back,
while every silken fool gave his opinion. At last, one of the
councillors was stirred by this strange anomaly. He declared among
them all, that as it was by the advice of the Maid that the expedition
had been undertaken, without her acquiescence it ought not to be
abandoned. “When the King set out it was not because of the great
puissance of the army he then had with him, or the great treasure he
had to provide for them, nor yet because it seemed to him a probable
thing to be accomplished; but the said expedition was undertaken
solely at the suit of the said Jeanne, who urged him constantly to go
forward, to be crowned at Rheims, and that he should find little
resistance, for it was the pleasure and will of God. If the said
Jeanne is not to be allowed to give her advice now, it is my opinion
that we should turn back,” said the Seigneur de Treves, who had never
been a partisan of or believer in Jeanne. We are told that at this
fortunate moment when one of her opponents had thus pronounced in her
favour, Jeanne, impatient and restless, knocked at the door of the
council chamber as she had done before in her rustic boldness; and
then there occurred a brief and characteristic dialogue.
“Jeanne,” said the Archbishop of Rheims, taking the first word,
probably with the ready instinct of a conspirator to excuse himself
from having helped to shut her out, “the King and his council are in
great perplexity to know what they should do.”
“Shall I be believed if I speak?” said the Maid.
“I cannot tell,” replied the King, interposing; “though if you say
things that are reasonable and profitable, I shall certainly believe
you.”
“Shall I be believed?” she repeated.
“Yes,” said the King, “according as you speak.”
“Noble Dauphin,” she exclaimed, “order your people to assault the city
of Troyes, to hold no more councils; for, by my God, in three days I
will introduce you into the town of Troyes, by love or by force, and
false Burgundy shall be dismayed.”
“Jeanne,” said the Chancellor, “if you could do that in six days, we
might well wait.”
“You shall be master of the place,” said the Maid, addressing herself
steadily to the King, “not in six days, but to-morrow.”
And then there occurred once more the now habitual scene. It was no
longer the miracle it had been to see her dash forward to her post
under the walls with her standard which was the signal for battle, to
which the impatient troops responded, confident in her, as she in
herself. But for the first time we hear how the young general,
learning her trade of war day by day, made her preparations for the
siege. She was a gunner born, according to all we hear, and was quick
to perceive the advantage of her rude artillery though she had never
seen one of these bouches de feu till she encountered them at
Orleans. The whole army was set to work during the night, knights and
men-at-arms alike, to raise–with any kind of handy material, palings
faggots, tables, even doors and windows, taken it must be feared from
some neighbouring village or faubourg–a mound on which to place the
guns. The country as we have said is as flat as the palm of one’s
hand. They worked all night under cover of the darkness with
incredible devotion, while the alarmed townsfolk not knowing what was
being done, but no doubt divining something from the unusual
commotion, betook themselves to the churches to pray, and began to
ponder whether after all it might not be better to join the King whose
armies were led by St. Michael himself in the person of his
representative, than to risk a siege. Once more the spell of the Maid
fell on the defenders of the place. It was witchcraft, it was some
vile art. They had no heart to man the battlements, to fight like
their brothers at Orleans and Jargeau in face of all the powers of the
evil one: the cry of “Sus! Sus!” was like the death-knell in their
ears.
While the soldiers within the walls were thus trembling and drawing
back, the bishop and his clergy took the matter in hand; they sallied
forth, a long procession attended by half the city, to parley with the
King. It was in the earliest dawn, while yet the peaceful world was
scarcely awake; but the town had been in commotion all night, every
visionary person in it seeing visions and dreaming dreams, and a panic
of superstition and spiritual terror taking the strength out of every
arm. Jeanne was already at her post, a glimmering white figure in the
faint and visionary twilight of the morning, when the gates of the
city swung back before this tremulous procession. The King, however,
received the envoys graciously, and readily promised to guarantee all
the rights of Troyes, and to permit the garrison to depart in peace,
if the town was given up to him. We are not told whether the Maid
acquiesced in this arrangement, though it at once secured the
fulfilment of her prophecy; but in any case she would seem to have
been suspicious of the good faith of the departing garrison. Instead
of retiring to her tent she took her place at the gate, watchful, to
see the enemy march forth. And her suspicion was not without reason.
The allied troops, English and Burgundian, poured forth from the city
gates, crestfallen, unwilling to look the way of the white witch, who
might for aught they knew lay them under some dreadful spell, even in
the moment of passing. But in the midst of them came a darker band,
the French prisoners whom they had previously taken, who were as a
sort of funded capital in their hands, each man worth so much money as
a ransom, It was for this that Jeanne had prepared herself. “En nom
Dieu,” she cried, “they shall not be carried away.” The march was
stopped, the alarm given, the King unwillingly aroused once more from
his slumbers. Charles must have been disturbed at the most untimely
hour by the ambassadors from the town, and it mattered little to his
supreme indolence and indifference what might happen to his
unfortunate lieges; but he was forced to bestir himself, and even to
give something from his impoverished exchequer for the ransom of the
prisoners, which must have been more disagreeable still. The feelings
of these men who would have been dragged away in captivity under the
eyes of their victorious countrymen, but for the vigilance of the
Maid, may easily be imagined.
Jeanne seems to have entered the town at once, to prepare for the
reception of the King, and to take instant possession of the place,
forestalling all further impediment. The people in the streets,
however, received her in a very different way from those of Orleans,
with trouble and alarm, staring at her as at a dangerous and malignant
visitor. The Brother Richard, before mentioned, the great preacher and
reformer, was the oracle of Troyes, and held the conscience of the
city in his hands. When he suddenly appeared to confront her, every
eye was turned upon them. But the friar himself was in no less doubt
than his disciples; he approached her dubiously, crossing himself,
making the sacred sign in the air, and sprinkling a shower of holy
water before him to drive away the demon, if demon there was. Jeanne
was not unused to support the rudest accost, and her frank voice,
still assez femme, made itself heard over every clamour. “Come on, I
shall not fly away,” she cried, with, one hopes, a laugh of confident
innocence and good-humour, in face of those significant gestures and
the terrified looks of all about her. French art has been unkind to
Jeanne, occupying itself very little about her till recently; but her
short career is full of pictures. Here the simple page grows bright
with the ancient houses and highly coloured crowd: the frightened and
eager faces at every window, the white warrior in the midst, sending
forth a thousand rays from the polished steel and silver of
breastplate and helmet: and the brown Franciscan monk advancing amid a
shower of water drops, a mysterious repetition of signs. It gives us
an extraordinary epitome of the history of France at that period to
turn from this scene to the wild enthusiasm of Orleans, its crowd of
people thronging about her, its shouts rending the air; while Troyes
was full of terror, doubt, and ill-will, though its nearest neighbour,
so to speak, the next town, and so short a distance away.
A little later in the same day, the next after the surrender, Jeanne,
riding with her standard by the side of the King, conducted him to the
cathedral where he confirmed his previous promises and received the
homage of the town. It was a beautiful sight, the chronicle tells us,
to see all these magnificent people, so well dressed and well mounted;
“il feroit très beau voir.“
The fate of Troyes decided that of Chalons, the only other important
town on the way, the gates of which were thrown open as Charles and
his army, which grew and increased every day, proceeded on its road.
Every promise of the Maid had been so far accomplished, both in the
greater object and in the details: and now there was nothing between
Charles the disinherited and almost ruined Dauphin of three months
ago, trying to forget himself in the seclusion and the sports of
Chinon–and the sacred ceremonial which drew with it every tradition
and every assurance of an ancient and lawful throne.
Jeanne had her little adventure, personal to herself on the way.
Though there were neither posts nor telegraphs in those days, there
has always been a strange swift current in the air or soil which has
conveyed news, in a great national crisis, from one end of the country
to the other. It was not so great a distance to Domremy on the Meuse
from Troyes on the Loire, and it appears that a little group of
peasants, bolder than the rest, had come forth to hang about the road
when the army passed and see what was so fine a sight, and perhaps to
catch a glimpse of their payse, their little neighbour, the
commère who was godmother to Gerard d’Epinal’s child, the youthful
gossip of his young wife–but who was now, if all tales were true, a
great person, and rode by the side of the King. They went as far as
Chalons to see if perhaps all this were true and not a fable; and no
doubt stood astonished to see her ride by, to hear all the marvellous
tales that were told of her, and to assure themselves that it was
truly Jeanne upon whom, more than upon the King, every eye was bent.
This small scene in the midst of so many great ones would probably
have been the most interesting of all had it been told us at any
length. The peasant travellers surrounded her with wistful questions,
with wonder and admiration. Was she never afraid among all those risks
of war, when the arrows hailed about her and the bouches de feu, the
mouths of fire, bellowed and flung forth great stones and bullets upon
her? “I fear nothing but treason,” said the victorious Maid. She knew,
though her humble visitors did not, how that base thing skulked at her
heels, and infested every path. It must not be forgotten that this
wonderful and victorious campaign, with all its lists of towns taken
and armies discomfited, lasted six weeks only, almost every day of
which was distinguished by some victory.


[1] The former story was written in 1429, by the Greffier of Rochelle.
    “I will yield me only to her, the most valiant woman in the
    world.” The Greffier was writing at the moment, but not, of
    course, as an eyewitness.–A. L.
Continue... Preface  •  Chapter I - France in the Fifteenth Century. 1412-1423.  •  Chapter II - Domremy and Vaucouleurs. 1424-1429.  •  Chapter III - Before the King. Feb.-April, 1429.  •  Chapter IV - The Relief of Orleans. May 1-8, 1429.  •  Chapter V - The Campaign of the Loire. June, July, 1429.  •  Chapter VI - The Coronation. July 17, 1429.  •  Chapter VII - The Second Period. 1429-1430.  •  Chapter VIII - Defeat and Discouragement. Autumn, 1429.  •  Chapter IX - Compiègne. 1430.  •  Chapter X - The Captive. May, 1430-Jan., 1431.  •  Chapter XI - The Judges. 1431.  •  Chapter XII - Before the Trial. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XIII - The Public Examination. February, 1431.  •  Chapter XIV - The Examination in Prison. Lent, 1431.  •  Chapter XV - Re-Examination. March-May, 1431.  •  Chapter XVI - The Abjuration. May 24, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - The Sacrifice. May 31, 1431.  •  Chapter XVIII - After.
This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About... 
[1] The former story was written in 1429, by the Greffier of Rochelle.
    “I will yield me only to her, the most valiant woman in the
    world.” The Greffier was writing at the moment, but not, of
    course, as an eyewitness.–A. L.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
