
St. Joan of Arc
In French Jeanne d’Arc;
Commonly known as la Pucelle (the Maid) by her contemporaries.





The road was now clear, and even the most timid of counsellors could
not longer hold back the most indolent of kings. Jeanne had kept her
word once more and fulfilled her own prophecy, and a force of
enthusiasm and certainty, not to be put down, pressed forward the
unwilling Court towards the great ceremonial of the coronation, to
which all except those most chiefly concerned attached so great an
importance. Charles would have hesitated still, and questioned the
possibility of resistance on the part of Rheims, if that city had not
sent a deputation of citizens with the keys of the town, to meet him.
After this it was but a triumphal march into the sacred place, where
the great cathedral dominated a swarming, busy, mediæval city. King
and Archbishop had a double triumph, for the priest like the monarch
had been shut out from his lawful throne, and it was only in the train
of the Maid that this great ecclesiastic was able to take possession
of his dignities. The King alighted with the Archbishop at the
Archevêché which is close to the cathedral, an immense, old palace in
which the heads of the expedition were lodged. There is a magnificent
old hall still remaining in which no doubt they all assembled,
scarcely able to believe that their object was accomplished and that
the King of France was actually in Rheims, and all the prophecies
fulfilled. The Archbishop marched into the city in the morning;
Charles and his Court, and all his great seigneurs, and the body of
his army, in which there were many fighting men half armed, and some
in their rustic clothes as they had left their fields to join the King
in his march–poured in in the evening, after the ecclesiastical
procession, filling the town with commotion. Jeanne rode beside the
King, her banner in her hand. It was July, the vigil of the Madeleine,
and every church poured forth its crowd to witness the entry, and the
populace, half troubled, half glad, gazed its eyes out upon the white
warrior at the side of the King. Her father and uncle were there to
meet her at the old inn in the Place, which still proudly preserves
the record of the peasant guests: two astonished rustics, no doubt,
were thrust forth from some window to watch that incredible sight–
Jacques who would rather have drowned his daughter with his own hands,
than have seen her thus launched among men, gazing still aghast at the
resplendent figure of the chevalière at the head of the procession.
This was very different from what he had thought of when his village
respectability was tortured by the idea of his girl among the
troopers, yet probably the rigid peasant had never changed his mind.
We are told by M. Blaze de Bury of an ancient custom which we do not
find stated elsewhere. A platform was erected, he tells us, outside
the choir of the cathedral to which the King was led the evening
before the coronation, surrounded by his peers, who showed him to the
assembled people with a traditional proclamation: “Here is your King
whom we, peers of France, crown as King and sovereign lord. And if
there is a soul here which has any objection to make, let him speak
and we will answer him. And to-morrow he shall be consecrated by the
grace of the Holy Spirit if you have nothing to say against it.” The
people replied by cries of “Noël, Noël!” It is not to be supposed that
the veto of the people of Rheims would have been effectual had they
opposed: but the scene is wonderfully picturesque. No doubt Jeanne too
was there, watching over her King, as she seems to have done, like a
mother over her child, at this crisis of his affairs.
That night there was little sleep in Rheims, for everything had to be
prepared in haste, the decorations of the cathedral, the provisions
for the ceremonial. Many of the necessary articles were at Saint Denis
in the hands of the English, and the treasury of the cathedral had to
be ransacked to find the fitting vessels. Fortunately it was rich,
more rich probably than it is now, when the commonplace silver of the
beginning of this century has replaced the ancient vials. Through the
short summer night everyone was at work in these preparations; and by
the dawn of day visitors began to flow into the city, great personages
and small, to attend the great ceremonial and to pay their homage. The
greatest of all was the Duke of Lorraine, he who had consulted Jeanne
about his health, husband of the heiress of that rich principality,
and son of Queen Yolande who was no doubt with the Court. All France
seemed to pour into the famous town, where so important an act was
about to be accomplished, with money and wine flowing on all hands,
and the enthusiasm growing along with the popular excitement and
profit. Even great London is stirred to its limits, many miles off
from the centre of proceedings, by such a great event; how much more
the little mediæval city, in which every one might hope to see
something of the pageant, as one shining group after another, with
armour blazing in the sun, and sleek horses caracoling, arrived at the
great gates of the Archevêché: and lesser parties scarcely less
interesting poured in in need of lodging, of equipment and provisions;
while every housewife searched her stores for a piece of brilliant
stuff, of old silk or embroidery, to make her house shine like the
rest.
Early in the morning, a wonderful procession came out of the
Archbishop’s house. Four splendid peers of France, in full armour with
their banners, rode through the streets to the old Abbey of Saint Remy
–the old church which Leo IX. consecrated, in the eleventh century,
on an equally splendid occasion, and which may still be seen to-day–
to fetch from its shrine, where it was strictly guarded by the monks,
the Sainte Ampoule, the holy and sacred vial in which the oil of
consecration had been sent to Clovis out of Heaven. These noble
messengers were the “hostages” of this sacred charge, engaging
themselves by an oath never to lose sight of it by night or day, till
it was restored to its appointed guardians. This vow having been made,
the Abbot of St. Remy, in his richest robes, appeared surrounded by
his monks, carrying the treasure in his hands; and under a splendid
canopy, blazing in the sunshine with cloth of gold, marched towards
the cathedral under the escort of the Knights Hostages, blazing also
in the flashes of their armour. This procession was met half-way,
before the Church of St. Denis, by another, that of the Archbishop and
his train, to whom the holy oil was solemnly confided, and carried by
them to the cathedral, already filled by a dazzled and dazzling crowd.
The Maid had her occupations this July morning like the rest. We hear
nothing of any interview with her father, or with Durand the good
uncle who had helped her in the beginning of her career; though it was
Durand who was sent for to the King and questioned as to Jeanne’s life
in her childhood and early youth; which we may take as proof that
Jacques d’Arc still stood aloof, dour, as a Scotch peasant father
might have been, suspicious of his daughter’s intimacy with all these
fine people, and in no way cured of his objections to the publicity
which is little less than shame to such rugged folk. And there were
his two sons who would take him about, and with whom probably in their
easier commonplace he was more at home than with Jeanne. What the Maid
had to do on the morning of the coronation day was something very
different from any home talk with her relations. She who felt herself
commissioned not only to lead the armies of France, but to deal with
her princes and take part in her councils, occupied the morning in
dictating a letter to the Duke of Burgundy. She had summoned the
English by letter three times repeated, to withdraw peaceably from the
possessions which by God’s will were French. It was with still better
reason that she summoned Philip of Burgundy to renounce his feud with
his cousin, and thus to heal the breach which had torn France in two:
  JHESUS, MARIA.
  High and redoubtable Prince, Duke of Burgundy. Jeanne the Maid
  requires on the part of the King of Heaven, my most just sovereign
  and Lord (/mon droicturier souverain seigneur), that the King of
  France and you make peace between yourselves, firm, strong and
  that will endure. Pardon each other of good heart, entirely, as
  loyal Christians ought to do, and if you desire to fight let it be
  against the Saracens. Prince of Burgundy, I pray, supplicate, and
  require, as humbly as may be, fight no longer against the holy
  kingdom of France: withdraw, at once and speedily, your people who
  are in any strongholds or fortresses of the said holy kingdom; and
  on the part of the gentle King of France, he is ready to make
  peace with you, having respect to his honour, and upon your life
  that you never will gain a battle against loyal Frenchmen and that
  all those who war against the said holy kingdom of France, war
  against the King Jesus, King of Heaven and of all the world and my
  just and sovereign Lord. And I pray and require with clasped hands
  that you fight not, nor make any battle against us, neither your
  friends nor your subjects; but believe always however great in
  number may be the men you lead against us, that you will never
  win, and it would be great pity for the great battle and the blood
  that would be shed of those who came against us. Three weeks ago I
  sent you a letter by a herald that you should be present at the
  consecration of the King, which to-day, Sunday, the seventeenth of
  the present month of July, is done in the city of Rheims: to which
  I have had no answer, nor even any news by the said herald. To God
  I commend you, and may He be your guard if it pleases Him, and I
  pray God to make good peace.
  Written at the aforesaid Rheims, the seventeenth day of July,
  1429.
When the letter was finished Jeanne put on her armour and prepared for
the great ceremony. We are not told what part she took in it, nor is
any more prominent position assigned to her than among the noble crowd
of peers and generals who surrounded the altar, where her place would
naturally be, upon the broad raised platform of the choir, so
excellently adapted for such ceremonies. Her banner we are told was
borne into the cathedral, in order, as she proudly explained
afterwards, that having been foremost in the danger it should share
the honour.
But we have no right to suppose that the Maid took the position of the
chief actor in the pageant and stood alone by the side of Charles, as
the exigencies of the pictorial art have required her to do. When,
however, the ceremony was completed, and he had received on his knees
the anointing which separated him as king from every other class of
men, and while the lofty vaults echoed with the cries of Noël! Noël!
by which the people hailed the completed ceremony, Jeanne could
contain herself no longer. The object was attained for which she had
laboured and struggled, and overcome every opponent. She stepped
forward out of the brilliant crowd, and threw herself at the feet of
the now crowned monarch, embracing his knees. “Gentle King,” she cried
with tears, “now is the pleasure of God fulfilled–whose will it was
that I should raise the siege of Orleans and lead you to this city of
Rheims to receive your consecration. Now has He shown that you are
true King, and that the kingdom of France truly belongs to you alone.”
Those broken words, her tears, the cry of that profound satisfaction
which is almost anguish, the “Lord, now lettest thou thy servant
depart in peace,” which is so suitable to the lips of the old, so
poignant from those of the young, pierced all hearts. It is added that
she asked leave to withdraw, her work being done, and that all who saw
her were filled with sympathy. It was no doubt the irresistible
outburst of a heart too full; and though that fulness was all joy and
triumph, yet there was in it a sense of completed work, a rending
asunder and tearing away from life, the end of a wonderful and
triumphant tale.
There is a considerable controversy as to the precise meaning of that
outburst of emotion. Did the Maid mean that her work was over, and her
divine mission fulfilled? Was this all that she believed herself to be
appointed to do? or did she expect, as she sometimes said, to bouter
the English out of France altogether? In the one case she ought to
have relinquished her work, and in not doing so she acted without the
protection of God which had hitherto made her invulnerable. In the
other, her “voices,” her inspiration, must have failed her, for her
course of triumph went no farther. It is impossible to decide between
these contending theories. She did speak in both senses, sometimes
declaring that she was to take Paris, sometimes, her intention to
bouter the English out of the kingdom. At the same time she betrayed
a constant conviction that her office had limitations and must come to
an end. “I will last but a year,” she said to the King and to Alençon.
The testimony of Dunois seems to be the best we can have on this
point. He says in his deposition, made many years after her death:
“Although Jeanne sometimes talked playfully to amuse people, of things
concerning the war which were not afterwards accomplished, yet when
she spoke seriously of the war, and of her own career and her
vocation, she never affirmed anything but that she was sent to raise
the siege of Orleans and to lead the King to Rheims to be crowned.”
If this were so was she wrong in continuing her warfare, and did she
place herself in the position of one who goes on her own charges,
finding the mission from on high unnecessary? Or in the other case did
her inspiration fail her, or were the intrigues of Charles and his
Court sufficient to balk the designs of Heaven? We prefer to think
that Jeanne’s commission concerned only those two things which she
accomplished so completely; but that in continuing the war, she acted
only as a well inspired and honourable young soldier might, though no
longer as the direct messenger of God. She had as much right to do so
as to return to her distaff or her needle in her native village; but
she became subject to all the ordinary laws of war by so doing,
exposed herself to be taken or overthrown like any man-at-arms, and
accepted that risk. What is certain is, that every intrigue sprang up
again afresh on the evening of that brilliant and triumphant
ceremonial, and that from the moment of the accomplishment of her
great work the failure of the Maid began.
These intrigues had been in her way since her very first beginning, as
has been seen. At Orleans, in the very field as well as in the council
chamber and the presence, everything was done to balk her, and to
cross her plans, but in vain; she triumphed over every contrivance
against her, and broke through the plots, and overcame the plotters.
But after Rheims the combination of dangers became ever greater and
greater, and we may say that no merely human general would have had a
chance in face of the many and bewildering influences of evil. Charles
who was himself, at least at this period of his career, sufficiently
indolent and unenterprising to have damped the energies of any
commander, was, in addition, surrounded by advisers who had always
been impatient and jealous of the interference of Jeanne, and would
have cast her off as a witch, or passed her by as an impostor, had
that been possible, without permitting her to strike a blow. They had
now grudgingly made use of her, or rather, for this is too much to
say, had permitted her action where they had no power to restrain it:
but they were as little friendly, as malignant in their treatment of
the Maid as ever, and more hopeful, now that so much had been done by
her means, of being able to shake her off and pursue their fate in
their own way.
The position of Charles crowned King of France with all the
traditional pomp, master of the Orleannais, with fresh bands of
supporters coming in to swell his army day by day, and Paris itself
almost within his reach, was very different from that of the
discredited Dauphin at Chinon, whom half the world believed to have no
right to the crown which his own mother had signed away from him, and
who wasted his idle days in folly to the profit of the greedy
councillors who schemed and trafficked with his enemies, and to the
destruction of all his hopes. The strange apparition of virginal
purity, energy, and faith which had taken up and saved him against his
will and all his efforts had not ceased for a moment to be hateful to
La Tremouille and his party; and Charles–though he seems to have had
a certain appreciation of the Maid, and even a liking for her frank
and fearless character, apart from any faith in her mission–was far
too ready to accept the facts of the moment, and probably to believe
that, after all, his own worth and favour with Heaven had a great deal
to do with this dazzling triumph and success: certainly he was not the
man to make any stand for his deliverer. But that she was an auxiliary
too important to be sent away was reluctantly apparent to them all. To
keep her as a sort of tame angel about the Court in order to be
produced when she was wanted, to put heart into the soldiers and
frighten the English as she certainly had the gift of doing, no doubt
appeared to all as a thing desirable enough. And they dared not let
her go “because of the people,” nor, may we believe, would Alençon,
Dunois, La Hire, and the rest have tolerated thus the abandonment of
their comrade. To dismiss her even at her own word would have been
impossible, and it is hard to believe that Jeanne, after that
extraordinary brief career as a triumphant general and leader, could
have gone back to her father’s cottage of the village, though she
thought she would fain have done so. If we are to believe that she
felt her mission to be fulfilled, she was yet mistress of her fate to
serve France and the King as seemed best.
And we have no evidence that her “voices” forsook her, or discouraged
her. They seem to have changed a little in their burden, they began to
mingle a sadder tone in their intimations. It began to be breathed
into her mind though not immediately, that something was to happen to
her, some disaster not explained, yet that God was to be with her. It
seems to me that all the circumstances are compatible with a change in
Jeanne’s consciousness, from the moment of the coronation. It might
have been a grander thing had she retired there and then, her work
being accomplished as she declared it to be; but it would not have
been human. She was still a power, if no longer the direct messenger
from Heaven; a general, with much skill and natural aptitude if not
the Sent of God; and the ardour of a military career had got into her
veins. No doubt she was much more good for that, now, than for sitting
by the side of Isabeau d’Arc at Domremy, and working even into a piece
of embroidery for the altar, her remembrances and visions of camp and
siege and the intoxication of victory. She remained, conscious that
she was no longer exactly as of old, to fight not only against the
English, but with intimate enemies, far more bitter, whom now she
knew, against the ordinary fortune of war, and against that which is a
thousand times worse, the hatred and envy, the cruel carelessness, and
the malignant schemes of her own countrymen for whom she had fought.
This, so far as we can judge, appears to be the position of Jeanne in
the second portion of her career; perhaps only dimly apprehended and
at moments, by herself; not much thought of probably by those around
her, the wisest of whom had always been sceptical of her divine
commission; while the populace never saw any change in her, and
believed that at one time as well as at another the Maid was the Maid,
and had victory at her command. And no doubt that influence would have
endured for some time at least, and her dauntless rush against every
obstacle would have carried success with it, had she been able to
carry out her plans, and fly forth upon Paris as she had done upon
Orleans, carrying on the campaign swiftly, promptly, without pause or
uncertainty. Bedford himself said that Paris “would fall at a blow,"
if she came on. It had been hard enough, however, to do that, as we
have seen, when she was the only hope of France and had the fire of
the divine enthusiasm in her veins; but it was still more hard now to
mould a young King elated with triumph, beginning to feel the crown
safe upon his head, and to feel that if there was still much to gain,
there was now a great deal to be lost. The position was complicated
and made more difficult for Jeanne by every advantage she had gained.
In the meantime the secret negotiations, which were always being
carried on under the surface, had come to this point, that Charles had
made a private treaty with Philip of Burgundy by which that prince
pledged himself to give up Paris into the King’s hands within fifteen
days. This agreement furnished a sufficient pretext for the delay in
marching against Paris, delay which was Charles’s invariable method,
and which but for Jeanne’s hardihood and determination, had all but
crushed the expedition to Rheims itself. It was never with any will of
his or of his adviser, La Tremouille, that any stronghold was
assailed. He would fain have passed by Troyes, as the reader will
remember, he would fain have delayed going to Rheims; in each case he
had been forced to move by the impetuosity of the Maid. But a treaty
which touched the honour of the King was a different matter. Philip of
Burgundy, with whom it was made, seems to have held the key of the
position. He was called to Paris by Bedford on one side to defend the
city against its lawful King; he had pledged himself on the other to
Charles to give it up. He had in his hands, though it is uncertain
whether he ever read it, that missive of the sorceress, the letter of
Jeanne which I have quoted, calling upon him on the part of God to
make peace. What was he to do? There were reasons drawing him to both
sides. He was the enemy of Charles on account of the murder of his
father, and therefore had every interest in keeping Paris from him; he
was angry with the English on account of the marriage of the Duke of
Gloucester with Jacqueline of Brabant, which interfered with his own
rights and safety in Flanders, and therefore might have served himself
by giving up the capital to the King. As for the appeal of Jeanne,
what was the letter of that mad creature to a prince and statesman?
The progress of affairs was arrested by this double problem. Jeanne
had been the prominent, the only important figure in the history of
France for some months past. Now that shining figure was jostled
aside, and the ordinary laws of life, with all the counter changes of
negotiation, the ineffectual comings and goings, the meaner half-seen
persons, the fierce contending personal interests–in which there was
no love of either God or man, or any elevated notion of patriotism–
came again into play.
Jeanne would seem to have already foreseen and felt this change even
before she left Rheims; there is a new tone of sadness in some of her
recorded words; or if not of sadness, at least of consciousness that
an end was approaching to all these triumphs and splendours. The
following tale is told in various different versions, as occurring
with different people; but the account I give is taken from the lips
of Dunois himself, a very competent witness. As the King, after his
coronation, wended his way through the country, receiving submission
and joyous welcome from every village and little town, it happened
that while passing through the town of La Ferté, Jeanne rode between
the Archbishop of Rheims and Dunois. The Archbishop had never been
friendly to the Maid, and now it was clear, watched her with that half
satirical, half amused look of the wise man, curious and cynical in
presence of the incomprehensible, observing her ways and very ready to
catch her tripping and to entangle her if possible in her own words.
The people thronged the way, full of enthusiasm, acclaiming the King
and shouting their joyful exclamations of “Noël!” though it does not
appear that any part of their devotion was addressed to Jeanne
herself. “Oh, the good people,” she cried with tears in her eyes, “how
joyful they are to see their noble King! And how happy should I be to
end my days and be buried here among them!” The priest unmoved by such
an exclamation from so young a mouth attempted instantly, like the
Jewish doctors with our Lord, to catch her in her words and draw from
her some expression that might be used against her. “Jeanne,” he said,
“in what place do you expect to die?” It was a direct challenge to the
messenger of Heaven to take upon herself the gift of prophecy. But
Jeanne in her simplicity shattered the snare which probably she did
not even perceive: “When it pleases God,” she said. “I know neither
the place nor the time.”
It was enough, however, that she should think of death and of the
sweetness of it, after her work accomplished, in the very moment of
her height of triumph–to show something of a new leaven working in
her virgin soul.
One characteristic reward, however, Jeanne did receive. Her father and
uncle were lodged at the public cost as benefactors of the kingdom, as
may still be seen by the inscription on the old inn in the great Place
at Rheims; and when Jacques d’Arc left the city he carried with him a
patent–better than one of nobility which, however, came to the family
later–of exemption for the villages of Domremy and Greux of all taxes
and tributes; “an exemption maintained and confirmed up to the
Revolution, in favour of the said Maid, native of that parish, in
which are her relations.” “In the register of the Exchequer,” says M.
Blaze de Bury, “at the name of the parish of Greux and Domremy, the
place for the receipt is blank, with these words as explanation: à
cause de la Pucelle, on account of the Maid.” There could not have
been a more delightful reward or one more after her own heart. It
would be a graceful act of the France of to-day, which has so warmly
revived the name and image of her maiden deliverer, to renew so
touching a distinction to her native place.
We are told that Jeanne parted with her father and uncle with tears,
longing that she might return with them and go back to her mother who
would rejoice to see her again. This was no doubt quite true, though
it might be equally true that she could not have gone back. Did not
the father return, a little sullen, grasping the present he had
himself received, not sure still that it was not disreputable to have
a daughter who wore coat armour and rode by the side of the King, a
position certainly not proper for maidens of humble birth? The dazzled
peasants turned their backs upon her while she was thus at the height
of glory, and never, so far as appears, saw her face again.
Continue...

This complete e-text of 
Jeanne d’Arc - Her Life and Death - by Mrs. Oliphant (Author of “Makers of Florence,” “Makers of Venice,” etc.)
is in the public domain.


This book at Amazon


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
