


Reared upon the broad catholic principle of brotherhood, extending its
helpful hand from nation to nation, and from continent to continent,
linking its votaries together with the golden triple chain of
Friendship, Love and Truth, can afford to be friendly with each, and
have a kindly word for all societies that reach down after and raise up
a fallen brother, and if possible make him wiser, better and happier.
Should a like courtesy be extended to this order, while it would
certainly constitute a new departure, it would prove none the less
gratifying.  But, from certain sources, the order has been the
recipient of a peculiar kind of consideration, so long that “the memory
of man scarce runneth to the contrary.”  Inflamed appeals and bristling
denunciations have gone out against it, “while great, swelling
words"–swollen with hatred, bigotry, prejudice and superstition–have
assailed it relentlessly and almost uninterruptedly.  Mainly, these
assaults have been met with the terse and pointed invocation, “Father,
forgive them; they know not what they do.”
That this great and potent brotherhood may not, in all its parts and
jurisdictions, have so deported itself, and so carried forward its
work, as to be justly free from unfavorable criticism and merited
censure, is probably true.  As with organizations, there is sometimes
too much haste displayed in gathering, and too little discrimination
exercised in selecting, the materials that are brought as component
parts of the great superstructure of Odd-Fellowship.  Too much daubing
with untempered mortar–too great a desire for the exhibition of
numerical force, and the multiplication of lodges–too much regard for
the outward trappings and paraphernalia, and too little regard for the
internal qualities of those seeking membership in the fraternity.  Such
deplorable departures, as well from the primary as the ultimate objects
had in view, are not fairly attributable to anything that may be
reasonably considered as an outgrowth of the order, but come despite
its constant teachings and warnings.  Bad work they of course make, and
so at times and to a limited extent bring the fraternity under the ban
of popular displeasure, but shall the world predicate unfavorable
judgment upon a few and unfair tests?  If so, and the principle
logically becomes general, pray who shall be appointed administrator of
the effects of other social and moral organizations, and even of the
church itself?  For in these regards all offend, if offense it be.
When the principles of Odd-Fellowship are carefully studied it is
apparent to every candid mind that it is founded upon that eternal
principle which recognizes man as a constituent of one universal
brotherhood, and teaches him that as he came from the hand of a common
parent, he is in duty bound to cherish and protect his fellow-man.
Viewed in this light, Odd-Fellowship becomes one of the noblest
institutions organized by man in the world.  If the beauty and grandeur
of universal brotherhood could be impressed upon the minds of all the
people, how very different from the past would the future history of
the world read.  What a delightful place this old stone-ribbed earth
would be if men would look upon each other as brothers, members of one
common family; enjoying the many comforts of one home; trusting to the
guidance and protection of one Father–God.  We are more nearly related
than we think.  Running through all humanity there is a link of
relationship and a bond of sympathy that can not be exterminated.  The
principle of brotherly love is so great and broad that all mankind
could unite in offices of human benefaction.  Brother.  Oh, how sacred
and how sweet when spoken by a true heart!  Whether it be in the home
circle, lodge-room, or in some distant land, it sends the same soothing
thrill of joy to the heart.  Let us pause just a moment to think of the
time and place when we first learned to call each other brother.  Ah!
Methinks no Odd-Fellow will ever forget his first lesson.  He will
always remember how quickly he was changed from the haughty disposition
manifested by that one of old, who, when he prayed, went to the public
square, or climbed to the house top, and thanked God that he was not
like other men, to the humble attitude of that one who stood afar off
and bowed his face in the dust, crying aloud, “O Lord!  Be merciful
unto me a sinner.”  How very much like this ancient boaster are
thousands of the human family today.  Sitting in high places,
surrounded by wealth and power, they see nothing beyond the narrow
circle in which they move.  They are deaf to the low, sad wail of
sorrow that comes from some breaking heart.  Seated by their own
comfortable fireside they give no thought to the lonely widow standing
outside in the cold.  It distresses them not that the keen, wintry
blast sends its icy chill to the already broken heart.  No thought, no
feeling, for this poor creature that must now fight the fierce battles
incident to human life, all alone.  How sadly these tender duties to
suffering humanity are neglected when left to the cold charity of the
world.
Odd-Fellowship seeks to lessen sorrow and suffering.  It supplies
temporal wants; gives encouragement; aids and comforts those who are in
distress.  In sickness we watch by their bedside and administer to
their wants.  If death calls, Odd-Fellowship forsakes not its follower,
but hovers near, listening attentively to the last words and parting
instruction of the dying one.  Brothers and friends, let me admonish
you to do all the good you can while in health and strength, for at
most life is short and we know not how soon the Angel of Death will
unfold his broad, shadowy wings over our path and call us to give an
account of our stewardship; then all that will remain of us on earth
will be the good or evil we have done.
Odd-Fellowship is full of sacred teachings and sublime warnings.  It
teaches us that we are in a world full of temptations, sin and sorrow.
We see the emblems of decay all around us.  The strong man of today may
stand forth, nerved for toil, with all the bloom of health mantling
cheek and brow, seemingly as strong and vigorous as the mighty oak, and
yet tomorrow he will fade as the autumn leaf.  Then he realizes how
foolish it is to be vain; thinks of the instability of wealth and
power, and the certain decay of all earthly greatness.  Odd-Fellowship
teaches us that charity springs from the heart, is not puffed up, seeks
not its own.  It makes us strong, and encourages us to push on through
life, even though we are beset on every side with toil, danger and
strife.  Brothers, let nothing cause you to turn back or away from the
principles of our noble order.  Cling closer and closer each day to
honesty and truth, and bear in mind that be the road ever so rough and
untraveled, narrow and dark, if you follow truth you will find light at
the end of the journey.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Jericho Road” by W. Bion Adkins belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Jericho RoadBy W. Bion AdkinsAt Amazon
