


Being invited some time since to deliver an address before a benevolent
institution, and being pressed amid the daily business cares which
surrounded, I was fearful I should not be able to command sufficient
time for preparation of the task.  Returning home, I retired to my bed,
my thoughts still keeping themselves in active motion in their endeavor
to “think out” what I should say.  In this state of mind I fell asleep,
and soon was in dreamland.  I dreamed that death had taken place, and
as I approached the gates of the unseen world, I was met by an angel,
who kindly tendered his services in escorting me through the realms of
Heaven.  Being a stranger there, I gladly and gracefully accepted his
kind invitation.  Proceeding along the pearly streets, enraptured with
the beauties which surrounded me, I saw a multitude of people, the
number of whom figures fail to compute; but I noticed there were
dividing lines, and they were gathered in companies.  Observing a
beautiful body of water in the distance, and a gathering of one company
by its banks, I inquired of my escort who they were.  He replied they
were Baptists, and said “they always keep near the water’s edge.”  Just
beyond was another company, which my faithful attendant informed me was
a Presbyterian band, and that their infant baptism views still clinging
to them was one of the causes of their “corralling” together.  Just
then we heard loud and prolonged shouting and singing of the hymn
“Shall we gather at the river,” and, pointing to the spot from whence
it came, near a beautiful stream not far off, the angel said: “Those
are the Methodists.  They never cease shouting, and so loud are they at
times that they annoy the Episcopalians, whom you see on the opposite
side of the stream, in their discussion of the doctrine of apostolic
succession.”  Seeing still other gatherings farther on, I was anxious
to go thither and mingle with them; but my guide remonstrated, saying:
“You can see from this standpoint the representatives of all churches.
There, said he, are the Catholics and the Jews, the Universalists and
the Congregationalists, the Unitarians and the Moravians, all with
their varied ’creeds,’ and if you go that way you will be surrounded by
them, each trying to prove that you got to Heaven through their
peculiar doctrine or faith.”
Turning to the right, we moved on, only to pass to more gorgeous and
beautiful apartments, where the streets were golden.  Here I observed
another multitude, but it was one body.  “This,” said the angel, “is
the gathering of the various priests and pastors, rectors and rabbis,
and the ministers and the elders who are trying to unite on some common
ground upon which their congregations (which we had passed) might
stand, where there would be but ’One Lord, one faith, one baptism.’"
Gal., iv, 5.  For, said the angel, until then, they go not up with
their churches and creeds to higher seats above, for “neither
circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision.” Gal., v, 6.
Proceeding on our way we approached a magnificent archway, over the
lintels of which was inscribed, “The Christian’s Home in Glory.”  The
grandeur of this new apartment exceeded all the rest, a description of
which lies beyond the power of words, “For eye hath not seen, nor the
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which
God hath prepared for them that love him.” I Cor., ii, 9.  This I found
to be the abode of the apostles, martyrs and Christians of all ages.
Here was Paul and Peter, and the prophets, the thief on the cross and
Bunyan, Lazarus and Baxter, Stephen and Father Abraham, Martha and Mary
and the widow who gave her two mites.  Pausing, I beheld, with banners
above, an innumerable number “marching on,” with Lincoln and Lovejoy,
Lyman, Beecher and John Brown in the advance, and on the banners was
inscribed, “These are they which came out of great tribulation.” Rev.,
viii, 14.  The angel said: “That is the multitude of poor slaves from
the cotton fields of earth, doing homage to their deliverers.”  “They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun
light on them, nor any heat.” Rev., vii, 16.  Here I also found Watts
and Wesley singing, while Bliss (who had but lately been translated
from earth to heaven by way of Ashtabula bridge), catching the
inspiration, was setting the songs of Heaven to the music of earth.
Gazing on the many thrones and crowns, there were some of peculiar
brightness.  I looked on one, and what was the inscription?  Was it, I
was a Methodist?  No.  I was immersed?  No.  I was a Jew?  No.  But
rather this: “Because I delivered the poor that cried and fatherless,
and him that had none to help him, the blessing of him that was ready
to perish came upon me, and I caused the widow’s heart to sing with
joy.” Job, xxix, 12, 14.  And this was the crown of Job.  And there was
another just beyond, and I read the inscription.  Was it, I was a
Presbyterian?  No.  I prayed by quantity?  No.  I was a Universalist?
No.  But “Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is
this, to visit the fatherless and the widow in their affliction and to
keep himself unspotted from the world.” James, i, 27.  And while the
memory and name of Peabody, the philanthropist, is and shall be honored
and loved for ages to come in two hemispheres, his crown of glory in
heaven is second to none.  But there was still another.  It was worn by
one of queenly beauty, and she sat upon her throne; the splendor of her
robe and the brilliancy of her apparel dimmed my vision.  I read her
inscription, set, as it was, in Heaven’s choicest diamonds.  Was it, I
was an Episcopalian?  No.  I was baptized?  No.  I was a Catholic?  No.
But thus: “I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and
ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye
clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came
unto me.” Matt., xxv, 35, 36.  And before her throne stood thousands
who had come up from the battle fields of the Crimea, and the widows
and orphans, the lame and the halt, the blind and the deaf from the
streets and alleys of London, and as they shouted their hallelujahs
before her, they carried banners on which were emblazoned these words:
“Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.” Matt., xxv, 40.  And the crown of
Florence Nightingale glistens brightly in Heaven.  Passing on, and
observing a large number of vacant thrones and crowns, I naturally
asked, for whom are these?  The angel replied: “For the Christians of
earth; the managers of the ’homes’ for the friendless, the widows and
the orphans, and those who, regardless of their respective church
creeds and doctrines, like their Master when he was on earth, go about
doing good.”  The angel vanished, and I awoke.
MORAL.–Brethren, in our tenacity for church creeds, let us not fail in
the practice of a little daily Christianity.  “Finally, brethren, if
there be any virtue and if there be any praise, think on these things."
Gal., iv, 8.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Jericho Road” by W. Bion Adkins belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Jericho RoadBy W. Bion AdkinsAt Amazon
