


Human isolation is an unnatural condition.  It antagonizes the highest
and best interests of the world.  Its influence is never beneficent,
but always and necessarily harmful.  If the truest well being of the
universe, and the supremest glory of Jehovah could have been attained
by conditions of solitude, it is not impossible that the good
All-Father would have given to every man a continent, and so have made
him monarch of all he surveyed.
Physically regarded, there is no limit to Omnipotent power.  A
continent, and even a world, was therefore within the pale of divine
possibilities.  Jehovah, however, is not only great, but he is the
Greatness of Goodness.  High and holy ends were to be accomplished, and
happy purposes to be secured, by means of human instrumentalities, and
be jointly shared by Creator and creature.
Among the earliest of Deific utterances, therefore, we have this: “It
is not good that man should be alone.”  I concede that, primarily, the
companionship of woman is here intended.  But the declaration is not
only good in this, but equally so in other regards.  A lifetime of
solitude with no incentives to action–nothing to draw out, exercise
and expand the latent powers of the soul–no interchange of thought–no
clashing of opinion–no towering resolves to stimulate–no difficulties
to surmount!  What imagination so fertile that it could picture a more
hateful or intolerable Hades than would be such a condition of affairs?
Hence, in the early days of the world’s history we discern the
principle of association and co-operation, with plans and systems
embodying its practical application.  Organizations came into being,
obedient to the summons of necessity.  How well the various
organizations have wrought along the pathway of centuries, and how
great or small may have been the measure of their success, I am not
here to discuss, much less to determine.  Each has done its work in its
own way, and pockets responsibility for results.  Common courtesy and
candor suggest that each has been largely animated by highest and
worthiest of motives.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Jericho Road” by W. Bion Adkins belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Jericho RoadBy W. Bion AdkinsAt Amazon
