


“Oh, mother,” said Mabel, kneeling by the bed; “cannot you understand
what has happened?”
She had tried desperately to tell the old lady of the extraordinary
change that had taken place in the world–and without success. It seemed
to her that some great issue depended on it; that it would be piteous if
the old woman went out into the dark unconscious of what had come. It
was as if a Christian knelt by the death-bed of a Jew on the first
Easter Monday. But the old lady lay in her bed, terrified but obdurate.
“Mother,” said the girl, “let me tell you again. Do you not understand
that all which Jesus Christ promised has come true, though in another
way? The reign of God has really begun; but we know now who God is. You
said just now you wanted the Forgiveness of Sins; well, you have that;
we all have it, because there is no such thing as sin. There is only
Crime. And then Communion. You used to believe that that made you a
partaker of God; well, we are all partakers of God, because we are human
beings. Don’t you see that Christianity is only one way of saying all
that? I dare say it was the only way, for a time; but that is all over
now. Oh! and how much better this is! It is true–true. You can see it
to be true!”
She paused a moment, forcing herself to look at that piteous old face,
the flushed wrinkled cheeks, the writhing knotted hands on the coverlet.
“Look how Christianity has failed–how it has divided people; think of
all the cruelties–the Inquisition, the Religious Wars; the separations
between husband and wife and parents and children–the disobedience to
the State, the treasons. Oh! you cannot believe that these were right.
What kind of a God would that be! And then Hell; how could you ever have
believed in that?... Oh! mother, don’t believe anything so frightful....
Don’t you understand that that God has gone–that He never existed at
all–that it was all a hideous nightmare; and that now we all know at
last what the truth is.... Mother! think of what happened last
night–how He came–the Man of whom you were so frightened. I told you
what He was like–so quiet and strong–how every one was silent–of
the–the extraordinary atmosphere, and how six millions of people saw
Him. And think what He has done–how He has healed all the old
wounds–how the whole world is at peace at last–and of what is going to
happen. Oh! mother, give up those horrible old lies; give them up; be
brave.”
“The priest, the priest!” moaned the old woman at last.
“Oh! no, no, no–not the priest; he can do nothing. He knows it’s all
lies, too!”
“The priest! the priest!” moaned the other again. “He can tell you; he
knows the answer.”
Her face was convulsed with effort, and her old fingers fumbled and
twisted with the rosary. Mabel grew suddenly frightened, and stood up.
“Oh! mother!” She stooped and kissed her. “There! I won’t say any more
now. But just think about it quietly. Don’t be in the least afraid; it
is all perfectly right.”
She stood a moment, still looking compassionately down; torn by sympathy
and desire. No! it was no use now; she must wait till the next day.
“I’ll look in again presently,” she said, “when you have had dinner.
Mother! don’t look like that! Kiss me!”
It was astonishing, she told herself that evening, how any one could be
so blind. And what a confession of weakness, too, to call only for the
priest! It was ludicrous, absurd! She herself was filled with an
extraordinary peace. Even death itself seemed now no longer terrible,
for was not death swallowed up in victory? She contrasted the selfish
individualism of the Christian, who sobbed and shrank from death, or, at
the best, thought of it only as the gate to his own eternal life, with
the free altruism of the New Believer who asked no more than that Man
should live and grow, that the Spirit of the World should triumph and
reveal Himself, while he, the unit, was content to sink back into that
reservoir of energy from which he drew his life. At this moment she
would have suffered anything, faced death cheerfully–she contemplated
even the old woman upstairs with pity–for was it not piteous that death
should not bring her to herself and reality?
She was in a quiet whirl of intoxication; it was as if the heavy veil of
sense had rolled back at last and shown a sweet, eternal landscape
behind–a shadowless land of peace where the lion lay down with the
lamb, and the leopard with the kid. There should be war no more: that
bloody spectre was dead, and with him the brood of evil that lived in
his shadow–superstition, conflict, terror, and unreality. The idols
were smashed, and rats had run out; Jehovah was fallen; the wild-eyed
dreamer of Galilee was in his grave; the reign of priests was ended. And
in their place stood a strange, quiet figure of indomitable power and
unruffled tenderness.... He whom she had seen–the Son of Man, the
Saviour of the world, as she had called Him just now–He who bore these
titles was no longer a monstrous figure, half God and half man, claiming
both natures and possessing neither; one who was tempted without
temptation, and who conquered without merit, as his followers said. Here
was one instead whom she could follow, a god indeed and a man as well–a
god because human, and a man because so divine.
She said no more that night. She looked into the bedroom for a few
minutes, and saw the old woman asleep. Her old hand lay out on the
coverlet, and still between the fingers was twisted the silly string of
beads. Mabel went softly across in the shaded light, and tried to detach
it; but the wrinkled fingers writhed and closed, and a murmur came from
the half-open lips. Ah! how piteous it was, thought the girl, how
hopeless that a soul should flow out into such darkness, unwilling to
make the supreme, generous surrender, and lay down its life because life
itself demanded it!
Then she went to her own room.
The clocks were chiming three, and the grey dawn lay on the walls, when
she awoke to find by her bed the woman who had sat with the old lady.
“Come at once, madam; Mrs. Brand is dying.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
