


Mabel remembered her husband’s advice to watch, and for a few days did
her best. But there was nothing that alarmed her. The old lady was a
little quiet, perhaps, but went about her minute affairs as usual. She
asked the girl to read to her sometimes, and listened unblenching to
whatever was offered her; she attended in the kitchen daily, organised
varieties of food, and appeared interested in all that concerned her
son. She packed his bag with her own hands, set out his furs for the
swift flight to Paris, and waved to him from the window as he went down
the little path towards the junction. He would be gone three days, he
said.
It was on the evening of the second day that she fell ill; and Mabel,
running upstairs, in alarm at the message of the servant, found her
rather flushed and agitated in her chair.
“It is nothing, my dear,” said the old lady tremulously; and she added
the description of a symptom or two.
Mabel got her to bed, sent for the doctor, and sat down to wait.
She was sincerely fond of the old lady, and had always found her
presence in the house a quiet sort of delight. The effect of her upon
the mind was as that of an easy-chair upon the body. The old lady was so
tranquil and human, so absorbed in small external matters, so
reminiscent now and then of the days of her youth, so utterly without
resentment or peevishness. It seemed curiously pathetic to the girl to
watch that quiet old spirit approach its extinction, or rather, as Mabel
believed, its loss of personality in the reabsorption into the Spirit of
Life which informed the world. She found less difficulty in
contemplating the end of a vigorous soul, for in that case she imagined
a kind of energetic rush of force back into the origin of things; but in
this peaceful old lady there was so little energy; her whole point, so
to speak, lay in the delicate little fabric of personality, built out of
fragile things into an entity far more significant than the sum of its
component parts: the death of a flower, reflected Mabel, is sadder than
the death of a lion; the breaking of a piece of china more irreparable
than the ruin of a palace.
“It is syncope,” said the doctor when he came in. “She may die at any
time; she may live ten years.”
“There is no need to telegraph for Mr. Brand?”
He made a little deprecating movement with his hands.
“It is not certain that she will die–it is not imminent?” she asked.
“No, no; she may live ten years, I said.”
He added a word or two of advice as to the use of the oxygen injector,
and went away.
The old lady was lying quietly in bed, when the girl went up, and put
out a wrinkled hand.
“Well, my dear?” she asked.
“It is just a little weakness, mother. You must lie quiet and do
nothing. Shall I read to you?”
“No, my dear; I will think a little.”
It was no part of Mabel’s idea to duty to tell her that she was in
danger, for there was no past to set straight, no Judge to be
confronted. Death was an ending, not a beginning. It was a peaceful
Gospel; at least, it became peaceful as soon as the end had come.
So the girl went downstairs once more, with a quiet little ache at her
heart that refused to be still.
What a strange and beautiful thing death was, she told herself–this
resolution of a chord that had hung suspended for thirty, fifty or
seventy years–back again into the stillness of the huge Instrument that
was all in all to itself. Those same notes would be struck again, were
being struck again even now all over the world, though with an infinite
delicacy of difference in the touch; but that particular emotion was
gone: it was foolish to think that it was sounding eternally elsewhere,
for there was no elsewhere. She, too, herself would cease one day, let
her see to it that the tone was pure and lovely.
Mr. Phillips arrived the next morning as usual, just as Mabel had left
the old lady’s room, and asked news of her.
“She is a little better, I think,” said Mabel. “She must be very quiet
all day.”
The secretary bowed and turned aside into Oliver’s room, where a heap of
letters lay to be answered.
A couple of hours later, as Mabel went upstairs once more, she met Mr.
Phillips coming down. He looked a little flushed under his sallow skin.
“Mrs. Brand sent for me,” he said. “She wished to know whether Mr.
Oliver would be back to-night.”
“He will, will he not? You have not heard?”
“Mr. Brand said he would be here for a late dinner. He will reach London
at nineteen.”
“And is there any other news?”
He compressed his lips.
“There are rumours,” he said. “Mr. Brand wired to me an hour ago.”
He seemed moved at something, and Mabel looked at him in astonishment.
“It is not Eastern news?” she asked.
His eyebrows wrinkled a little.
“You must forgive me, Mrs. Brand,” he said. “I am not at liberty to say
anything.”
She was not offended, for she trusted her husband too well; but she went
on into the sick-room with her heart beating.
The old lady, too, seemed excited. She lay in bed with a clear flush in
her white cheeks, and hardly smiled at all to the girl’s greeting.
“Well, you have seen Mr. Phillips, then?” said Mabel.
Old Mrs. Brand looked at her sharply an instant, but said nothing.
“Don’t excite yourself, mother. Oliver will be back to-night.”
The old lady drew a long breath.
“Don’t trouble about me, my dear,” she said. “I shall do very well now.
He will be back to dinner, will he not?”
“If the volor is not late. Now, mother, are you ready for breakfast?”
Mabel passed an afternoon of considerable agitation. It was certain that
something had happened. The secretary, who breakfasted with her in the
parlour looking on to the garden, had appeared strangely excited. He had
told her that he would be away the rest of the day: Mr. Oliver had given
him his instructions. He had refrained from all discussion of the
Eastern question, and he had given her no news of the Paris Convention;
he only repeated that Mr. Oliver would be back that night. Then he had
gone of in a hurry half-an-hour later.
The old lady seemed asleep when the girl went up afterwards, and Mabel
did not like to disturb her. Neither did she like to leave the house; so
she walked by herself in the garden, thinking and hoping and fearing,
till the long shadow lay across the path, and the tumbled platform of
roofs was bathed in a dusty green haze from the west.
As she came in she took up the evening paper, but there was no news
there except to the effect that the Convention would close that
afternoon.
Twenty o’clock came, but there was no sign of Oliver. The Paris volor
should have arrived an hour before, but Mabel, staring out into the
darkening heavens had seen the stars come out like jewels one by one,
but no slender winged fish pass overhead. Of course she might have
missed it; there was no depending on its exact course; but she had seen
it a hundred times before, and wondered unreasonably why she had not
seen it now. But she would not sit down to dinner, and paced up and
down in her white dress, turning again and again to the window,
listening to the soft rush of the trains, the faint hoots from the
track, and the musical chords from the junction a mile away. The lights
were up by now, and the vast sweep of the towns looked like fairyland
between the earthly light and the heavenly darkness. Why did not Oliver
come, or at least let her know why he did not?
Once she went upstairs, miserably anxious herself, to reassure the old
lady, and found her again very drowsy.
“He is not come,” she said. “I dare say he may be kept in Paris.”
The old face on the pillow nodded and murmured, and Mabel went down
again. It was now an hour after dinner-time.
Oh! there were a hundred things that might have kept him. He had often
been later than this: he might have missed the volor he meant to catch;
the Convention might have been prolonged; he might be exhausted, and
think it better to sleep in Paris after all, and have forgotten to wire.
He might even have wired to Mr. Phillips, and the secretary have
forgotten to pass on the message.
She went at last, hopelessly, to the telephone, and looked at it. There
it was, that round silent month, that little row of labelled buttons.
She half decided to touch them one by one, and inquire whether anything
had been heard of her husband: there was his club, his office in
Whitehall, Mr. Phillips’s house, Parliament-house, and the rest. But she
hesitated, telling herself to be patient. Oliver hated interference, and
he would surely soon remember and relieve her anxiety.
Then, even as she turned away, the bell rang sharply, and a white label
flashed into sight.–WHITEHALL.
She pressed the corresponding button, and, her hand shaking so much that
she could scarcely hold the receiver to her ear, she listened.
“Who is there?”
Her heart leaped at the sound of her husband’s voice, tiny and minute
across the miles of wire.
“I–Mabel,” she said. “Alone here.”
“Oh! Mabel. Very well. I am back: all is well. Now listen. Can you
hear?”
“Yes, yes.”
“The best has happened. It is all over in the East. Felsenburgh has done
it. Now listen. I cannot come home to-night. It will be announced in
Paul’s House in two hours from now. We are communicating with the Press.
Come up here to me at once. You must be present.... Can you hear?”
“Oh, yes.”
“Come then at once. It will be the greatest thing in history. Tell no
one. Come before the rush begins. In half-an-hour the way will be
stopped.”
“Oliver.”
“Yes? Quick.”
“Mother is ill. Shall I leave her?”
“How ill?”
“Oh, no immediate danger. The doctor has seen her.”
There was silence for a moment.
“Yes; come then. We will go back to-night anyhow, then. Tell her we
shall be late.”
“Very well.”
” ... Yes, you must come. Felsenburgh will be there.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
