


They still had food left in their knapsacks, and they ate a portion,
drinking afterward from the creek. Then they resumed their places
in the dense undergrowth, where they could watch well and yet remain
hidden. They could also see from where they lay the shimmering waters
of Andiatarocte, and the lake seemed to be once more at peace. They
felt satisfaction that they had completed their part of the great
enterprise, but their anxiety nevertheless was intense. As Willet had
truly said, Tayoga’s share was the more dangerous and delicate by far.
“Do you think he will come?” Robert asked after a long silence.
“If any human being could come under such circumstances and bring
Grosvenor with him, it is Tayoga,” replied the hunter. “I think
sometimes that the Onondaga is superhuman in the forest.”
“Then he will come,” said Robert hopefully.
“Best not place our hopes too high. The hours alone will tell. It’s
hard work waiting, but that’s our task.”
The morning drew on. Another beautiful day had dawned, but Robert
scarcely noticed its character. He was thinking with all his soul of
Tayoga and Grosvenor. Would they come? Willet was able to read his
mind. He was intensely anxious himself, but he knew that the strain
of waiting upon Robert, with his youthful and imaginative mind, was
greater. He was bound to be suffering cruelly.
“We must give them time,” he said. “Remember that Grosvenor is not
used to the woods, and can’t go through them as fast as we can. We
must have confidence too. We both know what a wonder Tayoga is.”
Robert sprang suddenly to his feet.
“What was that!” he exclaimed.
A sound had come out of the north, just a breath, but it was not the
wind among the leaves, nor yet the distant song of a bird. It was the
faint howl of a wolf, and yet Robert believed that it was not a wolf
that made it.
“Did you hear it?” he repeated.
“Aye, lad, I heard it,” replied the hunter. “’Tis a signal, and ’tis
Tayoga too who comes. But whether he comes alone, or with a friend, I
know not. To tell that we must bide here and see.”
“Should not we send our answer?”
“Nay, lad. He knows where we are. This is the appointed place, and the
fewer signals we give the less likely the enemy is to get a hint we’re
here. I don’t think we will hear from Tayoga again until he shows in
person.”
Robert said no more, knowing full well the truth of the hunter’s
words, but his heart was beating hard, and he stirred nervously. He
had been drawn strongly to Grosvenor, and he knew what a horrible fate
awaited him at the hands of Tandakora, unless the Onondaga saved
him. Nor would there be another chance for interruption by Tayoga or
anybody else. But the minutes passed and he took courage. Tayoga
had not yet come. If alone he would have arrived by this time. His
slowness must be due to the fact that he had Grosvenor with him. More
minutes passed and he heard steps in the undergrowth. Now he was sure.
Tayoga was not alone. His moccasins never left any sound. He stood
up expectant, and two figures appeared among the bushes. They were
Tayoga, calm, his breath unhurried, a faint smile in his dark eyes,
and Grosvenor, exhausted, reeling, his clothing worse torn than ever,
but the light of hope on his face. Robert uttered a cry of joy and
grasped the young Englishman’s hand.
“Thank God, you are here!” he exclaimed.
“I thank God and I thank this wonderful young Indian too,” panted
Grosvenor. “It was a miracle! I had given up hope when he dropped from
the skies and saved me!”
“Sit down and get your breath, man,” said Willet. “Then you can tell
us about it.”
Grosvenor sank upon the ground, and did not speak again until the
pain in his laboring chest was gone. Tayoga leaned against a tree, and
Robert noticed then that he carried an extra rifle and ammunition. The
Onondaga thought of everything. Willet filled his cap with water at
the creek, and brought it to Grosvenor, who drank long and deeply.
“Tastes good!” said the hunter, smiling.
“Like nectar,” said the Englishman, “but it’s nectar to me too to see
both of you, Mr. Willet and Mr. Lennox. I don’t understand yet how it
happened. It’s really and truly a miracle.”
“A miracle mostly of Tayoga’s working,” said the hunter.
“I thought the end of everything for me had come,” said Grosvenor,
“and I was only praying that it might not be harder for me than I
could stand, when the alarm was heard in the forest, and nearly all
the Indians ran off in pursuit of something or other. Only two were
left with me. There was a shot from the woods, one of them fell, this
wonderful friend of yours appeared from the forest, wounded the other,
who took to his heels, then we started running in the other direction,
and here we are. It’s a marvel and I don’t yet see how it was done.”
“Tayoga’s marvelous knowledge of the woods, his skill and his
quickness made the greater part of the miracle,” said the hunter, “and
you see too, Lieutenant Grosvenor, that he even had the forethought
to bring away with him the rifle and ammunition of the fallen warrior,
that you might have arms now that you are strong enough to bear them
again.”
Tayoga without a word handed him the rifle and ammunition, and
Grosvenor felt strength flowing back into his body when he took them.
“Could you eat a bite?” asked Willet.
“I think I could now,” replied the Englishman, “although I’ll confess
I’ve had no appetite up to the present. My situation didn’t permit
hunger.”
Willet handed him a piece of venison and he ate. Meanwhile Tayoga, who
seemed to feel no weariness, and the others were watching. In a short
time the hunter announced that it was time to go.
“We can’t afford to delay here any longer and have ’em overtake us!"
he said. “We’re out of the ring now, and it’s our affair to keep out.
Lieutenant Grosvenor, you can tell us as we go along how you happened
to be the prisoner of Tandakora.”
“It needs only a few words,” said the Englishman as they took their
way southward through the woods. “I was at Albany with a body of
troops, a vanguard for the force that we mean to march against the
French at Ticonderoga. I was sent northward with ten men to scour
the country, and in the woods we were set upon suddenly by savage
warriors. My troopers were either killed or scattered, and I was
taken. That was yesterday morning. Since then I have been hurried
through the forest, I know not where, and I have had a most appalling
experience. As I have said before, I’d long since given up hope for a
miracle like the one that has saved me. What a horrible creature that
giant Indian was!”
“Tandakora is all that you think him and more. He’s been hunting us
too, and when he comes back to his camp he’ll be after us all four
again. So, that’s why we hurry.”
“You’re in no bigger hurry than I am,” said Grosvenor with attempt at
a smile. “If I could find the seven-league boots I’d put them on.”
Tayoga once more led the way, and he examined the forest on all sides
with eyes that saw everything.
Robert and Willet were greatly refreshed by their rest at the creek,
and the promise of life that had been made again so wonderfully put
new strength in Grosvenor’s frame. So they were able to travel at a
good pace, though the three listened continually for any sound that
might indicate pursuit.
Yet as the morning progressed there was no hostile sign and their
confidence rose.
Robert hoped most devoutly that they would soon come within the region
of friends. While the French and Indians held the whole length of Lake
Champlain and it was believed Montcalm would fortify somewhere
near Ticonderoga, yet Lake George was debatable. It was generally
considered within the British and American sphere, although they were
having ample proof that fierce bands of the enemy roved about it at
will.
Aside from the danger there was another reason why he wished so
earnestly for escape from this tenacious pursuit. They were seeing
the bottoms of their knapsacks. One could not live on air and mountain
lakes alone, however splendid they might be, and, although the
wilderness usually furnished food to three such capable hunters,
they could not seek game while Tandakora and his savage warriors were
seeking them. So, their problem was, in a sense, economic, and could
not be fought with weapons only.
At a signal from Willet, who observed that Grosvenor was somewhat
tired, they sank their pace to a slow walk, and in about three hours
stopped entirely, sitting down on fallen timber which had been heaped
in a windrow by a passing hurricane. They were still in dense forest
and had borne away somewhat from Andiatarocte, but, through the
foliage, they caught glimpses of the lake rippling peacefully in
silver and blue and purple.
“Once more I want to thank you fellows for saving me,” said Grosvenor.
“Don’t mention it again,” said the hunter. “In the wilderness we have
to save one another now and then, or none of us would live. Your turn
to rescue us may come before you think.”
“I know nothing of the forest. I feel helpless here.”
“Just the same, you don’t know what weapon Tayoga’s Manitou may place
in your hands. The border brings strange and unexpected chances. But
our present crisis is not over. We’re not saved yet, and we can’t
afford to relax our efforts a particle. What is it, Tayoga?”
The Onondaga, rising from the fallen tree, had gone about twenty yards
into the forest, where he was examining the ground, obviously with
great concentration of both eye and mind. He waited at least a minute
before replying. Then he said:
“Our friend, the lone ranger, Black Rifle, has passed here.”
“How can you know that?” asked Grosvenor in surprise.
“Come and look at his traces,” said Tayoga. “See where he has written
his name in the earth; that is, he has left what you would call in
Europe his visiting card.”
Grosvenor looked attentively at the ground, but he saw only a very
faint impression, and he never would have noticed that had not the
Onondaga pointed it out to him.
“It might have been left by a deer,” he objected.
“Impossible,” said Tayoga. “The entire imprint is not made, but there
is enough to indicate very clearly that a human foot and nothing
else pressed there. Here is another trace, although lighter, and here
another and another. The trail leads southward.”
“But granting it to be that of a man,” Grosvenor again objected, “it
might be that of any one of the thousands who roam the wilderness.”
The great red trailer who had inherited the forest lore of countless
generations smiled.
“It is not any one of the thousands and it could not be,” he said. “It
is easy to tell that. The footsteps are those of a white man, because
they turn out, and not in, as do ours of the red race. That is very
easy; even Dagaeoga here, the great talker, knows it. The footsteps
are far apart, so we are sure that they are those of a tall man; the
imprints are deep, proving them to have been made by a heavy man, and
at the outer edge of the heel the impression is deeper than on the
inner edge. I noticed, when we last saw Black Rifle, which was not
long ago, that he wore moccasins of moose hide, that he had turned
them outward a little, through wear, and that a small strip of the
hardest moose hide had been sewed on the right edge of each heel in
order to keep them level. Those strips have made their marks here.”
“Somebody else might have put strips of hide on his moccasin heels!”
“It is so, but Black Rifle is tall and large and heavy, and we know
that the man who made this trail is tall, large and heavy. The chances
are a hundred to one against the fact that any other man tall, large
and heavy with moose hide strips to even the wear of his moccasin
heels has passed here, especially as this is within the range of Black
Rifle. I know that it is he as truly as I know that I am standing
here.”
“Of course,” said Robert, who had never felt the slightest doubt of
Tayoga’s knowledge. “What was Black Rifle doing?”
“He was looking for St. Luc or Tandakora, because his trail does not
lead straight on. See! here it comes, and here again. If Black Rifle
had been on a journey he would have gone straight, but he is seeking
something and so he turns about. Ah, he wishes to see if there are
any canoes visible on the lake, for lo! the trail now leads toward
the water! Here he found that none was to be seen and here he rested.
Black Rifle had been long on his feet, two days and two nights
perhaps, because it takes much to make him weary. He sat on this log.
He left a strand from the fringe of his buckskin hunting shirt, caught
on a splinter. Do you not see it, Lieutenant Grosvenor?”
“Now that you hold it up before my eyes I notice it But I should never
have found it in the wilderness.” “Minute observation is what every
trailer has to learn,” said Willet, “else you are no trailer at all,
and you’ll learn, Lieutenant, while you are with us, that Tayoga is
probably the greatest trailer the world has ever produced.”
“Peace, Great Bear! Peace!” protested the Onondaga.
“It’s so, just the same. Now, what did Black Rifle do after he rested
himself on the log?”
“He went back farther into the woods, turning away from the lake,"
replied Tayoga, “and he sat down again on another fallen log. Black
Rifle was hungry, and he ate. Here is the small bone of a deer,
picked quite clean, lying on the ground by the log. Black Rifle was a
fortunate man. He had bread, too. See, here is a crumb in this crack
in the log too deep down for any bird to reach with his bill. Black
Rifle sat here quite a long time. He was thinking hard. He did not
need so much time for resting. He remained sitting on the log while he
was trying to decide what he would do. It is likely that Black Rifle
thought a great force was behind him, and he turned back to see. Had
he kept straight on toward the south, as he was going at first, he
would not have needed so much time for thinking over his plans. Ah, he
has turned! Lo! his trail goes almost directly back on his own course.
It will lead to the top of the hillock there, because he wants to see
far, and I think that after seeing he will turn again, and follow his
original course.”
“Why do you think that?” asked Grosvenor.
“Because, O Red Coat, it is likely that Black Rifle knew from the
first which way he wanted to go and went that way. He has merely
turned back, like a wise general, to scout a little, and see that no
danger comes from the rear. Yes, he stood here on the hillock from
which we can get a good view over the country, and walked to every
side of the crest to find where the best view could be obtained. That,
Red Coat, is the simplest of all things. Behold the traces of his
moccasins as he walked from side to side. Nothing else could have made
Black Rifle move about so much in the space of a few square yards. Now
he leaves the hillock and goes down its side toward a low valley in
which runs a brook. Black Rifle is thirsty and will drink deep.”
“That you can’t possibly know, Tayoga.”
“But I do know it, Red Coat.”
“You don’t even know a brook is near.”
“I know it, because I have seen it. My eyes are trained to the forest,
and I caught the gleam of running water through the leaves to the
west. Running water, of course, means a brook. Black Rifle’s trail now
leads toward it, and I assume that he was thirsty because he had just
eaten well. We are nearly always thirsty after eating. But we shall
see whether I am right. Here is the brook, and there are the faint
traces made by Black Rifle’s knees, when he knelt to reach the water.
He started away, but found that he was still thirsty, so he came back
and drank again. Here are his footprints about a yard from the others.
This time, he will go back toward the south, and I think it is sure
that he is looking for St. Luc, who must have gone in that direction
with a strong force, Tandakora having stayed behind to take us. It is
likely that Black Rifle went on, because a great British and American
army is gathering below, which fact he knows well, and it is probable
that Black Rifle follows St. Luc, because he will hunt the biggest
game.”
Grosvenor’s eyes sparkled.
“I understand,” he said. “It is a great art, that of trailing through
the wilderness, and I can see how circumstances compel you to learn
it.”
“We have to learn it to live,” said the hunter gravely, “but with
Tayoga it is an art carried to the highest degree of perfection. He
was born with a gift for it, a very great gift. He inherited all the
learning accumulated by a thousand years of ancestors, and then he
added to it by his own supreme efforts.”
“Do not believe all that Great Bear tells you,” said Tayoga modestly.
“For unknown reasons he is partial to me, and enlarges my small
merits.”
“I think this would be a good place for all of you to wait, while
I went back on the trail a piece,” said the hunter. “If Black Rifle
found it necessary to cover the rear, it’s a much more urgent duty for
us who know that we’ve been followed by Tandakora to do the same.”
“The Great Bear is always wise,” said Tayoga. “We will take our ease
while we await him.”
He flung himself down on the turf and relaxed his figure completely.
He had learned long since to make the most of every passing minute,
and, seeing Robert imitate him exactly, Grosvenor did likewise. The
hunter had disappeared already in the bushes and the three lay in
silence.
Grosvenor felt an immense peace. Brave as a young lion, he had been
overwhelmed nevertheless by his appalling experiences, and his sudden
rescue where rescue seemed impossible had taken him back to the
heights. Now, it seemed to him that the three, and especially the
Onondaga, could do everything. Tayoga’s skill as a trailer and scout
was so marvelous that no enemy could come anywhere near without
his knowledge. The young Englishman felt that he was defended by
impassable walls, and he was so free from apprehension that his nerves
became absolutely quiet. Then worn nature took its toll, and his
eyelids drooped. Before he was aware that he was sleepy he was asleep.
“You might do as Red Coat has done, Dagaeoga,” said Tayoga. “I can
watch for us all, and it is wise in the forest to take sleep when we
can.”
“I’ll try,” said Robert, and he tried so successfully that in a few
minutes he too slumbered, with his figure outstretched, and his head
on his arm. Tayoga made a circle about three hundred yards in diameter
about them, but finding no hostile sign came back and lay on the turf
near them. He relaxed his figure again and closed his eyes, which may
have seemed strange but which was not so in the case of Tayoga. His
hearing was extraordinarily acute, and, when his eyes were shut, it
grew much stronger than ever. Now he knew that no warrior could come
within rifle shot of them without his ears telling him of the savage
approach. Every creeping footstep would be registered upon that
delicate drum.
With eyes shut and brain rested, Tayoga nevertheless knew all that was
going on near him. That eardrum of infinite delicacy told him that a
woodpecker was tapping on a tree, well toward the north; that a little
gray bird almost as far to the south was singing with great vigor and
sweetness; that a rabbit was hopping about in the undergrowth,
curious and yet fearful; that an eagle with a faint whirr of wings
had alighted on a bough, and was looking at the three; that the eagle
thinking they might be dangerous had unfolded his wings again and was
flying away; that a deer passing to the west had caught a whiff
of them on the wind and was running with all speed in the other
direction; that a lynx had climbed a tree, and, after staring at them,
had climbed down again, and had fled, his coward heart filled with
terror.
Thus Tayoga, with his ears, watched his world. He too, his eyelids
lowered, felt a peace that was soothing and almost dreamy, but, though
his body relaxed, those wonderfully sensitive drums of his ears caught
and registered everything. The record showed that for nearly two hours
the life of the wilderness went on as usual, the ordinary work and
play of animal and bird, and then the drums told him that man was
coming. A footstep was registered very clearly, and then another and
another, but Tayoga did not open his eyes. He knew who was coming as
well as if he had seen him. The drums of his ears made signals that
his mind recognized at once. He had long known the faint sound of
those footsteps. Willet was coming back.
Tayoga, through the faculty of hearing, was aware of much more than
the mere fact that the hunter was returning. He knew that Willet had
found nothing, that the pursuit was still far away and that they were
in no immediate danger. He knew it by his easy, regular walk, free
from either haste or lagging delay. He knew it by the straight, direct
line he took for the three young men, devoid of any stops or turnings
aside to watch and listen. Willet’s course was without care.
Tayoga opened his eyes, and lazily regarded the giant figure of his
friend now in full view. Robert and Grosvenor slept on. “I am glad,"
said the Onondaga.
It was significant of the way in which they understood each other and
the way they could read the signs of the forest that they could talk
almost without words.
“So am I,” said the hunter, “but I had hoped for it.”
“Since it is so, we need not awaken them just yet.”
“No, let them sleep another hour.”
Tayoga meant that he was glad the enemy had not approached and Willet
replied that he had hoped for such good luck. No further explanation
was needed.
“You had the heaviest part of the burden to carry, last night,” said
the hunter, “so it would be wise for you to join them if you can, in
the hour that’s left. See if you can’t follow them, at once.”
“I think I can,” said Tayoga. “At least I will try.”
In five minutes he too had gone to the land of dreams and the hunter
watched alone. Willet, although weary, was in high spirits. They had
come marvelously through many perils, and Tayoga’s achievement in
rescuing Grosvenor, he repeated to himself, was well nigh miraculous.
After such startling luck they could not fail, and an omen of
continued good fortune was the fact they had encountered the trail of
Black Rifle. He would be a powerful addition to their little force,
when found, and Willet did not doubt that they would overtake him. The
only problem that really worried him now was that of food. Small
as was their army of four, it had to be provisioned, and, for the
present, he did not see the way to do it.
He let the three sleep overtime, and when they awoke they were
grateful to him for it.
“I am quite made over,” said Grosvenor, “and I think that if I stay in
the wilderness long enough I may learn to be a scout too. But as all
my life has been spent in quite different kinds of country, I suppose
it will take a hundred years to give me a good start.”
Tayoga smiled.
“Not a hundred years,” he said. “Red Coat has begun very well.”
“And now with a lot of good solid food I’ll feel equal to any march,"
continued Grosvenor. “Most Englishmen, you know, eat well.”
Tayoga looked at Robert, who looked at Willet, who in his turn looked
at the Onondaga.
“That’s just what we’ll have to do without,” said the hunter gravely.
“The bottoms of our knapsacks are looking up at us. We’ll have a
splendid chance to see how long we can do without food. One needs such
a test now and then.”
Grosvenor’s face fell, but his was the true mettle. In an instant his
countenance became cheerful again.
“I’m not hungry!” he exclaimed. “It was the delusion of a moment, and
it passed as quickly as it came. I suffer from such brief spells.”
The others laughed.
“That’s the right spirit,” said Willet, “and while we have nothing to
eat we have lots of hope. I’ve been hungrier than this often, and,
as you see, I’ve never starved to death a single time. There’s always
lots of food somewhere in the wilderness, if you only know how to put
your hand on it.”
“I think it is now best for us to follow on the trail of Black Rifle,"
said Tayoga.
“That’s so,” responded the hunter. “It’s grown a lot colder, while
you lads slept, though I think you can follow it without any trouble,
Tayoga.”
The red lad said nothing, but at once picked up the traces, which now
led south, slanting back a little toward the lake.
“Black Rifle was going fast,” he said. “His stride lengthens. He must
have divined where St. Luc with his force lay, and he took a direct
course for it. Ah, he turns suddenly aside and walks to and fro.”
“That’s curious,” said the hunter. “I see the footprints all about.
What did Black Rifle mean by moving about in such a manner?”
“It is not odd at all,” said Tayoga. “Doubtless Black Rifle was
suffering from the same lack that we are, and it was necessary for him
to provision his army of one at once. He suddenly saw a chance to do
so and he turned aside from his direct journey toward the south. So we
shall soon see where Black Rifle shot his bear.”
“And why not a deer?” said Grosvenor.
“Because his trail now leads toward that deep thicket on our right, a
thicket made up of bushes and vines and briars. A deer could not have
gone into it, but a bear could, and we know now it was a bear, because
here are its tracks. Black Rifle killed the bear in the thicket.”
“Are you sure of that, Tayoga?” asked Robert.
“Absolutely sure, Dagaeoga. It is in this case a matter of mind and
not of eye. Black Rifle is too good a hunter to fire a useless shot,
and too experienced to miss his game, when he needs it so badly. He
would take every precaution for success. My mind tells me that it was
impossible for him to miss.”
“And he didn’t miss,” said Robert, as they entered the thicket. “See
where the vines and briars were threshed about by the bear as he fell.
Here are spots of blood, and here goes the path along which he dragged
the body. All this is as plain as day.”
“It was a fat bear too,” said Tayoga. “Although it is early spring he
had found so many good roots and berries that he had more than made
up for the loss of weight in his long winter fast. We will soon find
where Black Rifle cleaned his prize. A bear is too heavy to carry far.
Ah, he did his work just beyond us in the little valley!”
“How do you know that?” asked Grosvenor. “We can’t yet see into the
valley.”
The great red trailer smiled.
“This time, O Red Coat,” he replied, “it is a combination of mind and
eye. Mind tells me that Black Rifle could not clean and dress his bear
unless he got it to water. Mind tells me that a brook is flowing in
the valley just ahead of us, because there is scarcely a valley in the
country that does not have its brook. Eye tells me that Black Rifle
finished his task by the great oak there. Do you not see the huge
buzzards flying above the tree? They are conclusive. Ah, the forest
people gathered fast in numbers! They expected that Black Rifle would
leave them a great feast.”
They found a little brook of clear, cold water and, beside it, the
place where Black Rifle had cleaned his bear, reserving afterward the
choice portion for himself.
“When he went on,” said Tayoga, “the forest people made a rush for
what he did not want, which was much. Great birds came. We cannot see
their trail through the air, but we can see where they hopped about
here on the ground, tore at the flesh, and fought with one another for
the spoil. A lynx came, and then another, and then wolves. The weasel
and the mink too hung on the outskirts, waiting for what the bigger
animals might leave. Among them they left nothing and they were not
long in the task.”
Only shining bones lay on the ground. They had been picked clean and
all the forest people had gone after their brief banquet. The trails
led away in different directions, but that of Black Rifle went on
toward the south. The traces, however, were more distinct than they
had been before he stopped for the bear.
“It is because he is carrying much weight,” said Tayoga. “Black Rifle
no longer skips along like a youth, as Red Coat here does.”
“You can have all the sport with me you wish,” said Grosvenor. “I
don’t forget that you saved my life, when by all the rules of logic it
was lost beyond the hope of recovery.”
“Black Rifle would not eat so much bear meat himself,” said Tayoga,
“nor would he carry such a burden, without good cause. It may be that
he expects us. He has perhaps heard that we are in this region.”
“It’s possible,” said the hunter.
Full of eagerness, they pressed forward on the trail.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Lords of the Wild” by Joseph A. Altsheler belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Lords of the Wild: A Story of the Old New York BorderBy Joseph A. AltshelerAt Amazon
