


As the five-minutes bell began, sounding like a continuous wind-note in
the great vaults overhead, solemn and persistent, Mabel drew a long
breath and leaned back in her seat from the rigid position in which for
the last half-hour she had been staring out at the wonderful sight. She
seemed to herself to have assimilated it at last, to be herself once
more, to have drunk her fill of the triumph and the beauty. She was as
one who looks upon a summer sea on the morning after a storm. And now
the climax was at hand.
From end to end and side to side the interior of the Abbey presented a
great broken mosaic of human faces; living slopes, walls, sections and
curves. The south transept directly opposite to her, from pavement to
rose window, was one sheet of heads; the floor was paved with them, cut
in two by the scarlet of the gangway leading from the chapel of St.
Faith–on the right, the choir beyond the open space before the
sanctuary was a mass of white figures, scarved and surpliced; the high
organ gallery, beneath which the screen had been removed, was crowded
with them, and, far down beneath, the dim nave stretched the same
endless pale living pavement to the shadow beneath the west window.
Between every group of columns behind the choir-stalls, before her, to
right, left, and behind, were platforms contrived in the masonry; and
the exquisite roof, fan-tracery and soaring capital, alone gave the eye
an escape from humanity. The whole vast space was full, it seemed, of
delicate sunlight that streamed in from the artificial light set outside
each window, and poured the ruby and the purple and the blue from the
old glass in long shafts of colour across the dusty air, and in broken
patches on the faces and dresses behind. The murmur of ten thousand
voices filled the place, supplying, it seemed, a solemn accompaniment to
that melodious note that now pulsed above it. And finally, more
significant than all, was the empty carpeted sanctuary at her feet, the
enormous altar with its flight of steps, the gorgeous curtain and the
great untenanted sedilia.
Mabel needed some such reassurance, for last night, until the coming of
Oliver, had passed for her as a kind of appalling waking dream. From the
first shock of what she had seen outside the church, through those hours
of waiting, with the knowledge that this was the way in which the Spirit
of Peace asserted its superiority, up to that last moment when, in her
husband’s arms, she had learned of the Fall of Rome, it had appeared to
her as if her new world had suddenly corrupted about her. It was
incredible, she told herself, that this ravening monster, dripping blood
from claws and teeth, that had arisen roaring in the night, could be the
Humanity that had become her God. She had thought revenge and cruelty
and slaughter to be the brood of Christian superstition, dead and buried
under the new-born angel of light, and now it seemed that the monsters
yet stirred and lived. All the evening she had sat, walked, lain about
her quiet house with the horror heavy about her, flinging open a window
now and again in the icy air to listen with clenched hands to the cries
and the roarings of the mob that raged in the streets beneath, the
clanks, the yells and the hoots of the motor-trains that tore up from
the country to swell the frenzy of the city–to watch the red glow of
fire, the volumes of smoke that heaved up from the burning chapels and
convents.
She had questioned, doubted, resisted her doubts, flung out frantic acts
of faith, attempted to renew the confidence that she attained in her
meditation, told herself that traditions died slowly; she had knelt,
crying out to the spirit of peace that lay, as she knew so well, at the
heart of man, though overwhelmed for the moment by evil passion. A line
or two ran in her head from one of the old Victorian poets:
You doubt If any one Could think or bid it? How could it come about?...
Who did it? Not men! Not here! Oh! not beneath the sun.... The torch
that smouldered till the cup o’er-ran The wrath of God which is the
wrath of Man!
She had even contemplated death, as she had told her husband–the taking
of her own life, in a great despair with the world. Seriously she had
thought of it; it was an escape perfectly in accord with her morality.
The useless and agonising were put out of the world by common consent;
the Euthanasia houses witnessed to it. Then why not she?... For she
could not bear it!... Then Oliver had come, she had fought her way back
to sanity and confidence; and the phantom had gone again.
How sensible and quiet he had been, she was beginning to tell herself
now, as the quiet influence of this huge throng in this glorious place
of worship possessed her once more–how reasonable in his explanation
that man was even now only convalescent and therefore liable to relapse.
She had told herself that again and again during the night, but it had
been different when he had said so. His personality had once more
prevailed; and the name of Felsenburgh had finished the work.
“If He were but here!” she sighed. But she knew He was far away.
It was not until a quarter to eleven that she understood that the crowds
outside were clamouring for Him too, and that knowledge reassured her
yet further. They knew, then, these wild tigers, where their redemption
lay; they understood what was their ideal, even if they had not attained
to it. Ah! if He were but here, there would be no more question: the
sullen waves would sink beneath His call of peace, the hazy clouds lift,
the rumble die to silence. But He was away–away on some strange
business. Well; He knew His work. He would surely come soon again to His
children who needed Him so terribly.
She had the good fortune to be alone in a crowd. Her neighbour, a
grizzled old man with his daughters beyond, was her only neighbour, and
a stranger. At her left rose up the red-covered barricade over which she
could see the sanctuary and the curtain; and her seat in the tribune,
raised some eight feet above the floor, removed her from any possibility
of conversation. She was thankful for that: she did not want to talk;
she wanted only to control her faculties in silence, to reassert her
faith, to look out over this enormous throng gathered to pay homage to
the great Spirit whom they had betrayed, to renew her own courage and
faithfulness. She wondered what the preacher would say, whether there
would be any note of penitence. Maternity was his subject–that benign
aspect of universal life–tenderness, love, quiet, receptive, protective
passion, the spirit that soothes rather than inspires, that busies
itself with peaceful tasks, that kindles the lights and fires of home,
that gives sleep, food and welcome....
The bell stopped, and in the instant before the music began she heard,
clear above the murmur within, the roar of the crowds outside, who still
demanded their God. Then, with a crash, the huge organ awoke, pierced by
the cry of the trumpets and the maddening throb of drums. There was no
delicate prelude here, no slow stirring of life rising through
labyrinths of mystery to the climax of sight–here rather was full-orbed
day, the high noon of knowledge and power, the dayspring from on high,
dawning in mid-heaven. Her heart quickened to meet it, and her reviving
confidence, still convalescent, stirred and smiled, as the tremendous
chords blared overhead, telling of triumph full-armed. God was man,
then, after all–a God who last night had faltered for an hour, but who
rose again on this morning of a new year, scattering mists, dominant
over his own passion, all-compelling and all-beloved. God was man, and
Felsenburgh his Incarnation! Yes, she must believe that! She did
believe that!
Then she saw how already the long procession was winding up beneath the
screen, and by imperceptible art the light grew yet more acutely
beautiful. They were coming, then, those ministers of a pure worship;
grave men who knew in what they believed, and who, even if they did not
at this moment thrill with feeling (for she knew that in this respect
her husband for one did not), yet believed the principles of this
worship and recognised their need of expression for the majority of
mankind–coming slowly up in fours and pairs and units, led by robed
vergers, rippling over the steps, and emerging again into the coloured
sunlight in all their bravery of Masonic apron, badge and jewel. Surely
here was reassurance enough.
The sanctuary now held a figure or two. Anxious-faced Mr. Francis, in
his robes of office, came gravely down the steps and stood awaiting the
procession, directing with almost imperceptible motions his satellites
who hovered about the aisles ready to point this way and that to the
advancing stream; and the western-most seats were already beginning to
fill, when on a sudden she recognised that something had happened.
Just now the roaring of the mob outside had provided a kind of underbass
to the music within, imperceptible except to sub-consciousness, but
clearly discernible in its absence; and this absence was now a fact.
At first she thought that the signal of beginning worship had hushed
them; and then, with an indescribable thrill, she remembered that in all
her knowledge only one thing had ever availed to quiet a turbulent
crowd. Yet she was not sure; it might be an illusion. Even now the mob
might be roaring still, and she only deaf to it; but again with an
ecstasy that was very near to agony she perceived that the murmur of
voices even within the building had ceased, and that some great wave of
emotion was stirring the sheets and slopes of faces before her as a wind
stirs wheat. A moment later, and she was on her feet, gripping the rail,
with her heart like an over-driven engine beating pulses of blood,
furious and insistent, through every vein; for with great rushing surge
that sounded like a sigh, heard even above the triumphant tumult
overhead, the whole enormous assemblage had risen to its feet.
Confusion seemed to break out in the orderly procession. She saw Mr.
Francis run forward quickly, gesticulating like a conductor, and at his
signal the long line swayed forward, split, recoiled, and again slid
swiftly forward, breaking as it did so into twenty streams that poured
along the seats and filled them in a moment. Men ran and pushed, aprons
flapped, hands beckoned, all without coherent words. There was a
knocking of feet, the crash of an overturned chair, and then, as if a
god had lifted his hand for quiet, the music ceased abruptly, sending a
wild echo that swooned and died in a moment; a great sigh filled its
place, and, in the coloured sunshine that lay along the immense length
of the gangway that ran open now from west to east, far down in the
distant nave, a single figure was seen advancing.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
