


“Ah! it is journalese,” said Oliver, at last, leaning back. “Tawdry
stuff! But–but the thing!”
Mabel got up, passed across to the window-seat, and sat down. Her lips
opened once or twice, but she said nothing.
“My darling,” cried the man, “have you nothing to say?”
She looked at him tremulously a moment.
“Say!” she said. “As you said, What is the use of words?”
“Tell me again,” said Oliver. “How do I know it is not a dream?”
“A dream,” she said. “Was there ever a dream like this?”
Again she got up restlessly, came across the floor, and knelt down by
her husband once more, taking his hands in hers.
“My dear,” she said, “I tell you it is not a dream. It is reality at
last. I was there too–do you not remember? You waited for me when all
was over–when He was gone out–we saw Him together, you and I. We heard
Him–you on the platform and I in the gallery. We saw Him again pass up
the Embankment as we stood in the crowd. Then we came home and we found
the priest.”
Her face was transfigured as she spoke. It was as of one who saw a
Divine Vision. She spoke very quietly, without excitement or hysteria.
Oliver stared at her a moment; then he bent forward and kissed her
gently.
“Yes, my darling; it is true. But I want to hear it again and again.
Tell me again what you saw.”
“I saw the Son of Man,” she said. “Oh! there is no other phrase. The
Saviour of the world, as that paper says. I knew Him in my heart as soon
as I saw Him–as we all did–as soon as He stood there holding the rail.
It was like a glory round his head. I understand it all now. It was He
for whom we have waited so long; and He has come, bringing Peace and
Goodwill in His hands. When He spoke, I knew it again. His voice was
as–as the sound of the sea–as simple as that–as–as lamentable–as
strong as that.–Did you not hear it?”
Oliver bowed his head.
“I can trust Him for all the rest,” went on the girl softly. “I do not
know where He is, nor when He will come back, nor what He will do. I
suppose there is a great deal for Him to do, before He is fully
known–laws, reforms–that will be your business, my dear. And the rest
of us must wait, and love, and be content.”
Oliver again lifted his face and looked at her.
“Mabel, my dear–-”
“Oh! I knew it even last night,” she said, “but I did not know that I
knew it till I awoke to-day and remembered. I dreamed of Him all
night.... Oliver, where is He?”
He shook his head.
“Yes, I know where He is, but I am under oath–-”
She nodded quickly, and stood up.
“Yes. I should not have asked that. Well, we are content to wait.”
There was silence for a moment or two. Oliver broke it.
“My dear, what do you mean when you say that He is not yet known?”
“I mean just that,” she said. “The rest only know what He has done–not
what He is; but that, too, will come in time.”
“And meanwhile–-”
“Meanwhile, you must work; the rest will come by and bye. Oh! Oliver, be
strong and faithful.”
She kissed him quickly, and went out.
Oliver sat on without moving, staring, as his habit was, out at the wide
view beyond his windows. This time yesterday he was leaving Paris,
knowing the fact indeed–for the delegates had arrived an hour
before–but ignorant of the Man. Now he knew the Man as well–at least
he had seen Him, heard Him, and stood enchanted under the glow of His
personality. He could explain it to himself no more than could any one
else–unless, perhaps, it were Mabel. The others had been as he had
been: awed and overcome, yet at the same time kindled in the very depths
of their souls. They had come out–Snowford, Cartwright, Pemberton, and
the rest–on to the steps of Paul’s House, following that strange
figure. They had intended to say something, but they were dumb as they
saw the sea of white faces, heard the groan and the silence, and
experienced that compelling wave of magnetism that surged up like
something physical, as the volor rose and started on that indescribable
progress.
Once more he had seen Him, as he and Mabel stood together on the deck of
the electric boat that carried them south. The white ship had passed
along overhead, smooth and steady, above the heads of that vast
multitude, bearing Him who, if any had the right to that title, was
indeed the Saviour of the world. Then they had come home, and found the
priest.
That, too, had been a shock to him; for, at first sight, it seemed that
this priest was the very man he had seen ascend the rostrum two hours
before. It was an extraordinary likeness–the same young face and white
hair. Mabel, of course, had not noticed it; for she had only seen
Felsenburgh at a great distance; and he himself had soon been reassured.
And as for his mother–it was terrible enough; if it had not been for
Mabel there would have been violence done last night. How collected and
reasonable she had been! And, as for his mother–he must leave her alone
for the present. By and bye, perhaps, something might be done. The
future! It was that which engrossed him–the future, and the absorbing
power of the personality under whose dominion he had fallen last night.
All else seemed insignificant now–even his mother’s defection, her
illness–all paled before this new dawn of an unknown sun. And in an
hour he would know more; he was summoned to Westminster to a meeting of
the whole House; their proposals to Felsenburgh were to be formulated;
it was intended to offer him a great position.
Yes, as Mabel had said; this was now their work–to carry into effect
the new principle that had suddenly become incarnate in this grey-haired
young American–the principle of Universal Brotherhood. It would mean
enormous labour; all foreign relations would have to be
readjusted–trade, policy, methods of government–all demanded
re-statement. Europe was already organised internally on a basis of
mutual protection: that basis was now gone. There was no more any
protection, because there was no more any menace. Enormous labour, too,
awaited the Government in other directions. A Blue-book must be
prepared, containing a complete report of the proceedings in the East,
together with the text of the Treaty which had been laid before them in
Paris, signed by the Eastern Emperor, the feudal kings, the Turkish
Republic, and countersigned by the American plenipotentiaries....
Finally, even home politics required reform: the friction of old strife
between centre and extremes must cease forthwith–there must be but one
party now, and that at the Prophet’s disposal.... He grew bewildered as
he regarded the prospect, and saw how the whole plane of the world was
shifted, how the entire foundation of western life required
readjustment. It was a Revolution indeed, a cataclysm more stupendous
than even invasion itself; but it was the conversion of darkness into
light, and chaos into order.
He drew a deep breath, and so sat pondering.
Mabel came down to him half-an-hour later, as he dined early before
starting for Whitehall.
“Mother is quieter,” she said. “We must be very patient, Oliver. Have
you decided yet as to whether the priest is to come again?”
He shook his head.
“I can think of nothing,” he said, “but of what I have to do. You
decide, my dear; I leave it in your hands.”
She nodded.
“I will talk to her again presently. Just now she can understand very
little of what has happened.... What time shall you be home?”
“Probably not to-night. We shall sit all night.”
“Yes, dear. And what shall I tell Mr. Phillips?”
“I will telephone in the morning.... Mabel, do you remember what I told
you about the priest?”
“His likeness to the other?”
“Yes. What do you make of that?”
She smiled.
“I make nothing at all of it. Why should they not be alike?”
He took a fig from the dish, and swallowed it, and stood up.
“It is only very curious,” he said. “Now, good-night, my dear.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
