


I
Old Mrs. Brand and Mabel were seated at a window of the new Admiralty
Offices in Trafalgar Square to see Oliver deliver his speech on the
fiftieth anniversary of the passing of the Poor Laws Reform.
It was an inspiriting sight, this bright June morning, to see the crowds
gathering round Braithwaite’s statue. That politician, dead fifteen
years before, was represented in his famous attitude, with arms
outstretched and down dropped, his head up and one foot slightly
advanced, and to-day was decked, as was becoming more and more usual on
such occasions, in his Masonic insignia. It was he who had given
immense impetus to that secret movement by his declaration in the House
that the key of future progress and brotherhood of nations was in the
hands of the Order. It was through this alone that the false unity of
the Church with its fantastic spiritual fraternity could be
counteracted. St. Paul had been right, he declared, in his desire to
break down the partition-walls between nations, and wrong only in his
exaltation of Jesus Christ. Thus he had preluded his speech on the Poor
Law question, pointing to the true charity that existed among Masons
apart from religious motive, and appealing to the famous benefactions on
the Continent; and in the enthusiasm of the Bill’s success the Order had
received a great accession of members.
Old Mrs. Brand was in her best to-day, and looked out with considerable
excitement at the huge throng gathered to hear her son speak. A platform
was erected round the bronze statue at such a height that the statesman
appeared to be one of the speakers, though at a slightly higher
elevation, and this platform was hung with roses, surmounted by a
sounding-board, and set with a chair and table.
The whole square round about was paved with heads and resonant with
sound, the murmurs of thousands of voices, overpowered now and again by
the crash of brass and thunder of drums as the Benefit Societies and
democratic Guilds, each headed by a banner, deployed from North, South,
East and West, and converged towards the wide railed space about the
platform where room was reserved for them. The windows on every side
were packed with faces; tall stands were erected along the front of the
National Gallery and St. Martin’s Church, garden-beds of colour behind
the mute, white statues that faced outwards round the square; from
Braithwaite in front, past the Victorians–John Davidson, John Burns,
and the rest–round to Hampden and de Montfort towards the north. The
old column was gone, with its lions. Nelson had not been found
advantageous to the Entente Cordiale, nor the lions to the new art;
and in their place stretched a wide pavement broken by slopes of steps
that led up to the National Gallery.
Overhead the roofs showed crowded friezes of heads against the blue
summer sky. Not less than one hundred thousand persons, it was estimated
in the evening papers, were collected within sight and sound of the
platform by noon.
As the clocks began to tell the hour, two figures appeared from behind
the statue and came forward, and, in an instant, the murmurs of talk
rose into cheering.
Old Lord Pemberton came first, a grey-haired, upright man, whose father
had been active in denouncing the House of which he was a member on the
occasion of its fall over seventy years ago, and his son had succeeded
him worthily. This man was now a member of the Government, and sat for
Manchester (3); and it was he who was to be chairman on this auspicious
occasion. Behind him came Oliver, bareheaded and spruce, and even at
that distance his mother and wife could see his brisk movement, his
sudden smile and nod as his name emerged from the storm of sound that
surged round the platform. Lord Pemberton came forward, lifted his hand
and made a signal; and in a moment the thin cheering died under the
sudden roll of drums beneath that preluded the Masonic Hymn.
There was no doubt that these Londoners could sing. It was as if a giant
voice hummed the sonorous melody, rising to enthusiasm till the music of
massed bands followed it as a flag follows a flag-stick. The hymn was
one composed ten years before, and all England was familiar with it.
Old Mrs. Bland lifted the printed paper mechanically to her eyes, and
saw the words that she knew so well:
“_The Lord that dwells in earth and sea.” ...
She glanced down the verses, that from the Humanitarian point of view
had been composed with both skill and ardour. They had a religious ring;
the unintelligent Christian could sing them without a qualm; yet their
sense was plain enough–the old human creed that man was all. Even
Christ’s, words themselves were quoted. The kingdom of God, it was said,
lay within the human heart, and the greatest of all graces was Charity.
She glanced at Mabel, and saw that the girl was singing with all her
might, with her eyes fixed on her husband’s dark figure a hundred yards
away, and her soul pouring through them. So the mother, too, began to
move her lips in chorus with that vast volume of sound.
As the hymn died away, and before the cheering could begin again, old
Lord Pemberton was standing forward on the edge of the platform, and his
thin, metallic voice piped a sentence or two across the tinkling splash
of the fountains behind him. Then he stepped back, and Oliver came
forward.
It was too far for the two to hear what was said, but Mabel slipped a
paper, smiling tremulously, into the old lady’s hand, and herself bent
forward to listen.
Old Mrs. Brand looked at that, too, knowing that it was an analysis of
her son’s speech, and aware that she would not be able to hear his
words.
There was an exordium first, congratulating all who were present to do
honour to the great man who presided from his pedestal on the occasion
of this great anniversary. Then there came a retrospect, comparing the
old state of England with the present. Fifty years ago, the speaker
said, poverty was still a disgrace, now it was so no longer. It was in
the causes that led to poverty that the disgrace or the merit lay. Who
would not honour a man worn out in the service of his country, or
overcome at last by circumstances against which his efforts could not
prevail?... He enumerated the reforms passed fifty years before on this
very day, by which the nation once and for all declared the glory of
poverty and man’s sympathy with the unfortunate.
So he had told them he was to sing the praise of patient poverty and its
reward, and that, he supposed, together with a few periods on the reform
of the prison laws, would form the first half of his speech.
The second part was to be a panegyric of Braithwaite, treating him as
the Precursor of a movement that even now had begun.
Old Mrs. Brand leaned back in her seat, and looked about her.
The window where they sat had been reserved for them; two arm-chairs
filled the space, but immediately behind there were others, standing
very silent now, craning forward, watching, too, with parted lips: a
couple of women with an old man directly behind, and other faces visible
again behind them. Their obvious absorption made the old lady a little
ashamed of her distraction, and she turned resolutely once more to the
square.
Ah! he was working up now to his panegyric! The tiny dark figure was
back, a yard nearer the statue, and as she looked, his hand went up and
he wheeled, pointing, as a murmur of applause drowned for an instant the
minute, resonant voice. Then again he was forward, half crouching–for
he was a born actor–and a storm of laughter rippled round the throng of
heads. She heard an indrawn hiss behind her chair, and the next instant
an exclamation from Mabel.... What was that?
There was a sharp crack, and the tiny gesticulating figure staggered
back a step. The old man at the table was up in a moment, and
simultaneously a violent commotion bubbled and heaved like water about a
rock at a point in the crowd immediately outside the railed space where
the bands were massed, and directly opposite the front of the platform.
Mrs. Brand, bewildered and dazed, found herself standing up, clutching
the window rail, while the girl gripped her, crying out something she
could not understand. A great roaring filled the square, the heads
tossed this way and that, like corn under a squall of wind. Then Oliver
was forward again, pointing and crying out, for she could see his
gestures; and she sank back quickly, the blood racing through her old
veins, and her heart hammering at the base of her throat.
“My dear, my dear, what is it?” she sobbed.
But Mabel was up, too, staring out at her husband; and a quick babble of
talk and exclamations from behind made itself audible in spite of the
roaring tumult of the square.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
