


A white figure sat in the green gloom, beside a great writing-table,
three or four yards away, but with the chair wheeled round to face the
door by which the two entered. So much Percy saw as he performed the
first genuflection. Then he dropped his eyes, advanced, genuflected
again with the other, advanced once more, and for the third time
genuflected, lifting the thin white hand, stretched out, to his lips. He
heard the door close as he stood up.
“Father Franklin, Holiness,” said the Cardinal’s voice at his ear.
A white-sleeved arm waved to a couple of chairs set a yard away, and the
two sat down.
While the Cardinal, talking in slow Latin, said a few sentences,
explaining that this was the English priest whose correspondence had
been found so useful, Percy began to look with all his eyes.
He knew the Pope’s face well, from a hundred photographs and moving
pictures; even his gestures were familiar to him, the slight bowing of
the head in assent, the tiny eloquent movement of the hands; but Percy,
with a sense of being platitudinal, told himself that the living
presence was very different.
It was a very upright old man that he saw in the chair before him, of
medium height and girth, with hands clasping the bosses of his
chair-arms, and an appearance of great and deliberate dignity. But it
was at the face chiefly that he looked, dropping his gaze three or four
times, as the Pope’s blue eyes turned on him. They were extraordinary
eyes, reminding him of what historians said of Pius X.; the lids drew
straight lines across them, giving him the look of a hawk, but the rest
of the face contradicted them. There was no sharpness in that. It was
neither thin nor fat, but beautifully modelled in an oval outline: the
lips were clean-cut, with a look of passion in their curves; the nose
came down in an aquiline sweep, ending in chiselled nostrils; the chin
was firm and cloven, and the poise of the whole head was strangely
youthful. It was a face of great generosity and sweetness, set at an
angle between defiance and humility, but ecclesiastical from ear to ear
and brow to chin; the forehead was slightly compressed at the temples,
and beneath the white cap lay white hair. It had been the subject of
laughter at the music-halls nine years before, when the composite face
of well-known priests had been thrown on a screen, side by side with the
new Pope’s, for the two were almost indistinguishable.
Percy found himself trying to sum it up, but nothing came to him except
the word “priest.” It was that, and that was all. Ecce sacerdos
magnus! He was astonished at the look of youth, for the Pope was
eighty-eight this year; yet his figure was as upright as that of a man
of fifty, his shoulders unbowed, his head set on them like an athlete’s,
and his wrinkles scarcely perceptible in the half light. Papa
Angelicus! reflected Percy.
The Cardinal ceased his explanations, and made a little gesture. Percy
drew up all his faculties tense and tight to answer the questions that
he knew were coming.
“I welcome you, my son,” said a very soft, resonant voice.
Percy bowed, desperately, from the waist.
The Pope dropped his eyes again, lifted a paper-weight with his left
hand, and began to play with it gently as he talked.
“Now, my son, deliver a little discourse. I suggest to you three
heads–what has happened, what is happening, what will happen, with a
peroration as to what should happen.”
Percy drew a long breath, settled himself back, clasped the fingers of
his left hand in the fingers of his right, fixed his eyes firmly upon
the cross-embroidered red shoe opposite, and began. (Had he not
rehearsed this a hundred times!)
He first stated his theme; to the effect that all the forces of the
civilised world were concentrating into two camps–the world and God. Up
to the present time the forces of the world had been incoherent and
spasmodic, breaking out in various ways–revolutions and wars had been
like the movements of a mob, undisciplined, unskilled, and unrestrained.
To meet this, the Church, too, had acted through her Catholicity–
dispersion rather than concentration: franc-tireurs had been opposed
to franc-tireurs. But during the last hundred years there had been
indications that the method of warfare was to change. Europe, at any
rate, had grown weary of internal strife; the unions first of Labour,
then of Capital, then of Labour and Capital combined, illustrated this
in the economic sphere; the peaceful partition of Africa in the
political sphere; the spread of Humanitarian religion in the spiritual
sphere. Over against this must be placed the increased centralisation of
the Church. By the wisdom of her pontiffs, over-ruled by God Almighty,
the lines had been drawing tighter every year. He instanced the
abolition of all local usages, including those so long cherished by the
East, the establishment of the Cardinal-Protectorates in Rome, the
enforced merging of all friars into one Order, though retaining their
familiar names, under the authority of the supreme General; all monks,
with the exception of the Carthusians, the Carmelites and the Trappists,
into another; of the three excepted into a third; and the classification
of nuns after the same plan. Further, he remarked on the more recent
decrees, establishing the sense of the Vatican decision on
infallibility, the new version of Canon Law, the immense simplification
that had taken place in ecclesiastical government, the hierarchy,
rubrics and the affairs of missionary countries, with the new and
extraordinary privileges granted to mission priests. At this point he
became aware that his self-consciousness had left him, and he began,
even with little gestures, and a slightly raised voice, to enlarge on
the significance of the last month’s events.
All that had gone before, he said, pointed to what had now actually
taken place–namely, the reconciliation of the world on a basis other
than that of Divine Truth. It was the intention of God and of His Vicars
to reconcile all men in Christ Jesus; but the corner-stone had once more
been rejected, and instead of the chaos that the pious had prophesied,
there was coming into existence a unity unlike anything known in
history. This was the more deadly from the fact that it contained so
many elements of indubitable good. War, apparently, was now extinct, and
it was not Christianity that had done it; union was now seen to be
better than disunion, and the lesson had been learned apart from the
Church. In fact, natural virtues had suddenly waxed luxuriant, and
supernatural virtues were despised. Friendliness took the place of
charity, contentment the place of hope, and knowledge the place of
faith.
Percy stopped, he had become conscious that he was preaching a kind of
sermon.
“Yes, my son,” said the kind voice. “What else?”
What else?... Very well, continued Percy, movements such as these
brought forth men, and the Man of this movement was Julian Felsenburgh.
He had accomplished a work that–apart from God–seemed miraculous. He
had broken down the eternal division between East and West, coming
himself from the continent that alone could produce such powers; he had
prevailed by sheer force of personality over the two supreme tyrants of
life religious fanaticism and party government. His influence over the
impassive English was another miracle, yet he had also set on fire
France, Germany, and Spain. Percy here described one or two of his
little scenes, saying that it was like the vision of a god: and he
quoted freely some of the titles given to the Man by sober, unhysterical
newspapers. Felsenburgh was called the Son of Man, because he was so
pure-bred a cosmopolitan; the Saviour of the World, because he had slain
war and himself survived–even–even–here Percy’s voice faltered–even
Incarnate God, because he was the perfect representative of divine man.
The quiet, priestly face watching opposite never winced or moved; and he
went on.
Persecution, he said, was coming. There had been a riot or two already.
But persecution was not to be feared. It would no doubt cause
apostasies, as it had always done, but these were deplorable only on
account of the individual apostates. On the other hand, it would
reassure the faithful; and purge out the half-hearted. Once, in the
early ages, Satan’s attack had been made on the bodily side, with whips
and fire and beasts; in the sixteenth century it had been on the
intellectual side; in the twentieth century on the springs of moral and
spiritual life. Now it seemed as if the assault was on all three planes
at once. But what was chiefly to be feared was the positive influence of
Humanitarianism: it was coming, like the kingdom of God, with power; it
was crushing the imaginative and the romantic, it was assuming rather
than asserting its own truth; it was smothering with bolsters instead of
wounding and stimulating with steel or controversy. It seemed to be
forcing its way, almost objectively, into the inner world. Persons who
had scarcely heard its name were professing its tenets; priests absorbed
it, as they absorbed God in Communion–he mentioned the names of the
recent apostates–children drank it in like Christianity itself. The
soul “naturally Christian” seemed to be becoming “the soul naturally
infidel.” Persecution, cried the priest, was to be welcomed like
salvation, prayed for, and grasped; but he feared that the authorities
were too shrewd, and knew the antidote and the poison apart. There might
be individual martyrdoms–in fact there would be, and very many–but
they would be in spite of secular government, not because of it.
Finally, he expected, Humanitarianism would presently put on the dress
of liturgy and sacrifice, and when that was done, the Church’s cause,
unless God intervened, would be over.
Percy sat back, trembling.
“Yes, my son. And what do you think should be done?”
Percy flung out his hands.
“Holy Father–the mass, prayer, the rosary. These first and last. The
world denies their power: it is on their power that Christians must
throw all their weight. All things in Jesus Christ–in Jesus Christ,
first and last. Nothing else can avail. He must do all, for we can do
nothing.”
The white head bowed. Then it rose erect.
“Yes, my son.... But so long as Jesus Christ deigns to use us, we must
be used. He is Prophet and King as well as Priest. We then, too, must be
prophet and king as well as priest. What of Prophecy and Royalty?”
The voice thrilled Percy like a trumpet.
“Yes, Holiness.... For prophecy, then, let us preach charity; for
Royalty, let us reign on crosses. We must love and suffer.... “ (He drew
one sobbing breath.) “Your Holiness has preached charity always. Let
charity then issue in good deeds. Let us be foremost in them; let us
engage in trade honestly, in family life chastely, in government
uprightly. And as for suffering–ah! Holiness!”
His old scheme leaped back to his mind, and stood poised there
convincing and imperious.
“Yes, my son, speak plainly.”
“Your Holiness–it is old–old as Rome–every fool has desired it: a new
Order, Holiness–a new Order,” he stammered.
The white hand dropped the paper-weight; the Pope leaned forward,
looking intently at the priest.
“Yes, my son?”
Percy threw himself on his knees.
“A new Order, Holiness–no habit or badge–subject to your Holiness
only–freer than Jesuits, poorer than Franciscans, more mortified than
Carthusians: men and women alike–the three vows with the intention of
martyrdom; the Pantheon for their Church; each bishop responsible for
their sustenance; a lieutenant in each country.... (Holiness, it is the
thought of a fool.) ... And Christ Crucified for their patron.”
The Pope stood up abruptly–so abruptly that Cardinal Martin sprang up
too, apprehensive and terrified. It seemed that this young man had gone
too far.
Then the Pope sat down again, extending his hand.
“God bless you, my son. You have leave to go.... Will your Eminence stay
for a few minutes?”
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
