


Six days later, Percy rose as usual, said his mass, breakfasted, and
sat down to say office until his servant should summon him to vest for
the Pontifical mass.
He had learned to expect bad news now so constantly–of apostasies,
deaths, losses–that the lull of the previous week had come to him with
extraordinary refreshment. It appeared to him as if his musings in St.
Anastasia had been truer than he thought, and that the sweetness of the
old feast had not yet wholly lost its power even over a world that
denied its substance. For nothing at all had happened of importance. A
few more martyrdoms had been chronicled, but they had been isolated
cases; and of Felsenburgh there had been no tidings at all. Europe
confessed its ignorance of his business.
On the other hand, to-morrow, Percy knew very well, would be a day of
extraordinary moment in England and Germany at any rate; for in England
it was appointed as the first occasion of compulsory worship throughout
the country, while it was the second in Germany. Men and women would
have to declare themselves now.
He had seen on the previous evening a photograph of the image that was
to be worshipped next day in the Abbey; and, in a fit of loathing, had
torn it to shreds. It represented a nude woman, huge and majestic,
entrancingly lovely, with head and shoulders thrown back, as one who
sees a strange and heavenly vision, arms downstretched and hands a
little raised, with wide fingers, as in astonishment–the whole
attitude, with feet and knees pressed together, suggestive of
expectation, hope and wonder; in devilish mockery her long hair was
crowned with twelve stars. This, then, was the spouse of the other, the
embodiment of man’s ideal maternity, still waiting for her child....
When the white scraps lay like poisonous snow at his feet, he had sprung
across the room to his prie-dieu, and fallen there in an agony of
reparation.
“Oh! Mother, Mother!” he cried to the stately Queen of Heaven who, with
Her true Son long ago in Her arms, looked down on him from Her
bracket–no more than that.
But he was still again this morning, and celebrated Saint Silvester,
Pope and Martyr, the last saint in the procession of the Christian year,
with tolerable equanimity. The sights of last night, the throng of
officials, the stately, scarlet, unfamiliar figures of the Cardinals who
had come in from north, south, east and west–these helped to reassure
him again–unreasonably, as he knew, yet effectually. The very air was
electric with expectation. All night the piazza had been crowded by a
huge, silent mob waiting till the opening of the doors at seven o’clock.
Now the church itself was full, and the piazza full again. Far down the
street to the river, so far as he could see as he had leaned from his
window just now, lay that solemn motionless pavement of heads. The roof
of the colonnade showed a fringe of them, the house-tops were black–and
this in the bitter cold of a clear, frosty morning, for it was announced
that after mass and the proceeding of the members of the Order past the
Pontifical Throne, the Pope would give Apostolic Benediction to the City
and the World.
Percy finished Terce, closed his book and lay back; his servant would be
here in a minute now.
His mind began to run over the function, and he reflected that the
entire Sacred College (with the exception of the Cardinal-Protector of
Jerusalem, detained by sickness), numbering sixty-four members, would
take part. This would mean an unique sight by and bye. Eight years
before, he remembered, after the freedom of Rome, there had been a
similar assembly; but the Cardinals at that time amounted to no more
than fifty-three all told, and four had been absent.
Then he heard voices in his ante-room, a quick step, and a loud English
expostulation. That was curious, and he sat up.
Then he heard a sentence.
“His Eminence must go to vest; it is useless.”
There was a sharp answer, a faint scuffle, and a snatch at the handle.
This was indecent; so Percy stood up, made three strides of it to the
door, and tore it open.
A man stood there, whom at first he did not recognise, pale and
disordered.
“Why–-” began Percy, and recoiled.
“Mr. Phillips!” he said.
The other threw out his hands.
“It is I, sir–your Eminence–this moment arrived. It is life and death.
Your servant tells me–-”
“Who sent you?”
“Father Blackmore.”
“Good news or bad?”
The man rolled his eyes towards the servant, who still stood erect and
offended a yard away; and Percy understood.
He put his hand on the other’s arm, drawing him through the doorway.
“Tap upon this door in two minutes, James,” he said.
They passed across the polished floor together; Percy went to his usual
place in the window, leaned against the shutter, and spoke.
“Tell me in one sentence, sir,” he said to the breathless man.
“There is a plot among the Catholics. They intend destroying the Abbey
to-morrow with explosives. I knew that the Pope–-”
Percy cut him short with a gesture.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
