


The same night Oliver Brand came home about an hour before midnight.
For himself, what he had heard and seen that day was still too vivid and
too imminent for him to judge of it coolly. He had seen, from his
windows in Whitehall, Parliament Square filled with a mob the like of
which had not been known in England since the days of Christianity–a
mob full of a fury that could scarcely draw its origin except from
sources beyond the reach of sense. Thrice during the hours that followed
the publication of the Catholic plot and the outbreak of mob-law he had
communicated with the Prime Minister asking whether nothing could be
done to allay the tumult; and on both occasions he had received the
doubtful answer that what could be done would be done, that force was
inadmissible at present; but that the police were doing all that was
possible.
As regarded the despatch of the volors to Rome, he had assented by
silence, as had the rest of the Council. That was, Snowford had said, a
judicial punitive act, regrettable but necessary. Peace, in this
instance, could not be secured except on terms of war–or rather, since
war was obsolete–by the sternness of justice. These Catholics had shown
themselves the avowed enemies of society; very well, then society must
defend itself, at least this once. Man was still human. And Oliver had
listened and said nothing.
As he passed in one of the Government volors over London on his way
home, he had caught more than one glimpse of what was proceeding beneath
him. The streets were as bright as day, shadowless and clear in the
white light, and every roadway was a crawling serpent. From beneath rose
up a steady roar of voices, soft and woolly, punctuated by cries. From
here and there ascended the smoke of burning; and once, as he flitted
over one of the great squares to the south of Battersea, he had seen as
it were a scattered squadron of ants running as if in fear or
pursuit.... He knew what was happening.... Well, after all, man was not
yet perfectly civilised.
He did not like to think of what awaited him at home. Once, about five
hours earlier, he had listened to his wife’s voice through the
telephone, and what he had heard had nearly caused him to leave all and
go to her. Yet he was scarcely prepared for what he found.
As he came into the sitting-room, there was no sound, except that
far-away hum from the seething streets below. The room seemed strangely
dark and cold; the only light that entered was through one of the
windows from which the curtains were withdrawn, and, silhouetted against
the luminous sky beyond, was the upright figure of a woman, looking and
listening....
He pressed the knob of the electric light; and Mabel turned slowly
towards him. She was in her day-dress, with a cloak thrown over her
shoulders, and her face was almost as that of a stranger. It was
perfectly colourless, her lips were compressed and her eyes full of an
emotion which he could not interpret. It might equally have been anger,
terror or misery.
She stood there in the steady light, motionless, looking at him.
For a moment he did not trust himself to speak. He passed across to the
window, closed it and drew the curtains. Then he took that rigid figure
gently by the arm.
“Mabel,” he said, “Mabel.”
She submitted to be drawn towards the sofa, but there was no response to
his touch. He sat down and looked up at her with a kind of despairing
apprehension.
“My dear, I am tired out,” he said.
Still she looked at him. There was in her pose that rigidity that actors
simulate; yet he knew it for the real thing. He had seen that silence
once or twice before in the presence of a horror–once at any rate, at
the sight of a splash of blood on her shoe.
“Well, my darling, sit down, at least,” he said.
She obeyed him mechanically–sat, and still stared at him. In the
silence once more that soft roar rose and died from the invisible world
of tumult outside the windows. Within here all was quiet. He knew
perfectly that two things strove within her, her loyalty to her faith
and her hatred of those crimes in the name of justice. As he looked on
her he saw that these two were at death grips, that hatred was
prevailing, and that she herself was little more than a passive
battlefield. Then, as with a long-drawn howl of a wolf, there surged and
sank the voices of the mob a mile away, the tension broke.... She threw
herself forward towards him, he caught her by the wrists, and so she
rested, clasped in his arms, her face and bosom on his knees, and her
whole body torn by emotion.
For a full minute neither spoke. Oliver understood well enough, yet at
present he had no words. He only drew her a little closer to himself,
kissed her hair two or three times, and settled himself to hold her. He
began to rehearse what he must say presently.
Then she raised her flushed face for an instant, looked at him
passionately, dropped her head again and began to sob out broken words.
He could only catch a sentence here and there, yet he knew what she was
saying....
It was the ruin of all her hopes, she sobbed, the end of her religion.
Let her die, die and have done with it! It was all gone, gone, swept
away in this murderous passion of the people of her faith ... they were
no better than Christians, after all, as fierce as the men on whom they
avenged themselves, as dark as though the Saviour, Julian, had never
come; it was all lost ... War and Passion and Murder had returned to the
body from which she had thought them gone forever.... The burning
churches, the hunted Catholics, the raging of the streets on which she
had looked that day, the bodies of the child and the priest carried on
poles, the burning churches and convents. ... All streamed out,
incoherent, broken by sobs, details of horror, lamentations, reproaches,
interpreted by the writhing of her head and hands upon his knees. The
collapse was complete.
He put his hands again beneath her arms and raised her. He was worn out
by his work, yet he knew he must quiet her. This was more serious than
any previous crisis. Yet he knew her power of recovery.
“Sit down, my darling,” he said. “There ... give me your hands. Now
listen to me.”
He made really an admirable defence, for it was what he had been
repeating to himself all day. Men were not yet perfect, he said; there
ran in their veins the blood of men who for twenty centuries had been
Christians.... There must be no despair; faith in man was of the very
essence of religion, faith in man’s best self, in what he would become,
not in what at present he actually was. They were at the beginning of
the new religion, not in its maturity; there must be sourness in the
young fruit. ... Consider, too, the provocation! Remember the appalling
crime that these Catholics had contemplated; they had set themselves to
strike the new Faith in its very heart....
“My darling,” he said, “men are not changed in an instant. What if those
Christians had succeeded!... I condemn it all as strongly as you. I saw
a couple of newspapers this afternoon that are as wicked as anything
that the Christians have ever done. They exulted in all these crimes. It
will throw the movement back ten years.... Do you think that there are
not thousands like yourself who hate and detest this violence?... But
what does faith mean, except that we know that mercy will prevail?
Faith, patience and hope–these are our weapons.”
He spoke with passionate conviction, his eyes fixed on hers, in a fierce
endeavour to give her his own confidence, and to reassure the remnants
of his own doubtfulness. It was true that he too hated what she hated,
yet he saw things that she did not.... Well, well, he told himself, he
must remember that she was a woman.
The look of frantic horror passed slowly out of her eyes, giving way to
acute misery as he talked, and as his personality once more began to
dominate her own. But it was not yet over.
“But the volors,” she cried, “the volors! That is deliberate; that is
not the work of the mob.”
“My darling, it is no more deliberate than the other. We are all human,
we are all immature. Yes, the Council permitted it, ... permitted it,
remember. The German Government, too, had to yield. We must tame nature
slowly, we must not break it.”
He talked again for a few minutes, repeating his arguments, soothing,
reassuring, encouraging; and he saw that he was beginning to prevail.
But she returned to one of his words.
“Permitted it! And you permitted it.”
“Dear; I said nothing, either for it or against. I tell you that if we
had forbidden it there would have been yet more murder, and the people
would have lost their rulers. We were passive, since we could do
nothing.”
“Ah! but it would have been better to die.... Oh, Oliver, let me die at
least! I cannot bear it.”
By her hands which he still held he drew her nearer yet to himself.
“Sweetheart,” he said gravely, “cannot you trust me a little? If I could
tell you all that passed to-day, you would understand. But trust me that
I am not heartless. And what of Julian Felsenburgh?”
For a moment he saw hesitation in her eyes; her loyalty to him and her
loathing of all that had happened strove within her. Then once again
loyalty prevailed, the name of Felsenburgh weighed down the balance, and
trust came back with a flood of tears.
“Oh, Oliver,” she said, “I know I trust you. But I am so weak, and all
is so terrible. And He so strong and merciful. And will He be with us
to-morrow?”
It struck midnight from the clock-tower a mile away as they yet sat and
talked. She was still tremulous from the struggle; but she looked at him
smiling, still holding his hands. He saw that the reaction was upon her
in full force at last.
“The New Year, my husband,” she said, and rose as she said it, drawing
him after her.
“I wish you a happy New Year,” she said. “Oh help me, Oliver.”
She kissed him, and drew back, still holding his hands, looking at him
with bright tearful eyes.
“Oliver,” she cried again, “I must tell you this.... Do you know what I
thought before you came?”
He shook his head, staring at her greedily. How sweet she was! He felt
her grip tighten on his hands.
“I thought I could not bear it,” she whispered–"that I must end it
all–ah! you know what I mean.”
His heart flinched as he heard her; and he drew her closer again to
himself.
“It is all over! it is all over,” she cried. “Ah! do not look like that!
I could not tell you if it was not."’
As their lips met again there came the vibration of an electric bell
from the next room, and Oliver, knowing what it meant, felt even in that
instant a tremor shake his heart. He loosed her hands, and still smiled
at her.
“The bell!” she said, with a flash of apprehension.
“But it is all well between us again?”
Her face steadied itself into loyalty and confidence.
“It is all well,” she said; and again the impatient bell tingled. “Go,
Oliver; I will wait here.”
A minute later he was back again, with a strange look on his white face,
and his lips compressed. He came straight up to her, taking her once
more by the hands, and looking steadily into her steady eyes. In the
hearts of both of them resolve and faith were holding down the emotion
that was not yet dead. He drew a long breath.
“Yes,” he said in an even voice, “it is over.”
Her lips moved; and that deadly paleness lay on her cheeks. He gripped
her firmly.
“Listen,” he said. “You must face it. It is over. Rome is gone. Now we
must build something better.”
She threw herself sobbing into his arms.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
