


He still felt a sense of insecure motion as he sat alone over coffee an
hour later in one of the remote rooms of the Vatican; but there was a
sense of exhilaration as well, as his tired brain realised where he was.
It had been strange to drive over the rattling stones in the weedy
little cab, such as he remembered ten years ago when he had left Rome,
newly ordained. While the world had moved on, Rome had stood still; she
had other affairs to think of than physical improvements, now that the
spiritual weight of the earth rested entirely upon her shoulders. All
had seemed unchanged–or rather it had reverted to the condition of
nearly one hundred and fifty years ago. Histories related how the
improvements of the Italian government had gradually dropped out of use
as soon as the city, eighty years before, had been given her
independence; the trains ceased to run; volors were not allowed to enter
the walls; the new buildings, permitted to remain, had been converted to
ecclesiastical use; the Quirinal became the offices of the “Red Pope";
the embassies, huge seminaries; even the Vatican itself, with the
exception of the upper floor, had become the abode of the Sacred
College, who surrounded the Supreme Pontiff as stars their sun.
It was an extraordinary city, said antiquarians–the one living example
of the old days. Here were to be seen the ancient inconveniences, the
insanitary horrors, the incarnation of a world given over to dreaming.
The old Church pomp was back, too; the cardinals drove again in gilt
coaches; the Pope rode on his white mule; the Blessed Sacrament went
through the ill-smelling streets with the sound of bells and the light
of lanterns. A brilliant description of it had interested the civilised
world immensely for about forty-eight hours; the appalling retrogression
was still used occasionally as the text for violent denunciations by the
poorly educated; the well-educated had ceased to do anything but take
for granted that superstition and progress were irreconcilable enemies.
Yet Percy, even in the glimpses he had had in the streets, as he drove
from the volor station outside the People’s Gate, of the old peasant
dresses, the blue and red-fringed wine carts, the cabbage-strewn
gutters, the wet clothes flapping on strings, the mules and
horses–strange though these were, he had found them a refreshment. It
had seemed to remind him that man was human, and not divine as the rest
of the world proclaimed–human, and therefore careless and
individualistic; human, and therefore occupied with interests other than
those of speed, cleanliness, and precision.
The room in which he sat now by the window with shading blinds, for the
sun was already hot, seemed to revert back even further than to a
century-and-a-half. The old damask and gilding that he had expected was
gone, and its absence gave the impression of great severity. There was a
wide deal table running the length of the room, with upright wooden arm
chairs set against it; the floor was red-tiled, with strips of matting
for the feet, the white, distempered walls had only a couple of old
pictures hung upon them, and a large crucifix flanked by candles stood
on a little altar by the further door. There was no more furniture than
that, with the exception of a writing-desk between the windows, on which
stood a typewriter. That jarred somehow on his sense of fitness, and he
wondered at it.
He finished the last drop of coffee in the thick-rimmed white cup, and
sat back in his chair.
Already the burden was lighter, and he was astonished at the swiftness
with which it had become so. Life looked simpler here; the interior
world was taken more for granted; it was not even a matter of debate.
There it was, imperious and objective, and through it glimmered to the
eyes of the soul the old Figures that had become shrouded behind the
rush of worldly circumstance. The very shadow of God appeared to rest
here; it was no longer impossible to realise that the saints watched and
interceded, that Mary sat on her throne, that the white disc on the
altar was Jesus Christ. Percy was not yet at peace after all, he had
been but an hour in Rome; and air, charged with never so much grace,
could scarcely do more than it had done. But he felt more at ease, less
desperately anxious, more childlike, more content to rest on the
authority that claimed without explanation, and asserted that the world,
as a matter of fact, proved by evidences without and within, was made
this way and not that, for this purpose and not the other. Yet he had
used the conveniences which he hated; he had left London a bare twelve
hours before, and now here he sat in a place which was either a stagnant
backwater of life, or else the very mid-current of it; he was not yet
sure which.
There was a step outside, a handle was turned; and the
Cardinal-Protector came through.
Percy had not seen him for four years, and for a moment scarcely
recognised him.
It was a very old man that he saw now, bent and feeble, his face covered
with wrinkles, crowned by very thin, white hair, and the little scarlet
cap on top; he was in his black Benedictine habit with a plain abbatial
cross on his breast, and walked hesitatingly, with a black stick. The
only sign of vigour was in the narrow bright slit of his eyes showing
beneath drooping lids. He held out his hand, smiling, and Percy,
remembering in time that he was in the Vatican, bowed low only as he
kissed the amethyst.
“Welcome to Rome, father,” said the old man, speaking with an unexpected
briskness. “They told me you were here half-an-hour ago; I thought I
would leave you to wash and have your coffee.”
Percy murmured something.
“Yes; you are tired, no doubt,” said the Cardinal, pulling out a chair.
“Indeed not, your Eminence. I slept excellently.”
The Cardinal made a little gesture to a chair.
“But I must have a word with you. The Holy Father wishes to see you at
eleven o’clock.”
Percy started a little.
“We move quickly in these days, father.... There is no time to dawdle.
You understand that you are to remain in Rome for the present?”
“I have made all arrangements for that, your Eminence.”
“That is very well.... We are pleased with you here, Father Franklin.
The Holy Father has been greatly impressed by your comments. You have
foreseen things in a very remarkable manner.”
Percy flushed with pleasure. It was almost the first hint of
encouragement he had had. Cardinal Martin went on.
“I may say that you are considered our most valuable
correspondent–certainly in England. That is why you are summoned. You
are to help us here in future–a kind of consultor: any one can relate
facts; not every one can understand them.... You look very young,
father. How old are you?”
“I am thirty-three, your Eminence.”
“Ah! your white hair helps you.... Now, father, will you come with me
into my room? It is now eight o’clock. I will keep you till nine–no
longer. Then you shall have some rest, and at eleven I shall take you up
to his Holiness.”
Percy rose with a strange sense of elation, and ran to open the door for
the Cardinal to go through.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
