


He passed straight up to the chair, followed by two secretaries, bowed
slightly to this side and that, sat down and made a little gesture. Then
they, too, were in their chairs, upright and intent. For perhaps the
hundredth time, Oliver, staring upon the President, marvelled at the
quietness and the astounding personality of Him. He was in the English
judicial dress that had passed down through centuries–black and scarlet
with sleeves of white fur and a crimson sash–and that had lately been
adopted as the English presidential costume of him who stood at the head
of the legislature. But it was in His personality, in the atmosphere
that flowed from Him, that the marvel lay. It was as the scent of the
sea to the physical nature–it exhilarated, cleansed, kindled,
intoxicated. It was as inexplicably attractive as a cherry orchard in
spring, as affecting as the cry of stringed instruments, as compelling
as a storm. So writers had said. They compared it to a stream of clear
water, to the flash of a gem, to the love of woman. They lost all
decency sometimes; they said it fitted all moods, as the voice of many
waters; they called it again and again, as explicitly as possible, the
Divine Nature perfectly Incarnate at last....
Then Oliver’s reflections dropped from him like a mantle, for the
President, with downcast eyes and head thrown back, made a little
gesture to the ruddy-faced secretary on His right; and this man, without
a movement, began to speak like an impersonal actor repeating his part.
“Gentlemen,” he said, in an even, resonant voice, “the President is come
direct from Paris. This afternoon His Honour was in Berlin; this
morning, early, in Moscow. Yesterday in New York. To-night His Honour
must be in Turin; and to-morrow will begin to return through Spain,
North Africa, Greece and the southeastern states.”
This was the usual formula for such speeches. The President spoke but
little himself now; but was careful for the information of his subjects
on occasions like this. His secretaries were perfectly trained, and this
speaker was no exception. After a slight pause, he continued:
“This is the business, gentlemen.
“Last Thursday, as you are aware, the Plenipotentaries signed the Test
Act in this room, and it was immediately communicated all over the
world. At sixteen o’clock His Honour received a message from a man named
Dolgorovski–who is, it is understood, one of the Cardinals of the
Catholic Church. This he claimed; and on inquiry it was found to be a
fact. His information confirmed what was already suspected–namely, that
there was a man claiming to be Pope, who had created (so the phrase is)
other cardinals, shortly after the destruction of Rome, subsequent to
which his own election took place in Jerusalem. It appears that this
Pope, with a good deal of statesmanship, has chosen to keep his own name
and place of residence a secret from even his own followers, with the
exception of the twelve cardinals; that he has done a great deal,
through the instrumentality of one of his cardinals in particular, and
through his new Order in general, towards the reorganisation of the
Catholic Church; and that at this moment he is living, apart from the
world, in complete security.
“His Honour blames Himself that He did not do more than suspect
something of the kind–misled, He thinks, by a belief that if there had
been a Pope, news would have been heard of it from other quarters, for,
as is well known, the entire structure of the Christian Church rests
upon him as upon a rock. Further, His Honour thinks inquiries should
have been made in the very place where now it is understood that this
Pope is living.
“The man’s name, gentlemen, is Franklin–-”
Oliver started uncontrollably, but relapsed again to bright-eyed
intelligence as for an instant the President glanced up from his
motionlessness.
“Franklin,” repeated the secretary, “and he is living in Nazareth,
where, it is said, the Founder of Christianity passed His youth.
“Now this, gentlemen, His Honour heard on Thursday in last week. He
caused inquiries to be made, and on Friday morning received further
intelligence from Dolgorovski that this Pope had summoned to Nazareth a
meeting of his cardinals, and certain other officials, from all over the
world, to consider what steps should be taken in view of the new Test
Act. This His Honour takes to show an extreme want of statesmanship
which seems hard to reconcile with his former action. These persons are
summoned by special messengers to meet on Saturday next, and will begin
their deliberations after some Christian ceremonies on the following
morning.
“You wish, gentlemen, no doubt, to know Dolgorovski’s motives in making
all this known. His Honour is satisfied that they are genuine. The man
has been losing belief in his religion; in fact, he has come to see that
this religion is the supreme obstacle to the consolidation of the race.
He has esteemed it his duty, therefore, to lay this information before
His Honour. It is interesting as an historical parallel to reflect that
the same kind of incident marked the rise of Christianity as will mark,
it is thought, its final extinction–namely, the informing on the part
of one of the leaders of the place and method by which the principal
personage may be best approached. It is also, surely, very significant
that the scene of the extinction of Christianity is identical with that
of its inauguration....
“Well, gentlemen, His Honour’s proposal is as follows, carrying out the
Declaration to which you all acceded. It is that a force should proceed
during the night of Saturday next to Palestine, and on the Sunday
morning, when these men will be all gathered together, that this force
should finish as swiftly and mercifully as possible the work to which
the Powers have set their hands. So far, the comment of the Governments
which have been consulted has been unanimous, and there is little doubt
that the rest will be equally so. His Honour felt that He could not act
in on grave a matter on His own responsibility; it is not merely local;
it is a catholic administration of justice, and will have results wider
than it is safe minutely to prophesy.
“It is not necessary to enter into His Honour’s reasons. They are
already well known to you; but before asking for your opinion, He
desires me to indicate what He thinks, in the event of your approval,
should be the method of action.
“Each Government, it is proposed, should take part in the final scene,
for it is something of a symbolic action; and for this purpose it is
thought well that each of the three Departments of the World should
depute volors, to the number of the constituting States, one hundred and
twenty-two all told, to set about the business. These volors should have
no common meeting-ground, otherwise the news will surely penetrate to
Nazareth, for it is understood that, this new Order of Christ Crucified
has a highly organised system of espionage. The rendezvous, then, should
be no other than Nazareth itself; and the time of meeting should be, it
is thought, not later than nine o’clock according to Palestine
reckoning. These details, however, can be decided and communicated as
soon as a determination has been formed as regards the entire scheme.
“With respect to the exact method of carrying out the conclusion, His
Honour is inclined to think it will be more merciful to enter into no
negotiations with the persons concerned. An opportunity should be given
to the inhabitants of the village to make their escape if they so desire
it, and then, with the explosives that the force should carry, the end
can be practically instantaneous.
“For Himself, His Honour proposes to be there in person, and further
that the actual discharge should take place from His own car. It seems
but suitable that the world which has done His Honour the goodness to
elect Him to its Presidentship should act through His hands; and this
would be at least some slight token of respect to a superstition which,
however infamous, is yet the one and only force capable of withstanding
the true progress of man.
“His Honour promises you, gentlemen, that in the event of this plan
being carried out, we shall be no more troubled with Christianity.
Already the moral effect of the Test Act has been prodigious. It is
understood that, by tens of thousands, Catholics, numbering among them
even members of this new fanatical Religious Order, have been renouncing
their follies even in these few days; and a final blow struck now at the
very heart and head of the Catholic Church, eliminating, as it would do,
the actual body on which the entire organisation subsists, would render
its resurrection impossible. It is a well-known fact that, granted the
extinction of the line of Popes, together with those necessary for its
continuance, there could be no longer any question amongst even the most
ignorant that the claim of Jesus had ceased to be either reasonable or
possible. Even the Order that has provided the sinews for this new
movement must cease to exist.
“Dolgorovski, of course, is the difficulty, for it is not certainly
known whether one Cardinal would be considered sufficient for the
propagation of the line; and, although reluctantly, His Honour feels
bound to suggest that at the conclusion of the affair, Dolgorovski,
also, who will not, of course, be with his fellows at Nazareth, should
be mercifully removed from even the danger of a relapse....
“His Honour, then, asks you, gentlemen, as briefly as possible, to state
your views on the points of which I have had the privilege of speaking.”
The quiet business-like voice ceased.
He had spoken throughout in the manner with which he had begun; his eyes
had been downcast throughout; his voice had been tranquil and
restrained. His deportment had been admirable.
There was an instant’s silence, and all eyes settled steadily again upon
the motionless figure in black and scarlet and the ivory face.
Then Oliver stood up. His face was as white as paper; his eyes bright
and dilated.
“Sir,” he said, “I have no doubt that we are all of one mind. I need say
no more than that, so far as I am a representative of my colleagues, we
assent to the proposal, and leave all details in your Honour’s hands.”
The President lifted his eyes, and ran them swiftly along the rigid
faces turned to him.
Then, in the breathless hush, he spoke for the first time in his strange
voice, now as passionless as a frozen river.
“Is there any other proposal?”
There was a murmur of assent as the men rose to their feet.
“Thank you, gentlemen,” said the secretary.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
