


Oliver had passed the days since Mabel’s disappearance in an
indescribable horror. He had done all that was possible: he had traced
her to the station and to Victoria, where he lost her clue; he had
communicated with the police, and the official answer, telling him
nothing, had arrived to the effect that there was no news: and it was
not until the Tuesday following her disappearance that Mr. Francis,
hearing by chance of his trouble, informed him by telephone that he had
spoken with her on the Friday night. But there was no satisfaction to be
got from him–indeed, the news was bad rather than good, for Oliver
could not but be dismayed at the report of the conversation, in spite of
Mr. Francis’s assurances that Mrs. Brand had shown no kind of
inclination to defend the Christian cause.
Two theories gradually emerged, in his mind; either she was gone to the
protection of some unknown Catholic, or–and he grew sick at the
thought–she had applied somewhere for Euthanasia as she had once
threatened, and was now under the care of the Law; such an event was
sufficiently common since the passing of the Release Act in 1998. And it
was frightful that he could not condemn it.
On the Tuesday evening, as he sat heavily in his room, for the hundredth
time attempting to trace out some coherent line through the maze of
intercourse he had had with his wife during these past months, his bell
suddenly rang. It was the red label of Whitehall that had made its
appearance; and for an instant his heart leaped with hope that it was
news of her. But at the first words it sank again.
“Brand,” came the sharp fairy voice, “is that you?... Yes, I am
Snowford. You are wanted at once–at once, you understand. There is an
extraordinary meeting of the Council at twenty o’clock. The President
will be there. You understand the urgency. No time for more. Come
instantly to my room.”
Even this message scarcely distracted him. He, with the rest of the
world, was no longer surprised at the sudden descents of the President.
He came and vanished again without warning, travelling and working with
incredible energy, yet always, as it seemed, retaining his personal
calm.
It was already after nineteen; Oliver supped immediately, and a
quarter-of-an-hour before the hour presented himself in Snowford’s room,
where half a dozen of his colleagues were assembled.
That minister came forward to meet him, with a strange excitement in his
face. He drew him aside by a button.
“See here, Brand, you are wanted to speak first–immediately after the
President’s Secretary who will open; they are coming from Paris. It is
about a new matter altogether. He has had information of the whereabouts
of the Pope.... It seems that there is one.... Oh, you will understand
presently. Oh, and by the way,” he went on, looking curiously at the
strained face, “I am sorry to hear of your anxiety. Pemberton told me
just now.”
Oliver lifted a hand abruptly.
“Tell me,” he said. “What am I wanted to say?”
“Well, the President will have a proposal, we imagine. You know our
minds well enough. Just explain our attitude towards the Catholics.”
Oliver’s eyes shrank suddenly to two bright lines beneath the lids. He
nodded.
Cartwright came up presently, an immense, bent old man with a face of
parchment, as befitted the Lord Chief Justice.
“By the way, Brand, what do you know of a man called Phillips? He seems
to have mentioned your name.”
“He was my secretary,” said Oliver slowly. “What about him?”
“I think he must be mad. He has given himself up to a magistrate,
entreating to be examined at once. The magistrate has applied for
instructions. You see, the Act has scarcely begun to move yet.”
“But what has he done?”
“That’s the difficulty. He says he cannot deny God, neither can he
affirm Him.–He was your secretary, then?”
“Certainly. I knew he was inclined to Christianity. I had to get rid of
him for that.”
“Well, he is to be remanded for a week. Perhaps he will be able to make
up his mind.”
Then the talk shifted off again. Two or three more came up, and all eyed
Oliver with a certain curiosity; the story was gone about that his wife
had left him. They wished to see how he took it.
At five minutes before the hour a bell rang, and the door into the
corridor was thrown open.
“Come, gentlemen,” said the Prime Minister.
The Council Chamber was a long high room on the first floor; its walls
from floor to ceiling were lined with books. A noiseless rubber carpet
was underfoot. There were no windows; the room was lighted artificially.
A long table, set round with armed chairs, ran the length of the floor,
eight on either side; and the Presidential chair, raised on a dais,
stood at the head.
Each man went straight to his chair in silence, and remained there,
waiting.
The room was beautifully cool, in spite of the absence of windows, and
was a pleasant contrast to the hot evening outside through which most of
these men had come. They, too, had wondered at the surprising weather,
and had smiled at the conflict of the infallible. But they were not
thinking about that now: the coming of the President was a matter which
always silenced the most loquacious. Besides, this time, they understood
that the affair was more serious than usual.
At one minute before the hour, again a bell sounded, four times, and
ceased; and at the signal each man turned instinctively to the high
sliding door behind the Presidential chair. There was dead silence
within and without: the huge Government offices were luxuriously
provided with sound-deadening apparatus, and not even the rolling of the
vast motors within a hundred yards was able to send a vibration through
the layers of rubber on which the walls rested. There was only one noise
that could penetrate, and that the sound of thunder. The experts were at
present unable to exclude this.
Again the silence seemed to fall in one yet deeper veil. Then the door
opened, and a figure came swiftly through, followed by Another in black
and scarlet.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
