


It was not until nearly two hours later that Percy was standing at the
house beyond the Junction.
He bad argued, expostulated, threatened, but the officials were like
men possessed. Half of them had disappeared in the rush to the City, for
it had leaked out, in spite of the Government’s precautions, that Paul’s
House, known once as St. Paul’s Cathedral, was to be the scene of
Felsenburgh’s reception. The others seemed demented; one man on the
platform had dropped dead from nervous exhaustion, but no one appeared
to care; and the body lay huddled beneath a seat. Again and again Percy
had been swept away by a rush, as he struggled from platform to platform
in his search for a car that would take him to Croydon. It seemed that
there was none to be had, and the useless carriages collected like
drift-wood between the platforms, as others whirled up from the country
bringing loads of frantic, delirious men, who vanished like smoke from
the white rubber-boards. The platforms were continually crowded, and as
continually emptied, and it was not until half-an-hour before midnight
that the block began to move outwards again.
Well, he was here at last, dishevelled, hatless and exhausted, looking
up at the dark windows.
He scarcely knew what he thought of the whole matter. War, of course,
was terrible. And such a war as this would have been too terrible for
the imagination to visualise; but to the priest’s mind there were other
things even worse. What of universal peace–peace, that is to say,
established by others than Christ’s method? Or was God behind even this?
The questions were hopeless.
Felsenburgh–it was he then who had done this thing–this thing
undoubtedly greater than any secular event hitherto known in
civilisation. What manner of man was he? What was his character, his
motive, his method? How would he use his success?... So the points flew
before him like a stream of sparks, each, it might be, harmless; each,
equally, capable of setting a world on fire. Meanwhile here was an old
woman who desired to be reconciled with God before she died....
He touched the button again, three or four times, and waited. Then a
light sprang out overhead, and he knew that he was heard.
“I was sent for,” he exclaimed to the bewildered maid. “I should have
been here at twenty-two: I was prevented by the rush.”
She babbled out a question at him.
“Yes, it is true, I believe,” he said. “It is peace, not war. Kindly
take me upstairs.”
He went through the hall with a curious sense of guilt. This was Brand’s
house then–that vivid orator, so bitterly eloquent against God; and
here was he, a priest, slinking in under cover of night. Well, well, it
was not of his appointment.
At the door of an upstairs room the maid turned to him.
“A doctor, sir?” she said.
“That is my affair,” said Percy briefly, and opened the door.
A little wailing cry broke from the corner, before he had time to close
the door again.
“Oh! thank God! I thought He had forgotten me. You are a priest,
father?”
“I am a priest. Do you not remember seeing me in the Cathedral?”
“Yes, yes, sir; I saw you praying, father. Oh! thank God, thank God!”
Percy stood looking down at her a moment, seeing her flushed old face in
the nightcap, her bright sunken eyes and her tremulous hands. Yes; this
was genuine enough.
“Now, my child,” he said, “tell me.”
“My confession, father.”
Percy drew out the purple thread, slipped it over his shoulders, and sat
down by the bed.
But she would not let him go for a while after that.
“Tell me, father. When will you bring me Holy Communion?”
He hesitated.
“I understand that Mr. Brand and his wife know nothing of all this?”
“No, father.”
“Tell me, are you very ill?”
“I don’t know, father. They will not tell me. I thought I was gone last
night.”
“When would you wish me to bring you Holy Communion? I will do as you
say.”
“Shall I send to you in a day or two? Father, ought I to tell him?”
“You are not obliged.”
“I will if I ought.”
“Well, think about it, and let me know.... You have heard what has
happened?”
She nodded, but almost uninterestedly; and Percy was conscious of a tiny
prick of compunction at his own heart. After all, the reconciling of a
soul to God was a greater thing than the reconciling of East to West.
“It may make a difference to Mr. Brand,” he said. “He will be a great
man, now, you know.”
She still looked at him in silence, smiling a little. Percy was
astonished at the youthfulness of that old face. Then her face changed.
“Father, I must not keep you; but tell me this–Who is this man?”
“Felsenburgh?”
“Yes.”
“No one knows. We shall know more to-morrow. He is in town to-night.”
She looked so strange that Percy for an instant thought it was a
seizure. Her face seemed to fall away in a kind of emotion, half
cunning, half fear.
“Well, my child?”
“Father, I am a little afraid when I think of that man. He cannot harm
me, can he? I am safe now? I am a Catholic–?”
“My child, of course you are safe. What is the matter? How can this man
injure you?”
But the look of terror was still there, and Percy came a step nearer.
“You must not give way to fancies,” he said. “Just commit yourself to
our Blessed Lord. This man can do you no harm.”
He was speaking now as to a child; but it was of no use. Her old mouth
was still sucked in, and her eyes wandered past him into the gloom of
the room behind.
“My child, tell me what is the matter. What do you know of Felsenburgh?
You have been dreaming.”
She nodded suddenly and energetically, and Percy for the first time felt
his heart give a little leap of apprehension. Was this old woman out of
her mind, then? Or why was it that that name seemed to him sinister?
Then he remembered that Father Blackmore had once talked like this. He
made an effort, and sat down once more.
“Now tell me plainly,” he said. “You have been dreaming. What have you
dreamt?”
She raised herself a little in bed, again glancing round the room; then
she put out her old ringed hand for one of his, and he gave it,
wondering.
“The door is shut, father? There is no one listening?”
“No, no, my child. Why are you trembling? You must not be
superstitious.”
“Father, I will tell you. Dreams are nonsense, are they not? Well, at
least, this is what I dreamt.
“I was somewhere in a great house; I do not know where it was. It was a
house I have never seen. It was one of the old houses, and it was very
dark. I was a child, I thought, and I was ... I was afraid of something.
The passages were all dark, and I went crying in the dark, looking for a
light, and there was none. Then I heard a voice talking, a great way
off. Father–-”
Her hand gripped his more tightly, and again her eyes went round the
room.
With great difficulty Percy repressed a sigh. Yet he dared not leave her
just now. The house was very still; only from outside now and again
sounded the clang of the cars, as they sped countrywards again from the
congested town, and once the sound of great shouting. He wondered what
time it was.
“Had you better tell me now?” he asked, still talking with a patient
simplicity. “What time will they be back?”
“Not yet,” she whispered. “Mabel said not till two o’clock. What time
is it now, father?”
He pulled out his watch with his disengaged hand.
“It is not yet one,” he said.
“Very well, listen, father.... I was in this house; and I heard that
talking; and I ran along the passages, till I saw light below a door;
and then I stopped.... Nearer, father.”
Percy was a little awed in spite of himself. Her voice had suddenly
dropped to a whisper, and her old eyes seemed to hold him strangely.
“I stopped, father; I dared not go in. I could hear the talking, and I
could see the light; and I dared not go in. Father, it was Felsenburgh
in that room.”
From beneath came the sudden snap of a door; then the sound of
footsteps. Percy turned his head abruptly, and at the same moment heard
a swift indrawn breath from the old woman.
“Hush!” he said. “Who is that?”
Two voices were talking in the hall below now, and at the sound the old
woman relaxed her hold.
“I–I thought it to be him,” she murmured.
Percy stood up; he could see that she did not understand the situation.
“Yes, my child,” he said quietly, “but who is it?”
“My son and his wife,” she said; then her face changed once more.
“Why–why, father–-”
Her voice died in her throat, as a step vibrated outside. For a moment
there was complete silence; then a whisper, plainly audible, in a girl’s
voice.
“Why, her light is burning. Come in, Oliver, but softly.”
Then the handle turned.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
