


What Mabel saw and heard and felt from eleven o’clock to half-an-hour
after noon on that first morning of the New Year she could never
adequately remember. For the time she lost the continuous consciousness
of self, the power of reflection, for she was still weak from her
struggle; there was no longer in her the process by which events are
stored, labelled and recorded; she was no more than a being who observed
as it were in one long act, across which considerations played at
uncertain intervals. Eyes and ear seemed her sole functions,
communicating direct with a burning heart.
She did not even know at what point her senses told her that this was
Felsenburgh. She seemed to have known it even before he entered, and she
watched Him as in complete silence He came deliberately up the red
carpet, superbly alone, rising a step or two at the entrance of the
choir, passing on and up before her. He was in his English judicial
dress of scarlet and black, but she scarcely noticed it. For her, too,
no one else existed but, He; this vast assemblage was gone, poised and
transfigured in one vibrating atmosphere of an immense human emotion.
There was no one, anywhere, but Julian Felsenburgh. Peace and light
burned like a glory about Him.
For an instant after passing he disappeared beyond the speaker’s
tribune, and the instant after reappeared once more, coming up the
steps. He reached his place–she could see His profile beneath her and
slightly to the left, pure and keen as the blade of a knife, beneath His
white hair. He lifted one white-furred sleeve, made a single motion, and
with a surge and a rumble, the ten thousand were seated. He motioned
again and with a roar they were on their feet.
Again there was a silence. He stood now, perfectly still, His hands laid
together on the rail, and His face looking steadily before Him; it
seemed as if He who had drawn all eyes and stilled all sounds were
waiting until His domination were complete, and there was but one will,
one desire, and that beneath His hand. Then He began to speak....
In this again, as Mabel perceived afterwards, there was no precise or
verbal record within her of what he said; there was no conscious process
by which she received, tested, or approved what she heard. The nearest
image under which she could afterwards describe her emotions to herself,
was that when He spoke it was she who was speaking. Her own thoughts,
her predispositions, her griefs, her disappointment, her passion, her
hopes–all these interior acts of the soul known scarcely even to
herself, down even, it seemed, to the minutest whorls and eddies of
thought, were, by this man, lifted up, cleansed, kindled, satisfied and
proclaimed. For the first time in her life she became perfectly aware of
what human nature meant; for it was her own heart that passed out upon
the air, borne on that immense voice. Again, as once before for a few
moments in Paul’s House, it seemed that creation, groaning so long, had
spoken articulate words at last–had come to growth and coherent thought
and perfect speech. Yet then He had spoken to men; now it was Man
Himself speaking. It was not one man who spoke there, it was Man–Man
conscious of his origin, his destiny, and his pilgrimage between, Man
sane again after a night of madness–knowing his strength, declaring his
law, lamenting in a voice as eloquent as stringed instruments his own
failure to correspond. It was a soliloquy rather than an oration. Rome
had fallen, English and Italian streets had run with blood, smoke and
flame had gone up to heaven, because man had for an instant sunk back to
the tiger. Yet it was done, cried the great voice, and there was no
repentance; it was done, and ages hence man must still do penance and
flush scarlet with shame to remember that once he turned his back on
the risen light.
There was no appeal to the lurid, no picture of the tumbling palaces,
the running figures, the coughing explosions, the shaking of the earth
and the dying of the doomed. It was rather with those hot hearts
shouting in the English and German streets, or aloft in the winter air
of Italy, the ugly passions that warred there, as the volors rocked at
their stations, generating and fulfilling revenge, paying back plot with
plot, and violence with violence. For there, cried the voice, was man as
he had been, fallen in an instant to the cruel old ages before he had
learned what he was and why.
There was no repentance, said the voice again, but there was something
better; and as the hard, stinging tones melted, the girl’s dry eyes of
shame filled in an instant with tears. There was something better–the
knowledge of what crimes man was yet capable of, and the will to use
that knowledge. Rome was gone, and it was a lamentable shame; Rome was
gone, and the air was the sweeter for it; and then in an instant, like
the soar of a bird, He was up and away–away from the horrid gulf where
He had looked just now, from the fragments of charred bodies, and
tumbled houses and all the signs of man’s disgrace, to the pure air and
sunlight to which man must once more set his face. Yet He bore with Him
in that wonderful flight the dew of tears and the aroma of earth. He had
not spared words with which to lash and whip the naked human heart, and
He did not spare words to lift up the bleeding, shrinking thing, and
comfort it with the divine vision of love....
Historically speaking, it was about forty minutes before He turned to
the shrouded image behind the altar.
“Oh! Maternity!” he cried. “Mother of us all–-”
And then, to those who heard Him, the supreme miracle took place.... For
it seemed now in an instant that it was no longer man who spoke, but One
who stood upon the stage of the superhuman. The curtain ripped back, as
one who stood by it tore, panting, at the strings; and there, it seemed,
face to face stood the Mother above the altar, huge, white and
protective, and the Child, one passionate incarnation of love, crying to
her from the tribune.
“Oh! Mother of us all, and Mother of Me!”
So He praised her to her face, that sublime principle of life, declared
her glories and her strength, her Immaculate Motherhood, her seven
swords of anguish driven through her heart by the passion and the
follies of her Son–He promised her great things, the recognition of her
countless children, the love and service of the unborn, the welcome of
those yet quickening within the womb. He named her the Wisdom of the
Most High, that sweetly orders all things, the Gate of Heaven, House of
Ivory, Comforter of the afflicted, Queen of the World; and, to the
delirious eyes of those who looked on her it seemed that the grave face
smiled to hear Him....
A great panting as of some monstrous life began to fill the air as the
mob swayed behind Him, and the torrential voice poured on. Waves of
emotion swept up and down; there were cries and sobs, the yelping of a
man beside himself at last, from somewhere among the crowded seats, the
crash of a bench, and another and another, and the gangways were full,
for He no longer held them passive to listen; He was rousing them to
some supreme act. The tide crawled nearer, and the faces stared no
longer at the Son but the Mother; the girl in the gallery tore at the
heavy railing, and sank down sobbing upon her knees. And above all the
voice pealed on–and the thin hands blanched to whiteness strained from
the wide and sumptuous sleeves as if to reach across the sanctuary
itself.
It was a new tale He was telling now, and all to her glory. He was from
the East, now they knew, come from some triumph. He had been hailed as
King, adored as Divine, as was meet and right–He, the humble superhuman
son of a Human Mother–who bore not a sword but peace, not a cross but a
crown. So it seemed He was saying; yet no man there knew whether He said
it or not–whether the voice proclaimed it, or their hearts asserted it.
He was on the steps of the sanctuary now, still with outstretched hands
and pouring words, and the mob rolled after him to the rumble of ten
thousand feet and the sighing of ten thousand hearts.... He was at the
altar; He was upon it. Again in one last cry, as the crowd broke against
the steps beneath, He hailed her Queen and Mother.
The end came in a moment, swift and inevitable. And for an instant,
before the girl in the gallery sank down, blind with tears, she saw the
tiny figure poised there at the knees of the huge image, beneath the
expectant hands, silent and transfigured in the blaze of light. The
Mother, it seemed, had found her Son at last.
For an instant she saw it, the soaring columns, the gilding and the
colours, the swaying heads, the tossing hands. It was a sea that heaved
before her, lights went up and down, the rose window whirled overhead,
presences filled the air, heaven flashed away, and the earth shook it
ecstasy. Then in the heavenly light, to the crash of drums, above the
screaming of the women and the battering of feet, in one thunder-peal of
worship ten thousand voices hailed Him Lord and God.
Continue...

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
