


The spirits of young Lennox rose to the zenith. Although they were
still grazing the edge of peril, he had supreme confidence in Tayoga
and also in the fog. It was a great fog, a thick fog, a kindly fog,
and it had made possible their escape and the achievement of their
mission. Having held so long it would hold until they needed it no
longer.
“Have they come any nearer, Tayoga?” he asked.
“Jumonville is still giving orders, and sending the canoes somewhat at
random. He is not the leader Sharp Sword would be in an emergency, nor
anything like it. He is having his own boat paddled about uncertainly.
I can hear the paddles of the four men in it. Now and then he speaks
angrily, too. He is upbraiding those who are not to blame. How are
you feeling now, Dagaeoga? Has Manitou already filled you with new
strength?”
“I’m feeling as well as I ever did in my life. I’m ready to swing the
paddle again.”
“Then we go. The fog will not wait for us forever. We must use it
while we have it.”
They swept their paddles through the water in long and vigorous
strokes, and the canoe shot forward once more. They were confident now
that no enemy was ahead of them, and that none of those behind could
overtake them. The wet, cold fog still enclosed them like a heavy,
damp blanket, but their vigorous exercise and their high spirits kept
them warm. After ten minutes they made another stop, but as Tayoga
could hear nothing of Jumonville’s party they pushed on again at
speed. By and by the Onondaga said:
“I feel the fog thinning, Dagaeoga. A wind out of the west has risen,
and soon it will take it all away.”
“But it has served its purpose. I shall always feel well toward fogs.
Yes, here it goes! The wind is rising fast, and it is taking away the
mists and vapors in great folds.”
The water began to roughen under the stiff breeze. The fog was split
asunder, the pieces were torn to fragments and shreds, and then
everything was swept away, leaving the surface of the lake a silver
mirror, and the mountains high and green on either shore. Far behind
them hovered the Indian canoes, and four or five miles ahead a tower
of smoke rose from the west bank.
“Certainly our people,” said Robert, looking at the smoke.
“There is no doubt of it,” said the Onondaga, “and that is where we
will go.”
“And those behind us know now that we tricked them in the fog and have
escaped. They give forth a shout of anger and disappointment. Now they
turn back.”
They eased their strokes a little as the pursuit had been abandoned,
but curved more toward the center of the lake, lest some hidden
sharpshooter on shore might reach them, and made fair speed toward the
smoke, which Robert surmised might be made by a vanguard of troops.
“We ought to have help for Colden and Willet very soon,” he said.
“It will not be long,” said Tayoga; “but Dagaeoga has forgotten
something. Can he not think what it is?”
“No, Tayoga, I can’t recall anything.”
“Dagaeoga’s body is bare from the waist up. It is well for an Indian
to go thus into a white camp, but it is not the custom of the people
to whom Lennox belongs.”
“You’re right. I’ve had so much excitement that I’d forgotten all
about my clothes. I must be true to my race, when I meet my brethren.”
He reclothed himself, resumed his paddle, and they pushed on steadily
for the smoke. No trace of the fog was left. The lake glistened in
the sun, the ranges showed green from base to summit, and the tower of
smoke deepened and broadened.
“Can you make out what lies at the foot of it, Tayoga?” asked Robert.
“I think I can see a gleam of the sun on an epaulet. It is certainly
a camp of your people. The lake is supposed to be under their command,
and if the French should make a new incursion here upon its shores
they would not build their fires so boldly. Now, I see another gleam,
and I hear the ring of axes. They are not boat builders, because no
boats, either finished or unfinished, show at the water’s edge. They
are probably cutting wood for their fires. I hear, too, the crack of
a whip, which means that they have wagons, and the presence of wagons
indicates a large force. They may be coming ahead with supplies for
our great army when it advances. I can now see men in uniform, and
there are some red coats among them. Hold your paddle as high as you
can, Dagaeoga, as a sign that we are friends, and I will send the
canoe in toward the shore. Ah, they see us now, and men are coming
down to the lake’s edge to meet us! It is a large camp, and it should
hold enough men to make St. Luc give up the siege of Colden.”
The two sent the canoe swiftly toward the land, where soldiers and
others in hunter’s dress were already gathered to meet them. Robert
saw a tall, thin officer in a Colonial uniform, standing on the narrow
beach, and, assuming him to be in command, he said as the canoe swept
in:
“We are messengers, sir, from the force of Captain Colden, which is
besieged at the sawmill ten or twelve miles farther north.”
“Besieged, did you say?” said the officer, speaking in a sharp, dry
voice. “It’s one of those French tricks they’re always playing on us,
rushing in under our very noses, and trying to cut out our forces.”
“That’s it, sir. The French and Indian host, in this case, is led
by St. Luc, the ablest and most daring of all their partisans, and,
unless you give help, they’ll have to escape as best they can in what
boats they have.”
“As I’m a good Massachusetts man, I expected something of this kind. I
sent word to Pownall, our Governor, that we must be extremely
cautious in respect to the French, but he thinks the army of General
Abercrombie will overwhelm everything. Forest fighting is very
different from that of the open fields, a fact which the French seem
to have mastered better than we have. My name, young sir, is Elihu
Strong. I’m a colonel of the Massachusetts militia, and I command the
force that you see posted here.”
“And mine, sir, is Robert Lennox, a free lance, and this is Tayoga, of
the clan of the Bear, of the great Onondaga nation, a devoted friend
of ours and the finest trailer the world has ever produced.”
“Ah, I heard something of you both when I was at Albany from one
Jacobus Huysman, a stout and worthy burgher, who spoke well of you,
and who hazarded a surmise that I might meet you somewhere in the
neighborhood of the lakes.”
“We lived in the house of Mynheer Jacobus when we went to school in
Albany. We owe him much.”
“There was a third who was generally with you, a famous hunter, David
Willet, was there not?”
“He is with Captain Colden, sir, assisting in the defense.”
“I’m glad he’s there. Judging from what I’ve heard of him, he’s a
tower of strength. But come into the camp. Doubtless, both of you
need food and rest. The times be dark, and we must get out of each day
whatever it has to offer.”
Robert looked at him with interest. He was the forerunner of a type
that was to develop markedly in New England, tall, thin, dry-lipped,
critical, shrewd and tenacious to the last degree. He and his kind
were destined to make a great impress upon the New World. He gave to
the two the best the camp had, and ordered that they be treated with
every courtesy.
“I’ve a strong force here,” he said, “although it might have been
stronger if our Governor and Legislature had done their full duty.
Still, we must make the best of everything. My men reported Indians in
the forest to the north of us, and that, perhaps, is the reason why we
have not come into contact with Captain Colden, but I did not suspect
that he was besieged.”
Robert, as he ate the good food set before him, looked over the camp,
which had been pitched well, with far-flung pickets to guard against
ambush, and his eyes glistened, as they fell upon two brass cannon,
standing side by side upon a slight rise in the center of the camp.
The big guns, when well handled, were always effective against forest
warriors. Colonel Strong’s eyes followed his.
“I see that you are taking notice of my cannon,” he said. “They’re
good pieces, but if our governor and legislature had done their duty
they’d be four instead of two. Still, we have to make the best of what
we have. I told Shirley that we must prepare for a great war, and I
tell Pownall the same. Those who don’t know him always underrate our
French foe.”
“I never do, sir,” said Robert. “I’ve seen too much of him to do
that.”
“Well, well, we’ll do the best we can. I’ve four hundred men here,
though if the Governor and the Legislature of Massachusetts had done
their full duty they’d be eight hundred, not to say a thousand. I’ll
advance as soon as possible to the relief of Colden. He can surely
hold out until the morrow.”
“Not a doubt of it, sir, and, if you’ll pardon me for making a
suggestion, I wouldn’t begin any advance until the morning. Not much
of the day is left. If we started this afternoon, night would overtake
us in the woods and the Chevalier de St. Luc is sure to plant an
ambush for us.”
“Sensibly spoken, young sir. We’re an eternally rash people. We’re
always walking into traps. I’ve in my force about twenty good scouts,
though if the Governor and Legislature of Massachusetts had done their
full duty they’d be forty, not to say fifty, and I don’t want to risk
their loss in night fighting in the forest.”
He went away and Robert saw him moving among his men, giving orders.
Elihu Strong, a merchant, nevertheless had made himself a strenuous
soldier at his province’s call, and he was not unwilling to learn even
from those not more than half his age.
“Open Eyes will do well,” said Tayoga.
“Open Eyes?”
“Aye, Dagaeoga. The colonel who is named Strong I will call Open Eyes,
because he is willing to look and see. He will look when you tell
him to look, and many who come from the cities will not do that. And
because his eyes are open he will not stick his head into an ambush.
Yet he will always complain of others.”
“And sometimes of himself, too,” laughed Robert. “I think he’ll be
fair in that respect. Now, Tayoga, we’ll rest here, and be easy with
ourselves until to-morrow morning, when we advance.”
“We will stay, Dagaeoga, but I do not know whether it will be so easy.
Since Jumonville saw us escape he will tell St. Luc of it, and Sharp
Sword will send a force here to harry Open Eyes, and to make him think
the forest is full of warriors. But Open Eyes, though he may complain,
will not be afraid.”
It was even as the Onondaga predicted. The foe came with the twilight.
The dark wilderness about them gave back whoops and yells, and furtive
bands skirmished with Strong’s scouts. Then the shouts of the warriors
increased greatly in number, and seemed to come from all points about
the camp. It was obvious to Robert that the enemy was trying to make
Strong’s men believe that a great force was confronting them, and some
of them, unused to the woods, showed apprehension lest such an unseen
and elusive danger overwhelm them. But Elihu Strong never flinched.
The forest was almost as much of a mystery to him as it was to his
troops, but he was there to dare its perils and he dared them.
“I shall keep my men in camp and await attack, if they make it,” he
said to Robert, to whom he seemed to have taken a great fancy, “and
whatever happens I shall move forward in the morning to the relief of
Colden.”
He shut his thin lips tightly together and his pale blue eyes flashed.
The merchant, turned soldier, had the stoutest of hearts, and a stout
heart was what was needed in his camp that night. The warriors gave
his men no rest. They circled about continually, firing and whooping,
and trying to create panic, or at least a fear that would hold Strong
where he was.
Robert went to sleep early, and, when he awakened far in the night,
the turmoil was still going on. But he saw Elihu Strong walking back
and forth near one of the fires, and in the glow his thin face still
reflected an iron resolution. Satisfied that the camp was in no danger
of being frightened, young Lennox went back to sleep.
A gray, chilly morning came, and soon after dawn Elihu Strong began
to prepare his men for their perilous progress, serving first an ample
hot breakfast with plenty of tea and coffee.
“Open Eyes not only watches but he knows much,” said Tayoga. “He has
learned that an army marches better on a full stomach.”
Strong then asked Robert and Tayoga to serve in a way as guides, and
he made his dispositions, sending his scouts in advance, putting his
most experienced soldiers on the flanks and heading his main column
with the two brass cannon. The strictest injunctions that nobody
straggle were given, and then the force took up its march.
They had not been molested while at breakfast, and when making the
preparations, but as soon as they left the fire and entered the
deep forest, the terrifying turmoil burst forth again, fierce whoops
resounding on every side and bullets pattering on the leaves or bark.
Colonel Strong left his scouts and flankers to deal with the ambushed
warriors, and the main column, face to the front, marched steadily
toward Colden’s camp. It was to be a trial of nerves, and Robert was
quite confident that the stern New England leader would win.
“The savages make a tremendous tumult,” he said to young Lennox, “but
their bullets are not reaching us. We’re not to be shaken by mere
noise.”
“When they find that out, as they soon will,” said Robert, “they’ll
make an attack. Some French officers and troops must be with them.
Perhaps Jumonville came in the night to lead them.”
He and Tayoga then went a short distance into the forest ahead of the
scouts, and Tayoga saw ample evidence that the French were present
with the Indians.
“You are right in your surmise that Jumonville came in the night,” he
said. “He wore boots, and here are the imprints of his heels. I think
he is not far away now. Watch well, Dagaeoga, while I lie on the earth
and listen.”
Ear to the ground, the Onondaga announced that he could hear men on
both sides of them moving.
“There is the light step of the warriors,” he said, “and also the
heavier tread of the French. I think I can hear Jumonville himself. It
sounds like the crush of boots. Perhaps they are now seeking to lay an
ambush.”
“Then it’s time for us to fall back, Tayoga, both for our own sakes
and for the sake of Colonel Strong’s force.”
The two retreated quickly lest they be caught in an ambush, and gave
warning to Elihu Strong that an attack was now probable, a belief
in which they were confirmed by the report the scouts brought in
presently that a creek was just ahead, a crossing always being a
favorite place for an Indian trap.
“So be it,” said Colonel Strong, calmly. “We are ready. If the
Governor and Legislature of Massachusetts had done their full duty,
we’d be twice as strong, but even as we are we’ll force the passage of
the creek.”
“You will find a body of the warriors on this side of the stream,"
said Tayoga. “They will give way after a little firing, tempting you
to think you have won an easy victory. Then when about half of your
men are across they will attack with all their might, hoping to cut
you down.”
“I thank you for telling me,” said Colonel Strong. “I’ve no doubt you
know what you’re talking about. Your manner indicates it. We might be
much better equipped than we are if those in authority in my province
had done their full duty, but we will make way, nevertheless. I’ll
cover the passage of the creek with the guns.”
The firing in front already showed that Tayoga’s prediction was coming
true, and it was accompanied by a tremendous volume of yelling, as if
the whole Indian force were gathered on the near side of the creek.
Robert from the crest of a hill saw the stream, narrow and deep,
though not too deep for fording as he was to learn later, fringed on
either side with a dense growth of low bushes, from the shelter of
which warriors were sending their bullets toward the white force. The
men were eager to go against them at once, but the scouts were sent
forward through the undergrowth to open up a flanking fire, and then
the main column marched on at a steady pace.
The crash of the rifles grew fast. The warriors on the near side of
the creek leaped from the bushes as Strong’s men drew near, waded the
stream and disappeared in the forest on the other bank, giving forth
howls of disappointment as they fled. The soldiers, uttering a
shout of triumph, undertook to rush forward in pursuit, but Strong
restrained them.
“It’s the ambush against which the Onondaga warned us,” he said to his
lieutenants, “and we won’t run into it. Bring forward the cannon.”
The two brass guns, fine twelve pounders, were moved up within close
range of the creek, and they swept the forest on the other side with
balls and grape shot. It was probably the first time cannon were ever
heard in those woods, and the reports came back in many echoes. Boughs
and twigs rained down.
“It is a great sound,” said Tayoga admiringly, “and the warriors who
are trying to plant an ambush will not like it.”
“But you’ll remember Braddock’s fate,” said Robert. “The cannon didn’t
do much then.”
“But this is different, Dagaeoga. Open Eyes has his eyes open. He
is merely using the cannon as a cover for his advance. They will be
backed up by the rifles. You will see.”
The soldiers approached the creek cautiously, and, when the first
ranks were in the water, the cannon raked the woods ahead to right and
left, and to left and right. The best of the riflemen were also pushed
forward, and, when the warriors opened fire, they were quickly driven
away. Then the whole force, carrying the cannon with them, crossed,
and stood in triumph on the other side.
“Did I not tell you that Open Eyes knew what he was doing?” said
Tayoga.
“It seems that he does,” Robert replied, “but we haven’t yet arrived
at Colden’s station. An attack in force is sure to come.”
“Dagaeoga speaks truth. I think it will occur a mile or two farther
on. They will make it before Captain Colden’s men can learn that we
are on the march.”
“Then they won’t wait long. Anywhere will do, as the forest is dense
everywhere.”
Since they had carried the ford with but little loss, the cannon
that had blazed the way ceased to fire, but the gunners regarded them
proudly and Robert did not withhold admiration. They were pioneers,
fine brass creatures, and when handled right they were a wonderful
help in the forest. He did not blame the gunners for patting the
barrels, for scraping the mud of the creek’s crossing from the wheels,
and for speaking to them affectionately. Massive and polished they
gleamed in the sun and inspired confidence.
Tayoga went ahead in the forest, but came back soon and reported a
low ridge not more than half a mile farther on, a likely place for
an attack, which he judged would come there. It would be made by the
united force of the French and Indians and would be severe.
“So be it,” said Elihu Strong, whose iron calm nothing disturbed. “We
are ready for the foe, though St. Luc himself should come. It is true
that instead of two cannon we might have had four or even six, or
twice as many men, if the Governor and Legislature of Massachusetts
had done their full duty, but we’ll let that pass. Will you, Lennox,
and you, Tayoga, advance with the scouts and be my eyes?”
Robert appreciated the compliment to the full, and promptly replied in
the affirmative for them both. Then he and Tayoga at once plunged
into the forest with the borderers who were there to provide against
ambush, all of them approaching the menacing ridge with great care. It
was a long projection, rising about a hundred feet, and grown densely
with trees and bushes. It looked very quiet and peaceful and birds
even were singing there among the boughs. The leader of the scouts, a
bronzed man of middle age named Adams, turned to Tayoga.
“I see nothing there,” he said, “but I’ve heard of you and your power
to find things where others can’t. Do you think they’re on that ridge
waiting for us?”
“It is certain,” replied the Onondaga. “It is the place best fitted
for them, and they will not neglect it. Let me go forward a little,
with my friend, Dagaeoga, and we will unveil them.”
“We’ll wait here, and if they’re on it I believe you’ll soon know it,"
said Adams confidently.
Tayoga slid forward among the bushes and Robert followed. Neither made
the slightest noise, and they drew much nearer to the ridge, which
still basked in the sun, peaceful and innocent in looks. Not a warrior
or a Frenchman appeared there, the bushes gave back no glint of
weapons, nothing was disclosed.
“They may be hidden in that jungle, but they won’t stir until we’re
under the muzzles of their rifles. What do you propose to do?” asked
Robert.
“I will tempt them, Dagaeoga.”
“Tempt them? I don’t understand you.”
“Tododaho on his great star which we cannot see in the day, but which,
nevertheless, is there, whispers to me that Tandakora himself is among
the bushes on the ridge. It is just such an ambush as he loves. As you
know, Dagaeoga, he hates us all, but he hates me most. If he sees a
good opportunity for a shot at me he will not be able to forego it.”
“For Heaven’s sake, Tayoga, don’t make a martyr of yourself merely to
draw the enemy’s fire!”
“No such thought was in my mind. I am not yet ready to leave the
world, which I find bright and full of interest. Moreover, I wish to
see the end of this war and what will happen afterward. Risks are a
part of our life, Dagaeoga, but I will take none that is undue.”
Tayoga spoke in his usual precise, book English, explaining everything
fully, and Robert said nothing more. But he awaited the actions of the
Onondaga with intense interest. Tayoga crept forward five or six yards
more, and then he stumbled, striking against a bush and shaking it
violently. Robert was amazed. It was incredible that the Onondaga
should be so awkward, and then he remembered. Tayoga was going to draw
the enemy’s fire.
Tayoga struck against another bush, and then stood upright and
visible. Those hidden on the ridge, if such there were, could see him
clearly. The response was immediate. A gigantic figure stood up among
the bushes, leveled a rifle and fired at him point blank. But the
Onondaga, quick as lightning, dropped back and the bullet whistled
over his head. Robert fired at the great painted figure of Tandakora,
but he too missed, and in a moment the Ojibway chief sank down in the
undergrowth. A shout came from the hidden Indians about him.
“They are there,” said Tayoga, “and we know just where many of them
lie. We will suggest to Open Eyes that he fire the cannon at that
point.”
They rejoined Adams.
“You were right, as I knew you’d be,” said the scout. “You’ve located
’em.”
“Yes, because Tandakora could not resist his hate of me,” said the
Onondaga.
They withdrew to the main force, and once more the brave brass guns
were brought up, sending solid shot and grape into the bushes on the
ridge, then moving forward and repeating the fire. Many rifles opened
upon them from the thickets, and several men fell, but Elihu Strong
held his people in hand, and the scouts drove back the sharpshooters.
Meanwhile the whole force advanced and began to climb the ridge, the
cannon being turned on the flanks, where the attack was now heaviest.
A fierce battle ensued, and the guns, served with great skill and
effectiveness, kept the Indians at bay. More of Strong’s men were
slain and many were hit, but their own rifles backed up the guns with
a deadly fire. Thus the combat was waged in the thickets a full two
hours, when they heard a great shout toward the north, and Willet, at
the head of a hundred men, broke his way through to their relief. Then
French and Indians drew off, and the united forces proceeded to the
point, where Colden, Wilton, Carson and Grosvenor gave them a great
welcome.
“We are here,” said Elihu Strong. “If the Governor and Legislature of
Massachusetts had done their full duty we might have been here sooner,
but here we are.”
“I knew that you would come back and bring help with you,” said
Grosvenor to Robert. “I felt sure that Tayoga would guide the canoe
through every peril.”
“Your confidence was not misplaced,” said Robert. “He did some
wonderful work. He was as great a trailer on the water as he is on
land. Now that we are so much stronger, I wonder what St. Luc is going
to do.”
But Black Rifle came in the next morning with the news that the
Chevalier and his whole force were gone.
They had stolen away silently in the night, and were now marching
northward, probably to join Montcalm.
“I’m not surprised,” said Willet. “We’re now too strong for him
and St. Luc is not the man to waste his time and strength in vain
endeavors. I suspect that we will next hear of him near Champlain,
somewhere in the neighborhood of Ticonderoga. I think we’d better
follow his trail a little distance.”
Willet himself led the band that pursued St. Luc, and it included
Tayoga, Robert, Grosvenor, Black Rifle and Adams, Daganoweda and his
Mohawks having left shortly before on an expedition of their own. It
was an easy enough task, as the trail necessarily was wide and deep,
and the Onondaga could read it almost with his eyes shut.
“Here went Sharp Sword,” he said after looking about a while. “I find
traces of his moccasins, which I would know anywhere because I have
seen them so many times before. Here another Frenchman joined him and
walked beside him for a while. It was Jumonville, whose imprints I
also know. They talked together. Perhaps Jumonville was narrating the
details of his encounter with us. Now he leaves St. Luc, who is joined
by another Frenchman wearing moccasins. But the man is heavy and
walked with a heavy step. It is the Canadian, Dubois, who attends upon
Sharp Sword, and who is devoted to him. Perhaps Sharp Sword is giving
him instructions about the camp that they will make when the day
is over. Now Dubois also goes, and here come the great moccasins of
Tandakora. I have seen none other so large in the woods, and a child
would know them. He too talks with Sharp Sword, but Sharp Sword does
not stop for him. They walk on together, because the stride continues
steady and even, just the length that a man of Sharp Sword’s height
would make when walking. Tandakora is very angry, not at Sharp
Sword–he would not dare to show anger against him–but at the will
of Manitou who would not let him win a victory over us. He did not get
much satisfaction from Sharp Sword, because he stayed with him only a
very short time. Here his trail leads away again, and Sharp Sword once
more walks on alone.
“Perhaps Sharp Sword prefers to be alone. Most men do after a
disappointment, and he knows that his attack upon the boat builders
has been a failure. Sharp Sword does not like failures any more than
other people do, and he wants to think. He is planning how to win
a great success, and to atone for his failure here. I do not see
anything of De Courcelles. I do not find his trail anywhere, which
shows that the wound you gave him, Dagaeoga, was severe. He is being
carried either by warriors or French soldiers on a litter. It is far
more likely to be soldiers, and here I find them, the trail of four
men who walk exactly even, two by two all the time. The rage of De
Courcelles will mount very high against you, Dagaeoga, and you will
have to beware of him.”
“I am ready for him,” said Robert, proudly.
The broad trail led steadily on toward the north, but Willet, after a
while, spread out his own little force, taking no chances with forest
ambush. He considered it highly probable that before long Tandakora
would curve aside with some of his warriors, hoping to trap the
unwary. He was confirmed in his opinion by the Onondaga’s reading of
the trail.
“I find the footprints of the Ojibway chief again,” said Tayoga. “Here
they go at the edge of the trail. Now he has stopped. His stride
has ceased, and he stands with his moccasins close together. He is
probably talking with his warriors and he meditates something. The
rage of Tandakora is as great as that of De Courcelles, but Tandakora
is not hurt, and he is able to strike. He moves on again, and, ah!
here he goes into the woods. Beyond question he is now engaged in
planting an ambush for those who would follow St. Luc. Shall we go
back, Great Bear, or shall we meet the Ojibway’s ambush with an ambush
of our own?”
The black eyes of the Onondaga sparkled.
“We ought to turn back,” replied Willet, “but I can’t resist playing
Tandakora’s own game with him. It may give us a chance to rid the
border of that scourge. We’ll leave the trail, and go into the deep
bush.”
Led by the hunter the little band plunged into the forest and began
a careful circle, intending to come back to the trail some distance
ahead, and to post themselves behind Tandakora in case that wily
savage was planning an ambush, as they felt sure he was. They
redoubled their precautions, ceasing all talk for the while, and
allowing no bushes to rustle as they passed. Willet led the line, and
Tayoga brought up the rear. Grosvenor was just behind Robert. He, too,
was now able to bring down his feet in soundless fashion, and to avoid
every stick or twig that might break with a crack beneath his weight.
While he was aware of the perils before them, his heart beat high. He
felt that he was making further progress, and that he was becoming a
worthy forest runner.
After two careful hours of travel, they came back again to the broad
trail which showed that St. Luc was still maintaining steady progress
toward the north. But both the hunter and the Onondaga felt sure that
Tandakora and a chosen band were now to the south, waiting in ambush
for those who would come in pursuit.
“We’d better draw ’em if we can,” said Willet. “Let ’em know we’re
here, but make ’em believe we’re friends.”
“I think I can do it,” said Tayoga. “I know Huron and St. Regis
signals. It is likely that some of the warriors with Tandakora are
Hurons, and, in any event, the Ojibway will understand the signals.”
He imitated the cawing of a crow, and presently the answer came
from the forest about a quarter of a mile to the south. The cry was
repeated, and the answer came duly a second time. No one in the little
band now doubted that Tandakora and his men were there.
“Shall we attack?” asked Robert.
“I think we can sting them a little,” replied Willet. “Our numbers are
few, but the force of the Ojibway is not likely to be large. It was
his purpose to strike and get away, and that’s what we’ll do. Now,
Tayoga, we’re relying upon you to get us into a good position on his
flank.”
The Onondaga led them in another but much smaller circle toward the
forest, from which the answering caws of the crow had come. The way
went through dense thickets but, before he reached his chosen spot, he
stopped.
“Look,” he said, pointing to the earth, where there were faint traces
that Robert could scarcely see and over which he would have passed,
unnoticing. “Here is where Tandakora went on his way to the ambush. It
is a little trail, and it was to be only a little ambush. He has only
about ten warriors with him. The Ojibway has come back for revenge. He
could not bear to leave without striking at least one blow. Perhaps he
slipped away from Sharp Sword to try the ambush on his own account.”
“They can’t be far ahead,” said the hunter.
“No,” said the Onondaga. “They will be coming back in response to my
call, and I think we would better await them here.”
They disposed themselves in good order for battle, and then sank to
the earth. Light waves of air registered delicately but clearly on
those wonderful eardrums of Tayoga’s. Faint though the sound was,
he understood it. It was the careful tread of men. Tandakora and his
warriors were on the way, called by the crow. He knew when they came
within a hundred yards of where he and his companions lay, and he
knew when they spread out in cautious fashion, to see what manner of
friends these were who came. He knew, too, that Tandakora would not
walk into a trap, and he had not expected at any time that he would,
it having been merely his purpose when he cawed like a crow to call
him back to fair and honorable combat, ambush against ambush. He noted
when the thin line of detached warriors began to advance again, he was
even able to trace the step of Tandakora, heavier than the others,
and to discern when the Ojibway chief stopped a second time, trying to
pierce the thickets with his eyes.
“Tandakora is in doubt,” he whispered to Robert. “The call of the crow
which at first seemed so friendly has another meaning now. He is not
so sure that friends are here after all, but he does not understand
how an enemy happens to be behind him. He is angry, too, that his own
pretty ambush, in which he was sitting so cunningly waiting for us,
is broken up. Tandakora’s humor is far from good, but, because of it,
mine is excellent.”
“You certainly learned the dictionary well when you were in our
schools,” Robert whispered back, but as full as ever of admiration for
Tayoga’s powers. “Has all sound ceased now?”
“They are not stirring. They have become quite sure that we are
enemies and they wait for us to act first.”
“Then I’ll give ’em a lead,” said Willet, who lay on Tayoga’s right.
He thrust out a foot, bringing it down on a dead stick so hard that
it broke with a sharp snap, but instantly drew away to the shelter of
another bush. A rifle cracked in front of them and a bullet cut the
air over the broken stick. Before the warrior who fired the bullet
could sink back Black Rifle pulled the trigger at a certain target,
and the man fell without a sound.
“A fine shot, Captain Jack,” said Willet, and a few minutes later the
hunter himself made another just as good. For a half hour the combat
was waged in the deep thickets, mere glimpses serving for aim, but the
combatants were as fierce and tenacious as if the issue were joined
by great armies. Four warriors fell, Willet’s band suffered only a few
scratches, and then, at a signal from him, they melted away into the
woods, curved about again, and took up the return journey toward their
own force.
“We did enough,” said Willet, when he was sure they were not pursued
by Tandakora. “All we wanted to do was to sting the Ojibway and not to
let him forget that those who ambush may be ambushed. He’ll be fairly
burning with anger.”
“How are you feeling, Red Coat?” asked Tayoga.
“As well as could be expected after such an experience,” replied
Grosvenor with pride. But the young Englishman was very sober, too.
A warrior had fallen before his rifle, and, with the heat of battle
over, he was very thoughtful.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Lords of the Wild” by Joseph A. Altsheler belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Lords of the Wild: A Story of the Old New York BorderBy Joseph A. AltshelerAt Amazon
