


Yet even at that sound and sight his soul scarcely tightened the languid
threads that united it through every fibre of his body with the world of
sense. He saw and heard the tumult in the passage, frantic eyes and
mouths crying aloud, and, in strange contrast, the pale ecstatic faces
of those princes who turned and looked; even within the tranquil
presence-chamber of the spirit where two beings, Incarnate God and all
but Discarnate Man, were locked in embrace, a certain mental process
went on. Yet all was still as apart from him as a lighted stage and its
drama from a self-contained spectator. In the material world, now as
attenuated as a mirage, events were at hand; but to his soul, balanced
now on reality and awake to facts, these things were but a spectacle....
He turned to the altar again, and there, as he had known it would be, in
the midst of clear light, all was at peace: the celebrant, seen as
through molten glass, adored as He murmured the mystery of the
Word-made-Flesh, and once more passing to the centre, sank upon His
knees.
Again the priest understood; for thought was no longer the process of a
mind, rather it was the glance of a spirit. He knew all now; and, by an
inevitable impulse, his throat began to sing aloud words that, as he
sang, opened for the first time as flowers telling their secret to the
sun.
O Salutaris Hostia
Qui coeli pandis ostium. . . .
They were all singing now; even the Mohammedan catechumen who had burst
in a moment ago sang with the rest, his lean head thrust out and his
arms tight across his breast; the tiny chapel rang with the forty
voices, and the vast world thrilled to hear it....
Still singing, the priest saw the veil laid as by a phantom upon the
Pontiff’s shoulders; there was a movement, a surge of figures–shadows
only in the midst of substance,
 ... Uni Trinoque Domino ....
–and the Pope stood erect, Himself a pallor in the heart of light, with
spectral folds of silk dripping from His shoulders, His hands swathed in
them, and His down-bent head hidden by the silver-rayed monstrance and
That which it bore....
 ... Qui vitam sine termino
Nobis donet in patria ....
... They were moving now, and the world of life swung with them; of so
much was he aware. He was out in the passage, among the white, frenzied
faces that with bared teeth stared up at that sight, silenced at last by
the thunder of Pange Lingua, and the radiance of those who passed out
to eternal life.... At the corner he turned for an instant to see the
six pale flames move along a dozen yards behind, as spear-heads about a
King, and in the midst the silver rays and the White Heart of God....
Then he was out, and the battle lay in array....
That sky on which he had looked an hour ago had passed from darkness
charged with light to light overlaid with darkness–from glimmering
night to Wrathful Day–and that light was red....
From behind Thabor on the left to Carmel on the far right, above the
hills twenty miles away rested an enormous vault of colour; here were no
gradations from zenith to horizon; all was the one deep smoulder of
crimson as of the glow of iron. It was such a colour as men have seen at
sunsets after rain, while the clouds, more translucent each instant,
transmit the glory they cannot contain. Here, too, was the sun, pale as
the Host, set like a fragile wafer above the Mount of Transfiguration,
and there, far down in the west where men had once cried upon Baal in
vain, hung the sickle of the white moon. Yet all was no more than
stained light that lies broken across carven work of stone....
... In suprema nocte coena,
sang the myriad voices,
Recumbens cum fratribus
Observata lege plena
Cibis in legalibus
Cibum turbae duodenae
Se dat suis manibus .... 
He saw, too, poised as motes in light, that ring of strange
fish-creatures, white as milk, except where the angry glory turned their
backs to flame, white-winged like floating moths, from the tiny shape
far to the south to the monster at hand scarcely five hundred yards
away; and even as he looked, singing as he looked, he understood that
the circle was nearer, and perceived that these as yet knew nothing....
Verbum caro, panem verum
Verbo carnem efficit ....
They were nearer still, until now even at his feet there slid along the
ground the shadow of a monstrous bird, pale and undefined, as between
the wan sun and himself moved out the vast shape that a moment ago hung
above the Hill.... Then again it backed across and waited ...
Et si census deficit
Ad formandum cor sincerum
Sola fides sufficit ....
... Then, with a roar, came the thunder again, pealing in circle beyond
circle of those tremendous Presences–Thrones and Powers–who,
themselves to the world as substance to shadow, are but shadows again
beneath the apex and within the ring of Absolute Deity.... The thunder
broke loose, shaking the earth that now cringed on the quivering edge of
dissolution....
TANTUM ERGO SACRAMENTUM
VENEREMUR CERNUI
ET ANTIQUUM DOCUMENTUM
NOVO CEDAT RITUI.
Ah! yes; it was He for whom God waited now–He who far up beneath that
trembling shadow of a dome, itself but the piteous core of unimagined
splendour, came in His swift chariot, blind to all save that on which He
had fixed His eyes so long, unaware that His world corrupted about Him,
His shadow moving like a pale cloud across the ghostly plain where
Israel had fought and Sennacherib boasted–that plain lighted now with a
yet deeper glow, as heaven, kindling to glory beyond glory of yet
fiercer spiritual flame, still restrained the power knit at last to the
relief of final revelation, and for the last time the voices sang....
PRAESTET FIDES SUPPLEMENTUM
SENSUUM DEFECTUI ....
... He was coming now, swifter than ever, the heir of temporal ages and
the Exile of eternity, the final piteous Prince of rebels, the creature
against God, blinder than the sun which paled and the earth that shook;
and, as He came, passing even then through the last material stage to
the thinness of a spirit-fabric, the floating circle swirled behind Him,
tossing like phantom birds in the wake of a phantom ship.... He was
coming, and the earth, rent once again in its allegiance, shrank and
reeled in the agony of divided homage....
... He was coming–and already the shadow swept off the plain and
vanished, and the pale netted wings were rising to the cheek; and the
great bell clanged, and the long sweet chord rang out–not more than
whispers heard across the pealing storm of everlasting praise....
.... GENITORI GENITOQUE
LAUS ET JUBILATIO
SALUS HONOR VIRTUS QUOQUE
SIT ET BENEDICTIO
PROCEDENTI AB UTROQUE
COMPAR SIT LAUDATIO.
and once more
PROCEDENTI AB UTROQUE
COMPAR SIT LAUDATIO ....
Then this world passed, and the glory of it.
The End
 

This eBook of “Lord of the World” by Robert Hugh Benson belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Lord of the World (Science Fiction Series)By Robert Hugh BensonAt Amazon
