




[Footnote: Extracts from a presidential address
before the American Psychological Association, published in the
Psychological Review, vol. ii, p. 105 (1895).]
THERE are two ways of knowing things, knowing them immediately or
intuitively, and knowing them conceptually or
representatively. Altho such things as the white paper before our
eyes can be known intuitively, most of the things we know, the
tigers now in India, for example, or the scholastic system of
philosophy, are known only representatively or symbolically.
Suppose, to fix our ideas, that we take first a case of conceptual
knowledge; and let it be our knowledge of the tigers in India, as we
sit here. Exactly what do we MEAN by saying that we here know the
tigers? What is the precise fact that the cognition so
confidently claimed is KNOWN-AS, to use Shadworth
Hodgson’s inelegant but valuable form of words?
Most men would answer that what we mean by knowing the tigers is
having them, however absent in body, become in some way present to
our thought; or that our knowledge of them is known as presence of
our thought to them. A great mystery is usually made of
this peculiar presence in absence; and the scholastic philosophy,
which is only common sense grown pedantic, would explain it as a
peculiar kind of existence, called INTENTIONAL EXISTENCE of the
tigers in our mind. At the very least, people would say that what we
mean by knowing the tigers is mentally POINTING towards them as we
sit here.
But now what do we mean by POINTING, in such a case as this? What is
the pointing known-as, here?
To this question I shall have to give a very prosaic answer–one
that traverses the pre-possessions not only of common sense
and scholasticism, but also those of nearly all the epistemological
writers whom I have ever read. The answer, made brief, is this:
The pointing of our thought to the tigers is known simply and solely
as a procession of mental associates and motor consequences that
follow on the thought, and that would lead harmoniously, if followed
out, into some ideal or real context, or even into the immediate
presence, of the tigers. It is known as our rejection of a jaguar,
if that beast were shown us as a tiger; as our assent to a genuine
tiger if so shown. It is known as our ability to utter all sorts of
propositions which don’t contradict other propositions that are true
of the real tigers. It is even known, if we take the tigers very
seriously, as actions of ours which may terminate in directly
intuited tigers, as they would if we took a voyage to India for the
purpose of tiger-hunting and brought back a lot of skins of the
striped rascals which we had laid low. In all this there is no self-
transcendency in our mental images TAKEN BY THEMSELVES. They are one
phenomenal fact; the tigers are another; and their pointing to the
tigers is a perfectly commonplace intra-experiential relation, IF
YOU ONCE GRANT A CONNECTING WORLD TO BE THERE. In short, the ideas
and the tigers are in themselves as loose and separate, to
use Hume’s language, as any two things can be; and pointing means
here an operation as external and adventitious as any that
nature yields.[Footnote: A stone in one field may ’fit,’ we say, a
hole in another field. But the relation of ’fitting,’ so long as no
one carries the stone to the hole and drops it in, is only one name
for the fact that such an act MAY happen. Similarly with the
knowing of the tigers here and now. It is only an anticipatory
name for a further associative and terminative process that
MAY occur.]
I hope you may agree with me now that in representative knowledge
there is no special inner mystery, but only an outer chain
of physical or mental intermediaries connecting thought and thing.
TO KNOW AN OBJECT IS HERE TO LEAD TO IT THROUGH A CONTEXT WHICH THE
WORLD SUPPLIES. All this was most instructively set forth by our
colleague D. S. Miller at our meeting in New York last Christmas,
and for re-confirming my sometime wavering opinion, I owe him this
acknowledgment. [Footnote: See Dr. Miller’s articles on Truth and
Error, and on Content and Function, in the Philosophical Review,
July, 1893, and Nov., 1895.]
Let us next pass on to the case of immediate or intuitive
acquaintance with an object, and let the object be the white paper
before our eyes. The thought-stuff and the thing-stuff are here
indistinguishably the same in nature, as we saw a moment since, and
there is no context of intermediaries or associates to stand between
and separate the thought and thing. There is no ’presence in
absence’ here, and no ’pointing,’ but rather an allround
embracing of the paper by the thought; and it is clear that the
knowing cannot now be explained exactly as it was when the tigers
were its object. Dotted all through our experience are states
of immediate acquaintance just like this. Somewhere our belief
always does rest on ultimate data like the whiteness, smoothness, or
squareness of this paper. Whether such qualities be truly ultimate
aspects of being, or only provisional suppositions of ours, held-to
till we get better informed, is quite immaterial for our present
inquiry. So long as it is believed in, we see our object face to
face. What now do we mean by ’knowing’ such a sort of object
as this? For this is also the way in which we should know the tiger
if our conceptual idea of him were to terminate by having led us
to his lair?
This address must not become too long, so I must give my answer in
the fewest words. And let me first say this: So far as the white
paper or other ultimate datum of our experience is considered to
enter also into some one else’s experience, and we, in knowing it,
are held to know it there as well as here; so far, again, as it is
considered to be a mere mask for hidden molecules that other now
impossible experiences of our own might some day lay bare to view;
so far it is a case of tigers in India again–the things known
being absent experiences, the knowing can only consist in
passing smoothly towards them through the intermediary context that
the world supplies. But if our own private vision of the paper be
considered in abstraction from every other event, as if it
constituted by itself the universe (and it might perfectly well do
so, for aught we can understand to the contrary), then the
paper seen and the seeing of it are only two names for one
indivisible fact which, properly named, is THE DATUM, THE
PHENOMENON, OR THE EXPERIENCE. The paper is in the mind and the
mind is around the paper, because paper and mind are only two names
that are given later to the one experience, when, taken in a larger
world of which it forms a part, its connections are traced in
different directions. [Footnote: What is meant by this is that ’the
experience’ can be referred to either of two great associative
systems, that of the experiencer’s mental history, or that of the
experienced facts of the world. Of both of these systems it forms
part, and may be regarded, indeed, as one of their points of
intersection. One might let a vertical line stand for the mental
history; but the same object, O, appears also in the mental history
of different persons, represented by the other vertical lines. It
thus ceases to be the private property of one experience, and
becomes, so to speak, a shared or public thing. We can track its
outer history in this way, and represent it by the horizontal line.
(It is also known representatively at other points of the
vertical lines, or intuitively there again, so that the line of its
outer history would have to be looped and wandering, but I make it
straight for simplicity’s sake.)] In any case, however, it is the
same stuff figures in all the sets of lines.
TO KNOW IMMEDIATELY, THEN, OR INTUITIVELY, IS FOR MENTAL CONTENT AND
OBJECT TO BE IDENTICAL. This is a very different definition from
that which we gave of representative knowledge; but neither
definition involves those mysterious notions of self-transcendency
and presence in absence which are such essential parts of the
ideas of knowledge, both of philosophers and of common men.
[Footnote: The reader will observe that the text is written from the
point of view of NAIF realism or common sense, and avoids raising
the idealistic controversy.]
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
