




[Footnote: Read before the Aristotelian Society, December 1,
1884, and first published in Mind, vol. x (1885).–This, and
the following articles have received a very slight verbal
revision, consisting mostly in the omission of redundancy.]
The following inquiry is (to use a distinction familiar
to readers of Mr. Shadworth Hodgson) not an inquiry into
the ’how it comes,’ but into the ’what it is’ of
cognition. What we call acts of cognition are evidently
realized through what we call brains and their events,
whether there be ’souls’ dynamically connected with the
brains or not. But with neither brains nor souls has this
essay any business to transact. In it we shall simply
assume that cognition IS produced, somehow, and limit
ourselves to asking what elements it contains, what
factors it implies.
Cognition is a function of consciousness. The first factor it
implies is therefore a state of consciousness wherein the cognition
shall take place. Having elsewhere used the word ’feeling’ to
designate generically all states of consciousness considered
subjectively, or without respect to their possible function, I shall
then say that, whatever elements an act of cognition may imply
besides, it at least implies the existence of a FEELING. [If the
reader share the current antipathy to the word ’feeling,’ he may
substitute for it, wherever I use it, the word ’idea,’ taken in the
old broad Lockian sense, or he may use the clumsy phrase ’state of
consciousness,’ or finally he may say ’thought’ instead.]
Now it is to be observed that the common consent of mankind has
agreed that some feelings are cognitive and some are simple
facts having a subjective, or, what one might almost call a
physical, existence, but no such self-transcendent function as
would be implied in their being pieces of knowledge. Our task
is again limited here. We are not to ask, ’How is self-transcendence
possible?’ We are only to ask, ’How comes it that common sense
has assigned a number of cases in which it is assumed not only to be
possible but actual? And what are the marks used by common sense
to distinguish those cases from the rest?’ In short, our inquiry is
a chapter in descriptive psychology,–hardly anything more.
Condillac embarked on a quest similar to this by his famous
hypothesis of a statue to which various feelings were successively
imparted. Its first feeling was supposed to be one of fragrance. But
to avoid all possible complication with the question of genesis, let
us not attribute even to a statue the possession of our imaginary
feeling. Let us rather suppose it attached to no matter, nor
localized at any point in space, but left swinging IN VACUO, as
it were, by the direct creative FIAT of a god. And let us also, to
escape entanglement with difficulties about the physical or
psychical nature of its ’object’ not call it a feeling of
fragrance or of any other determinate sort, but limit ourselves to
assuming that it is a feeling of Q. What is true of it under this
abstract name will be no less true of it in any more particular
shape (such as fragrance, pain, hardness) which the reader may
suppose.
Now, if this feeling of Q be the only creation of the god, it will
of course form the entire universe. And if, to escape the cavils of
that large class of persons who believe that SEMPER IDEM SENTIRE AC
NON SENTIRE are the same, [Footnote:1 ’The Relativity of Knowledge,’
held in this sense, is, it may be observed in passing, one of the
oddest of philosophic superstitions. Whatever facts may be cited in
its favor are due to the properties of nerve-tissue, which may be
exhausted by too prolonged an excitement. Patients with neuralgias
that last unremittingly for days can, however, assure us that
the limits of this nerve-law are pretty widely drawn. But if
we physically could get a feeling that should last
eternally unchanged, what atom of logical or psychological argument
is there to prove that it would not be felt as long as it
lasted, and felt for just what it is, all that time? The reason for
the opposite prejudice seems to be our reluctance to think that
so stupid a thing as such a feeling would necessarily be, should be
allowed to fill eternity with its presence. An
interminable acquaintance, leading to no knowledge-about,–such
would be its condition.] we allow the feeling to be of as short a
duration as they like, that universe will only need to last an
infinitesimal part of a second. The feeling in question will thus be
reduced to its fighting weight, and all that befalls it in the way
of a cognitive function must be held to befall in the brief
instant of its quickly snuffed-out life,–a life, it will also be
noticed, that has no other moment of consciousness either preceding
or following it.
Well now, can our little feeling, thus left alone in the universe,–
for the god and we psychological critics may be supposed left out of
the account,–can the feeling, I say, be said to have any sort of a
cognitive function? For it to KNOW, there must be something to be
known. What is there, on the present supposition? One may reply,
’the feeling’s content q.’ But does it not seem more proper to call
this the feeling’s QUALITY than its content? Does not the
word ’content’ suggest that the feeling has already dirempted itself
as an act from its content as an object? And would it be quite safe
to assume so promptly that the quality q of a feeling is one and the
same thing with a feeling of the quality q? The quality q, so far,
is an entirely subjective fact which the feeling carries so to speak
endogenously, or in its pocket. If any one pleases to dignify so
simple a fact as this by the name of knowledge, of course
nothing can prevent him. But let us keep closer to the path of
common usage, and reserve the name knowledge for the cognition of
’realities,’ meaning by realities things that exist independently of
the feeling through which their cognition occurs. If the content of
the feeling occur nowhere in the universe outside of the feeling
itself, and perish with the feeling, common usage refuses to call it
a reality, and brands it as a subjective feature of the
feeling’s constitution, or at the most as the feeling’s DREAM.
For the feeling to be cognitive in the specific sense, then, it must
be self-transcendent; and we must prevail upon the god to CREATE A
REALITY OUTSIDE OF IT to correspond to its intrinsic quality Q. Thus
only can it be redeemed from the condition of being a solipsism. If
now the new created reality RESEMBLE the feeling’s quality Q I say
that the feeling may be held by us TO BE COGNIZANT OF THAT REALITY.
This first instalment of my thesis is sure to be attacked. But one
word before defending it ’Reality’ has become our warrant for
calling a feeling cognitive; but what becomes our warrant for
calling anything reality? The only reply is–the faith of the
present critic or inquirer. At every moment of his life he
finds himself subject to a belief in SOME realities, even though his
realities of this year should prove to be his illusions of the next.
Whenever he finds that the feeling he is studying contemplates what
he himself regards as a reality, he must of course admit the feeling
itself to be truly cognitive. We are ourselves the critics here; and
we shall find our burden much lightened by being allowed to take
reality in this relative and provisional way. Every science must
make some assumptions. Erkenntnisstheoretiker are but fallible
mortals. When they study the function of cognition, they do it by
means of the same function in themselves. And knowing that the
fountain cannot go higher than its source, we should promptly
confess that our results in this field are affected by our own
liability to err. THE MOST WE CAN CLAIM IS, THAT WHAT WE SAY ABOUT
COGNITION MAY BE COUNTED AS TRUE AS WHAT WE SAY ABOUT ANYTHING ELSE.
If our hearers agree with us about what are to be held ’realities,’
they will perhaps also agree to the reality of our doctrine of the
way in which they are known. We cannot ask for more.
Our terminology shall follow the spirit of these remarks. We will
deny the function of knowledge to any feeling whose quality or
content we do not ourselves believe to exist outside of that feeling
as well as in it. We may call such a feeling a dream if we like; we
shall have to see later whether we can call it a fiction or an
error.
To revert now to our thesis. Some persons will immediately cry out,
’How CAN a reality resemble a feeling?’ Here we find how wise we
were to name the quality of the feeling by an algebraic letter Q. We
flank the whole difficulty of resemblance between an inner state
and an outward reality, by leaving it free to any one to postulate
as the reality whatever sort of thing he thinks CAN resemble a
feeling,–if not an outward thing, then another feeling like
the first one,–the mere feeling Q in the critic’s mind for example.
Evading thus this objection, we turn to another which is sure to
be urged.
It will come from those philosophers to whom ’thought,’ in the sense
of a knowledge of relations, is the all in all of mental life; and
who hold a merely feeling consciousness to be no better–one would
sometimes say from their utterances, a good deal worse–than no
consciousness at all. Such phrases as these, for example, are common
to-day in the mouths of those who claim to walk in the footprints
of Kant and Hegel rather than in the ancestral English paths: ’A
perception detached from all others, “left out of the heap we call a
mind,” being out of all relation, has no qualities–is simply
nothing. We can no more consider it than we can see vacancy.’ ’It is
simply in itself fleeting, momentary, unnameable (because while we
name it it has become another), and for the very same reason
unknowable, the very negation of knowability.’ ’Exclude from what we
have considered real all qualities constituted by relation, we find
that none are left.’
Altho such citations as these from the writings of Professor Green
might be multiplied almost indefinitely, they would hardly repay
the pains of collection, so egregiously false is the doctrine they
teach. Our little supposed feeling, whatever it may be, from the
cognitive point of view, whether a bit of knowledge or a dream, is
certainly no psychical zero. It is a most positively and definitely
qualified inner fact, with a complexion all its own. Of course there
are many mental facts which it is NOT. It knows Q, if Q be a
reality, with a very minimum of knowledge. It neither dates nor
locates it. It neither classes nor names it. And it neither knows
itself as a feeling, nor contrasts itself with other feelings, nor
estimates its own duration or intensity. It is, in short, if there
is no more of it than this, a most dumb and helpless and useless
kind of thing.
But if we must describe it by so many negations, and if it can say
nothing ABOUT itself or ABOUT anything else, by what right do we
deny that it is a psychical zero? And may not the ’relationists’ be
right after all?
In the innocent looking word ’about’ lies the solution of this
riddle; and a simple enough solution it is when frankly looked at. A
quotation from a too seldom quoted book, the Exploratio Philosophica
of John Grote (London, 1865), p. 60, will form the best
introduction to it.
’Our knowledge,’ writes Grote, ’may be contemplated in either of two
ways, or, to use other words, we may speak in a double manner of
the “object” of knowledge. That is, we may either use language thus:
we KNOW a thing, a man, etc.; or we may use it thus: we know such
and such things ABOUT the thing, the man, etc. Language in general,
following its true logical instinct, distinguishes between these two
applications of the notion of knowledge, the one being yvwvai,
noscere, kennen, connaitre, the other being eidevai, scire, wissen,
savoir. In the origin, the former may be considered more what I have
called phenomenal–it is the notion of knowledge as ACQUAINTANCE or
familiarity with what is known; which notion is perhaps more akin to
the phenomenal bodily communication, and is less purely
intellectual than the other; it is the kind of knowledge which we
have of a thing by the presentation to the senses or the
representation of it in picture or type, a Vorstellung. The
other, which is what we express in judgments or propositions, what
is embodied in Begriffe or concepts without any necessary
imaginative representation, is in its origin the more
intellectual notion of knowledge. There is no reason, however, why
we should not express our knowledge, whatever its kind, in
either manner, provided only we do not confusedly express it, in the
same proposition or piece of reasoning, in both.’
Now obviously if our supposed feeling of Q is (if knowledge at all)
only knowledge of the mere acquaintance-type, it is milking a he-
 goat, as the ancients would have said, to try to extract from it
any deliverance ABOUT anything under the sun, even about itself. And
it is as unjust, after our failure, to turn upon it and call it a
psychical nothing, as it would be, after our fruitless attack upon
the billy-goat, to proclaim the non-lactiferous character of
the whole goat-tribe. But the entire industry of the Hegelian school
in trying to shove simple sensation out of the pale of philosophic
recognition is founded on this false issue. It is always the
’speechlessness’ of sensation, its inability to make any
’statement,’[Footnote: See, for example, Green’s Introduction to
Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature, p. 36.] that is held to make the
very notion of it meaningless, and to justify the student of
knowledge in scouting it out of existence. ’Significance,’ in the
sense of standing as the sign of other mental states, is taken to be
the sole function of what mental states we have; and from the
perception that our little primitive sensation has as yet no
significance in this literal sense, it is an easy step to call it
first meaningless, next senseless, then vacuous, and finally to
brand it as absurd and inadmissible. But in this universal
liquidation, this everlasting slip, slip, slip, of
direct acquaintance into knowledge-ABOUT, until at last nothing is
left about which the knowledge can be supposed to obtain, does not
all ’significance’ depart from the situation? And when our knowledge
about things has reached its never so complicated perfection, must
there not needs abide alongside of it and inextricably mixed in with
it some acquaintance with WHAT things all this knowledge is about?
Now, our supposed little feeling gives a WHAT; and if other feelings
should succeed which remember the first, its WHAT may stand as
subject or predicate of some piece of knowledge-about, of some
judgment, perceiving relations between it and other WHATS which
the other feelings may know. The hitherto dumb Q will then receive a
name and be no longer speechless. But every name, as students
of logic know, has its ’denotation’; and the denotation always means
some reality or content, relationless as extra or with its
internal relations unanalyzed, like the Q which our
primitive sensation is supposed to know. No relation-
expressing proposition is possible except on the basis of a
preliminary acquaintance with such ’facts,’ with such contents, as
this. Let the Q be fragrance, let it be toothache, or let it be a
more complex kind of feeling, like that of the full-moon swimming in
her blue abyss, it must first come in that simple shape, and be held
fast in that first intention, before any knowledge ABOUT it can be
attained. The knowledge ABOUT it is IT with a context added. Undo
IT, and what is added cannot be CONtext. [Footnote: If A enters and
B exclaims, ’Didn’t you see my brother on the stairs?’ we all hold
that A may answer, ’I saw him, but didn’t know he was your brother’;
ignorance of brotherhood not abolishing power to see. But those who,
on account of the unrelatedness of the first facts with which we
become acquainted, deny them to be ’known’ to us, ought in
consistency to maintain that if A did not perceive the relationship
of the man on the stairs to B, it was impossible he should
have noticed him at all.]
Let us say no more then about this objection, but enlarge our
thesis, thus: If there be in the universe a Q other than the Q in
the feeling, the latter may have acquaintance with an entity
ejective to itself; an acquaintance moreover, which, as mere
acquaintance, it would be hard to imagine susceptible either of
improvement or increase, being in its way complete; and which would
oblige us (so long as we refuse not to call acquaintance
knowledge) to say not only that the feeling is cognitive, but that
all qualities of feeling, SO LONG AS THERE IS ANYTHING OUTSIDE OF
THEM WHICH THEY RESEMBLE, are feelings OF qualities of existence,
and perceptions of outward fact.
The point of this vindication of the cognitive function of the first
feeling lies, it will be noticed, in the discovery that q does exist
elsewhere than in it. In case this discovery were not made, we could
not be sure the feeling was cognitive; and in case there were
nothing outside to be discovered, we should have to call the feeling
a dream. But the feeling itself cannot make the discovery. Its own q
is the only q it grasps; and its own nature is not a particle
altered by having the self-transcendent function of cognition either
added to it or taken away. The function is accidental; synthetic,
not analytic; and falls outside and not inside its being. [Footnote:
It seems odd to call so important a function accidental, but I do
not see how we can mend the matter. Just as, if we start with the
reality and ask how it may come to be known, we can only reply by
invoking a feeling which shall RECONSTRUCT it in its own more
private fashion; so, if we start with the feeling and ask how it may
come to know, we can only reply by invoking a reality which shall
RECONSTRUCT it in its own more public fashion. In either case,
however, the datum we start with remains just what it was. One may
easily get lost in verbal mysteries about the difference between
quality of feeling and feeling of quality, between receiving and
reconstructing the knowledge of a reality. But at the end we must
confess that the notion of real cognition involves an
unmediated dualism of the knower and the known. See Bowne’s
Metaphysics, New York, 1882, pp. 403-412, and various passages in
Lotze, e.g., Logic, Sec. 308. [’Unmediated’ is a bad word to
have used.–1909.]]
A feeling feels as a gun shoots. If there be nothing to be felt or
hit, they discharge themselves ins blaue hinein. If, however,
something starts up opposite them, they no longer simply shoot or
feel, they hit and know.
But with this arises a worse objection than any yet made. We the
critics look on and see a real q and a feeling of q; and because the
two resemble each other, we say the one knows the other. But what
right have we to say this until we know that the feeling of q means
to stand for or represent just that SAME other q? Suppose, instead
of one q, a number of real q’s in the field. If the gun shoots and
hits, we can easily see which one of them it hits. But how can we
distinguish which one the feeling knows? It knows the one it stands
for. But which one DOES it stand for? It declares no intention in
this respect. It merely resembles; it resembles all indifferently;
and resembling, per se, is not necessarily representing or standing-
for at all. Eggs resemble each other, but do not on that account
represent, stand for, or know each other. And if you say this
is because neither of them is a FEELING, then imagine the world to
consist of nothing but toothaches, which ARE feelings, feelings
resembling each other exactly,–would they know each other the
better for all that?
The case of q being a bare quality like that of toothache-pain is
quite different from that of its being a concrete individual thing.
There is practically no test for deciding whether the feeling of a
bare quality means to represent it or not. It can DO nothing to the
quality beyond resembling it, simply because an abstract quality is
a thing to which nothing can be done. Being without context or
environment or principium individuationis, a quiddity with
no haecceity, a platonic idea, even duplicate editions of such a
quality (were they possible), would be indiscernible, and no sign
could be given, no result altered, whether the feeling I meant to
stand for this edition or for that, or whether it simply resembled
the quality without meaning to stand for it at all.
If now we grant a genuine pluralism of editions to the quality q, by
assigning to each a CONTEXT which shall distinguish it from its
mates, we may proceed to explain which edition of it the feeling
knows, by extending our principle of resemblance to the context too,
and saying the feeling knows the particular q whose context it most
exactly duplicates. But here again the theoretic doubt recurs:
duplication and coincidence, are they knowledge? The gun shows which
q it points to and hits, by BREAKING it. Until the feeling can show
us which q it points to and knows, by some equally flagrant token,
why are we not free to deny that it either points to or knows any
one of the REAL q’s at all, and to affirm that the
word ’resemblance’ exhaustively describes its relation to the
reality?
Well, as a matter of fact, every actual feeling DOES show us, quite
as flagrantly as the gun, which q it points to; and practically in
concrete cases the matter is decided by an element we have hitherto
left out. Let us pass from abstractions to possible instances, and
ask our obliging deus ex machina to frame for us a richer world. Let
him send me, for example, a dream of the death of a certain man, and
let him simultaneously cause the man to die. How would our practical
instinct spontaneously decide whether this were a case of cognition
of the reality, or only a sort of marvellous coincidence of a
resembling reality with my dream? Just such puzzling cases as this
are what the ’society for psychical research’ is busily
collecting and trying to interpret in the most reasonable way.
If my dream were the only one of the kind I ever had in my life, if
the context of the death in the dream differed in many particulars
from the real death’s context, and if my dream led me to no action
about the death, unquestionably we should all call it a strange
coincidence, and naught besides. But if the death in the dream had a
long context, agreeing point for point with every feature that
attended the real death; if I were constantly having such
dreams, all equally perfect, and if on awaking I had a habit of
ACTING immediately as if they were true and so getting ’the start’
of my more tardily instructed neighbors,–we should in all
probability have to admit that I had some mysterious kind of
clairvoyant power, that my dreams in an inscrutable way meant just
those realities they figured, and that the word ’coincidence’ failed
to touch the root of the matter. And whatever doubts any one
preserved would completely vanish, if it should appear that from the
midst of my dream I had the power of INTERFERING with the course of
the reality, and making the events in it turn this way or that,
according as I dreamed they should. Then at least it would be
certain that my waking critics and my dreaming self were dealing
with the SAME.
And thus do men invariably decide such a question. THE FALLING OF
THE DREAM’S PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES into the real world, and the
EXTENT of the resemblance between the two worlds are the criteria
they instinctively use. [Footnote: The thoroughgoing objector might,
it is true, still return to the charge, and, granting a dream which
should completely mirror the real universe, and all the actions
dreamed in which should be instantly matched by duplicate actions in
this universe, still insist that this is nothing more than harmony,
and that it is as far as ever from being made clear whether
the dream-world refers to that other world, all of whose details it
so closely copies. This objection leads deep into metaphysics. I do
not impugn its importance, and justice obliges me to say that but
for the teachings of my colleague, Dr. Josiah Royce, I should
neither have grasped its full force nor made my own practical and
psychological point of view as clear to myself as it is. On this
occasion I prefer to stick steadfastly to that point of view; but I
hope that Dr. Royce’s more fundamental criticism of the function of
cognition may ere long see the light. [I referred in this note to
Royce’s religious aspect of philosophy, then about to be published.
This powerful book maintained that the notion of REFERRING involved
that of an inclusive mind that shall own both the real q and the
mental q, and use the latter expressly as a representative symbol of
the former. At the time I could not refute this transcendentalist
opinion. Later, largely through the influence of Professor D. S.
Miller (see his essay ’The meaning of truth and error,’ in the
Philosophical Review for 1893, vol. 2 p. 403) I came to see that any
definitely experienceable workings would serve as
intermediaries quite as well as the absolute mind’s
intentions would.]] All feeling is for the sake of action, all
feeling results in action,–to-day no argument is needed to prove
these truths. But by a most singular disposition of nature which we
may conceive to have been different, MY FEELINGS ACT UPON THE
REALITIES WITHIN MY CRITIC’S WORLD. Unless, then, my critic can
prove that my feeling does not ’point to’ those realities which it
acts upon, how can he continue to doubt that he and I are alike
cognizant of one and the same real world? If the action is performed
in one world, that must be the world the feeling intends; if in
another world, THAT is the world the feeling has in mind. If your
feeling bear no fruits in my world, I call it utterly detached from
my world; I call it a solipsism, and call its world a dream-world.
If your toothache do not prompt you to ACT as if I had a toothache,
nor even as if I had a separate existence; if you neither say to me,
’I know now how you must suffer!’ nor tell me of a remedy, I deny
that your feeling, however it may resemble mine, is really cognizant
of mine. It gives no SIGN of being cognizant, and such a sign is
absolutely necessary to my admission that it is.
Before I can think you to mean my world, you must affect my world;
before I can think you to mean much of it, you must affect much of
it; and before I can be sure you mean it AS I DO, you must affect it
JUST AS I SHOULD if I were in your place. Then I, your critic, will
gladly believe that we are thinking, not only of the same reality,
but that we are thinking it ALIKE, and thinking of much of its
extent.
Without the practical effects of our neighbor’s feelings on our own
world, we should never suspect the existence of our
neighbor’s feelings at all, and of course should never
find ourselves playing the critic as we do in this article. The
constitution of nature is very peculiar. In the world of each of us
are certain objects called human bodies, which move about and act on
all the other objects there, and the occasions of their action are
in the main what the occasions of our action would be, were they our
bodies. They use words and gestures, which, if we used them, would
have thoughts behind them,–no mere thoughts uberhaupt, however, but
strictly determinate thoughts. I think you have the notion of
fire in general, because I see you act towards this fire in my room
just as I act towards it,–poke it and present your person towards
it, and so forth. But that binds me to believe that if you feel
’fire’ at all, THIS is the fire you feel. As a matter of fact,
whenever we constitute ourselves into psychological critics, it is
not by dint of discovering which reality a feeling ’resembles’ that
we find out which reality it means. We become first aware of which
one it means, and then we suppose that to be the one it resembles.
We see each other looking at the same objects, pointing to them and
turning them over in various ways, and thereupon we hope and trust
that all of our several feelings resemble the reality and each
other. But this is a thing of which we are never theoretically sure.
Still, it would practically be a case of grubelsucht, if a ruffian
were assaulting and drubbing my body, to spend much time in subtle
speculation either as to whether his vision of my body resembled
mine, or as to whether the body he really MEANT to insult were not
some body in his mind’s eye, altogether other from my own. The
practical point of view brushes such metaphysical cobwebs away. If
what he have in mind be not MY body, why call we it a body at all?
His mind is inferred by me as a term, to whose existence we trace
the things that happen. The inference is quite void if the term,
once inferred, be separated from its connection with the body
that made me infer it, and connected with another that is not mine
at all. No matter for the metaphysical puzzle of how our two minds,
the ruffian’s and mine, can mean the same body. Men who see each
other’s bodies sharing the same space, treading the same earth,
splashing the same water, making the same air resonant, and pursuing
the same game and eating out of the same dish, will never
practically believe in a pluralism of solipsistic worlds.
Where, however, the actions of one mind seem to take no effect in
the world of the other, the case is different. This is what happens
in poetry and fiction. Every one knows Ivanhoe, for example; but so
long as we stick to the story pure and simple without regard to
the facts of its production, few would hesitate to admit that there
are as many different Ivanhoes as there are different minds
cognizant of the story. [Footnote: That is, there is no REAL
’Ivanhoe,’ not even the one in Sir Walter Scott’s mind as he was
writing the story. That one is only the FIRST one of the Ivanhoe-
solipsisms. It is quite true we can make it the real Ivanhoe if we
like, and then say that the other Ivanhoes know it or do not know
it, according as they refer to and resemble it or no. This is done
by bringing in Sir Walter Scott himself as the author of the real
Ivanhoe, and so making a complex object of both. This object,
however, is not a story pure and simple. It has dynamic
relations with the world common to the experience of all the
readers. Sir Walter Scott’s Ivanhoe got itself printed in volumes
which we all can handle, and to any one of which we can refer to
see which of our versions be the true one, i.e., the original one
of Scott himself. We can see the manuscript; in short we can
get back to the Ivanhoe in Scott’s mind by many an avenue
and channel of this real world of our experience,–a thing we can by
no means do with either the Ivanhoe or the Rebecca, either the
Templar or the Isaac of York, of the story taken simply as such, and
detached from the conditions of its production. Everywhere, then, we
have the same test: can we pass continuously from two objects in two
minds to a third object which seems to be in BOTH minds, because
each mind feels every modification imprinted on it by the other? If
so, the first two objects named are derivatives, to say the least,
from the same third object, and may be held, if they resemble each
other, to refer to one and the same reality.] The fact that all
these Ivanhoes RESEMBLE each other does not prove the contrary. But
if an alteration invented by one man in his version were to
reverberate immediately through all the other versions, and
produce changes therein, we should then easily agree that all these
thinkers were thinking the SAME Ivanhoe, and that, fiction or no
fiction, it formed a little world common to them all.
Having reached this point, we may take up our thesis and improve it
again. Still calling the reality by the name of q and letting
the critic’s feeling vouch for it, we can say that any other feeling
will be held cognizant of q, provided it both resemble q, and refer
to q, as shown by its either modifying q directly, or modifying some
other reality, p or r, which the critic knows to be continuous with
q. Or more shortly, thus: THE FEELING OF q KNOWS WHATEVER REALITY IT
RESEMBLES, AND EITHER DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY OPERATES ON. If it
resemble without operating, it is a dream; if it operate without
resembling, it is an error. [Footnote: Among such errors are those
cases in which our feeling operates on a reality which it does
partially resemble, and yet does not intend: as for instance, when
I take up your umbrella, meaning to take my own. I cannot be said
here either to know your umbrella, or my own, which latter my
feeling more completely resembles. I am mistaking them both,
misrepresenting their context, etc.
We have spoken in the text as if the critic were necessarily one
mind, and the feeling criticised another. But the criticised feeling
and its critic may be earlier and later feelings of the same mind,
and here it might seem that we could dispense with the notion of
operating, to prove that critic and criticised are referring to and
meaning to represent the SAME. We think we see our past feelings
directly, and know what they refer to without appeal. At the worst,
we can always fix the intention of our present feeling and MAKE it
refer to the same reality to which any one of our past feelings may
have referred. So we need no ’operating’ here, to make sure that the
feeling and its critic mean the same real q. Well, all the better if
this is so! We have covered the more complex and difficult case in
our text, and we may let this easier one go. The main thing
at present is to stick to practical psychology, and ignore
metaphysical difficulties.
One more remark. Our formula contains, it will be observed, nothing
to correspond to the great principle of cognition laid down by
Professor Ferrier in his Institutes of Metaphysic and apparently
adopted by all the followers of Fichte, the principle, namely, that
for knowledge to be constituted there must be knowledge of the
knowing mind along with whatever else is known: not q, as we have
supposed, but q PLUS MYSELF, must be the least I can know. It is
certain that the common sense of mankind never dreams of using any
such principle when it tries to discriminate between conscious
states that are knowledge and conscious states that are not. So
that Ferrier’s principle, if it have any relevancy at all, must
have relevancy to the metaphysical possibility of consciousness
at large, and not to the practically recognized constitution
of cognitive consciousness. We may therefore pass it by
without further notice here.] It is to be feared that the reader may
consider this formula rather insignificant and obvious, and hardly
worth the labor of so many pages, especially when he considers that
the only cases to which it applies are percepts, and that the whole
field of symbolic or conceptual thinking seems to elude its grasp.
Where the reality is either a material thing or act, or a state of
the critic’s consciousness, I may both mirror it in my mind and
operate upon it–in the latter case indirectly, of course–as
soon as I perceive it. But there are many cognitions, universally
allowed to be such, which neither mirror nor operate on their
realities.
In the whole field of symbolic thought we are universally held both
to intend, to speak of, and to reach conclusions about–to know in
short–particular realities, without having in our subjective
consciousness any mind-stuff that resembles them even in a remote
degree. We are instructed about them by language which awakens no
consciousness beyond its sound; and we know WHICH realities they
are by the faintest and most fragmentary glimpse of some remote
context they may have and by no direct imagination of themselves. As
minds may differ here, let me speak in the first person. I am sure
that my own current thinking has WORDS for its almost exclusive
subjective material, words which are made intelligible by being
referred to some reality that lies beyond the horizon of direct
consciousness, and of which I am only aware as of a terminal
MORE existing in a certain direction, to which the words might lead
but do not lead yet. The SUBJECT, or TOPIC, of the words is
usually something towards which I mentally seem to pitch them in a
backward way, almost as I might jerk my thumb over my shoulder to
point at something, without looking round, if I were only entirely
sure that it was there. The UPSHOT, or CONCLUSION, of the words is
something towards which I seem to incline my head forwards, as if
giving assent to its existence, tho all my mind’s eye catches sight
of may be some tatter of an image connected with it, which tatter,
however, if only endued with the feeling of familiarity and reality,
makes me feel that the whole to which it belongs is rational and
real, and fit to be let pass.
 Here then is cognitive consciousness on a large scale, and yet what
it knows, it hardly resembles in the least degree. The formula last
laid down for our thesis must therefore be made more complete. We
may now express it thus: A PERCEPT KNOWS WHATEVER REALITY IT
DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY OPERATES ON AND RESEMBLES; ACONCEPTUAL
FEELING, OR THOUGHT KNOWS A REALITY, WHENEVER IT ACTUALLY OR
POTENTIALLY TERMINATES IN A PERCEPT THAT OPERATES ON, OR RESEMBLES
THAT REALITY, OR IS OTHERWISE CONNECTED WITH IT OR WITH ITS CONTEXT.
The latter percept may be either sensation or sensorial idea; and
when I say the thought must TERMINATE in such a percept, I mean that
it must ultimately be capable of leading up thereto,–by the way of
practical
 Is an incomplete ’thought about’ that reality, that reality is its
’topic,’ etc. experience, if the terminal feeling be a sensation; by
the way of logical or habitual suggestion, if it be only an image in
the mind.
Let an illustration make this plainer. I open the first book I take
up, and read the first sentence that meets my eye: ’Newton saw
the handiwork of God in the heavens as plainly as Paley in the
animal kingdom.’ I immediately look back and try to analyze the
subjective state in which I rapidly apprehended this sentence as I
read it. In the first place there was an obvious feeling that the
sentence was intelligible and rational and related to the world of
realities. There was also a sense of agreement or harmony between
’Newton,’ ’Paley,’ and ’God.’ There was no apparent image connected
with the words ’heavens,’ or ’handiwork,’ or ’God’; they were
words merely. With ’animal kingdom’ I think there was the faintest
consciousness (it may possibly have been an image of the steps) of
the Museum of Zoology in the town of Cambridge where I write. With
’Paley’ there was an equally faint consciousness of a small
dark leather book; and with ’Newton’ a pretty distinct vision of the
right-hand lower corner of curling periwig. This is all the mind-
stuff I can discover in my first consciousness of the meaning of
this sentence, and I am afraid that even not all of this would have
been present had I come upon the sentence in a genuine reading of
the book, and not picked it out for an experiment. And yet my
consciousness was truly cognitive. The sentence is ’about realities’
which my psychological critic–for we must not forget him–
acknowledges to be such, even as he acknowledges my distinct feeling
that they ARE realities, and my acquiescence in the general
rightness of what I read of them, to be true knowledge on my part.
Now what justifies my critic in being as lenient as this? This
singularly inadequate consciousness of mine, made up of symbols
that neither resemble nor affect the realities they stand for,–how
can he be sure it is cognizant of the very realities he has himself
in mind?
He is sure because in countless like cases he has seen such
inadequate and symbolic thoughts, by developing themselves,
terminate in percepts that practically modified and presumably
resembled his own. By ’developing’ themselves is meant obeying their
tendencies, following up the suggestions nascently present in them,
working in the direction in which they seem to point, clearing up
the penumbra, making distinct the halo, unravelling the
fringe, which is part of their composition, and in the midst of
which their more substantive kernel of subjective content seems
consciously to lie. Thus I may develop my thought in the
Paley direction by procuring the brown leather volume and bringing
the passages about the animal kingdom before the critic’s eyes. I
may satisfy him that the words mean for me just what they mean for
him, by showing him IN CONCRETO the very animals and their
arrangements, of which the pages treat. I may get Newton’s works and
portraits; or if I follow the line of suggestion of the wig, I may
smother my critic in seventeenth-century matters pertaining to
Newton’s environment, to show that the word ’Newton’ has the same
LOCUS and relations in both our minds. Finally I may, by act and
word, persuade him that what I mean by God and the heavens and
the analogy of the handiworks, is just what he means also.
My demonstration in the last resort is to his SENSES. My thought
makes me act on his senses much as he might himself act on
them, were he pursuing the consequences of a perception of his own.
Practically then MY thought terminates in HIS realities. He
willingly supposes it, therefore, to be OF them, and inwardly to
RESEMBLE what his own thought would be, were it of the same symbolic
sort as mine. And the pivot and fulcrum and support of his
mental persuasion, is the sensible operation which my thought leads
me, or may lead, to effect–the bringing of Paley’s book, of
Newton’s portrait, etc., before his very eyes.
In the last analysis, then, we believe that we all know and think
about and talk about the same world, because WE BELIEVE OUR
PERCEPTS ARE POSSESSED BY US IN COMMON. And we believe this because
the percepts of each one of us seem to be changed in consequence of
changes in the percepts of someone else. What I am for you is in the
first instance a percept of your own. Unexpectedly, however, I open
and show you a book, uttering certain sounds the while. These acts
are also your percepts, but they so resemble acts of yours with
feelings prompting them, that you cannot doubt I have the
feelings too, or that the book is one book felt in both our worlds.
That it is felt in the same way, that my feelings of it resemble
yours, is something of which we never can be sure, but which we
assume as the simplest hypothesis that meets the case. As a matter
of fact, we never ARE sure of it, and, as ERKENNTNISSTHEORETIKER, we
can only say that of feelings that should NOT resemble each other,
both could not know the same thing at the same time in the same way.
[Footnote: Though both might terminate in the same thing and be
incomplete thoughts ’about’ it.] If each holds to its own percept
as the reality, it is bound to say of the other percept, that,
though it may INTEND that reality, and prove this by working change
upon it, yet, if it do not resemble it, it is all false and wrong.
[Footnote: The difference between Idealism and Realism is
immaterial here. What is said in the text is consistent with
either theory. A law by which my percept shall change yours
directly is no more mysterious than a law by which it shall
first change a physical reality, and then the reality change
yours. In either case you and I seem knit into a continuous
world, and not to form a pair of solipsisms.]
If this be so of percepts, how much more so of higher modes of
thought! Even in the sphere of sensation individuals are
probably different enough. Comparative study of the simplest
conceptual elements seems to show a wider divergence still. And when
it comes to general theories and emotional attitudes towards life,
it is indeed time to say with Thackeray, ’My friend, two different
universes walk about under your hat and under mine.’
What can save us at all and prevent us from flying asunder into a
chaos of mutually repellent solipsisms? Through what can our
several minds commune? Through nothing but the mutual resemblance of
those of our perceptual feelings which have this power of modifying
one another, WHICH ARE MERE DUMB KNOWLEDGES-OF-ACQUAINTANCE, and
which must also resemble their realities or not know them aright at
all. In such pieces of knowledge-of-acquaintance all our knowledge-
about must end, and carry a sense of this possible termination as
part of its content. These percepts, these termini, these sensible
things, these mere matters-of-acquaintance, are the only
realities we ever directly know, and the whole history of our
thought is the history of our substitution of one of them for
another, and the reduction of the substitute to the status of a
conceptual sign. Contemned though they be by some thinkers, these
sensations are the mother-earth, the anchorage, the stable rock,
the first and last limits, the terminus a quo and the terminus ad
quem of the mind. to find such sensational termini should be our aim
with all our higher thought. They end discussion; they destroy the
false conceit of knowledge; and without them we are all at sea with
each other’s meaning. If two men act alike on a percept, they
believe themselves to feel alike about it; if not, they may suspect
they know it in differing ways. We can never be sure we understand
each other till we are able to bring the matter to this test.
[Footnote: ’There  is no distinction of meaning so fine as to
consist in anything but a possible difference of practice.... It
appears, then, that the rule for attaining the [highest] grade
of clearness of apprehension is as follows: Consider what
effects, which might conceivably have practical bearings, we
conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our
conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the
object.’ Charles S. Peirce: ’How to make our Ideas clear,’ in
Popular Science Monthly, New York, January, 1878, p. 293.] This is
why metaphysical discussions are so much like fighting with the air;
they have no practical issue of a sensational kind. ’Scientific’
theories, on the other hand, always terminate in definite
percepts. You can deduce a possible sensation from your theory and,
taking me into your laboratory, prove that your theory is true of my
world by giving me the sensation then and there. Beautiful is the
flight of conceptual reason through the upper air of truth.
No wonder philosophers are dazzled by it still, and no wonder they
look with some disdain at the low earth of feeling from which the
goddess launched herself aloft. But woe to her if she return not
home to its acquaintance; Nirgends haften dann die unsicheren
Sohlen–every crazy wind will take her, and, like a fire-balloon at
night, she will go out among the stars.
NOTE.–The reader will easily see how much of the account of the
truth-function developed later in Pragmatism was already explicit in
this earlier article, and how much came to be defined later. In this
earlier article we find distinctly asserted:–
1. The reality, external to the true idea;
2. The critic, reader, or epistemologist, with his own belief, as
warrant for this reality’s existence;
3. The experienceable environment, as the vehicle or
medium connecting knower with known, and yielding the
cognitive RELATION;
4. The notion of POINTING, through this medium, to the reality, as
one condition of our being said to know it;
5. That of RESEMBLING it, and eventually AFFECTING it, as
determining the pointing to IT and not to something else.
6. The elimination of the ’epistemological gulf,’ so that the whole
truth-relation falls inside of the continuities of
concrete experience, and is constituted of particular processes,
varying with every object and subject, and susceptible of being
described in detail.
The defects in this earlier account are:–
1. The possibly undue prominence given to resembling, which altho a
fundamental function in knowing truly, is so often dispensed with;
2. The undue emphasis laid upon operating on the object itself,
which in many cases is indeed decisive of that being what we refer
to, but which is often lacking, or replaced by operations on other
things related to the object.
3. The imperfect development of the generalized notion of the
WORKABILITY of the feeling or idea as equivalent to
that SATISFACTORY ADAPTATION to the particular reality,
which constitutes the truth of the idea. It is this more generalized
notion, as covering all such specifications as pointing, fitting,
operating or resembling, that distinguishes the developed view
of Dewey, Schiller, and myself.
4. The treatment, [earlier], of percepts as the only realm of
reality. I now treat concepts as a co-ordinate realm.
The next paper represents a somewhat broader grasp of the topic on
the writer’s part.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
