




[Footnote: Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy, etc.,
August 15, 1907 (vol. iv, p. 464).]
Professor J. B. Pratt’s paper in the Journal of Philosophy for June
6, 1907, is so brilliantly written that its misconception of
the pragmatist position seems doubly to call for a reply.
He asserts that, for a pragmatist, truth cannot be a relation
between an idea and a reality outside and transcendent of the idea,
but must lie ’altogether within experience,’ where it will need ’no
reference to anything else to justify it’–no reference to the
object, apparently. The pragmatist must ’reduce everything
to psychology,’ aye, and to the psychology of the immediate moment.
He is consequently debarred from saying that an idea that
eventually gets psychologically verified WAS already true before the
process of verifying was complete; and he is equally debarred from
treating an idea as true provisionally so long as he only believes
that he CAN verify it whenever he will.
Whether such a pragmatist as this exists, I know not, never having
myself met with the beast. We can define terms as we like; and
if that be my friend Pratt’s definition of a pragmatist, I can only
concur with his anti-pragmatism. But, in setting up the weird
type, he quotes words from me; so, in order to escape being classed
by some reader along with so asinine a being, I will reassert my own
view of truth once more.
Truth is essentially a relation between two things, an idea, on the
one hand, and a reality outside of the idea, on the other. This
relation, like all relations, has its fundamentum, namely, the
matrix of experiential circumstance, psychological as well as
physical, in which the correlated terms are found embedded. In
the case of the relation between ’heir’ and ’legacy’ the fundamentum
is a world in which there was a testator, and in which there is now
a will and an executor; in the case of that between idea and object,
it is a world with circumstances of a sort to make a satisfactory
verification process, lying around and between the two terms. But
just as a man may be called an heir and treated as one before the
executor has divided the estate, so an idea may practically be
credited with truth before the verification process has been
exhaustively carried out–the existence of the mass of
verifying circumstance is enough. Where potentiality counts for
actuality in so many other cases, one does not see why it may not so
count here. We call a man benevolent not only for his kind acts paid
in, but for his readiness to perform others; we treat an idea as
’luminous’ not only for the light it has shed, but for that
we expect it will shed on dark problems. Why should we not equally
trust the truth of our ideas? We live on credits everywhere; and
we use our ideas far oftener for calling up things connected with
their immediate objects, than for calling up those objects
themselves. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the only use
we should make of the object itself, if we were led up to it by our
idea, would be to pass on to those connected things by its means. So
we continually curtail verification-processes, letting our belief
that they are possible suffice.
What CONSTITUTES THE RELATION known as truth, I now say, is just the
EXISTENCE IN THE EMPIRICAL WORLD OF THIS FUNDAMENTUM OF
CIRCUMSTANCE SURROUNDING OBJECT AND IDEA and ready to be either
short-circuited or traversed at full length. So long as it exists,
and a satisfactory passage through it between the object and
the idea is possible, that idea will both BE true, and will HAVE
BEEN true of that object, whether fully developed verification has
taken place or not. The nature and place and affinities of
the object of course play as vital a part in making the particular
passage possible as do the nature and associative tendencies of the
idea; so that the notion that truth could fall altogether inside of
the thinker’s private experience and be something purely
psychological, is absurd. It is BETWEEN the idea and the object that
the truth-relation is to be sought and it involves both terms.
But the ’intellectualistic’ position, if I understand Mr. Pratt
rightly, is that, altho we can use this fundamentum, this mass
of go-between experience, for TESTING truth, yet the truth-relation
in itself remains as something apart. It means, in Mr. Pratt’s
words, merely ’THIS SIMPLE THING THAT THE OBJECT OF WHICH ONE IS
THINKING IS AS ONE THINKS IT.’
It seems to me that the word ’as,’ which qualifies the relation
here, and bears the whole ’epistemological’ burden, is anything but
simple. What it most immediately suggests is that the idea should be
LIKE the object; but most of our ideas, being abstract concepts,
bear almost no resemblance to their objects. The ’as’ must
therefore, I should say, be usually interpreted functionally, as
meaning that the idea shall lead us into the same quarters of
experience AS the object would. Experience leads ever on and on, and
objects and our ideas of objects may both lead to the same goals.
The ideas being in that case shorter cuts, we SUBSTITUTE them more
and more for their objects; and we habitually waive direct
verification of each one of them, as their train passes through our
mind, because if an idea leads AS the object would lead, we can say,
in Mr. Pratt’s words, that in so far forth the object is AS we think
it, and that the idea, verified thus in so far forth, is true
enough.
Mr. Pratt will undoubtedly accept most of these facts, but he will
deny that they spell pragmatism. Of course, definitions are free to
every one; but I have myself never meant by the pragmatic view of
truth anything different from what I now describe; and inasmuch as
my use of the term came earlier than my friend’s, I think it ought
to have the right of way. But I suspect that Professor
Pratt’s contention is not solely as to what one must think in order
to be called a pragmatist. I am cure that he believes that the
truth-relation has something MORE in it than the fundamentum which I
assign can account for. Useful to test truth by, the matrix of
circumstance, be thinks, cannot found the truth-relation in se, for
that is trans-empirical and ’saltatory.’
Well, take an object and an idea, and assume that the latter is true
of the former–as eternally and absolutely true as you like. Let the
object be as much ’as’ the idea thinks it, as it is possible for one
thing to be ’as’ another. I now formally ask of Professor Pratt to
tell what this ’as’-ness in itself CONSISTS in–for it seems to me
that it ought to consist in something assignable and describable,
and not remain a pure mystery, and I promise that if he can assign
any determination of it whatever which I cannot successfully refer
to some specification of what in this article I have called the
empirical fundamentum, I will confess my stupidity cheerfully, and
will agree never to publish a line upon this subject of truth again.
Professor Pratt has returned to the charge in a whole book,
[Footnote 1: J. B. Pratt: What is Pragmatism. New York, The
Macmillan Company, 1909.–The comments I have printed were written
in March, 1909, after some of the articles printed later in the
present volume.] which for its clearness and good temper deserves to
supersede all the rest of the anti-pragmatistic literature. I wish
it might do so; for its author admits all MY essential contentions,
simply distinguishing my account of truth as ’modified’
pragmatism from Schiller’s and Dewey’s, which he calls pragmatism of
the ’radical’ sort. As I myself understand Dewey and Schiller, our
views absolutely agree, in spite of our different modes of
statement; but I have enough trouble of my own in life without
having to defend my friends, so I abandon them provisionally to the
tender mercy of Professor Pratt’s interpretations, utterly erroneous
tho I deem these to be. My reply as regards myself can be
very short, for I prefer to consider only essentials, and Dr.
Pratt’s whole book hardly takes the matter farther than the article
to which I retort in Part I of the present paper.
He repeats the ’as’-formula, as if it were something that I, along
with other pragmatists, had denied, [Footnote: Op. cit., pp. 77-
80.] whereas I have only asked those who insist so on its importance
to do something more than merely utter it–to explicate it, for
example, and tell us what its so great importance consists in. I
myself agree most cordially that for an idea to be true the object
must be ’as’ the idea declares it, but I explicate the ’as’-ness as
meaning the idea’s verifiability.
Now since Dr. Pratt denies none of these verifying ’workings’ for
which I have pleaded, but only insists on their inability to serve
as the fundamentum of the truth-relation, it seems that there is
really nothing in the line of FACT about which we differ, and that
the issue between us is solely as to how far the notion of
workableness or verifiability is an essential part of the notion of
’trueness’–’trueness’ being Dr. Pratt’s present name for the
character of as-ness in the true idea. I maintain that there is no
meaning left in this notion of as-ness or trueness if no reference
to the possibility of concrete working on the part of the idea is
made.
Take an example where there can be no possible working. Suppose I
have an idea to which I give utterance by the vocable ’skrkl,’
claiming at the same time that it is true. Who now can say
that it is FALSE, for why may there not be somewhere in the
unplumbed depths of the cosmos some object with which ’skrkl’ can
agree and have trueness in Dr. Pratt’s sense? On the other hand who
can say that it is TRUE, for who can lay his hand on that object and
show that it and nothing else is what I MEAN by my word? But yet
again, who can gainsay any one who shall call my word utterly
IRRELATIVE to other reality, and treat it as a bare fact in my mind,
devoid of any cognitive function whatever. One of these three
alternatives must surely be predicated of it. For it not to be
irrelevant (or not-cognitive in nature), an object of some kind must
be provided which it may refer to. Supposing that object provided,
whether ’skrkl’ is true or false of it, depends, according to
Professor Pratt, on no intermediating condition whatever. The
trueness or the falsity is even now immediately, absolutely, and
positively there.
I, on the other hand, demand a cosmic environment of some kind to
establish which of them is there rather than utter
irrelevancy. [Footnote: Dr. Pratt, singularly enough, disposes of
this primal postulate of all pragmatic epistemology, by saying that
the pragmatist ’unconsciously surrenders his whole case by smuggling
in the idea of a conditioning environment which determines whether
or not the experience can work, and which cannot itself be
identified with the experience or any part of it’ (pp. 167-168). The
’experience’ means here of course the idea, or belief; and the
expression ’smuggling in’ is to the last degree diverting. If any
epistemologist could dispense with a conditioning environment, it
would seem to be the antipragmatist, with his immediate saltatory
trueness, independent of work done. The mediating pathway which the
environment supplies is the very essence of the pragmatist’s
explanation.] I then say, first, that unless some sort of a
natural path exists between the ’skrkl’ and THAT object,
distinguishable among the innumerable pathways that run among all
the realities of the universe, linking them promiscuously with one
another, there is nothing there to constitute even the POSSIBILITY
OF ITS REFERRING to that object rather than to any other.
I say furthermore that unless it have some TENDENCY TO FOLLOW UP
THAT PATH, there is nothing to constitute its INTENTION to refer to
the object in question.
Finally, I say that unless the path be strown with possibilities of
frustration or encouragement, and offer some sort of terminal
satisfaction or contradiction, there is nothing to constitute its
agreement or disagreement with that object, or to constitute the as-
ness (or ’not-as-ness’) in which the trueness (or falseness) is
said to consist.
I think that Dr. Pratt ought to do something more than repeat the
name ’trueness,’ in answer to my pathetic question whether
that there be not some CONSTITUTION to a relation as important as
this. The pathway, the tendency, the corroborating or contradicting
progress, need not in every case be experienced in full, but I don’t
see, if the universe doesn’t contain them among its possibilities of
furniture, what LOGICAL MATERIAL FOR DEFINING the trueness of
my idea is left. But if it do contain them, they and they only are
the logical material required.
I am perplexed by the superior importance which Dr. Pratt attributes
to abstract trueness over concrete verifiability in an idea, and
I wish that he might be moved to explain. It is prior to
verification, to be sure, but so is the verifiability for which I
contend prior, just as a man’s ’mortality’ (which is nothing but
the possibility of his death) is prior to his death, but it can
hardly be that this abstract priority of all possibility to its
correlative fact is what so obstinate a quarrel is about. I think it
probable that Dr. Pratt is vaguely thinking of something concreter
than this. The trueness of an idea must mean SOMETHING DEFINITE IN
IT THAT DETERMINES ITS TENDENCY TO WORK, and indeed towards this
object rather than towards that. Undoubtedly there is something of
this sort in the idea, just as there is something in man
that accounts for his tendency towards death, and in bread that
accounts for its tendency to nourish. What that something is in
the case of truth psychology tells us: the idea has associates
peculiar to itself, motor as well as ideational; it tends by its
place and nature to call these into being, one after another;
and the appearance of them in succession is what we mean by the
’workings’ of the idea. According to what they are, does the
trueness or falseness which the idea harbored come to light. These
tendencies have still earlier conditions which, in a general way,
biology, psychology and biography can trace. This whole chain of
natural causal conditions produces a resultant state of things in
which new relations, not simply causal, can now be found, or
into which they can now be introduced,–the relations namely which
we epistemologists study, relations of adaptation, of
substitutability, of instrumentality, of reference and of truth.
The prior causal conditions, altho there could be no knowing of any
kind, true or false, without them, are but preliminary to the
question of what makes the ideas true or false when once their
tendencies have been obeyed. The tendencies must exist in some shape
anyhow, but their fruits are truth, falsity, or
irrelevancy, according to what they concretely turn out to be. They
are not ’saltatory’ at any rate, for they evoke their consequences
contiguously, from next to next only; and not until the final result
of the whole associative sequence, actual or potential, is in our
mental sight, can we feel sure what its epistemological
significance, if it have any, may be. True knowing is, in fine, not
substantially, in itself, or ’as such,’ inside of the idea from the
first, any more than mortality AS SUCH is inside of the man,
or nourishment AS SUCH inside of the bread. Something else is there
first, that practically MAKES FOR knowing, dying or nourishing, as
the case may be. That something is the ’nature’ namely of the first
term, be it idea, man, or bread, that operates to start the causal
chain of processes which, when completed, is the complex fact to
which we give whatever functional name best fits the case. Another
nature, another chain of cognitive workings; and then either another
object known or the same object known differently, will ensue.
Dr. Pratt perplexes me again by seeming to charge Dewey and Schiller
[Footnote: Page 200] (I am not sure that he charges me) with an
account of truth which would allow the object believed in not
to exist, even if the belief in it were true. ’Since the truth of an
idea,’ he writes, ’means merely the fact that the idea works, that
fact is all that you mean when you say the idea is true’ (p. 206).
’WHEN YOU SAY THE IDEA IS TRUE’–does that mean true for YOU, the
critic, or true for the believer whom you are describing? The
critic’s trouble over this seems to come from his taking the word
’true’ irrelatively, whereas the pragmatist always means ’true for
him who experiences the workings.’ ’But is the object REALLY true or
not?’–the critic then seems to ask,–as if the pragmatist
were bound to throw in a whole ontology on top of his epistemology
and tell us what realities indubitably exist. ’One world at a time,’
would seem to be the right reply here.
One other trouble of Dr. Pratt’s must be noticed. It concerns the
’transcendence’ of the object. When our ideas have worked so as
to bring us flat up against the object, NEXT to it, ’is our relation
to it then ambulatory or saltatory?’ Dr. Pratt asks. If YOUR
headache be my object, ’MY experiences break off where yours begin,’
Dr. Pratt writes, and ’this fact is of great importance, for it bars
out the sense of transition and fulfilment which forms so important
an element in the pragmatist description of knowledge–the sense of
fulfilment due to a continuous passage from the original idea to the
known object. If this comes at all when I know your headache, it
comes not with the object, but quite on my side of
the “epistemological gulf.” The gulf is still there to be
transcended.’ (p. 158).
Some day of course, or even now somewhere in the larger life of the
universe, different men’s headaches may become confluent or be ’co-
conscious.’ Here and now, however, headaches do transcend each other
and, when not felt, can be known only conceptually. My idea is that
you really have a headache; it works well with what I see of your
expression, and with what I hear you say; but it doesn’t put me in
possession of the headache itself. I am still at one remove, and the
headache ’transcends’ me, even tho it be in nowise transcendent of
human experience generally. Bit the ’gulf’ here is that which the
pragmatist epistemology itself fixes in the very first words it
uses, by saying there must be an object and an idea. The idea
however doesn’t immediately leap the gulf, it only works from next
to next so as to bridge it, fully or approximately. If it bridges
it, in the pragmatist’s vision of his hypothetical universe, it can
be called a ’true’ idea. If it only MIGHT bridge it, but doesn’t, or
if it throws a bridge distinctly AT it, it still has, in the
onlooking pragmatist’s eyes, what Professor Pratt calls
’trueness.’ But to ask the pragmatist thereupon whether, when it
thus fails to coalesce bodily with the object, it is REALLY true or
has REAL trueness,–in other words whether the headache he
supposes, and supposes the thinker he supposes, to believe in, be a
real headache or not,–is to step from his hypothetical universe
of discourse into the altogether different world of natural fact.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
