




[Footnote: Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and
Scientific Methods, vol. ii. No. 5, March 2, 1905.]
Humanism is a ferment that has ’come to stay.’ It is not a single
hypothesis or theorem, and it dwells on no new facts. It is rather a
slow shifting in the philosophic perspective, making things appear
as from a new centre of interest or point of sight. Some writers are
strongly conscious of the shifting, others half unconscious, even
though their own vision may have undergone much change. The result
is no small confusion in debate, the half-conscious humanists often
taking part against the radical ones, as if they wished to count
upon the other side. [Footnote: Professor Baldwin, for example. His
address ’Selective Thinking’ (Psychological Review, January, 1898,
reprinted in his volume, ’Development and Evolution’) seems to me an
unusually well written pragmatic manifesto. Nevertheless in ’The
Limits of Pragmatism’ (ibid; January, 1904), he (much less clearly)
joins in the attack.]
If humanism really be the name for such a shifting of perspective,
it is obvious that the whole scene of the philosophic stage
will change in some degree if humanism prevails. The emphasis of
things, their foreground and background distribution, their sizes
and values, will not keep just the same. [Footnote: The
ethical changes, it seems to me, are beautifully made evident in
Professor Dewey’s series of articles, which will never get the
attention they deserve till they are printed in a book. I mean: ’The
Significance of Emotions,’ Psychological Review, vol. ii, 13; ’The
Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology,’ ibid; iii, 357; ’Psychology and
Social Practice,’ ibid., vii, 105; ’Interpretation of Savage Mind,’
ibid; ix, 2l7; ’Green’s Theory of the Moral Motive,’ Philosophical
Review, vol. i, 593; ’Self-realization as the Moral Ideal,’ ibid;
ii, 652; ’The Psychology of Effort,’ ibid; vi, 43; ’The Evolutionary
Method as Applied to Morality,’ ibid; xi, 107,353; ’Evolution and
Ethics,’ Monist, vol. viii, 321; to mention only a few.] If such
pervasive consequences be involved in humanism, it is clear that no
pains which philosophers may take, first in defining it, and then in
furthering, checking, or steering its progress, will be thrown away.
It suffers badly at present from incomplete definition. Its most
systematic advocates, Schiller and Dewey, have published
fragmentary programmes only; and its bearing on many vital
philosophic problems has not been traced except by adversaries who,
scenting heresies in advance, have showered blows on doctrines–
subjectivism and scepticism, for example–that no good humanist
finds it necessary to entertain. By their still greater reticences,
the anti-humanists have, in turn, perplexed the humanists. Much of
the controversy has involved the word ’truth.’ It is always good in
debate to know your adversary’s point of view authentically. But the
critics of humanism never define exactly what the word ’truth’
signifies when they use it themselves. The humanists have to guess
at their view; and the result has doubtless been much beating of the
air. Add to all this, great individual differences in both camps,
and it becomes clear that nothing is so urgently needed, at the
stage which things have reached at present, as a sharper
definition by each side of its central point of view.
Whoever will contribute any touch of sharpness will help us to make
sure of what’s what and who is who. Any one can contribute such a
definition, and, without it, no one knows exactly where he stands.
If I offer my own provisional definition of humanism now and here,
others may improve it, some adversary may be led to define his own
creed more sharply by the contrast, and a certain quickening of the
crystallization of general opinion may result.
The essential service of humanism, as I conceive the situation, is
to have seen that THO ONE PART OF OUR EXPERIENCE MAY LEAN
UPON ANOTHER PART TO MAKE IT WHAT IT IS IN ANY ONE OF SEVERAL
ASPECTS IN WHICH IT MAY BE CONSIDERED, EXPERIENCE AS A WHOLE IS
SELF-CONTAINING AND LEANS ON NOTHING. Since this formula
also expresses the main contention of transcendental idealism, it
needs abundant explication to make it unambiguous. It seems, at
first sight, to confine itself to denying theism and pantheism. But,
in fact, it need not deny either; everything would depend on the
exegesis; and if the formula ever became canonical, it would
certainly develop both right-wing and left-wing interpreters. I
myself read humanism theistically and pluralistically. If there be a
God, he is no absolute all-experiencer, but simply the experiencer
of widest actual conscious span. Read thus, humanism is for me a
religion susceptible of reasoned defence, tho I am well aware how
many minds there are to whom it can appeal religiously only when it
has been monistically translated. Ethically the pluralistic form of
it takes for me a stronger hold on reality than any other philosophy
I know of–it being essentially a SOCIAL philosophy, a philosophy of
’CO,’ in which conjunctions do the work. But my primary reason for
advocating it is its matchless intellectual economy. It gets rid,
not only of the standing ’problems’ that monism engenders (’problem
of evil,’ ’problem of freedom,’ and the like), but of other
metaphysical mysteries and paradoxes as well.
It gets rid, for example, of the whole agnostic controversy, by
refusing to entertain the hypothesis of trans-empirical reality at
all. It gets rid of any need for an absolute of the bradleyan type
(avowedly sterile for intellectual purposes) by insisting that the
conjunctive relations found within experience are faultlessly real.
It gets rid of the need of an absolute of the roycean type
(similarly sterile) by its pragmatic treatment of the problem of
knowledge. As the views of knowledge, reality and truth imputed to
humanism have been those so far most fiercely attacked, it is in
regard to these ideas that a sharpening of focus seems most urgently
required. I proceed therefore to bring the views which I impute to
humanism in these respects into focus as briefly as I can.
If the central humanistic thesis, printed above in italics, be
accepted, it will follow that, if there be any such thing at all as
knowing, the knower and the object known must both be portions of
experience. One part of experience must, therefore, either
(1) Know another part of experience–in other words, parts must, as
Professor Woodbridge says, [Footnote: In Science, November 4,
1904, p. 599.] represent ONE ANOTHER instead of representing
realities outside of ’consciousness’–this case is that of
conceptual knowledge; or else
(2) They must simply exist as so many ultimate THATS or facts of
being, in the first instance; and then, as a secondary
complication, and without doubling up its entitative singleness, any
one and the same THAT in experience must figure alternately as a
thing known and as a knowledge of the thing, by reason of two
divergent kinds of context into which, in the general course of
experience, it gets woven. [Footnote: This statement is
probably excessively obscure to any one who has not read my two
articles ’Does Consciousness Exist?’ and ’A World of Pure
Experience’ in the Journal of Philosophy, vol. i, 1904.]
This second case is that of sense-perception. There is a stage of
thought that goes beyond common sense, and of it I shall say
more presently; but the common-sense stage is a perfectly definite
halting-place of thought, primarily for purposes of action; and, so
long as we remain on the common-sense stage of thought, object and
subject FUSE in the fact of ’presentation’ or sense-perception-
the pen and hand which I now SEE writing, for example, ARE the
physical realities which those words designate. In this case there
is no self-transcendency implied in the knowing. Humanism, here, is
only a more comminuted IDENTITATSPHILOSOPHIE.
In case (1), on the contrary, the representative experience DOES
TRANSCEND ITSELF in knowing the other experience that is its object.
No one can talk of the knowledge of the one by the other without
seeing them as numerically distinct entities, of which the one lies
beyond the other and away from it, along some direction and with
some interval, that can be definitely named. But, if the talker be
a humanist, he must also see this distance-interval concretely and
pragmatically, and confess it to consist of other
intervening experiences–of possible ones, at all events, if not of
actual. To call my present idea of my dog, for example, cognitive of
the real dog means that, as the actual tissue of experience is
constituted, the idea is capable of leading into a chain of other
experiences on my part that go from next to next and terminate at
last in vivid sense-perceptions of a jumping, barking, hairy body.
Those ARE the real dog, the dog’s full presence, for my common
sense. If the supposed talker is a profound philosopher, altho they
may not BE the real dog for him, they MEAN the real dog, are
practical substitutes for the real dog, as the representation was a
practical substitute for them, that real dog being a lot of atoms,
say, or of mind-stuff, that lie WHERE the sense-perceptions lie in
his experience as well as in my own.
The philosopher here stands for the stage of thought that goes
beyond the stage of common sense; and the difference is simply
that he ’interpolates’ and ’extrapolates,’ where common sense does
not. For common sense, two men see the same identical real dog.
Philosophy, noting actual differences in their perceptions points
out the duality of these latter, and interpolates something between
them as a more real terminus–first, organs, viscera, etc.; next,
cells; then, ultimate atoms; lastly, mind-stuff perhaps. The
original sense-termini of the two men, instead of coalescing with
each other and with the real dog-object, as at first supposed, are
thus held by philosophers to be separated by invisible realities
with which, at most, they are conterminous.
Abolish, now, one of the percipients, and the interpolation changes
into ’extrapolation.’ The sense-terminus of the remaining
percipient is regarded by the philosopher as not quite reaching
reality. He has only carried the procession of experiences, the
philosopher thinks, to a definite, because practical, halting-
place somewhere on the way towards an absolute truth that lies
beyond.
The humanist sees all the time, however, that there is no absolute
transcendency even about the more absolute realities
thus conjectured or believed in. The viscera and cells are only
possible percepts following upon that of the outer body. The atoms
again, tho we may never attain to human means of perceiving them,
are still defined perceptually. The mind-stuff itself is conceived
as a kind of experience; and it is possible to frame the hypothesis
(such hypotheses can by no logic be excluded from philosophy) of two
knowers of a piece of mind-stuff and the mind-stuff itself becoming
’confluent’ at the moment at which our imperfect knowing might pass
into knowing of a completed type. Even so do you and I habitually
conceive our two perceptions and the real dog as confluent, tho only
provisionally, and for the common-sense stage of thought. If my pen
be inwardly made of mind-stuff, there is no confluence NOW between
that mind-stuff and my visual perception of the pen. But conceivably
there might come to be such. confluence; for, in the case of my
HAND, the visual sensations and the inward feelings of the hand, its
mind-stuff, so to speak, are even now as confluent as any two things
can be.
There is, thus, no breach in humanistic epistemology. Whether
knowledge be taken as ideally perfected, or only as true enough to
pass muster for practice, it is hung on one continuous scheme.
Reality, howsoever remote, is always defined as a terminus
within the general possibilities of experience; and what knows it is
defined as an experience THAT ’REPRESENTS’ IT, IN THE SENSE OF BEING
SUBSTITUTABLE FOR IT IN OUR THINKING because it leads to the same
associates, OR IN THE SENSE OF ’POINTING TO IT THROUGH A CHAIN OF
OTHER EXPERIENCES THAT EITHER INTERVENE OR MAY INTERVENE.
Absolute reality here bears the same relation to sensation as
sensation bears to conception or imagination. Both are provisional
or final termini, sensation being only the terminus at which the
practical man habitually stops, while the philosopher projects a
’beyond,’ in the shape of more absolute reality. These termini, for
the practical and the philosophical stages of thought respectively,
are self-supporting. They are not ’true’ of anything else,
they simply ARE, are REAL. They ’lean on nothing,’ as my italicized
formula said. Rather does the whole fabric of experience lean on
them, just as the whole fabric of the solar system, including many
relative positions, leans, for its absolute position in space, on
any one of its constituent stars. Here, again, one gets a new
IDENTITATSPHILOSOPHIE in pluralistic form.
If I have succeeded in making this at all clear (tho I fear that
brevity and abstractness between them may have made me fail), the
reader will see that the ’truth’ of our mental operations must
always be an intra-experiential affair. A conception is
reckoned true by common sense when it can be made to lead to a
sensation. The sensation, which for common sense is not so much
’true’ as ’real,’ is held to be PROVISIONALLY true by the
philosopher just in so far as it COVERS (abuts at, or occupies the
place of) a still more absolutely real experience, in the
possibility of which, to some remoter experient, the
philosopher finds reason to believe.
Meanwhile what actually DOES count for true to any individual
trower, whether he be philosopher or common man, is always a result
of his APPERCEPTIONS. If a novel experience, conceptual or sensible,
contradict too emphatically our pre-existent system of beliefs,
in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred it is treated as false. Only
when the older and the newer experiences are congruous enough to
mutually apperceive and modify each other, does what we treat as an
advance in truth result. In no case, however, need truth consist in
a relation between our experiences and something archetypal or
trans-experiential. Should we ever reach absolutely terminal
experiences, experiences in which we all agreed, which were
superseded by no revised continuations, these would not be TRUE,
they would be REAL, they would simply BE, and be indeed the angles,
corners, and linchpins of all reality, on which the truth of
everything else would be stayed. Only such OTHER things as led to
these by satisfactory conjunctions would be ’true.’
Satisfactory connection of some sort with such termini is all
that the word ’truth’ means. On the common-stage of thought sense-
presentations serve as such termini. Our ideas and concepts and
scientific theories pass for true only so far as they harmoniously
lead back to the world of sense.
I hope that many humanists will endorse this attempt of mine to
trace the more essential features of that way of viewing things. I
feel almost certain that Messrs. Dewey and Schiller will do so. If
the attackers will also take some slight account of it, it may be
that discussion will be a little less wide of the mark than it
has hitherto been.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
