




[Footnote: Reprint from the Philosophical Review, January, 1908
(vol. xvii, p. 1).]
 The account of truth given in my volume entitled Pragmatism,
continues to meet with such persistent misunderstanding that I
am tempted to make a final brief reply. My ideas may well deserve
refutation, but they can get none till they are conceived of in
their proper shape. The fantastic character of the
current misconceptions shows how unfamiliar is the concrete point of
view which pragmatism assumes. Persons who are familiar with a
conception move about so easily in it that they understand each
other at a hint, and can converse without anxiously attending to
their P’s and Q’s. I have to admit, in view of the results, that we
have assumed too ready an intelligence, and consequently in many
places used a language too slipshod. We should never have spoken
elliptically. The critics have boggled at every word they could
boggle at, and refused to take the spirit rather than the letter of
our discourse. This seems to show a genuine unfamiliarity in the
whole point of view. It also shows, I think, that the second stage
of opposition, which has already begun to express itself in the
stock phrase that ’what is new is not true, and what is true not
new,’ in pragmatism, is insincere. If we said nothing in any degree
new, why was our meaning so desperately hard to catch? The
blame cannot be laid wholly upon our obscurity of speech, for in
other subjects we have attained to making ourselves understood. But
recriminations are tasteless; and, as far as I personally am
concerned, I am sure that some of the misconception I complain of is
due to my doctrine of truth being surrounded in that volume
of popular lectures by a lot of other opinions not necessarily
implicated with it, so that a reader may very naturally have grown
confused. For this I am to blame,–likewise for omitting certain
explicit cautions, which the pages that follow will now in part
supply.
First Misunderstanding: Pragmatism Is Only a Re-Editing Of
Positivism.
This seems the commonest mistake. Scepticism, positivism, and
agnosticism agree with ordinary dogmatic rationalism in
presupposing that everybody knows what the word ’truth’ means,
without further explanation. But the former doctrines then either
suggest or declare that real truth, absolute truth, is inaccessible
to us, and that we must fain put up with relative or phenomenal
truth as its next best substitute. By scepticism this is treated as
an unsatisfactory state of affairs, while positivism and agnosticism
are cheerful about it, call real truth sour grapes, and consider
phenomenal truth quite sufficient for all our ’practical’ purposes.
In point of fact, nothing could be farther from all this than what
pragmatism has to say of truth. Its thesis is an altogether
previous one. It leaves off where these other theories begin, having
contented itself with the word truth’s DEFINITION. ’No matter
whether any mind extant in the universe possess truth or not,’ it
asks, ’what does the notion of truth signify IDEALLY?’ ’What kind of
things would true judgments be IN CASE they existed?’ The answer
which pragmatism offers is intended to cover the most complete truth
that can be conceived of, ’absolute’ truth if you like, as well
as truth of the most relative and imperfect description. This
question of what truth would be like if it did exist, belongs
obviously to a purely speculative field of inquiry. It is not a
theory about any sort of reality, or about what kind of knowledge is
actually possible; it abstracts from particular terms altogether,
and defines the nature of a possible relation between two of them.
As Kant’s question about synthetic judgments had escaped previous
philosophers, so the pragmatist question is not only so subtile as
to have escaped attention hitherto, but even so subtile, it would
seem, that when openly broached now, dogmatists and sceptics
alike fail to apprehend it, and deem the pragmatist to be treating
of something wholly different. He insists, they say (I quote an
actual critic), ’that the greater problems are insoluble by human
intelligence, that our need of knowing truly is artificial and
illusory, and that our reason, incapable of reaching the
foundations of reality, must turn itself exclusively
towards ACTION.’ There could not be a worse misapprehension.
Second Misunderstanding: Pragmatism Is Primarily An Appeal To
Action.
The name ’pragmatism,’ with its suggestions of action, has been an
unfortunate choice, I have to admit, and has played into the
hands of this mistake. But no word could protect the doctrine from
critics so blind to the nature of the inquiry that, when Dr.
Schiller speaks of ideas ’working’ well, the only thing they think
of is their immediate workings in the physical environment, their
enabling us to make money, or gain some similar
’practical’ advantage. Ideas do work thus, of course, immediately or
remotely; but they work indefinitely inside of the mental world
also. Not crediting us with this rudimentary insight, our critics
treat our view as offering itself exclusively to engineers, doctors,
financiers, and men of action generally, who need some sort of
a rough and ready weltanschauung, but have no time or wit to study
genuine philosophy. It is usually described as a characteristically
American movement, a sort of bobtailed scheme of thought,
excellently fitted for the man on the street, who naturally hates
theory and wants cash returns immediately.
It is quite true that, when the refined theoretic question that
pragmatism begins with is once answered, secondary corollaries of a
practical sort follow. Investigation shows that, in the function
called truth, previous realities are not the only independent
variables. To a certain extent our ideas, being realities, are
also independent variables, and, just as they follow other reality
and fit it, so, in a measure, does other reality follow and fit
them. When they add themselves to being, they partly redetermine the
existent, so that reality as a whole appears incompletely definable
unless ideas also are kept account of. This pragmatist
doctrine, exhibiting our ideas as complemental factors of reality,
throws open (since our ideas are instigators of our action) a wide
window upon human action, as well as a wide license to
originality in thought. But few things could be sillier than to
ignore the prior epistemological edifice in which the window is
built, or to talk as if pragmatism began and ended at the
window. This, nevertheless, is what our critics do almost without
exception. They ignore our primary step and its motive, and make the
relation to action, which is our secondary achievement, primary.
Third Misunderstanding: Pragmatists Cut Themselves Off From The
Right to Believe in Ejective Realities.
They do so, according to the critics, by making the truth of our
beliefs consist in their verifiability, and their verifiability in
the way in which they do work for us. Professor Stout, in his
otherwise admirable and hopeful review of Schiller in Mind for
October, 1897, considers that this ought to lead Schiller (could he
sincerely realize the effects of his own doctrine) to the absurd
consequence of being unable to believe genuinely in another
man’s headache, even were the headache there. He can only
’postulate’ it for the sake of the working value of the postulate to
himself. The postulate guides certain of his acts and leads
to advantageous consequences; but the moment he understands fully
that the postulate is true ONLY (!) in this sense, it ceases (or
should cease) to be true for him that the other man really HAS a
headache. All that makes the postulate most precious then
evaporates: his interest in his fellow-man ’becomes a veiled form
of self-interest, and his world grows cold, dull, and heartless.’
Such an objection makes a curious muddle of the pragmatist’s
universe of discourse. Within that universe the pragmatist finds
some one with a headache or other feeling, and some one else who
postulates that feeling. Asking on what condition the postulate is
’true’ the pragmatist replies that, for the postulator at any rate,
it is true just in proportion as to believe in it works in him the
fuller sum of satisfactions. What is it that is satisfactory
here? Surely to BELIEVE in the postulated object, namely, in the
really existing feeling of the other man. But how (especially if the
postulator were himself a thoroughgoing pragmatist) could it ever be
satisfactory to him NOT to believe in that feeling, so long as, in
Professor Stout’s words, disbelief ’made the world seem to him cold,
dull, and heartless’? Disbelief would seem, on pragmatist
principles, quite out of the question under such conditions,
unless the heartlessness of the world were made probable already on
other grounds. And since the belief in the headache, true for the
subject assumed in the pragmatist’s universe of discourse, is also
true for the pragmatist who for his epitemologizing purposes has
assumed that entire universe, why is it not true in that
universe absolutely? The headache believed in is a reality there,
and no extant mind disbelieves it, neither the critic’s mind nor his
subject’s! Have our opponents any better brand of truth in this real
universe of ours that they can show us? [Footnote: I see here a
chance to forestall a criticism which some one may make on Lecture
III of my Pragmatism, where, on pp. 96-100, I said that ’God’ and
’Matter’ might be regarded as synonymous terms, so long as no
differing future consequences were deducible from the two
conceptions. The passage was transcribed from my address at the
California Philosophical Union, reprinted in the Journal of
Philosophy, vol. i, p. 673. I had no sooner given the address than I
perceived a flaw in that part of it; but I have left the passage
unaltered ever since, because the flaw did not spoil its
illustrative value. The flaw was evident when, as a case analogous
to that of a godless universe, I thought of what I called an
’automatic sweetheart,’ meaning a soulless body which should be
absolutely indistinguishable from a spiritually animated maiden,
laughing, talking, blushing, nursing us, and performing all feminine
offices as tactfully and sweetly as if a soul were in her. Would
any one regard her as a full equivalent? Certainly not, and
why? Because, framed as we are, our egoism craves above all
things inward sympathy and recognition, love and admiration.
The outward treatment is valued mainly as an expression, as
a manifestation of the accompanying consciousness believed
in. Pragmatically, then, belief in the automatic sweetheart
would not work, and is point of fact no one treats it as a
serious hypothesis. The godless universe would be exactly
similar. Even if matter could do every outward thing that God does,
the idea of it would not work as satisfactorily, because the
chief call for a God on modern men’s part is for a being who will
inwardly recognize them and judge them sympathetically. Matter
disappoints this craving of our ego, so God remains for most men the
truer hypothesis, and indeed remains so for definite pragmatic
reasons.]
So much for the third misunderstanding, which is but one
specification of the following still wider one.
Fourth Misunderstanding: No Pragmatist Can Be a Realist in His
Epistemology.
This is supposed to follow from his statement that the truth of our
beliefs consists in general in their giving satisfaction. Of
course satisfaction per se is a subjective condition; so the
conclusion is drawn that truth falls wholly inside of the subject,
who then may manufacture it at his pleasure. True beliefs become
thus wayward affections, severed from all responsibility to other
parts of experience.
It is difficult to excuse such a parody of the pragmatist’s opinion,
ignoring as it does every element but one of his universe of
discourse. The terms of which that universe consists
positively forbid any non-realistic interpretation of the function
of knowledge defined there. The pragmatizing epistemologist posits
there a reality and a mind with ideas. What, now, he asks, can make
those ideas true of that reality? Ordinary epistemology contents
itself with the vague statement that the ideas must ’correspond’ or
’agree’; the pragmatist insists on being more concrete, and asks
what such ’agreement’ may mean in detail. He finds first that the
ideas must point to or lead towards THAT reality and no other, and
then that the pointings and leadings must yield satisfaction as
their result. So far the pragmatist is hardly less abstract than the
ordinary slouchy epistemologist; but as he defines himself
farther, he grows more concrete. The entire quarrel of the
intellectualist with him is over his concreteness, intellectualism
contending that the vaguer and more abstract account is here the
more profound. The concrete pointing and leading are conceived by
the pragmatist to be the work of other portions of the same
universe to which the reality and the mind belong,
intermediary verifying bits of experience with which the mind at one
end, and the reality at the other, are joined. The ’satisfaction,’
in turn, is no abstract satisfaction ueberhaupt, felt by an
unspecified being, but is assumed to consist of such satisfactions
(in the plural) as concretely existing men actually do find in
their beliefs. As we humans are constituted in point of fact, we
find that to believe in other men’s minds, in independent physical
realities, in past events, in eternal logical relations,
is satisfactory. We find hope satisfactory. We often find it
satisfactory to cease to doubt. Above all we find CONSISTENCY
satisfactory, consistency between the present idea and the entire
rest of our mental equipment, including the whole order of our
sensations, and that of our intuitions of likeness and difference,
and our whole stock of previously acquired truths.
The pragmatist, being himself a man, and imagining in general no
contrary lines of truer belief than ours about the ’reality’ which
he has laid at the base of his epistemological discussion, is
willing to treat our satisfactions as possibly really true guides to
it, not as guides true solely for US. It would seem here to be
the duty of his critics to show with some explicitness why, being
our subjective feelings, these satisfactions can not yield
’objective’ truth. The beliefs which they accompany ’posit’
the assumed reality, ’correspond’ and ’agree’ with it, and ’fit’ it
in perfectly definite and assignable ways, through the sequent
trains of thought and action which form their verification, so
merely to insist on using these words abstractly instead of
concretely is no way of driving the pragmatist from the field,–
his more concrete account virtually includes his critic’s. If our
critics have any definite idea of a truth more objectively grounded
than the kind we propose, why do they not show it more articulately?
As they stand, they remind one of Hegel’s man who wanted
’fruit,’ but rejected cherries, pears, and grapes, because they were
not fruit in the abstract. We offer them the full quart-pot, and
they cry for the empty quart-capacity.
But here I think I hear some critic retort as follows: ’If
satisfactions are all that is needed to make truth, how about the
notorious fact that errors are so often satisfactory? And how about
the equally notorious fact that certain true beliefs may cause the
bitterest dissatisfaction? Isn’t it clear that not the
satisfaction which it gives, but the relation of the belief TO THE
REALITY is all that makes it true? Suppose there were no such
reality, and that the satisfactions yet remained: would they not
then effectively work falsehood? Can they consequently be treated
distinctively as the truth-builders? It is the INHERENT RELATION TO
REALITY of a belief that gives us that specific TRUTH-satisfaction,
compared with which all other satisfactions are the hollowest
humbug. The satisfaction of KNOWING TRULY is thus the only one which
the pragmatist ought to have considered. As a PSYCHOLOGICAL
SENTIMENT, the anti-pragmatist gladly concedes it to him, but then
only as a concomitant of truth, not as a constituent. What
CONSTITUTES truth is not the sentiment, but the purely logical or
objective function of rightly cognizing the reality, and the
pragmatist’s failure to reduce this function to lower values is
patent.’
Such anti-pragmatism as this seems to me a tissue of confusion. To
begin with, when the pragmatist says ’indispensable,’ it
confounds this with ’sufficient.’ The pragmatist calls satisfactions
indispensable for truth-building, but I have everywhere called them
insufficient unless reality be also incidentally led to. If
the reality assumed were cancelled from the pragmatist’s universe of
discourse, he would straightway give the name of falsehoods to the
beliefs remaining, in spite of all their satisfactoriness. For him,
as for his critic, there can be no truth if there is nothing to be
true about. Ideas are so much flat psychological surface unless
some mirrored matter gives them cognitive lustre. This is why as a
pragmatist I have so carefully posited ’reality’ AB INITIO, and
why, throughout my whole discussion, I remain an epistemological
realist. [Footnote: I need hardly remind the reader that both sense-
percepts and percepts of ideal relation (comparisons, etc.) should
be classed among the realities. The bulk of our mental
’stock’ consists of truths concerning these terms.]
The anti-pragmatist is guilty of the further confusion of imagining
that, in undertaking to give him an account of what truth
formally means, we are assuming at the same time to provide a
warrant for it, trying to define the occasions when he can be sure
of materially possessing it. Our making it hinge on a reality so
’independent’ that when it comes, truth comes, and when it goes,
truth goes with it, disappoints this naive expectation, so he
deems our description unsatisfactory. I suspect that under this
confusion lies the still deeper one of not discriminating
sufficiently between the two notions, truth and reality. Realities
are not TRUE, they ARE; and beliefs are true OF them. But I suspect
that in the anti-pragmatist mind the two notions sometimes swap
their attributes. The reality itself, I fear, is treated as if
’true’ and conversely. Whoso tells us of the one, it is then
supposed, must also be telling us of the other; and a true idea must
in a manner BE, or at least YIELD without extraneous aid, the
reality it cognitively is possessed of.
To this absolute-idealistic demand pragmatism simply opposes its non
possumus. If there is to be truth, it says, both realities and
beliefs about them must conspire to make it; but whether there ever
is such a thing, or how anyone can be sure that his own beliefs
possess it, it never pretends to determine. That truth-satisfaction
par excellence which may tinge a belief unsatisfactory in other
ways, it easily explains as the feeling of consistency with
the stock of previous truths, or supposed truths, of which one’s
whole past experience may have left one in possession.
But are not all pragmatists sure that their own belief is right?
their enemies will ask at this point; and this leads me to the
Fifth Misunderstanding: What Pragmatists Say Is Inconsistent With
Their Saying So.
A correspondent puts this objection as follows: ’When you say to
your audience, “pragmatism is the truth concerning truth,” the
first truth is different from the second. About the first you and
they are not to be at odds; you are not giving them liberty to take
or leave it according as it works satisfactorily or not for their
private uses. Yet the second truth, which ought to describe and
include the first, affirms this liberty. Thus the INTENT of your
utterance seems to contradict the CONTENT of it.’
General scepticism has always received this same classic refutation.
’You have to dogmatize,’ the rationalists say to the sceptics,’
whenever you express the sceptical position; so your lives keep
contradicting your thesis.’ One would suppose that the impotence of
so hoary an argument to abate in the slightest degree the amount of
general scepticism in the world might have led some rationalists
themselves to doubt whether these instantaneous logical refutations
are such fatal ways, after all, of killing off live mental
attitudes. General scepticism is the live mental attitude
of refusing to conclude. It is a permanent torpor of the will,
renewing itself in detail towards each successive thesis that
offers, and you can no more kill it off by logic than yon can
kill off obstinacy or practical joking. This is why it is so
irritating. Your consistent sceptic never puts his scepticism into a
formal proposition,–he simply chooses it as a habit. He provokingly
hangs back when he might so easily join us in saying yes, but he is
not illogical or stupid,–on the contrary, he often impresses us by
his intellectual superiority. This is the REAL scepticism that
rationalists have to meet, and their logic does not even touch it.
No more can logic kill the pragmatist’s behavior: his act of
utterance, so far from contradicting, accurately exemplifies the
matter which he utters. What is the matter which he utters? In part,
it is this, that truth, concretely considered, is an attribute of
our beliefs, and that these are attitudes that follow satisfactions.
The ideas around which the satisfactions cluster are primarily only
hypotheses that challenge or summon a belief to come and take its
stand upon them. The pragmatist’s idea of truth is just such a
challenge. He finds it ultra-satisfactory to accept it, and takes
his own stand accordingly. But, being gregarious as they are, men
seek to spread their beliefs, to awaken imitation, to infect others.
Why should not YOU also find the same belief satisfactory? thinks
the pragmatist, and forthwith endeavors to convert you. You and he
will then believe similarly; you will hold up your subject-end of a
truth, which will be a truth objective and irreversible if the
reality holds up the object-end by being itself
present simultaneously. What there is of self-contradiction in all
this I confess I cannot discover. The pragmatist’s conduct in his
own case seems to me on the contrary admirably to illustrate his
universal formula; and of all epistemologists, he is perhaps the
only one who is irreproachably self-consistent.
Sixth Misunderstanding: Pragmatism Explains Not What Truth Is, But
Only How It Is Arrived At.
In point of fact it tells us both, tells us what it is incidentally
to telling us how it is arrived at,–for what IS arrived at except
just what the truth is? If I tell you how to get to the railroad
station, don’t I implicitly introduce you to the WHAT, to the being
and nature of that edifice? It is quite true that the abstract WORD
’how’ hasn’t the same meaning as the abstract WORD ’what,’ but in
this universe of concrete facts you cannot keep hows and
whats asunder. The reasons why I find it satisfactory to believe
that any idea is true, the HOW of my arriving at that belief, may be
among the very reasons why the idea IS true in reality. If not, I
summon the anti-pragmatist to explain the impossibility
articulately.
His trouble seems to me mainly to arise from his fixed inability to
understand how a concrete statement can possibly mean as much, or be
as valuable, as an abstract one. I said above that the main quarrel
between us and our critics was that of concreteness
VERSUS abstractness. This is the place to develop that point
farther.
In the present question, the links of experience sequent upon an
idea, which mediate between it and a reality, form and for
the pragmatist indeed ARE, the CONCRETE relation of truth that may
obtain between the idea and that reality. They, he says, are all
that we mean when we speak of the idea ’pointing’ to the reality,
’fitting’ it, ’corresponding’ with it, or ’agreeing’ with it,–they
or other similar mediating trains of verification. Such
mediating events make the idea ’true.’ The idea itself, if it exists
at all, is also a concrete event: so pragmatism insists that truth
in the singular is only a collective name for truths in the plural,
these consisting always of series of definite events; and that what
intellectualism calls the truth, the inherent truth, of any one such
series is only the abstract name for its truthfulness in act, for
the fact that the ideas there do lead to the supposed reality in a
way that we consider satisfactory.
The pragmatist himself has no objection to abstractions.
Elliptically, and ’for short,’ he relies on them as much as any one,
ending upon innumerable occasions that their comparative emptiness
makes of them useful substitutes for the overfulness of the facts he
meets, with. But he never ascribes to them a higher grade of
reality. The full reality of a truth for him is always some process
of verification, in which the abstract property of connecting ideas
with objects truly is workingly embodied. Meanwhile it is endlessly
serviceable to be able to talk of properties abstractly and apart
from their working, to find them the same in innumerable cases, to
take them ’out of time,’ and to treat of their relations to other
similar abstractions. We thus form whole universes of platonic ideas
ante rem, universes in posse, tho none of them exists effectively
except in rebus. Countless relations obtain there which nobody
experiences as obtaining,–as, in the eternal universe of musical
relations, for example, the notes of Aennchen von Tharau were a
lovely melody long ere mortal ears ever heard them. Even so the
music of the future sleeps now, to be awakened hereafter. Or, if we
take the world of geometrical relations, the thousandth decimal of
’pi’ sleeps there, tho no one may ever try to compute it. Or, if
we take the universe of ’fitting,’ countless coats ’fit’ backs, and
countless boots ’fit’ feet, on which they are not practically
FITTED; countless stones ’fit’ gaps in walls into which no one seeks
to fit them actually. In the same way countless opinions ’fit’
realities, and countless truths are valid, tho no thinker
ever thinks them.
For the anti-pragmatist these prior timeless relations are the
presupposition of the concrete ones, and possess the profounder
dignity and value. The actual workings of our ideas in verification-
processes are as naught in comparison with the ’obtainings’ of
this discarnate truth within them.
For the pragmatist, on the contrary,–all discarnate truth is
static, impotent, and relatively spectral, full truth being the
truth that energizes and does battle. Can any one suppose that the
sleeping quality of truth would ever have been abstracted or have
received a name, if truths had remained forever in that storage-
 vault of essential timeless ’agreements’ and had never been
embodied in any panting struggle of men’s live ideas for
verification? Surely no more than the abstract property of
’fitting’ would have received a name, if in our world there had been
no backs or feet or gaps in walls to be actually fitted. EXISTENTIAL
truth is incidental to the actual competition of opinions. ESSENTIAL
truth, the truth of the intellectualists, the truth with no one
thinking it, is like the coat that fits tho no one has ever tried it
on, like the music that no ear has listened to. It is less real, not
more real, than the verified article; and to attribute a superior
degree of glory to it seems little more than a piece of perverse
abstraction-worship. As well might a pencil insist that the outline
is the essential thing in all pictorial representation, and chide
the paint-brush and the camera for omitting it, forgetting that
THEIR pictures not only contain the whole outline, but a hundred
other things in addition. Pragmatist truth contains the whole of
intellectualist truth and a hundred other things in addition.
Intellectualist truth is then only pragmatist truth in posse.
That on innumerable occasions men do substitute truth in posse or
verifiability, for verification or truth in act, is a fact to which
no one attributes more importance than the pragmatist: he emphasizes
the practical utility of such a habit. But he does not on that
account consider truth in posse,–truth not alive enough ever to
have been asserted or questioned or contradicted, to be the
metaphysically prior thing, to which truths in act are tributary and
subsidiary. When intellectualists do this, pragmatism charges them
with inverting the real relation. Truth in posse MEANS only
truths in act; and he insists that these latter take precedence in
the order of logic as well as in that of being.
Seventh Minunderstanding: Pragmatism Ignores the Theoretical
Interest.
This would seem to be an absolutely wanton slander, were not a
certain excuse to be found in the linguistic affinities of the word
’pragmatism,’ and in certain offhand habits of speech of ours which
assumed too great a generosity on our reader’s part. When we
spoke of the meaning of ideas consisting “in their ’practical’
consequences”, or of the ’practical’ differences which our beliefs
make to us; when we said that the truth of a belief consists in
its ’working’ value, etc.; our language evidently was too careless,
for by ’practical’ we were almost unanimously held to mean OPPOSED
to theoretical or genuinely cognitive, and the consequence was
punctually drawn that a truth in our eyes could have no relation to
any independent reality, or to any other truth, or to anything
whatever but the acts which we might ground on it or the
satisfactions they might bring. The mere existence of the idea, all
by itself, if only its results were satisfactory, would give full
truth to it, it was charged, in our absurd pragmatist epistemology.
The solemn attribution of this rubbish to us was also encouraged by
two other circumstances. First, ideas ARE practically useful in the
narrow sense, false ideas sometimes, but most often ideas which we
can verify by the sum total of all their leadings, and the reality
of whose objects may thus be considered established beyond
doubt. That these ideas should be true in advance of and apart from
their utility, that, in other words, their objects should be
really there, is the very condition of their having that kind of
utility,–the objects they connect us with are so important that the
ideas which serve as the objects’ substitutes grow important
also. This manner of their practical working was the first thing
that made truths good in the eyes of primitive men; and buried among
all the other good workings by which true beliefs are
characterized, this kind of subsequential utility remains.
The second misleading circumstance was the emphasis laid by Schiller
and Dewey on the fact that, unless a truth be relevant to the mind’s
momentary predicament, unless it be germane to the ’practical’
situation,–meaning by this the quite particular perplexity,–it is
no good to urge it. It doesn’t meet our interests any better than a
falsehood would under the same circumstances. But why
our predicaments and perplexities might not be theoretical here as
well as narrowly practical, I wish that our critics would explain.
They simply assume that no pragmatist CAN admit a genuinely
theoretic interest. Having used the phrase ’cash-value’ of an idea,
I am implored by one correspondent to alter it, ’for every one
thinks you mean only pecuniary profit and loss.’ Having said that
the true is ’the expedient in our thinking,’ I am rebuked in this
wise by another learned correspondent:
’The word expedient has no other meaning than that of self-interest.
The pursuit of this has ended by landing a number of officers
of national banks in penitentiaries. A philosophy that leads to such
results must be unsound.’
But the word ’practical’ is so habitually loosely used that more
indulgence might have been expected. When one says that a sick
man has now practically recovered, or that an enterprise has
practically failed, one usually means I just the opposite of
practically in the literal sense. One means that, altho untrue in
strict practice, what one says is true in theory, true virtually,
certain to be true. Again, by the practical one often means the
distinctively concrete, the individual, particular, and
effective, as opposed to the abstract, general, and inert. To speak
for myself, whenever I have emphasized the practical nature of
truth, this is mainly what has been in my mind. ’Pragmata’
are things in their plurality; and in that early California address,
when I described pragmatism as holding that the meaning of any
proposition can always be brought down to some
particular consequence in our future practical experience, whether
passive or active, expressly added these qualifying words: the point
lying rather in the fact that the experience must be particular than
in the fact that it must be active,–by ’active’ meaning here
’practical’ in the narrow literal sense. [Footnote: The ambiguity of
the word ’practical’ comes out well in these words of a recent
would-be reporter of our views: ’Pragmatism is an Anglo-Saxon
reaction against the intellectualism and rationalism of the Latin
mind.... Man, each individual man is the measure of things. He is
able to conceive one but relative truths, that is to say, illusions.
What these illusions are worth is revealed to him, not by general
theory, but by individual practice. Pragmatism, which consists
in experiencing these illusions of the mind and obeying them
by acting them out, is a PHILOSOPHY WITHOUT WORDS, a philosophy of
GESTURES AND OF ACTS, which abandons what is general and olds only
to what is particular.’ (Bourdeau, in Journal des. debats, October
89, 1907.)] But particular consequences can perfectly well be of a
theoretic nature. Every remote fact which we infer from an idea is a
particular theoretic consequence which our mind practically works
towards. The loss of every old opinion of ours which we see that we
shall have to give up if a new opinion be true, is a particular
theoretic as well as a particular practical consequence. After man’s
interest in breathing freely, the greatest of all his interests
(because it never fluctuates or remits, as most of his
physical interests do), is his interest in consistency, in feeling
that what he now thinks goes with what he thinks on other occasions.
We tirelessly compare truth with truth for this sole purpose. Is the
present candidate for belief perhaps contradicted by principle
number one? Is it compatible with fact number two? and so forth. The
particular operations here are the purely logical ones of analysis,
deduction, comparison, etc.; and altho general terms may be used ad
libitum, the satisfactory practical working of the candidate–idea
consists in the consciousness yielded by each successive theoretic
consequence in particular. It is therefore simply idiotic to repeat
that pragmatism takes no account of purely theoretic interests. All
it insists on is that verity in act means VERIFICATIONS, and that
these are always particulars. Even in exclusively theoretic matters,
it insists that vagueness and generality serve to verify nothing.
Eighth Misunderstanding: Pragmatism Is Shut Up to Solipsism.
I have already said something about this misconception under the
third and fourth heads, above, but a little more may be helpful. The
objection is apt to clothe itself in words like these: ’You make
truth to consist in every value except the cognitive value proper;
you always leave your knower at many removes (or, at the uttermost,
at one remove) from his real object; the best you do is to let his
ideas carry him towards it; it remains forever outside of him,’ etc.
I think that the leaven working here is the rooted intellectualist
persuasion that, to know a reality, an idea must in some
inscrutable fashion possess or be it. [Footnote: Sensations may,
indeed, possess their objects or coalesce with them, as common sense
supposes that they do; and intuited differences between concepts may
coalesce with the ’eternal’ objective differences; but to simplify
our discussion. here we can afford to abstract from these very
special cases of knowing.] For pragmatism this kind of coalescence
is inessential. As a rule our cognitions are only processes of mind
off their balance and in motion towards real termini; and the
reality of the termini, believed in by the states of mind in
question, can be guaranteed only by some wider knower [Footnote: The
transcendental idealist thinks that, in some inexplicable way, the
finite states of mind are identical with the transfinite all-knower
which he finds himself obliged to postulate in order to supply a
fundamentum far the relation of knowing, as he apprehends it.
Pragmatists can leave the question of identity open; but they cannot
do without the wider knower any more than they can do without the
reality, if they want to prove a case of knowing. They themselves
play the part of the absolute knower for the universe of discourse
which serves them as material for epistemologizing. They warrant the
reality there, and the subject’s true knowledge, there, of it.
But whether what they themselves say about that whole universe is
objectively true, i.e., whether the pragmatic theory of truth is
true really, they cannot warrant,–they can only believe it To their
hearers they can only propose it, as I propose it to my readers, as
something to be verified ambulando, or by the way is which its
consequences may confirm it]. But if there is no reason extant in
the universe why they should be doubted, the beliefs are true in the
only sense in which anything can be true anyhow: they are
practically and concretely true, namely. True in the mystical
mongrel sense of an Identitatsphilosophie they need not be; nor is
there any intelligible reason why they ever need be true otherwise
than verifiably and practically. It is reality’s part to possess its
own existence; it is thought’s part to get into ’touch’ with it by
innumerable paths of verification.
I fear that the ’humanistic’ developments of pragmatism may cause a
certain difficulty here. We get at one truth only through the rest
of truth; and the reality, everlastingly postulated as that which
all our truth must keep in touch with, may never be given to us save
in the form of truth other than that which we are now testing. But
since Dr. Schiller has shown that all our truths, even the most
elemental, are affected by race-inheritance with a
human coefficient, reality per se thus may appear only as a sort of
limit; it may be held to shrivel to the mere PLACE for an object,
and what is known may be held to be only matter of our psyche that
we fill the place with. It must be confessed that pragmatism, worked
in this humanistic way, is COMPATIBLE with solipsism. It joins
friendly hands with the agnostic part of kantism, with
contemporary agnosticism, and with idealism generally. But worked
thus, it is a metaphysical theory about the matter of reality, and
flies far beyond pragmatism’s own modest analysis of the nature of
the knowing function, which analysis may just as harmoniously be
combined with less humanistic accounts of reality. One
of pragmatism’s merits is that it is so purely epistemological. It
must assume realities; but it prejudges nothing as to their
constitution, and the most diverse metaphysics can use it as
their foundation. It certainly has no special affinity with
solipsism.
As I look back over what I have written, much of it gives me a queer
impression, as if the obvious were set forth so condescendingly that
readers might well laugh at my pomposity. It may be, however, that
concreteness as radical as ours is not so obvious. The
whole originality of pragmatism, the whole point in it, is its use
of the concrete way of seeing. It begins with concreteness, and
returns and ends with it. Dr. Schiller, with his two
’practical’ aspects of truth, (1) relevancy to situation, and (2)
subsequential utility, is only filling the cup of concreteness to
the brim for us. Once seize that cup, and you cannot misunderstand
pragmatism. It seems as if the power of imagining the world
concretely MIGHT have been common enough to let our readers
apprehend us better, as if they might have read between our
lines, and, in spite of all our infelicities of expression, guessed
a little more correctly what our thought was. But alas! this was not
on fate’s programme, so we can only think, with the German ditty:–
   “Es waer’ zu schoen gewesen, Es hat nicht sollen sein.”
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
