




Mr. Bertrand Russell’s article entitled ’Transatlantic Truth,’
[Footnote: In the Albany Review for January, 1908.] has all the
clearness, dialectic subtlety, and wit which one expects from his
pen, but it entirely fails to hit the right point of view for
apprehending our position. When, for instance, we say that a
true proposition is one the consequences of believing which are
good, he assumes us to mean that any one who believes a proposition
to be true must first have made out clearly that its consequences be
good, and that his belief must primarily be in that fact,–an
obvious absurdity, for that fact is the deliverance of a
new proposition, quite different from the first one and is,
moreover, a fact usually very hard to verify, it being ’far easier,’
as Mr. Russell justly says, ’to settle the plain question of fact:
“Have popes always been infallible?"’ than to settle the question
whether the effects of thinking them infallible are on the
whole good.’
We affirm nothing as silly as Mr. Russell supposes. Good
consequences are not proposed by us merely as a sure sign, mark, or
criterion, by which truth’s presence is habitually ascertained, tho
they may indeed serve on occasion as such a sign; they are proposed
rather as the lurking motive inside of every truth-claim, whether
the ’trower’ be conscious of such motive, or whether he obey it
blindly. They are proposed as the causa existendi of our beliefs,
not as their logical cue or premise, and still less as their
objective deliverance or content. They assign the only intelligible
practical meaning to that difference in our beliefs which our habit
of calling them true or false comports.
No truth-claimer except the pragmatist himself need ever be aware of
the part played in his own mind by consequences, and he himself is
aware of it only abstractly and in general, and may at any moment be
quite oblivious of it with respect to his own beliefs.
Mr. Russell next joins the army of those who inform their readers
that according to the pragmatist definition of the word ’truth’
the belief that A exists may be ’true’ even when A does not exist.
This is the usual slander repeated to satiety by our critics. They
forget that in any concrete account of what is denoted by ’truth’ in
human life, the word can only be used relatively to some
particular trower. Thus, I may hold it true that Shakespeare wrote
the plays that bear his name, and may express my opinion to a
critic. If the critic be both a pragmatist and a baconian, he will
in his capacity of pragmatist see plain that the workings of my
opinion, I being who I am, make it perfectly true for me, while
in his capacity of baconian he still believes that Shakespeare never
wrote the plays in question. But most anti-pragmatist critics take
the wont ’truth’ as something absolute, and easily play on their
reader’s readiness to treat his OWE truths as the absolute ones. If
the reader whom they address believes that A does not exist,
while we pragmatists show that those for whom tho belief that it
exists works satisfactorily will always call it true, he easily
sneers at the naivete of our contention, for is not then the belief
in question ’true,’ tho what it declares as fact has, as the reader
so well knows, no existence? Mr. Russell speaks of our statement as
an ’attempt to get rid of fact’ and naturally enough considers it ’a
failure’ (p. 410). ’The old notion of truth reappears,’ he adds–
that notion being, of course, that when a belief is true, its
object does exist.
It is, of course, BOUND to exist, on sound pragmatic principles.
Concepts signify consequences. How is the world made different for
me by my conceiving an opinion of mine under the concept ’true’?
First, an object must be findable there (or sure signs of such an
object must be found) which shall agree with the opinion. Second,
such an opinion must not be contradicted by anything else I am aware
of. But in spite of the obvious pragmatist requirement that when I
have said truly that something exists, it SHALL exist, the
slander which Mr. Russell repeats has gained the widest currency.
Mr. Russell himself is far too witty and athletic a ratiocinator
simply to repeat the slander dogmatically. Being nothing if
not mathematical and logical, he must prove the accusation secundum
artem, and convict us not so much of error as of absurdity. I
have sincerely tried to follow the windings of his mind in this
procedure, but for the life of me I can only see in it another
example of what I have called (above, p. 249) vicious
abstractionism. The abstract world of mathematics and pure logic is
so native to Mr. Russell that he thinks that we describers of the
functions of concrete fact must also mean fixed mathematical terms
and functions. A mathematical term, as a, b, c, x, y, sin., log., is
self-sufficient, and terms of this sort, once equated, can
be substituted for one another in endless series without error. Mr.
Russell, and also Mr. Hawtrey, of whom I shall speak presently, seem
to think that in our mouth also such terms as ’meaning,’ ’truth,’
’belief,’ ’object,’ ’definition,’ are self-sufficients with no
context of varying relation that might be further asked about. What
a word means is expressed by its definition, isn’t it? The
definition claims to be exact and adequate, doesn’t it? Then it can
be substituted for the word–since the two are identical–can’t it?
Then two words with the same definition can be substituted for one
another, n’est–ce pas? Likewise two definitions of the same word,
nicht wahr, etc., etc., till it will be indeed strange if you can’t
convict some one of self-contradiction and absurdity.
The particular application of this rigoristic treatment to my own
little account of truth as working seems to be something like what
follows. I say ’working’ is what the ’truth’ of our ideas means, and
call it a definition. But since meanings and things meant,
definitions and things defined, are equivalent and
interchangeable, and nothing extraneous to its definition can be
meant when a term is used, it follows that who so calls an idea
true, and means by that word that it works, cannot mean
anything else, can believe nothing but that it does work, and in
particular can neither imply nor allow anything about its object or
deliverance. ’According to the pragmatists,’ Mr. Russell writes, ’to
say “it is true that other people exist” means “it is useful to
believe that other people exist.” But if so, then these two
phrases are merely different words for the same
proposition; therefore when I believe the one, I believe the other’
(p. 400). [Logic, I may say in passing, would seem to require Mr.
Russell to believe them both at once, but he ignores
this consequence, and considers that other people exist’ and ’it is
useful to believe that they do EVEN IF THEY DON’T,’ must be
identical and therefore substitutable propositions in the pragmatist
mouth.]
But may not real terms, I now ask, have accidents not expressed in
their definitions? and when a real value is finally substituted for
the result of an algebraic series of substituted definitions, do not
all these accidents creep back? Beliefs have their objective
’content’ or ’deliverance’ as well as their truth, and truth has its
implications as well as its workings. If any one believe that other
men exist, it is both a content of his belief and an implication of
its truth, that they should exist in fact. Mr. Russell’s logic would
seem to exclude, ’by definition,’ all such accidents as contents,
implications, and associates, and would represent us as translating
all belief into a sort of belief in pragmatism itself–of
all things! If I say that a speech is eloquent, and explain
’eloquent’ as meaning the power to work in certain ways upon the
audience; or if I say a book is original, and define ’original’ to
mean differing from other books, Russell’s logic, if I follow it at
all, would seem to doom me to agreeing that the speech is about
eloquence, and the book about other books. When I call a belief
true, and define its truth to mean its workings, I certainly do not
mean that the belief is a belief ABOUT the workings. It is a belief
about the object, and I who talk about the workings am a different
subject, with a different universe of discourse, from that of the
believer of whose concrete thinking I profess to give an account.
The social proposition ’other men exist’ and the pragmatist
proposition ’it is expedient to believe that other men exist’ come
from different universes of discourse. One can believe the second
without being logically compelled to believe the first; one can
believe the first without having ever heard of the second; or one
can believe them both. The first expresses the object of a belief,
the second tells of one condition of the belief’s power to maintain
itself. There is no identity of any kind, save the term ’other men’
which they contain in common, in the two propositions; and to
treat them as mutually substitutable, or to insist that we shall do
so, is to give up dealing with realities altogether.
Mr. Ralph Hawtrey, who seems also to serve under the banner of
abstractionist logic, convicts us pragmatists of absurdity by
arguments similar to Mr. Russell’s. [Footnote: See The New
Quarterly, for March, 1908.]
As a favor to us and for the sake of the argument, he abandons the
word ’true’ to our fury, allowing it to mean nothing but the
fact that certain beliefs are expedient; and he uses the word
’correctness’ (as Mr. Pratt uses the word ’trueness’) to designate a
fact, not about the belief, but about the belief’s object,
namely that it is as the belief declares it. ’When therefore,’ he
writes, ’I say it is correct to say that Caesar is dead, I mean
“Caesar is dead.” This must be regarded as the definition of
correctness.’ And Mr. Hawtrey then goes on to demolish me by the
conflict of the definitions. What is ’true’ for the pragmatist
cannot be what is ’correct,’ he says, ’for the definitions are not
logically interchangeable; or if we interchange them, we reach the
tautology:
“Caesar is dead” means “it is expedient to believe that Caesar is
dead.” But what is it expedient to believe? Why, “that Caesar is
dead.” A precious definition indeed of ’Caesar is dead.’
Mr. Hawtrey’s conclusion would seem to be that the pragmatic
definition of the truth of a belief in no way implies–what?–that
the believer shall believe in his own belief’s deliverance?–or that
the pragmatist who is talking about him shall believe in that
deliverance? The two cases are quite different. For the believer,
Caesar must of course really exist; for the pragmatist critic he
need not, for the pragmatic deliverance belongs, as I have just
said, to another universe of discourse altogether. When one argues
by substituting definition for definition, one needs to stay in the
same universe.
The great shifting of universes in this discussion occurs when we
carry the word ’truth’ from the subjective into the objective
realm, applying it sometimes to a property of opinions, sometimes to
the facts which the opinions assert. A number of writers, as Mr.
Russell himself, Mr. G. E. Moore, and others, favor the unlucky word
’proposition,’ which seems expressly invented to foster this
confusion, for they speak of truth as a property of ’propositions.’
But in naming propositions it is almost impossible not to use the
word ’that.’
THAT Caesar is dead, THAT virtue is its own reward, are
propositions.
I do not say that for certain logical purposes it may not be useful
to treat propositions as absolute entities, with truth or falsehood
inside of them respectively, or to make of a complex like ’that–
Caesar–is–dead’ a single term and call it a ’truth.’ But the
’that’ here has the extremely convenient ambiguity for those
who wish to make trouble for us pragmatists, that sometimes it means
the FACT that, and sometimes the BELIEF that, Caesar is no longer
living. When I then call the belief true, I am told that the truth
means the fact; when I claim the fact also, I am told that my
definition has excluded the fact, being a definition only of a
certain peculiarity in the belief–so that in the end I have no
truth to talk about left in my possession.
The only remedy for this intolerable ambiguity is, it seems to me,
to stick to terms consistently. ’Reality,’ ’idea’ or ’belief,’ and
the ’truth of the idea or belief,’ which are the terms I have
consistently held to, seem to be free from all objection.
Whoever takes terms abstracted from all their natural settings,
identifies them with definitions, and treats the latter more
algebraico, not only risks mixing universes, but risks fallacies
which the man in the street easily detects. To prove ’by definition’
that the statement ’Caesar exists’ is identical with a statement
about ’expediency’ because the one statement is ’true’ and the other
is about ’true statements,’ is like proving that an omnibus is
a boat because both are vehicles. A horse may be defined as a beast
that walks on the nails of his middle digits. Whenever we see a
horse we see such a beast, just as whenever we believe a ’truth’ we
believe something expedient. Messrs. Russell and Hawtrey, if they
followed their antipragmatist logic, would have to say here that we
see THAT IT IS such a beast, a fact which notoriously no one sees
who is not a comparative anatomist.
It almost reconciles one to being no logician that one thereby
escapes so much abstractionism. Abstractionism of the worst sort
dogs Mr. Russell in his own trials to tell positively what the word
’truth’ means. In the third of his articles on Meinong, in Mind,
vol. xiii, p. 509 (1904), he attempts this feat by limiting the
discussion to three terms only, a proposition, its content, and an
object, abstracting from the whole context of associated
realities in which such terms are found in every case of actual
knowing. He puts the terms, thus taken in a vacuum, and made into
bare logical entities, through every possible permutation
and combination, tortures them on the rack until nothing is left of
them, and after all this logical gymnastic, comes out with the
following portentous conclusion as what he believes to be the
correct view: that there is no problem at all in truth and
falsehood, that some propositions are true and some false, just as
some roses are red and some white, that belief is a certain attitude
towards propositions, which is called knowledge when they are true,
error when they are false’–and he seems to think that when once
this insight is reached the question may be considered closed
forever!
In spite of my admiration of Mr. Russell’s analytic powers, I wish,
after reading such an article, that pragmatism, even had it no
other function, might result in making him and other similarly
gifted men ashamed of having used such powers in such abstraction
from reality. Pragmatism saves us at any rate from such diseased
abstractionism as those pages show.
P. S. Since the foregoing rejoinder was written an article on
Pragmatism which I believe to be by Mr. Russell has appeared in the
Edinburgh Review for April, 1909. As far as his discussion of the
truth-problem goes, altho he has evidently taken great pains to be
fair, it seems to me that he has in no essential respect improved
upon his former arguments. I will therefore add nothing further, but
simply refer readers who may be curious to pp. 272-280 of the said
article.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
