




[Footnote: Reprint from the Journal of Philosophy for December 3,
1908 (vol. v, p. 689), of a review of Le Pragmatisme et ses Diverses
Formes Anglo-Americaines, by Marcel Hebert. (Paris: Librairie
critique Emile Nourry. 1908. Pp. 105.)]
Professor Marcel Hebert is a singularly erudite and liberal thinker
(a seceder, I believe, from the Catholic priesthood) and
an uncommonly direct and clear writer. His book Le Divin is one of
the ablest reviews of the general subject of religious philosophy
which recent years have produced; and in the small volume the title
of which is copied above he has, perhaps, taken more pains not to do
injustice to pragmatism than any of its numerous critics. Yet the
usual fatal misapprehension of its purposes vitiates his exposition
and his critique. His pamphlet seems to me to form a worthy hook, as
it were, on which to hang one more attempt to tell the reader what
the pragmatist account of truth really means.
M. Hebert takes it to mean what most people take it to mean, the
doctrine, namely, that whatever proves subjectively expedient in
the way of our thinking is ’true’ in the absolute and unrestricted
sense of the word, whether it corresponds to any objective state of
things outside of our thought or not. Assuming this to be the
pragmatist thesis, M. Hebert opposes it at length. Thought that
proves itself to be thus expedient may, indeed, have every
OTHER kind of value for the thinker, he says, but cognitive value,
representative value, VALEUR DE CONNAISSANCE PROPREMENT DITE, it has
not; and when it does have a high degree of general utility value,
this is in every case derived from its previous value in the way of
correctly representing independent objects that have an
important influence on our lives. Only by thus representing things
truly do we reap the useful fruits. But the fruits follow on the
truth, they do not constitute it; so M. Hebert accuses pragmatism of
telling us everything about truth except what it essentially is. He
admits, indeed, that the world is so framed that when men have true
ideas of realities, consequential utilities ensue in abundance; and
no one of our critics, I think, has shown as concrete a sense of the
variety of these utilities as he has; but he reiterates that,
whereas such utilities are secondary, we insist on treating them
as primary, and that the connaissance objective from which they draw
all their being is something which we neglect, exclude, and
destroy. The utilitarian value and the strictly cognitive value of
our ideas may perfectly well harmonize, he says–and in the main he
allows that they do harmonize–but they are not logically identical
for that. He admits that subjective interests, desires, impulses may
even have the active ’primacy’ in our intellectual life. Cognition
awakens only at their spur, and follows their cues and aims; yet,
when it IS awakened, it is objective cognition proper and not
merely another name for the impulsive tendencies themselves in the
state of satisfaction. The owner of a picture ascribed to Corot
gets uneasy when its authenticity is doubted. He looks up its origin
and is reassured. But his uneasiness does not make the
proposition false, any more than his relief makes the
proposition true, that the actual Corot was the painter. Pragmatism,
which, according to M. Hebert, claims that our sentiments MAKE truth
and falsehood, would oblige us to conclude that our minds exert no
genuinely cognitive function whatever.
This subjectivist interpretation of our position seems to follow
from my having happened to write (without supposing it necessary
to explain that I was treating of cognition solely on its subjective
side) that in the long run the true is the expedient in the way of
our thinking, much as the good is the expedient in the way of our
behavior! Having previously written that truth means ’agreement with
reality,’ and insisted that the chief part of the expediency of any
one opinion is its agreement with the rest of acknowledged truth, I
apprehended no exclusively subjectivistic reading of my meaning. My
mind was so filled with the notion of objective reference that I
never dreamed that my hearers would let go of it; and the very
last accusation I expected was that in speaking of ideas and their
satisfactions, I was denying realities outside. My only wonder now
is that critics should have found so silly a personage as I must
have seemed in their eyes, worthy of explicit refutation.
The object, for me, is just as much one part of reality as the idea
is another part. The truth of the idea is one relation of it to the
reality, just as its date and its place are other relations. All
three relations CONSIST of intervening parts of the universe which
can in every particular case be assigned and catalogued, and
which differ in every instance of truth, just as they differ with
every date and place.
The pragmatist thesis, as Dr. Schiller and I hold it,–I prefer to
let Professor Dewey speak for himself,–is that the relation called
’truth’ is thus concretely DEFINABLE. Ours is the only articulate
attempt in the field to say positively what truth actually CONSISTS
OF. Our denouncers have literally nothing to oppose to it as an
alternative. For them, when an idea is true, it IS true, and there
the matter terminates; the word ’true’ being indefinable. The
relation of the true idea to its object, being, as they think,
unique, it can be expressed in terms of nothing else, and needs only
to be named for any one to recognize and understand it. Moreover it
is invariable and universal, the same in every single instance of
truth, however diverse the ideas, the realities, and the other
relations between them may be.
Our pragmatist view, on the contrary, is that the truth-relation is
a definitely experienceable relation, and therefore describable as
well as namable; that it is not unique in kind, and neither
invariable nor universal. The relation to its object that makes an
idea true in any given instance, is, we say, embodied in
intermediate details of reality which lead towards the object, which
vary in every instance, and which in every instance can be
concretely traced. The chain of workings which an opinion sets up IS
the opinion’s truth, falsehood, or irrelevancy, as the case may
be. Every idea that a man has works some consequences in him, in the
shape either of bodily actions or of other ideas. Through these
consequences the man’s relations to surrounding realities are
modified. He is carried nearer to some of them and farther from
others, and gets now the feeling that the idea has
worked satisfactorily, now that it has not. The idea has put him
into touch with something that fulfils its intent, or it has not.
This something is the MAN’S OBJECT, primarily. Since the only
realities we can talk about are such OBJECTS-BELIEVED-IN, the
pragmatist, whenever he says ’reality,’ means in the first instance
what may count for the man himself as a reality, what he believes at
the moment to be such. Sometimes the reality is a concrete sensible
presence. The idea, for example, may be that a certain door opens
into a room where a glass of beer may be bought. If opening the door
leads to the actual sight and taste of the beer, the man calls the
idea true. Or his idea may be that of an abstract relation, say of
that between the sides and the hypothenuse of a triangle, such a
relation being, of course, a reality quite as much as a glass
of beer is. If the thought of such a relation leads him to draw
auxiliary lines and to compare the figures they make, he may at
last, perceiving one equality after another, SEE the
relation thought of, by a vision quite as particular and direct as
was the taste of the beer. If he does so, he calls THAT idea, also,
true. His idea has, in each case, brought him into closer touch with
a reality felt at the moment to verify just that idea. Each reality
verifies and validates its own idea exclusively; and in each case
the verification consists in the satisfactorily-ending consequences,
mental or physical, which the idea was able to set up. These
’workings’ differ in every single instance, they never
transcend experience, they consist of particulars, mental or
sensible, and they admit of concrete description in every individual
case. Pragmatists are unable to see what you can possibly MEAN by
calling an idea true, unless you mean that between it as a terminus
a quo in some one’s mind and some particular reality as a terminus
ad quem, such concrete workings do or may intervene. Their direction
constitutes the idea’s reference to that reality,
their satisfactoriness constitutes its adaptation thereto, and the
two things together constitute the ’truth’ of the idea for its
possessor. Without such intermediating portions of concretely real
experience the pragmatist sees no materials out of which the
adaptive relation called truth can be built up.
The anti-pragmatist view is that the workings are but evidences of
the truth’s previous inherent presence in the idea, and that you can
wipe the very possibility of them out of existence and still leave
the truth of the idea as solid as ever. But surely this is not a
counter-theory of truth to ours. It is the renunciation of all
articulate theory. It is but a claim to the right to call certain
ideas true anyhow; and this is what I meant above by saying that
the anti-pragmatists offer us no real alternative, and that our
account is literally the only positive theory extant. What meaning,
indeed, can an idea’s truth have save its power of adapting us
either mentally or physically to a reality?
How comes it, then, that our critics so uniformly accuse us of
subjectivism, of denying the reality’s existence? It comes, I think,
from the necessary predominance of subjective language in our
analysis. However independent and elective realities may be, we can
talk about them, in framing our accounts of truth, only as so many
objects believed-in. But the process of experience leads men so
continually to supersede their older objects by newer ones
which they find it more satisfactory to believe in, that the notion
of an ABSOLUTE reality inevitably arises as a grenzbegriff,
equivalent to that of an object that shall never be superseded,
and belief in which shall be endgueltig. Cognitively we thus live
under a sort of rule of three: as our private concepts represent the
sense-objects to which they lead us, these being public realities
independent of the individual, so these sense-realities may, in
turn, represent realities of a hypersensible order, electrons, mind-
stuff. God, or what not, existing independently of all human
thinkers. The notion of such final realities, knowledge of
which would be absolute truth, is an outgrowth of our cognitive
experience from which neither pragmatists nor anti-pragmatists
escape. They form an inevitable regulative postulate in every one’s
thinking. Our notion of them is the most abundantly suggested and
satisfied of all our beliefs, the last to suffer doubt. The
difference is that our critics use this belief as their sole
paradigm, and treat any one who talks of human realities as if he
thought the notion of reality ’in itself’ illegitimate. Meanwhile,
reality-in-itself, so far as by them TALKED OF, is only a human
object; they postulate it just as we postulate it; and if we are
subjectivists they are so no less. Realities in themselves can be
there FOR any one, whether pragmatist or anti-pragmatist, only by
being believed; they are believed only by their notions appearing
true; and their notions appear true only because they work
satisfactorily. Satisfactorily, moreover, for the
particular thinker’s purpose. There is no idea which is THE true
idea, of anything. Whose is THE true idea of the absolute? Or to
take M. Hebert’s example, what is THE true idea of a picture which
you possess? It is the idea that most satisfactorily meets your
present interest. The interest may be in the picture’s place,
its age, its ’tone,’ its subject, its dimensions, its authorship,
its price, its merit, or what not. If its authorship by Corot have
been doubted, what will satisfy the interest aroused in you at that
moment will be to have your claim to own a Corot confirmed; but, if
you have a normal human mind, merely calling it a Corot will
not satisfy other demands of your mind at the same time. For THEM to
be satisfied, what you learn of the picture must make smooth
connection with what you know of the rest of the system of reality
in which the actual Corot played his part. M. Hebert accuses us of
holding that the proprietary satisfactions of themselves suffice to
make the belief true, and that, so far as we are concerned, no
actual Corot need ever have existed. Why we should be thus cut off
from the more general and intellectual satisfactions, I know not;
but whatever the satisfactions may be, intellectual or proprietary,
they belong to the subjective side of the truth-relation. They found
our beliefs; our beliefs are in realities; if no realities are
there, the beliefs are false but if realities are there, how they
can even be KNOWN without first being BELIEVED; or how BELIEVED
except by our first having ideas of them that work satisfactorily,
pragmatists find it impossible to imagine. They also find
it impossible to imagine what makes the anti-pragmatists’ dogmatic
’ipse dixit’ assurance of reality more credible than the
pragmatists conviction based on concrete verifications. M. Hebert
will probably agree to this, when put in this way, so I do not see
our inferiority to him in the matter of connaissance
proprement dite.
Some readers will say that, altho I may possibly believe in
realities beyond our ideas Dr. Schiller, at any rate, does not. This
is a great misunderstanding, for Schiller’s doctrine and mine are
identical, only our exposition follow different directions. He
starts from the subjective pole of the chain, the individual with
his beliefs, as the more concrete and immediately given phenomenon.
’An individual claims his belief to be true,’ Schiller says,
’but what does he mean by true? and how does he establish the
claim?’ With these questions we embark on a psychological inquiry.
To be true, it appears, means, FOR THAT INDIVIDUAL, to work
satisfactorily for him; and the working and the satisfaction, since
they vary from case to case, admit of no universal description. What
works is true and represents a reality, for the individual for whom
it works. If he is infallible, the reality is ’really’ there; if
mistaken it is not there, or not there as he thinks it. We all
believe, when our ideas work satisfactorily; but we don’t yet know
who of us is infallible; so that the problem of truth and that of
error are EBENBURTIG and arise out of the same situations. Schiller,
remaining with the fallible individual, and treating only of
reality-for-him, seems to many of his readers to ignore reality-in-
itself altogether. But that is because he seeks only to tell us how
truths are attained, not what the content of those truths, when
attained, shall be. It may be that the truest of all beliefs shall
be that in transsubjective realities. It certainly SEEMS the
truest for no rival belief is as voluminously satisfactory, and it
is probably Dr. Schiller’s own belief; but he is not required, for
his immediate purpose, to profess it. Still less is he obliged to
assume it in advance as the basis of his discussion.
I, however, warned by the ways of critics, adopt different tactics.
I start from the object-pole of the idea-reality chain and follow
it in the opposite direction from Schiller’s. Anticipating the
results of the general truth-processes of mankind, I begin with the
abstract notion of an objective reality. I postulate it, and ask on
my own account, I VOUCHING FOR THIS REALITY, what would make any one
else’s idea of it true for me as well as for him. But I find no
different answer from that which Schiller gives. If the other man’s
idea leads him, not only to believe that the reality is there, but
to use it as the reality’s temporary substitute, by letting it evoke
adaptive thoughts and acts similar to those which the reality itself
would provoke, then it is true in the only intelligible sense,
true through its particular consequences, and true for me as well as
for the man.
My account is more of a logical definition; Schiller’s is more of a
psychological description. Both treat an absolutely identical
matter of experience, only they traverse it in opposite ways.
Possibly these explanations may satisfy M. Hebert, whose little
book, apart from the false accusation of subjectivism, gives a
fairly instructive account of the pragmatist epistemology.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
