




Abstract concepts, such as elasticity, voluminousness,
disconnectedness, are salient aspects of our concrete experiences
which we find it useful to single out. Useful, because we are then
reminded of other things that offer those same aspects; and, if the
aspects carry consequences in those other things, we can return to
our first things, expecting those same consequences to accrue.
To be helped to anticipate consequences is always a gain, and such
being the help that abstract concepts give us, it is obvious that
their use is fulfilled only when we get back again into concrete
particulars by their means, bearing the consequences in our minds,
and enriching our notion of the original objects therewithal.
Without abstract concepts to handle our perceptual particulars by,
we are like men hopping on one foot. Using concepts along with the
particulars, we become bipedal. We throw our concept forward, get a
foothold on the consequence, hitch our line to this, and draw
our percept up, travelling thus with a hop, skip and jump over the
surface of life at a vastly rapider rate than if we merely waded
through the thickness of the particulars as accident rained
them down upon our heads. Animals have to do this, but men raise
their heads higher and breathe freely in the upper conceptual air.
 The enormous esteem professed by all philosophers for the
conceptual form of consciousness is easy to understand. From Plato’s
time downwards it has been held to be our sole avenue to essential
truth. Concepts are universal, changeless, pure; their relations
are eternal; they are spiritual, while the concrete particulars
which they enable us to handle are corrupted by the flesh. They are
precious in themselves, then, apart from their original use, and
confer new dignity upon our life.
One can find no fault with this way of feeling about concepts so
long as their original function does not get swallowed up in
the admiration and lost. That function is of course to enlarge
mentally our momentary experiences by ADDING to them the
consequences conceived; but unfortunately, that function is not only
too often forgotten by philosophers in their reasonings, but is
often converted into its exact opposite, and made a means of
diminishing the original experience by DENYING (implicitly or
explicitly) all its features save the one specially abstracted to
conceive it by.
This itself is a highly abstract way of stating my complaint, and it
needs to be redeemed from obscurity by showing instances of what is
meant. Some beliefs very dear to my own heart have been conceived in
this viciously abstract way by critics. One is the ’will
to believe,’ so called; another is the indeterminism of certain
futures; a third is the notion that truth may vary with the
standpoint of the man who holds it. I believe that the perverse
abuse of the abstracting function has led critics to employ false
arguments against these doctrines, and often has led their readers
to false conclusions. I should like to try to save the situation, if
possible, by a few counter-critical remarks.
Let me give the name of ’vicious abstractionism’ to a way of using
concepts which may be thus described: We conceive a concrete
situation by singling out some salient or important feature in it,
and classing it under that; then, instead of adding to its previous
characters all the positive consequences which the new way of
conceiving it may bring, we proceed to use our concept privatively;
reducing the originally rich phenomenon to the naked suggestions of
that name abstractly taken, treating it as a case of ’nothing but’
that concept, and acting as if all the other characters from out of
which the concept is abstracted were expunged. [Footnote: Let not
the reader confound the fallacy here described with legitimately
negative inferences such as those drawn in the mood ’celarent’ of
the logic-books.] Abstraction, functioning in this way, becomes a
means of arrest far more than a means of advance in thought. It
mutilates things; it creates difficulties and finds impossibilities;
and more than half the trouble that metaphysicians and logicians
give themselves over the paradoxes and dialectic puzzles of the
universe may, I am convinced, be traced to this relatively simple
source. THE VICIOUSLY PRIVATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF ABSTRACT CHARACTERS
AND CLASS NAMES is, I am persuaded, one of the great original sins
of the rationalistic mind.
To proceed immediately to concrete examples, cast a glance at the
belief in ’free will,’ demolished with such specious
persuasiveness recently by the skilful hand of Professor Fullerton.
[Footnote: Popular Science Monthly, N. Y., vols. lviii and lix.]
When a common man says that his will is free, what does he mean? He
means that there are situations of bifurcation inside of his life in
which two futures seem to him equally possible, for both have their
roots equally planted in his present and his past. Either,
if realized, will grow out of his previous motives, character and
circumstances, and will continue uninterruptedly the pulsations of
his personal life. But sometimes both at once are incompatible with
physical nature, and then it seems to the naive observer as if he
made a choice between them NOW, and that the question of which
future is to be, instead of having been decided at the foundation of
the world, were decided afresh at every passing moment in I which
fact seems livingly to grow, and possibility seems, in turning
itself towards one act, to exclude all others.
He who takes things at their face-value here may indeed be deceived.
He may far too often mistake his private ignorance of what
is predetermined for a real indetermination of what is to be. Yet,
however imaginary it may be, his picture of the situation offers no
appearance of breach between the past and future. A train is the
same train, its passengers are the same passengers, its momentum is
the same momentum, no matter which way the switch which fixes its
direction is placed. For the indeterminist there is at all times
enough past for all the different futures in sight, and
more besides, to find their reasons in it, and whichever future
comes will slide out of that past as easily as the train slides by
the switch. The world, in short, is just as CONTINUOUS WITH
ITSELF for the believers in free will as for the
rigorous determinists, only the latter are unable to believe in
points of bifurcation as spots of really indifferent equilibrium or
as containing shunts which there–and there only, NOT BEFORE–
 direct existing motions without altering their amount.
Were there such spots of indifference, the rigorous determinists
think, the future and the past would be separated absolutely,
for, ABSTRACTLY TAKEN, THE WORD ’INDIFFERENT’ SUGGESTS DISCONNECTION
SOLELY. Whatever is indifferent is in so far forth unrelated and
detached. Take the term thus strictly, and you see, they tell
us, that if any spot of indifference is found upon the broad highway
between the past and the future, then no connection of any sort
whatever, no continuous momentum, no identical passenger, no common
aim or agent, can be found on both sides of the shunt or
switch which there is moved. The place is an impassable chasm.
Mr. Fullerton writes–the italics are mine–as follows:–
’In so far as my action is free, what I have been, what I am, what I
have always done or striven to do, what I most earnestly wish
or resolve to do at the present moment–these things can have NO
MORE TO DO WITH ITS FUTURE REALIZATION THAN IF THEY HAD NO
EXISTENCE.... The possibility is a hideous one; and surely even the
most ardent free-willist will, when he contemplates it frankly,
excuse me for hoping that if I am free I am at least not very
free, and that I may reasonably expect to find SOME degree of
consistency in my life and actions. ... Suppose that I have given a
dollar to a blind beggar. Can I, if it is really an act of free-
will, be properly said to have given the money? Was it given because
I was a man of tender heart, etc., etc.? ... What has all this to do
with acts of free-will? If they are free, they must not be
conditioned by antecedent circumstances of any sort, by the
misery of the beggar, by the pity in the heart of the passer-by.
They must be causeless, not determined. They must drop from a clear
sky out of the void, for just in so far as they can be accounted
for, they are not free.’ [Footnote: Loc. cit., vol. lviii, pp. 189,
188.]
Heaven forbid that I should get entangled here in a controversy
about the rights and wrongs of the free-will question at large, for
I am only trying to illustrate vicious abstractionism by the conduct
of some of the doctrine’s assailants. The moments of bifurcation,
as the indeterminist seems to himself to experience them, are
moments both of re-direction and of continuation. But because in
the ’either–or’ of the re-direction we hesitate, the determinist
abstracts this little element of discontinuity from the
superabundant continuities of the experience, and cancels in
its behalf all the connective characters with which the latter is
filled. Choice, for him, means henceforward DISconnection pure and
simple, something undetermined in advance IN ANY RESPECT WHATEVER,
and a life of choices must be a raving chaos, at no two moments
of which could we be treated as one and the same man. If Nero were
’free’ at. the moment of ordering his mother’s murder, Mr. McTaggart
[Footnote: Some Dogmas of Religion, p. 179.] assures us that no one
would have the right at any other moment to call him a bad man, for
he would then be an absolutely other Nero.
A polemic author ought not merely to destroy his victim. He ought to
try a bit to make him feel his error–perhaps not enough to convert
him, but enough to give him a bad conscience and to weaken the
energy of his defence. These violent caricatures of men’s beliefs
arouse only contempt for the incapacity of their authors to see the
situations out of which the problems grow. To treat the negative
character of one abstracted element as annulling all the positive
features with which it coexists, is no way to change any
actual indeterminist’s way of looking on the matter, tho it may make
the gallery applaud.
Turn now to some criticisms of the ’will to believe,’ as another
example of the vicious way in which abstraction is currently
employed. The right to believe in things for the truth of which
complete objective proof is yet lacking is defended by those who
apprehend certain human situations in their concreteness. In those
situations the mind has alternatives before it so vast that the full
evidence for either branch is missing, and yet so significant
that simply to wait for proof, and to doubt while waiting, might
often in practical respects be the same thing as weighing down the
negative side. Is life worth while at all? Is there any general
meaning in all this cosmic weather? Is anything being permanently
bought by all this suffering? Is there perhaps a
transmundane experience in Being, something corresponding to a
’fourth dimension,’ which, if we had access to it, might patch up
some of this world’s zerrissenheit and make things look more
rational than they at first appear? Is there a superhuman
consciousness of which our minds are parts, and from which
inspiration and help may come? Such are the questions in which the
right to take sides practically for yes or no is affirmed by some of
us, while others hold that this is methodologically inadmissible,
and summon us to die professing ignorance and proclaiming the duty
of every one to refuse to believe.
I say nothing of the personal inconsistency of some of these
critics, whose printed works furnish exquisite illustrations of the
will to believe, in spite of their denunciations of it as a phrase
and as a recommended thing. Mr. McTaggart, whom I will once more
take as an example, is sure that ’reality is rational and righteous’
and ’destined sub specie temporis to become perfectly good’; and his
calling this belief a result of necessary logic has surely never
deceived any reader as to its real genesis in the gifted author’s
mind. Mankind is made on too uniform a pattern for any of us to
escape successfully from acts of faith. We have a lively vision of
what a certain view of the universe would mean for us. We kindle
or we shudder at the thought, and our feeling runs through our whole
logical nature and animates its workings. It CAN’T be that, we feel;
it MUST be this. It must be what it OUGHT to be, and OUGHT to be
this; and then we seek for every reason, good or bad, to make this
which so deeply ought to be, seem objectively the probable thing. We
show the arguments against it to be insufficient, so that it MAY be
true; we represent its appeal to be to our whole nature’s loyalty
and not to any emaciated faculty of syllogistic proof. We reinforce
it by remembering the enlargement of our world by music, by thinking
of the promises of sunsets and the impulses from vernal woods. And
the essence of the whole experience, when the individual swept
through it says finally ’I believe,’ is the intense concreteness of
his vision, the individuality of the hypothesis before him, and
the complexity of the various concrete motives and perceptions that
issue in his final state.
But see now how the abstractionist treats this rich and intricate
vision that a certain state of things must be true. He accuses
the believer of reasoning by the following syllogism:–
All good desires must be fulfilled; The desire to believe this
proposition is a good desire;
Ergo, this proposition must be believed.
He substitutes this abstraction for the concrete state of mind of
the believer, pins the naked absurdity of it upon him, and
easily proves that any one who defends him must be the greatest fool
on earth. As if any real believer ever thought in this preposterous
way, or as if any defender of the legitimacy of men’s concrete ways
of concluding ever used the abstract and general premise, ’All
desires must be fulfilled’! Nevertheless, Mr. McTaggart solemnly and
laboriously refutes the syllogism in sections 47 to 57 of the above-
cited book. He shows that there is no fixed link in the dictionary
between the abstract concepts ’desire,’ ’goodness’ and ’reality’;
and he ignores all the links which in the single concrete case the
believer feels and perceives to be there! He adds:–
’When the reality of a thing is uncertain, the argument encourages
us to suppose that our approval of a thing can determine its
reality. And when this unhallowed link has once been established,
retribution overtakes us. For when the reality of the thing is
independently certain, we [then] have to admit that the reality of
the thing should determine our approval of that thing. I find it
difficult to imagine a more degraded position.’
One here feels tempted to quote ironically Hegel’s famous equation
of the real with the rational to his english disciple, who ends
his chapter with the heroic words:–
’For those who do not pray, there remains the resolve that, so far
as their strength may permit, neither the pains of death nor the
pains of life shall drive them to any comfort in that which they
hold to be false, or drive them from any comfort [discomfort?] in
that which they hold to be true.’
How can so ingenious-minded a writer fail to see how far over the
heads of the enemy all his arrows pass? When Mr. McTaggart
himself believes that the universe is run by the dialectic energy of
the absolute idea, his insistent desire to have a world of that sort
is felt by him to be no chance example of desire in general, but
an altogether peculiar insight-giving passion to which, in this if
in no other instance, he would be stupid not to yield. He obeys its
concrete singularity, not the bare abstract feature in it of being a
’desire.’ His situation is as particular as that of an actress who
resolves that it is best for her to marry and leave the stage, of
a priest who becomes secular, of a politician who abandons public
life. What sensible man would seek to refute the concrete decisions
of such persons by tracing them to abstract premises, such as that
’all actresses must marry,’ ’all clergymen must be laymen,’
’all politicians should resign their posts’? Yet this type of
refutation, absolutely unavailing though it be for purposes of
conversion, is spread by Mr. McTaggart through many pages of his
book. For the aboundingness of our real reasons he substitutes one
narrow point. For men’s real probabilities he gives a skeletonized
abstraction which no man was ever tempted to believe.
The abstraction in my next example is less simple, but is quite as
flimsy as a weapon of attack. Empiricists think that truth in
general is distilled from single men’s beliefs; and the so-called
pragmatists ’go them one better’ by trying to define what it
consists in when it comes. It consists, I have elsewhere said,
in such a working on the part of the beliefs as may bring the man
into satisfactory relations with objects to which these latter
point. The working is of course a concrete working in the actual
experience of human beings, among their ideas, feelings,
perceptions, beliefs and acts, as well as among the physical things
of their environment, and the relations must be understood as being
possible as well as actual. In the chapter on truth of my book
Pragmatism I have taken pains to defend energetically this view.
Strange indeed have been the misconceptions of it by its enemies,
and many have these latter been. Among the most formidable-sounding
onslaughts on the attempt to introduce some concreteness into our
notion of what the truth of an idea may mean, is one that has been
raised in many quarters to the effect that to make truth grow in any
way out of human opinion is but to reproduce that
protagorean doctrine that the individual man is ’the measure of all
things,’ which Plato in his immortal dialogue, the Thaeatetus, is
unanimously said to have laid away so comfortably in its grave
two thousand years ago. The two cleverest brandishers of this
objection to make truth concrete, Professors Rickert and
Munsterberg, write in German, [Footnote: Munsterberg’s book has just
appeared in an English version: The Eternal Values, Boston,
1909.] and ’relativismus’ is the name they give to the heresy which
they endeavor to uproot.
The first step in their campaign against ’relativismus’ is entirely
in the air. They accuse relativists–and we pragmatists are typical
relativists–of being debarred by their self-adopted principles, not
only from the privilege which rationalist philosophers enjoy, of
believing that these principles of their own are truth impersonal
and absolute, but even of framing the abstract notion of such a
truth, in the pragmatic sense, of an ideal opinion in which all men
might agree, and which no man should ever wish to change. Both
charges fall wide of their mark. I myself, as a pragmatist, believe
in my own account of truth as firmly as any rationalist can possibly
believe in his. And I believe in it for the very reason that I have
the idea of truth which my learned adversaries contend that no
pragmatist can frame. I expect, namely, that the more fully
men discuss and test my account, the more they will agree that it
fits, and the less will they desire a change. I may of course be
premature in this confidence, and the glory of being truth final and
absolute may fall upon some later revision and correction of my
scheme, which later will then be judged untrue in just the
measure in which it departs from that finally
satisfactory formulation. To admit, as we pragmatists do, that we
are liable to correction (even tho we may not expect it) involves
the use on our part of an ideal standard. Rationalists
themselves are, as individuals, sometimes sceptical enough to admit
the abstract possibility of their own present opinions being
corrigible and revisable to some degree, so the fact that the mere
NOTION of an absolute standard should seem to them so important a
thing to claim for themselves and to deny to us is not easy
to explain. If, along with the notion of the standard, they could
also claim its exclusive warrant for their own fulminations now, it
would be important to them indeed. But absolutists like Rickert
freely admit the sterility of the notion, even in their own hands.
Truth is what we OUGHT to believe, they say, even tho no man ever
did or shall believe it, and even tho we have no way of getting at
it save by the usual empirical processes of testing our opinions by
one another and by facts. Pragmatically, then, this part of the
dispute is idle. No relativist who ever actually walked the earth
[Footnote: Of course the bugaboo creature called ’the sceptic’ in
the logic-books, who dogmatically makes the statement that
no statement, not even the one he now makes, is true, is a
mere mechanical toy–target for the rationalist shooting-gallery–
 hit him and he turns a summersault–yet he is the only sort of
relativist whom my colleagues appear able to imagine to exist.] has
denied the regulative character in his own thinking of the notion of
absolute truth. What is challenged by relativists is the pretence on
any one’s part to have found for certain at any given moment what
the shape of that truth is. Since the better absolutists agree in
this, admitting that the proposition ’There is absolute truth’ is
the only absolute truth of which we can be sure, [Footnote:
Compare Bickert’s Gegenstand der Erkentniss, pp. 187, 138.
Munsterberg’s version of this first truth is that ’Es gibt eine
Welt,’–see his Philosophie der Werte, pp. 38 and 74 And, after all,
both these philosophers confess in the end that the primal truth of
which they consider our supposed denial so irrational is not
properly an insight at all, but a dogma adopted by the will which
any one who turns his back on duty may disregard! But if it all
reverts to ’the will to believe,’ pragmatists have that privilege as
well as their critics.] further debate is practically unimportant,
so we may pass to their next charge.
It is in this charge that the vicious abstractionism becomes most
apparent. The antipragmatist, in postulating absolute truth,
refuses to give any account of what the words may mean. For him they
form a self-explanatory term. The pragmatist, on the
contrary, articulately defines their meaning. Truth absolute, he
says, means an ideal set of formulations towards which all opinions
may in the long run of experience be expected to converge. In this
definition of absolute truth he not only postulates that there is a
tendency to such convergence of opinions, to such ultimate
consensus, but he postulates the other factors of his definition
equally, borrowing them by anticipation from the true conclusions
expected to be reached. He postulates the existence of opinions, he
postulates the experience that will sift them, and the consistency
which that experience will show. He justifies himself in these
assumptions by saying that they are not postulates in the strict
sense but simple inductions from the past extended to the future by
analogy; and he insists that human opinion has already reached a
pretty stable equilibrium regarding them, and that if its
future development fails to alter them, the definition itself, with
all its terms included, will be part of the very absolute truth
which it defines. The hypothesis will, in short, have worked
successfully all round the circle and proved self-corroborative, and
the circle will be closed.
The anti-pragmatist, however, immediately falls foul of the word
’opinion’ here, abstracts it from the universe of life, and uses it
as a bare dictionary-substantive, to deny the rest of the
assumptions which it coexists withal. The dictionary says that an
opinion is ’what some one thinks or believes.’ This
definition leaves every one’s opinion free to be autogenous, or
unrelated either to what any one else may think or to what the truth
may be.
Therefore, continue our abstractionists, we must conceive it as
essentially thus unrelated, so that even were a billion men to sport
the same opinion, and only one man to differ, we could admit no
collateral circumstances which might presumptively make it more
probable that he, not they, should be wrong. Truth, they say,
follows not the counting of noses, nor is it only another name for a
majority vote. It is a relation that antedates experience,
between our opinions and an independent something which the
pragmatist account ignores, a relation which, tho the opinions of
individuals should to all eternity deny it, would still remain to
qualify them as false. To talk of opinions without referring to this
independent something, the anti-pragmatist assures us, is to play
Hamlet with Hamlet’s part left out.
But when the pragmatist speaks of opinions, does he mean any such
insulated and unmotived abstractions as are here supposed? Of course
not, he means men’s opinions in the flesh, as they have really
formed themselves, opinions surrounded by their causes and
the influences they obey and exert, and along with the whole
environment of social communication of which they are a part and out
of which they take their rise. Moreover the ’experience’ which the
pragmatic definition postulates is the independent something which
the anti-pragmatist accuses him of ignoring. Already have men grown
unanimous in the opinion that such experience is of an
independent reality, the existence of which all opinions
must acknowledge, in order to be true. Already do they agree that in
the long run it is useless to resist experience’s pressure; that the
more of it a man has, the better position he stands in, in respect
of truth; that some men, having had more experience, are therefore
better authorities than others; that some are also wiser by nature
and better able to interpret the experience they have had; that it
is one part of such wisdom to compare notes, discuss, and follow the
opinion of our betters; and that the more systematically and
thoroughly such comparison and weighing of opinions is pursued, the
truer the opinions that survive are likely to be. When the
pragmatist talks of opinions, it is opinions as they thus concretely
and livingly and interactingly and correlatively exist that he has
in mind; and when the anti-pragmatist tries to floor him because the
word ’opinion’ can also be taken abstractly and as if it had no
environment, he simply ignores the soil out of which the whole
discussion grows. His weapons cut the air and strike no blow. No
one gets wounded in the war against caricatures of belief and
skeletons of opinion of which the German onslaughts upon
’relativismus’ consists. Refuse to use the word ’opinion’
abstractly, keep it in its real environment, and the withers of
pragmatism remain unwrung. That men do exist who are ’opinionated,’
in the sense that their opinions are self-willed, is unfortunately a
fact that must be admitted, no matter what one’s notion of truth in
general may be. But that this fact should make it impossible for
truth to form itself authentically out of the life of opinion is
what no critic has yet proved. Truth may well consist of
certain opinions, and does indeed consist of nothing but opinions,
tho not every opinion need be true. No pragmatist needs to dogmatize
about the consensus of opinion in the future being right–he need
only postulate that it will probably contain more of truth than any
one’s opinion now.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
