




After correcting the proofs of all that precedes I imagine a
residual state of mind on the part of my reader which may still keep
him unconvinced, and which it may be my duty to try at least to
dispel. I can perhaps be briefer if I put what I have to say in
dialogue form. Let then the anti-pragmatist begin:–
Anti-Pragmatist:–You say that the truth of an idea is constituted
by its workings. Now suppose a certain state of facts, facts for
example of antediluvian planetary history, concerning which the
question may be asked:
’Shall the truth about them ever be known?’ And suppose (leaving the
hypothesis of an omniscient absolute out of the account) that we
assume that the truth is never to be known. I ask you now, brother
pragmatist, whether according to you there can be said to be
any truth at all about such a state of facts. Is there a truth, or
is there not a truth, in cases where at any rate it never comes
to be known?
Pragmatist:–Why do you ask me such a question?
Anti-Prag.:–Because I think it puts you in a bad dilemma.
Prag.:–How so?
Anti-Prag.:–Why, because if on the one hand you elect to say that
there is a truth, you thereby surrender your whole pragmatist
theory. According to that theory, truth requires ideas and workings
to constitute it; but in the present instance there is supposed to
be no knower, and consequently neither ideas nor workings can exist.
What then remains for you to make your truth of?
Prag.:–Do you wish, like so many of my enemies, to force me to make
the truth out of the reality itself? I cannot: the truth is
something known, thought or said about the reality, and consequently
numerically additional to it. But probably your intent is something
different; so before I say which horn of your dilemma I choose, I
ask you to let me hear what the other horn may be.
Anti-Prag.:–The other horn is this, that if you elect to say that
there is no truth under the conditions assumed, because there are
no ideas or workings, then you fly in the face of common sense.
Doesn’t common sense believe that every state of facts must in
the nature of things be truly statable in some kind of a
proposition, even tho in point of fact the proposition should never
be propounded by a living soul?
Prag.:–Unquestionably common sense believes this, and so do I.
There have been innumerable events in the history of our planet of
which nobody ever has been or ever will be able to give an account,
yet of which it can already be said abstractly that only one sort of
possible account can ever be true. The truth about any such event is
thus already generically predetermined by the event’s nature; and
one may accordingly say with a perfectly good conscience that it
virtually pre-exists. Common sense is thus right in its instinctive
contention.
Anti-Prag.:–Is this then the horn of the dilemma which you stand
for? Do you say that there is a truth even in cases where it
shall never be known?
Prag.:–Indeed I do, provided you let me hold consistently to my own
conception of truth, and do not ask me to abandon it for something
which I find impossible to comprehend.–You also believe, do you
not, that there is a truth, even in cases where it never shall
be known?
Anti-Prag.:–I do indeed believe so.
Prag.:–Pray then inform me in what, according to you, this truth
regarding the unknown consists.
Anti-Prag.:–Consists?–pray what do you mean by ’consists’? It
consists in nothing but itself, or more properly speaking it
has neither consistence nor existence, it obtains, it holds.
Prag.:–Well, what relation does it bear to the reality of which it
holds?
Anti-Prag.:-How do you mean, ’what relation’? It holds of it, of
course; it knows it, it represents it.
Prag.:–Who knows it? What represents it?
Anti-Prag.:–The truth does; the truth knows it; or rather not
exactly that, but any one knows it who possesses the truth. Any true
idea of the reality represents the truth concerning it.
Prag.:–But I thought that we had agreed that no knower of it, nor
any idea representing it was to be supposed.
Anti-Prag.:–Sure enough!
Prag.:–Then I beg you again to tell me in what this truth consists,
all by itself, this tertium quid intermediate between the facts per
se, on the one hand, and all knowledge of them, actual or potential,
on the other. What is the shape of it in this third estate? Of
what stuff, mental, physical, or ’epistemological,’ is it built?
What metaphysical region of reality does it inhabit?
Anti-Prag.:–What absurd questions! Isn’t it enough to say that it
is true that the facts are so-and-so, and false that they are
otherwise?
Prag.:–’It’ is true that the facts are so-and-so–I won’t yield to
the temptation of asking you what is true; but I do ask you
whether your phrase that ’it is true that’ the facts are so-and-so
really means anything really additional to the bare being so-and-so
of the facts themselves.
Anti-Prag.:–It seems to mean more than the bare being of the facts.
It is a sort of mental equivalent for them, their
epistemological function, their value in noetic terms. Prag.:–A
sort of spiritual double or ghost of them, apparently! If so, may I
ask you where this truth is found.
Anti-Prag.:–Where? where? There is no ’where’–it simply obtains,
absolutely obtains.
Prag.:–Not in any one’s mind?
Anti-Prag.:–No, for we agreed that no actual knower of the truth
should be assumed.
Prag.:–No actual knower, I agree. But are you sure that no notion
of a potential or ideal knower has anything to do with forming this
strangely elusive idea of the truth of the facts in your mind?
Anti-Prag.:–Of course if there be a truth concerning the facts,
that truth is what the ideal knower would know. To that extent you
can’t keep the notion of it and the notion of him separate. But it
is not him first and then it; it is it first and then him, in my
opinion.
Prag.:–But you still leave me terribly puzzled as to the status of
this so-called truth, hanging as it does between earth and
heaven, between reality and knowledge, grounded in the reality, yet
numerically additional to it, and at the same time antecedent to any
knower’s opinion and entirely independent thereof. Is it as
independent of the knower as you suppose? It looks to me terribly
dubious, as if it might be only another name for a potential as
distinguished from an actual knowledge of the reality. Isn’t your
truth, after all, simply what any successful knower would have to
know in case he existed? And in a universe where no knowers were
even conceivable would any truth about the facts there as something
numerically distinguishable from the facts themselves, find a place
to exist in? To me such truth would not only be non-existent, it
would be unimaginable, inconceivable.
Anti-Prag.:–But I thought you said a while ago that there is a
truth of past events, even tho no one shall ever know it.
Prag.:–Yes, but you must remember that I also stipulated for
permission to define the word in my own fashion. The truth of
an event, past, present, or future, is for me only another name for
the fact that if the event ever does get known, the nature of the
knowledge is already to some degree predetermined. The truth which
precedes actual knowledge of a fact means only what any possible
knower of the fact will eventually find himself necessitated to
believe about it. He must believe something that will bring him into
satisfactory relations with it, that will prove a decent
mental substitute for it. What this something may be is of course
partly fixed already by the nature of the fact and by the sphere of
its associations. This seems to me all that you can clearly mean
when you say that truth pre-exists to knowledge. It is knowledge
anticipated, knowledge in the form of possibility merely.
Anti-Prag.:–But what does the knowledge know when it comes? Doesn’t
it know the truth? And, if so, mustn’t the truth be distinct from
either the fact or the knowledge?
Prag.:–It seems to me that what the knowledge knows is the fact
itself, the event, or whatever the reality may be. Where you
see three distinct entities in the field, the reality, the knowing,
and the truth, I see only two. Moreover, I can see what each of my
two entities is known-as, but when I ask myself what your third
entity, the truth, is known-as, I can find nothing distinct from the
reality on the one hand, and the ways in which it may be known on
the other. Are you not probably misled by common language, which has
found it convenient to introduce a hybrid name, meaning sometimes a
kind of knowing and sometimes a reality known, to apply to either of
these things interchangeably? And has philosophy anything to gain by
perpetuating and consecrating the ambiguity? If you call the object
of knowledge ’reality,’ and call the manner of its being cognized
’truth,’ cognized moreover on particular occasions, and
variously, by particular human beings who have their various
businesses with it, and if you hold consistently to this
nomenclature, it seems to me that you escape all sorts of trouble.
Anti-Prag.:–Do you mean that you think you escape from my dilemma?
Prag.:–Assuredly I escape; for if truth and knowledge are terms
correlative and interdependent, as I maintain they are,
then wherever knowledge is conceivable truth is
conceivable, wherever knowledge is possible truth is possible,
wherever knowledge is actual truth is actual. Therefore when you
point your first horn at me, I think of truth actual, and say it
doesn’t exist. It doesn’t; for by hypothesis there is no knower, no
ideas, no workings. I agree, however, that truth possible or virtual
might exist, for a knower might possibly be brought to birth; and
truth conceivable certainly exists, for, abstractly taken, there
is nothing in the nature of antediluvian events that should make the
application of knowledge to them inconceivable. Therefore when
you try to impale me on your second horn, I think of the truth in
question as a mere abstract possibility, so I say it does exist, and
side with common sense.
Do not these distinctions rightly relieve me from embarrassment? And
don’t you think it might help you to make them yourself?
Anti-Prag.:–Never!–so avaunt with your abominable hair-splitting
and sophistry! Truth is truth; and never will I degrade it by
identifying it with low pragmatic particulars in the way you
propose.
Prag.:–Well, my dear antagonist, I hardly hoped to convert an
eminent intellectualist and logician like you; so enjoy, as long as
you live, your own ineffable conception. Perhaps the rising
generation will grow up more accustomed than you are to that
concrete and empirical interpretation of terms in which the
pragmatic method consists. Perhaps they may then wonder how so
harmless and natural an account of truth as mine could have found
such difficulty in entering the minds of men far more intelligent
than I can ever hope to become, but wedded by education and
tradition to the abstractionist manner of thought.
 

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
