




[Footnote: Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy, etc., 1906.]
Professor W. A. Brown, in the Journal for August 15, approves my
pragmatism for allowing that a belief in the absolute may give
holidays to the spirit, but takes me to task for the narrowness of
this concession, and shows by striking examples how great a power
the same belief may have in letting loose the strenuous life.
I have no criticism whatever to make upon his excellent article, but
let me explain why ’moral holidays’ were the only gift of
the absolute which I picked out for emphasis. I was primarily
concerned in my lectures with contrasting the belief that the world
is still in process of making with the belief that there is
an ’eternal’ edition of it ready-made and complete. The former, or
’pluralistic’ belief, was the one that my pragmatism favored.
Both beliefs confirm our strenuous moods. Pluralism actually demands
them, since it makes the world’s salvation depend upon the
energizing of its several parts, among which we are. Monism permits
them, for however furious they may be, we can always justify
ourselves in advance for indulging them by the thought that they
WILL HAVE BEEN expressions of the absolute’s perfect life. By
escaping from your finite perceptions to the conception of
the eternal whole, you can hallow any tendency whatever. Tho the
absolute DICTATES nothing, it will SANCTION anything and everything
after the fact, for whatever is once there will have to be regarded
as an integral member of the universe’s perfection. Quietism and
frenzy thus alike receive the absolute’s permit to exist. Those of
us who are naturally inert may abide in our resigned passivity;
those whose energy is excessive may grow more reckless still.
History shows how easily both quietists and fanatics have drawn
inspiration from the absolutistic scheme. It suits sick souls
and strenuous ones equally well.
One cannot say thus of pluralism. Its world is always vulnerable,
for some part may go astray; and having no ’eternal’ edition of
it to draw comfort from, its partisans must always feel to some
degree insecure. If, as pluralists, we grant ourselves moral
holidays, they can only be provisional breathing-spells, intended to
refresh us for the morrow’s fight. This forms one permanent
inferiority of pluralism from the pragmatic point of view. It has no
saving message for incurably sick souls. Absolutism, among its other
messages, has that message, and is the only scheme that has it
necessarily. That constitutes its chief superiority and is the
source of its religious power. That is why, desiring to do it full
justice, I valued its aptitude for moral-holiday giving so highly.
Its claims in that way are unique, whereas its affinities with
strenuousness are less emphatic than those of the pluralistic
scheme.
In the last lecture of my book I candidly admitted this inferiority
of pluralism. It lacks the wide indifference that absolutism shows.
It is bound to disappoint many sick souls whom absolutism can
console. It seems therefore poor tactics for absolutists to make
little of this advantage. The needs of sick souls are surely the
most urgent; and believers in the absolute should rather hold it to
be great merit in their philosophy that it can meet them so well.
The pragmatism or pluralism which I defend has to fall back on a
certain ultimate hardihood, a certain willingness to live
without assurances or guarantees. To minds thus willing to live on
possibilities that are not certainties, quietistic religion, sure of
salvation ANY HOW, has a slight flavor of fatty degeneration about
it which has caused it to be looked askance on, even in the church.
Which side is right here, who can say? Within religion, emotion is
apt to be tyrannical; but philosophy must favor the emotion that
allies itself best with the whole body and drift of all the
truths in sight. I conceive this to be the more strenuous type of
emotion; but I have to admit that its inability to let loose
quietistic raptures is a serious deficiency in the pluralistic
philosophy which I profess.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
