




[Footnote: Reprint from the Journal of Philosophy, July 18,1907.]
 My failure in making converts to my conception of truth seems, if I
may judge by what I hear in conversation, almost complete.
An ordinary philosopher would feel disheartened, and a common
choleric sinner would curse God and die, after such a reception. But
instead of taking counsel of despair, I make bold to vary my
statements, in the faint hope that repeated droppings may wear upon
the stone, and that my formulas may seem less obscure if surrounded
by something more of a ’mass’ whereby to apperceive them.
For fear of compromising other pragmatists, whoe’er they be, I will
speak of the conception which I am trying to make intelligible, as
my own conception. I first published it in the year 1885, in the
first article reprinted in the present book. Essential theses of
this article were independently supported in 1893 and 1895
by Professor D. S. Miller [Footnote: Philosophical Review, vol. ii,
p. 408, and Psychological Review, vol. ii, p. 533.] and were
repeated by me in a presidential address on ’The knowing of things
together’ [Footnote: The relevant parts of which are printed above,
p. 43.] in 1895. Professor Strong, in an article in the Journal of
Philosophy, etc., [Footnote: Vol. i, p. 253.] entitled ’A
naturalistic theory of the reference of thought to reality,’ called
our account ’the James-Miller theory of cognition,’ and, as I
understood him, gave it his adhesion. Yet, such is the difficulty of
writing clearly in these penetralia of philosophy, that each of
these revered colleagues informs me privately that the account of
truth I now give–which to me is but that earlier statement more
completely set forth–is to him inadequate, and seems to leave the
gist of real cognition out. If such near friends disagree, what can
I hope from remoter ones, and what from unfriendly critics?
Yet I feel so sure that the fault must lie in my lame forms of
statement and not in my doctrine, that I am fain to try once more
to express myself.
Are there not some general distinctions which it may help us to
agree about in advance? Professor Strong distinguishes between what
he calls ’saltatory’ and what he calls ’ambulatory’ relations.
’Difference,’ for example, is saltatory, jumping as it were
immediately from one term to another, but ’distance’ in time or
space is made out of intervening parts of experience through which
we ambulate in succession. Years ago, when T. H. Green’s ideas were
most influential, I was much troubled by his criticisms of english
sensationalism. One of his disciples in particular would always say
to me, ’Yes! TERMS may indeed be possibly sensational in origin; but
RELATIONS, what are they but pure acts of the intellect coming upon
the sensations from above, and of a higher nature?’ I well remember
the sudden relief it gave me to perceive one day that SPACE-
relations at any rate were homogeneous with the terms between which
they mediated. The terms were spaces, and the relations were other
intervening spaces. [Footnote: See my Principles of Psychology, vol.
ii, pp. 148-153.] For the Greenites space-relations had
been saltatory, for me they became thenceforward ambulatory.
Now the most general way of contrasting my view of knowledge with
the popular view (which is also the view of most epistemologists) is
to call my view ambulatory, and the other view saltatory; and the
most general way of characterizing the two views is by saying
that my view describes knowing as it exists concretely, while the
other view only describes its results abstractly taken.
I fear that most of my recalcitrant readers fail to recognize that
what is ambulatory in the concrete may be taken so abstractly as
to appear saltatory. Distance, for example, is made abstract by
emptying out whatever is particular in the concrete intervals–it is
reduced thus to a sole ’difference,’ a difference of ’place,’ which
is a logical or saltatory distinction, a so-called ’pure relation.’
The same is true of the relation called ’knowing,’ which may connect
an idea with a reality. My own account of this relation is
ambulatory through and through. I say that we know an object by
means of an idea, whenever we ambulate towards the object under the
impulse which the idea communicates. If we believe in so-called
’sensible’ realities, the idea may not only send us towards its
object, but may put the latter into our very hand, make it
our immediate sensation. But, if, as most reflective people opine,
sensible realities are not ’real’ realities, but only their
appearances, our idea brings us at least so far, puts us in touch
with reality’s most authentic appearances and substitutes. In any
case our idea brings us into the object’s neighborhood, practical or
ideal, gets us into commerce with it, helps us towards its closer
acquaintance, enables us to foresee it, class it, compare it, deduce
it,–in short, to deal with it as we could not were the idea not in
our possession.
The idea is thus, when functionally considered, an instrument for
enabling us the better to HAVE TO DO with the object and to act
about it. But it and the object are both of them bits of the general
sheet and tissue of reality at large; and when we say that the idea
leads us towards the object, that only means that it carries us
forward through intervening tracts of that reality into the object’s
closer neighborhood, into the midst of its associates at least, be
these its physical neighbors, or be they its logical congeners only.
Thus carried into closer quarters, we are in an improved
situation as regards acquaintance and conduct; and we say that
through the idea we now KNOW the object better or more truly.
My thesis is that the knowing here is MADE by the ambulation through
the intervening experiences. If the idea led us nowhere, or FROM
that object instead of towards it, could we talk at all of its
having any cognitive quality? Surely not, for it is only when taken
in conjunction with the intermediate experiences that it gets
related to THAT PARTICULAR OBJECT rather than to any other part of
nature. Those intermediaries determine what particular
knowing function it exerts. The terminus they guide us to tells us
what object it ’means,’ the results they enrich us with ’verify’ or
’refute’ it. Intervening experiences are thus as
indispensable foundations for a concrete relation of cognition as
intervening space is for a relation of distance. Cognition, whenever
we take it concretely, means determinate ’ambulation,’ through
intermediaries, from a terminus a quo to, or towards, a terminus ad
quem. As the intermediaries are other than the termini,
and connected with them by the usual associative bonds (be these
’external’ or be they logical, i.e., classificatory, in character),
there would appear to be nothing especially unique about the
processes of knowing. They fall wholly within experience; and we
need use, in describing them, no other categories than those which
we employ in describing other natural processes.
But there exist no processes which we cannot also consider
abstractly, eviscerating them down to their essential skeletons or
outlines; and when we have treated the processes of knowing thus, we
are easily led to regard them as something altogether unparalleled
in nature. For we first empty idea, object and intermediaries of all
their particularities, in order to retain only a general scheme, and
then we consider the latter only in its function of giving a result,
and not in its character of being a process. In this treatment the
intermediaries shrivel into the form of a mere space of separation,
while the idea and object retain only the logical distinctness of
being the end-terms that are separated. In other words,
the intermediaries which in their concrete particularity form a
bridge, evaporate ideally into an empty interval to cross, and then,
the relation of the end-terms having become saltatory, the whole
hocus-pocus of Erkenntnistheorie begins, and goes on unrestrained by
further concrete considerations. The idea, in ’meaning’ an object
separated by an ’epistemological chasm’ from itself, now executes
what Professor Ladd calls a ’salto mortale’; in knowing the object’s
nature, it now ’transcends’ its own. The object in turn becomes
’present’ where it is really absent, etc.; until a scheme remains
upon our hands, the sublime paradoxes of which some of us think that
nothing short of an ’absolute’ can explain.
The relation between idea and object, thus made abstract and
saltatory, is thenceforward opposed, as being more essential and
previous, to its own ambulatory self, and the more
concrete description is branded as either false or insufficient. The
bridge of intermediaries, actual or possible, which in every real
case is what carries and defines the knowing, gets treated as an
episodic complication which need not even potentially be there. I
believe that this vulgar fallacy of opposing abstractions to the
concretes from which they are abstracted, is the main reason why my
account of knowing is deemed so unsatisfactory, and I will
therefore say a word more on that general point.
Any vehicle of conjunction, if all its particularities are
abstracted from it, will leave us with nothing on our hands but the
original disjunction which it bridged over. But to escape treating
the resultant self-contradiction as an achievement of dialectical
profundity, all we need is to restore some part, no matter
how small, of what we have taken away. In the case of the
epistemological chasm the first reasonable step is to remember that
the chasm was filled with SOME empirical material,
whether ideational or sensational, which performed SOME bridging
function and saved us from the mortal leap. Restoring thus the
indispensable modicum of reality to the matter of our discussion, we
find our abstract treatment genuinely useful. We escape entanglement
with special cases without at the same time falling into gratuitous
paradoxes. We can now describe the general features of cognition,
tell what on the whole it DOES FOR US, in a universal way.
We must remember that this whole inquiry into knowing grows up on a
reflective level. In any real moment of knowing, what we
are thinking of is our object, not the way in which we ourselves are
momentarily knowing it. We at this moment, as it happens, have
knowing itself for our object; but I think that the reader will
agree that his present knowing of that object is included only
abstractly, and by anticipation, in the results he may reach. What
he concretely has before his mind, as he reasons, is some supposed
objective instance of knowing, as he conceives it to go on in some
other person, or recalls it from his own past. As such, he, the
critic, sees it to contain both an idea and an object, and processes
by which the knower is guided from the one towards the other. He
sees that the idea is remote from the object, and that, whether
through intermediaries or not, it genuinely HAS TO DO with it.
He sees that it thus works beyond its immediate being, and lays hold
of a remote reality; it jumps across, transcends itself. It does all
this by extraneous aid, to be sure, but when the aid has come, it
HAS done it and the result is secure. Why not talk of results by
themselves, then, without considering means? Why not treat the idea
as simply grasping or intuiting the reality, of its having the
faculty anyhow, of shooting over nature behind the scenes
and knowing things immediately and directly? Why need we always lug
in the bridging?–it only retards our discourse to do so.
Such abstract talk about cognition’s results is surely convenient;
and it is surely as legitimate as it is convenient, SO LONG AS WE DO
NOT FORGET OR POSITIVELY DENY, WHAT IT IGNORES. We may on occasion
say that our idea meant ALWAYS that particular object, that it led
us there because it was OF it intrinsically and essentially. We may
insist that its verification follows upon that original
cognitive virtue in it–and all the rest–and we shall do no harm so
long as we know that these are only short cuts in our thinking. They
are positively true accounts of fact AS FAR AS THEY GO, only they
leave vast tracts of fact out of the account, tracts of tact that
have to be reinstated to make the accounts literally true of any
real case. But if, not merely passively ignoring the intermediaries,
you actively deny them [Footnote: This is the fallacy which I have
called ’vicious intellectualism’ in my book A Pluralistic Universe,
Longmans, Green & Co., 1909.] to be even potential requisites for
the results you are so struck by, your epistemology goes to
irremediable smash. You are as far off the track as an historian
would be, if, lost in admiration of Napoleon’s personal power, he
were to ignore his marshals and his armies, and were to accuse you
of error in describing his conquests as effected by their means.
Of such abstractness and one-sidedness I accuse most of the critics
of my own account.
In the second lecture of the book Pragmatism, I used the
illustration of a squirrel scrambling round a tree-trunk to keep
out of sight of a pursuing man: both go round the tree, but does the
man go round the squirrel? It all depends, I said, on what you mean
by going round.’ In one sense of the word the man ’goes round,’ in
another sense he does not. I settled the dispute by
pragmatically distinguishing the senses. But I told how
some disputants had called my distinction a shuffling evasion and
taken their stand on what they called ’plain honest English going-
round.’
In such a simple case few people would object to letting the term in
dispute be translated into its concreter equivalents. But in
the case of a complex function like our knowing they act
differently. I give full concrete particular value for the ideas of
knowing in every case I can think of, yet my critics insist
that ’plain honest English knowing’ is left out of my account. They
write as if the minus were on my side and the plus on theirs.
The essence of the matter for me is that altho knowing can be both
abstractly and concretely described, and altho the
abstract descriptions are often useful enough, yet they are all
sucked up and absorbed without residuum into the concreter ones, and
contain nothing of any essentially other or higher nature, which the
concrete descriptions can be justly accused of leaving behind.
Knowing is just a natural process like any other. There is no
ambulatory process whatsoever, the results of which we may not
describe, if we prefer to, in saltatory terms, or represent
in static formulation. Suppose, e.g., that we say a man is
’prudent.’ Concretely, that means that he takes out insurance,
hedges in betting, looks before he leaps. Do such acts
CONSTITUTE the prudence? ARE they the man qua prudent?
Or is the prudence something by itself and independent of them? As a
constant habit in him, a permanent tone of character, it
is convenient to call him prudent in abstraction from any one of his
acts, prudent in general and without specification, and to say the
acts follow from the pre-existing prudence. There are peculiarities
in his psycho-physical system that make him act prudently; and there
are tendencies to association in our thoughts that prompt some of
them to make for truth and others for error. But would the man be
prudent in the absence of each and all of the acts? Or would the
thoughts be true if they had no associative or impulsive
tendencies? Surely we have no right to oppose static essences in
this way to the moving processes in which they live embedded.
My bedroom is above my library. Does the ’aboveness’ here mean aught
that is different from the concrete spaces which have to be moved-
through in getting from the one to the other? It means, you may say,
a pure topographic relation, a sort of architect’s plan among the
eternal essences. But that is not the full aboveness, it is only an
abbreviated substitute that on occasion may lead my mind towards
truer, i.e., fuller, dealings with the real aboveness. It is not an
aboveness ante rem, it is a post rem extract from the aboveness in
rebus. We may indeed talk, for certain conveniences, as if the
abstract scheme preceded, we may say ’I must go up stairs because of
the essential aboveness,’ just as we may say that the man ’does
prudent acts because of his ingrained prudence,’ or that our ideas
’lead us truly because of their intrinsic truth.’ But this should
not debar us on other occasions from using completer forms of
description. A concrete matter of fact always remains identical
under any form of description, as when we say of a line, now that it
runs from left to right, and now that it runs from right to left.
These are but names of one and the same fact, one more expedient to
use at one time, one at another. The full facts of cognition,
whatever be the way in which we talk about them, even when we talk
most abstractly, stand inalterably given in the actualities and
possibilities of the experience-continuum. [Footnote 1: The ultimate
object or terminus of a cognitive process may in certain instances
lie beyond the direct experience of the particular cognizer, but it,
of course, must exist as part of the total universe of experience
whose constitution, with cognition in it, the critic is discussing.]
But my critics treat my own more concrete talk as if IT were the
kind that sinned by its inadequacy, and as if the full continuum
left something out.
A favorite way of opposing the more abstract to the more concrete
account is to accuse those who favor the latter of
’confounding psychology with logic.’ Our critics say that when we
are asked what truth MEANS, we reply by telling only how it is
ARRIVED-AT. But since a meaning is a logical relation, static,
independent of time, how can it possibly be identified, they say,
with any concrete man’s experience, perishing as this does at the
instant of its production? This, indeed, sounds profound, but I
challenge the profundity. I defy any one to show any difference
between logic and psychology here. The logical relation stands to
the psychological relation between idea and object only as saltatory
abstractness stands to ambulatory concreteness. Both relations need
a psychological vehicle; and the ’logical’ one is simply the
’psychological’ one disemboweled of its fulness, and reduced to a
bare abstractional scheme.
A while ago a prisoner, on being released, tried to assassinate the
judge who had sentenced him. He had apparently succeeded
in conceiving the judge timelessly, had reduced him to a bare
logical meaning, that of being his ’enemy and persecutor,’ by
stripping off all the concrete conditions (as jury’s
verdict, official obligation, absence of personal spite, possibly
sympathy) that gave its full psychological character to the sentence
as a particular man’s act in time. Truly the sentence WAS inimical
to the culprit; but which idea of it is the truer one, that bare
logical definition of it, or its full psychological specification?
The anti-pragmatists ought in consistency to stand up for the
criminal’s view of the case, treat the judge as the latter’s logical
enemy, and bar out the other conditions as so much
inessential psychological stuff.
A still further obstacle, I suspect, stands in the way of my
account’s acceptance. Like Dewey and like Schiller, I have had to
say that the truth of an idea is determined by its satisfactoriness.
But satisfactoriness is a subjective term, just as idea is; and
truth is generally regarded as ’objective.’ Readers who admit
that satisfactoriness is our only MARK of truth, the only sign that
we possess the precious article, will still say that the objective
relation between idea and object which the word ’truth’ points to is
left out of my account altogether. I fear also that the association
of my poor name with the ’will to believe’ (which ’will,’ it seems
to me, ought to play no part in this discussion) works against my
credit in some quarters. I fornicate with that unclean thing,
my adversaries may think, whereas your genuine truth-lover must
discourse in huxleyan heroics, and feel as if truth, to be real
truth, ought to bring eventual messages of death to all
our satisfactions. Such divergences certainly prove the complexity
of the area of our discussion; but to my mind they also are based
on misunderstandings, which (tho with but little hope of success) I
will try to diminish by a further word of explanation.
First, then, I will ask my objectors to define exactly what SORT of
thing it is they have in mind when they speak of a truth that shall
be absolute, complete and objective; and then I will defy them to
show me any conceivable standing-room for such a kind of truth
outside the terms of my own description. It will fall, as I contend,
entirely within the field of my analysis.
To begin with, it must obtain between an idea and a reality that is
the idea’s object; and, as a predicate, it must apply to the
idea and not to the object, for objective realities are not TRUE, at
least not in the universe of discourse to which we are now confining
ourselves, for there they are taken as simply BEING, while the ideas
are true OF them. But we can suppose a series of ideas to be
successively more and more true of the same object, and can ask what
is the extreme approach to being absolutely true that the last idea
might attain to.
The maximal conceivable truth in an idea would seem to be that it
should lead to an actual merging of ourselves with the object, to an
utter mutual confluence and identification. On the common-sense
level of belief this is what is supposed really to take place in
sense-perception. My idea of this pen verifies itself through my
percept; and my percept is held to BE the pen for the time being–
percepts and physical realities being treated by common sense as
identical. But the physiology of the senses has criticised common
sense out of court, and the pen ’in itself’ is now believed to lie
beyond my momentary percept. Yet the notion once suggested, of what
a completely consummated acquaintance with a reality might be like,
remains over for our speculative purposes. TOTAL CONFLUX OF THE MIND
WITH THE REALITY would be the absolute limit of truth, there could
be no better or more satisfying knowledge than that.
Such total conflux, it is needless to say, is ALREADY EXPLICITLY
PROVIDED FOR, AS A POSSIBILITY, IN MY ACCOUNT OF THE MATTER. If an
idea should ever lead us not only TOWARDS, or UP TO, or AGAINST, a
reality, but so close that we and the reality should MELT TOGETHER,
it would be made absolutely true, according to me, by that
performance.
In point of fact philosophers doubt that this ever occurs. What
happens, they think, is only that we get nearer and nearer to
realities, we approximate more and more to the all-satisfying limit;
and the definition of actually, as distinguished from
imaginably, complete and objective truth, can then only be that it
belongs to the idea that will lead us as CLOSE UP AGAINST THE OBJECT
as in the nature of our experience is possible, literally NEXT
to it, for instance.
Suppose, now, there were an idea that did this for a certain
objective reality. Suppose that no further approach were possible,
that nothing lay between, that the next step would carry us right
INTO the reality; then that result, being the next thing to conflux,
would make the idea true in the maximal degree that might be
supposed practically attainable in the world which we inhabit.
Well, I need hardly explain that THAT DEGREE OF TRUTH IS ALSO
PROVIDED FOR IN MY ACCOUNT OF THE MATTER. And if satisfactions are
the marks of truth’s presence, we may add that any less true
substitute for such a true idea would prove less satisfactory.
Following its lead, we should probably find out that we did not
quite touch the terminus. We should desiderate a closer approach,
and not rest till we had found it.
I am, of course, postulating here a standing reality independent of
the idea that knows it. I am also postulating that satisfactions
grow pari passu with our approximation to such reality. [Footnote 1:
Say, if you prefer to, that DISsatisfactions decrease pari passu
with such approximation. The approximation may be of any kind
assignable–approximation in time or in space, or approximation in
kind, which in common speech means ’copying.’] If my critics
challenge this latter assumption, I retort upon them with the
former. Our whole notion of a standing reality grows up in the form
of an ideal limit to the series of successive termini to which
our thoughts have led us and still are leading us. Each terminus
proves provisional by leaving us unsatisfied. The truer idea is the
one that pushes farther; so we are ever beckoned on by the ideal
notion of an ultimate completely satisfactory terminus. I, for one,
obey and accept that notion. I can conceive no other objective
CONTENT to the notion of ideally perfect truth than that of
penetration into such a terminus, nor can I conceive that the
notion would ever have grown up, or that true ideas would ever have
been sorted out from false or idle ones, save for the greater sum
of satisfactions, intellectual or practical, which the truer ones
brought with them. Can we imagine a man absolutely satisfied with an
idea and with all its relations to his other ideas and to his
sensible experiences, who should yet not take its content as a true
account of reality? The matter of the true is thus
absolutely identical with the matter of the satisfactory. You may
put either word first in your ways of talking; but leave out that
whole notion of SATISFACTORY WORKING or LEADING (which is the
essence of my pragmatistic account) and call truth a static logical
relation, independent even of POSSIBLE leadings or
satisfactions, and it seems to me you cut all ground from under you.
I fear that I am still very obscure. But I respectfully implore
those who reject my doctrine because they can make nothing of
my stumbling language, to tell us in their own name–und zwar very
concretely and articulately!–just how the real, genuine and
absolutely ’objective’ truth which they believe in so profoundly, is
constituted and established. They mustn’t point to the ’reality’
itself, for truth is only our subjective relation to realities. What
is the nominal essence of this relation, its logical definition,
whether or not it be ’objectively’ attainable by mortals?
Whatever they may say it is, I have the firmest faith that my
account will prove to have allowed for it and included it by
anticipation, as one possible case in the total mixture of cases.
There is, in short, no ROOM for any grade or sort of truth outside
of the framework of the pragmatic system, outside of that jungle of
empirical workings and leadings, and their nearer or ulterior
terminations, of which I seem to have written so unskilfully.
Continue...

This e-book of The Meaning of Truth (a sequel to “Pragmatism”) by William James is in the public domain (via Project Gutenberg).
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
William James : Writings 1902-1910 : The Varieties of Religious Experience / Pragmatism / A Pluralistic Universe / The Meaning of Truth / Some Problems of Philosophy / Essays (Library of America)By William JamesAt Amazon
