


“Minded of nought but peace, and of a child.”
“Well, there!” said Miss Vesta. “The child has a wonderful gift, that
is certain. Just listen to her, Rejoice! You never heard our canary
sing like that!”
Miss Vesta put back the shutters as she spoke, and let a flood of
light into the room where Miss Rejoice lay. The window was open, and
Melody’s voice came in like a wave of sound, filling the room with
sweetness and life and joy.
“It’s like the foreign birds they tell about!” said Miss Rejoice,
folding her thin hands, and settling herself on the pillow with an air
of perfect content,–"nightingales, and skylarks, and all the birds in
the poetry-books. What is she doing, Vesta?”
Miss Rejoice could see part of the yard from her bed. She could see
the white lilac-bush, now a mass of snowy plumes, waving in the June
breeze; she could see the road, and knew when any of the neighbors
went to town or to meeting; but the corner from which the wonderful
voice came thrilling and soaring was hidden from her.
Miss Vesta peered out between the muslin curtains. “She’s sitting on
the steps,” she said, “feeding the hens. It is wonderful, the way the
creatures know her! That old top-knot hen, that never has a good word
for anybody, is sitting in her lap almost. She says she understands
their talk, and I really believe she does. ’Tis certain none of them
cluck, not a sound, while she’s singing. ’Tis a manner of marvel, to
my mind.”
“It is so,” assented Miss Rejoice, mildly. “There, sister! you said
you had never heard her sing ’Tara’s Harp.’ Do listen now!”
Both sisters were silent in delight. Miss Vesta stood at the window,
leaning against the frame. She was tall, and straight as an arrow,
though she was fifty years old. Her snow-white hair was brushed
straight up from her broad forehead; her blue eyes were keen and
bright as a sword. She wore a black dress and a white apron; her hands
showed the marks of years of serving, and of hard work of all kinds.
No one would have thought that she and Miss Rejoice were sisters,
unless he had surprised one of the loving looks that sometimes passed
between them when they were alone together. The face that lay on the
pillow was white and withered, like a crumpled white rose. The dark
eyes had a pleading, wistful look, and were wonderfully soft withal.
Miss Rejoice had white hair too, but it had a warm yellowish tinge,
very different from the clear white of Miss Vesta’s. It curled, too,
in little ringlets round her beautiful old face. In short, Miss Vesta
was splendidly handsome, while no one would think of calling Miss
Rejoice anything but lovely. The younger sister lay always in bed. It
was some thirty years since she met with the accident which changed
her from a rosy, laughing girl into a helpless cripple. A party of
pleasure,–gay lads and lasses riding together, careless of anything
save the delight of the moment; a sudden leap of the horse, frightened
at some obstacle; a fall, striking on a sharp stone,–this was Miss
Rejoice’s little story. People in the village had forgotten that there
was any story; even her own contemporaries almost forgot that Rejoice
had ever been other than she was now. But Miss Vesta never forgot. She
left her position in the neighboring town, broke off her engagement to
the man she loved, and came home to her sister; and they had never
been separated for a day since. Once, when the bitter pain began to
abate, and the sufferer could realize that she was still a living
creature and not a condemned spirit, suffering for the sins of some
one else (she had thought of all her own, and could not feel that they
were bad enough to merit such suffering, if God was the person she
supposed),–in those first days Miss Rejoice ventured to question her
sister about her engagement. She was afraid–she did hope the breaking
of it had nothing to do with her. “It has to do with myself!” said
Miss Vesta, briefly, and nothing more was said. The sisters had lived
their life together, without a thought save for each other, till
Melody came into their world.
But here is Melody at the door; she shall introduce herself. A girl of
twelve years old, with a face like a flower. A broad white forehead,
with dark hair curling round it in rings and tendrils as delicate as
those of a vine; a sweet, steadfast mouth, large blue eyes, clear and
calm under the long dark lashes, but with a something in them which
makes the stranger turn to look at them again. He may look several
times before he discovers the reason of their fixed, unchanging calm.
The lovely mouth smiles, the exquisite face lights up with gladness or
softens into sympathy or pity; but the blue eyes do not flash or
soften, for Melody is blind.
She came into the room, walking lightly, with a firm, assured tread,
which gave no hint of hesitation or uncertainty.
“See, Aunt Joy,” she said brightly, “here is the first rose. You were
saying yesterday that it was time for cinnamon-roses; now here is one
for you.” She stooped to kiss the sweet white face, and laid the
glowing blossom beside it.
“Thank you, dear,” said Miss Rejoice; “I might have known you would
find the first blossom, wherever it was. Where was this, now? On the
old bush behind the barn?”
“Not in our yard at all,” replied the child, laughing. “The smell came
to me a few minutes ago, and I went hunting for it. It was in Mrs.
Penny’s yard, right down by the fence, close, so you could hardly see
it.”
“Well, I never!” exclaimed Miss Vesta. “And she let you have it?”
“Of course,” said the child. “I told her it was for Aunt Joy.”
“H’m!” said Miss Vesta. “Martha Penny doesn’t suffer much from giving,
as a rule, to Aunt Joy or anybody else. Did she give it to you at the
first asking, hey?”
“Now, Vesta!” remonstrated Miss Rejoice, gently.
“Well, I want to know,” persisted the elder sister.
Melody laughed softly. “Not quite the first asking,” she said. “She
wanted to know if I thought she had no nose of her own. ’I didn’t mean
that,’ said I; ’but I thought perhaps you wouldn’t care for it quite
as much as Aunt Joy would.’ And when she asked why, I said, ’You don’t
sound as if you would.’ Was that rude, Aunt Vesta?”
“Humph!” said Miss Vesta, smiling grimly. “I don’t know whether it was
exactly polite, but Martha Penny wouldn’t know the difference.”
The child looked distressed, and so did Miss Rejoice.
“I am sorry,” said Melody. “But then Mrs. Penny said something so
funny. ’Well, gaffle onto it! I s’pose you’re one of them kind as must
always have what they want in this world. Gaffle onto your rose, and
go ’long! Guess I might be sick enough before anybody ’ud get roses
for me!’ So I told her I would bring her a whole bunch of our white
ones as soon as they were out, and told her how I always tried to get
the first cinnamon-rose for Aunt Joy. She said, ’She ain’t your aunt,
nor mine either.’ But she spoke kinder, and didn’t seem cross any
more; so I took the rose, and here it is.”
Miss Vesta was angry. A bright spot burned in her cheeks, and she was
about to speak hastily; but Miss Rejoice raised a gentle hand, and
motioned her to be silent.
“Martha Penny has a sharp way, Melody,” said Miss Rejoice; “but she
meant no unkindness, I think. The rose is very sweet,” she added;
“there are no other roses so sweet, to my mind. And how are the hens
this morning, dearie?”
The child clapped her hands, and laughed aloud. “Oh, we have had such
fun!” she cried. “Top-knot was very cross at first, and would not let
the young speckled hen eat out of the dish with her. So I took one
under each arm, and sang and talked to them till they were both in a
good humor. That made the Plymouth rooster jealous, and he came and
drove them both away, and had to have a petting all by himself. He is
such a dear!”
“You do spoil those hens, Melody,” said Miss Vesta, with an
affectionate grumble. “Do you suppose they’ll eat any better for being
talked to and sung to as if they were persons?”
“Poor dears!” said the child; “they ought to be happy while they do
live, oughtn’t they, Auntie? Is it time to make the cake now, Aunt
Vesta, or shall I get my knitting, and sing to Auntie Joy a little?”
At that moment a clear whistle was heard outside the house. “The
doctor!” cried Melody, her sightless face lighting up with a flash of
joy. “I must go,” and she ran quickly out to the gate.
“Now he’ll carry her off,” said Miss Vesta, “and we sha’n’t see her
again till dinner-time. You’d think she was his child, not ours. But
so it is, in this world.”
“What has crossed you this morning, Sister?” asked Miss Rejoice,
mildly. “You seem put about.”
“Oh, the cat got into the tea-kettle.” replied the elder sister.
“Don’t fret your blessed self if I am cross. I can’t stand Martha
Penny, that’s all,–speaking so to that blessed child! I wish I had
her here; she’d soon find out whether she had a nose or not. Dear
knows it’s long enough! It isn’t the first time I’ve had four parts of
a mind to pull it for her.”
“Why, Vesta Dale, how you do talk!” said Miss Rejoice, and then they
both laughed, and Miss Vesta went out to scold the doctor.
Continue...

This eBook of “Melody: The Story of a Child” by Laura E. Richards belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Melody The Story of a ChildBy Laura, E. RichardsAt Amazon
