


Memoirs of the Court of Marie Antoinette, Queen of France
Being the Historic Memoirs of Madam Campan,
First Lady in Waiting to the Queen
Louis XVI. possessed an immense crowd of confidants, advisers, and
guides; he selected them even from among the factions which attacked him.
Never, perhaps, did he make a full disclosure to any one of them, and
certainly he spoke with sincerity, to but very few.  He invariably kept
the reins of all secret intrigues in his own hand; and thence, doubtless,
arose the want of cooperation and the weakness which were so conspicuous
in his measures.  From these causes considerable chasms will be found in
the detailed history of the Revolution.
In order to become thoroughly acquainted with the latter years of the
reign of Louis XV., memoirs written by the Duc de Choiseul, the Duc
d’Aiguillon, the Marechal de Richelieu,
     [I heard Le Marechal de Richelieu desire M. Campan, who was
     librarian to the Queen, not to buy the Memoirs which would certainly
     be attributed to him after his death, declaring them false by
     anticipation; and adding that he was ignorant of orthography, and
     had never amused himself with writing.  Shortly after the death of
     the Marshal, one Soulavie put forth Memoirs of the Marechal de
     Richelieu.]
and the Duc de La Vauguyon, should be before us.  To give us a faithful
portrait of the unfortunate reign of Louis XVI., the Marechal du Muy,
M. de Maurepas, M. de Vergennes, M. de Malesherbes, the Duc d’Orleans,
M. de La Fayette, the Abby de Vermond, the Abbe Montesquiou, Mirabeau,
the Duchesse de Polignac, and the Duchesse de Luynes should have noted
faithfully in writing all the transactions in which they took decided
parts.  The secret political history of a later period has been
disseminated among a much greater number of persons; there are Ministers
who have published memoirs, but only when they had their own measures to
justify, and then they confined themselves to the vindication of their
own characters, without which powerful motive they probably would have
written nothing.  In general, those nearest to the Sovereign, either by
birth or by office, have left no memoirs; and in absolute monarchies the
mainsprings of great events will be found in particulars which the most
exalted persons alone could know.  Those who have had but little under
their charge find no subject in it for a book; and those who have long
borne the burden of public business conceive themselves to be forbidden
by duty, or by respect for authority, to disclose all they know.  Others,
again, preserve notes, with the intention of reducing them to order when
they shall have reached the period of a happy leisure; vain illusion of
the ambitious, which they cherish, for the most part, but as a veil to
conceal from their sight the hateful image of their inevitable downfall!
and when it does at length take place, despair or chagrin deprives them
of fortitude to dwell upon the dazzling period which they never cease to
regret.
Louis XVI.  meant to write his own memoirs; the manner in which his
private papers were arranged indicated this design.  The Queen also had
the same intention; she long preserved a large correspondence, and a
great number of minute reports, made in the spirit and upon the event of
the moment.  But after the 20th of June, 1792, she was obliged to burn
the larger portion of what she had so collected, and the remainder were
conveyed out of France.
Considering the rank and situations of the persons I have named as
capable of elucidating by their writings the history of our political
storms, it will not be imagined that I aim at placing myself on a level
with them; but I have spent half my life either with the daughters of
Louis XV. or with Marie Antoinette.  I knew the characters of those
Princesses; I became privy to some extraordinary facts, the publication
of which may be interesting, and the truth of the details will form the
merit of my work.
I was very young when I was placed about the Princesses, the daughters of
Louis XV., in the capacity of reader.  I was acquainted with the Court of
Versailles before the time of the marriage of Louis XVI. with the
Archduchess Marie Antoinette.
My father, who was employed in the department of Foreign Affairs, enjoyed
the reputation due to his talents and to his useful labours.  He had
travelled much.  Frenchmen, on their return home from foreign countries,
bring with them a love for their own, increased in warmth; and no man was
more penetrated with this feeling, which ought to be the first virtue of
every placeman, than my father.  Men of high title, academicians, and
learned men, both natives and foreigners, sought my father’s
acquaintance, and were gratified by being admitted into his house.
Twenty years before the Revolution I often heard it remarked that the
imposing character of the power of Louis XIV. was no longer to be found
in the Palace of Versailles; that the institutions of the ancient
monarchy were rapidly sinking; and that the people, crushed beneath the
weight of taxes, were miserable, though silent; but that they began to
give ear to the bold speeches of the philosophers, who loudly proclaimed
their sufferings and their rights; and, in short, that the age would not
pass away without the occurrence of some great outburst, which would
unsettle France, and change the course of its progress.
Those who thus spoke were almost all partisans of M. Turgot’s system of
administration: they were Mirabeau the father, Doctor Quesnay, Abbe
Bandeau, and Abbe Nicoli, charge d’affaires to Leopold, Grand Duke of
Tuscany, and as enthusiastic an admirer of the maxims of the innovators
as his Sovereign.
My father sincerely respected the purity of intention of these
politicians.  With them he acknowledged many abuses in the Government;
but he did not give these political sectarians credit for the talent
necessary for conducting a judicious reform.  He told them frankly that
in the art of moving the great machine of Government, the wisest of them
was inferior to a good magistrate; and that if ever the helm of affairs
should be put into their hands, they would be speedily checked in the
execution of their schemes by the immeasurable difference existing
between the most brilliant theories and the simplest practice of
administration.
Destiny having formerly placed me near crowned heads, I now amuse my
solitude when in retirement with collecting a variety of facts which may
prove interesting to my family when I shall be no more.  The idea of
collecting all the interesting materials which my memory affords occurred
to me from reading the work entitled “Paris, Versailles, and the
Provinces in the Eighteenth Century.”  That work, composed by a man
accustomed to the best society, is full of piquant anecdotes, nearly all
of which have been recognised as true by the contemporaries of the
author.  I have put together all that concerned the domestic life of an
unfortunate Princess, whose reputation is not yet cleared of the stains
it received from the attacks of calumny, and who justly merited a
different lot in life, a different place in the opinion of mankind after
her fall.  These memoirs, which were finished ten years ago, have met
with the approbation of some persons; and my son may, perhaps, think
proper to print them after my decease.
J.  L.  H.  C.
–When Madame Campan wrote these lines, she did not anticipate that the
death of her son would precede her own.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
