


The Queen having been robbed of her purse as she was passing from the
Tuileries to the Feuillans, requested my sister to lend her twenty-five
louis.
     [On being interrogated the Queen declared that these five and twenty
     louis had been lent to her by my sister; this formed a pretence for
     arresting her and me, and led to her death.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
I spent part of the day at the Feuillans, and her Majesty told me she
would ask Potion to let me be with her in the place which the Assembly
should decree for her prison.  I then returned home to prepare everything
that might be necessary for me to accompany her.
On the same day (11th August), at nine in the evening, I returned to the
Feuillans.  I found there were orders at all the gates forbidding my
being admitted.  I claimed a right to enter by virtue of the first
permission which had been given to me; I was again refused.  I was told
that the Queen had as many people as were requisite about her.  My sister
was with her, as well as one of my companions, who came out of the
prisons of the Abbaye on the 11th.  I renewed my solicitations on the
12th; my tears and entreaties moved neither the keepers of the gates, nor
even a deputy, to whom I addressed myself.
I soon heard of the removal of Louis XVI. and his family to the Temple.
I went to Potion accompanied by M. Valadon, for whom I had procured a
place in the post-office, and who was devoted to me.  He determined to go
up to Potion alone; he told him that those who requested to be confined
could not be suspected of evil designs, and that no political opinion
could afford a ground of objection to these solicitations.  Seeing that
the well-meaning man did not succeed, I thought to do more in person; but
Petion persisted in his refusal, and threatened to send me to La Force.
Thinking to give me a kind of consolation, he added I might be certain
that all those who were then with Louis XVI. and his family would not
stay with them long.  And in fact, two or three days afterwards the
Princesse de Lamballe, Madame de Tourzel, her daughter, the Queen’s first
woman, the first woman of the Dauphin and of Madame, M. de Chamilly, and
M. de Hue were carried off during the night and transferred to La Force.
After the departure of the King and Queen for the Temple, my sister was
detained a prisoner in the apartments their Majesties had quitted for
twenty-four hours.
From this time I was reduced to the misery of having no further
intelligence of my august and unfortunate mistress but through the medium
of the newspapers or the National Guard, who did duty at the Temple.
The King and Queen said nothing to me at the Feuillans about the
portfolio which had been deposited with me; no doubt they expected to see
me again.  The minister Roland and the deputies composing the provisional
government were very intent on a search for papers belonging to their
Majesties.  They had the whole of the Tuileries ransacked.  The infamous
Robespierre bethought himself of M. Campan, the Queen’s private
secretary, and said that his death was feigned; that he was living
unknown in some obscure part of France, and was doubtless the depositary
of all the important papers.  In a great portfolio belonging to the King
there had been found a solitary letter from the Comte d’Artois, which, by
its date, and the subjects of which it treated, indicated the existence
of a continued correspondence.  (This letter appeared among the documents
used on the trial of Louis XVI.)  A former preceptor of my son’s had
studied with Robespierre; the latter, meeting him in the street, and
knowing the connection which had subsisted between him and the family of
M. Campan, required him to say, upon his honour, whether he was certain
of the death of the latter.  The man replied that M. Campan had died at
La Briche in 1791, and that he had seen him interred in the cemetery of
Epinay.  “well, then,” resumed Robespierre, “bring me the certificate of
his burial at twelve to-morrow; it is a document for which I have
pressing occasion.”  Upon hearing the deputy’s demand I instantly sent
for a certificate of M. Campan’s burial, and Robespierre received it at
nine o’clock the next morning.  But I considered that, in thinking of my
father-in-law, they were coming very near me, the real depositary of
these important papers.  I passed days and nights in considering what I
could do for the best under such circumstances.
I was thus situated when the order to inform against those who had been
denounced as suspected on the 10th of August led to domiciliary visits.
My servants were told that the people of the quarter in which I lived
were talking much of the search that would be made in my house, and came
to apprise me of it.  I heard that fifty armed men would make themselves
masters of M. Auguies house, where I then was.  I had just received this
intelligence when M. Gougenot, the King’s maitre d’hotel and receiver-
general of the taxes, a man much attached to his sovereign, came into my
room wrapped in a ridingcloak, under which, with great difficulty, he
carried the King’s portfolio, which I had entrusted to him.  He threw it
down at my feet, and said to me, “There is your deposit; I did not
receive it from our unfortunate King’s own hands; in delivering it to you
I have executed my trust.”  After saying this he was about to withdraw.
I stopped him, praying him to consult with me what I ought to do in such
a trying emergency.  He would not listen to my entreaties, or even hear
me describe the course I intended to pursue.  I told him my abode was
about to be surrounded; I imparted to him what the Queen had said to me
about the contents of the portfolio.  To all this he answered, “There it
is; decide for yourself; I will have no hand in it.”  Upon that I
remained a few seconds thinking, and my conduct was founded upon the
following reasons.  I spoke aloud, although to myself; I walked about the
room with agitated steps; M. Gougenot was thunderstruck.  “Yes,” said I,
“when we can no longer communicate with our King and receive his orders,
however attached we may be to him, we can only serve him according to the
best of our own judgment.  The Queen said to me, ’This portfolio contains
scarcely anything but documents of a most dangerous description in the
event of a trial taking place, if it should fall into the hands of
revolutionary persons.’  She mentioned, too, a single document which
would, under the same circumstances, be useful.  It is my duty to
interpret her words, and consider them as orders.  She meant to say,
’You will save such a paper, you will destroy the rest if they are likely
to be taken from you.’  If it were not so, was there any occasion for her
to enter into any detail as to what the portfolio contained?  The order
to keep it was sufficient.  Probably it contains, moreover, the letters
of that part of the family which has emigrated; there is nothing which
may have been foreseen or decided upon that can be useful now; and there
can be no political thread which has not been cut by the events of the
10th of August and the imprisonment of the King.  My house is about to be
surrounded; I cannot conceal anything of such bulk; I might, then,
through want of foresight, give up that which would cause the
condemnation of the King.  Let us open the portfolio, save the document
alluded to, and destroy the rest.”  I took a knife and cut open one side
of the portfolio.  I saw a great number of envelopes endorsed by the
King’s own hand.  M. Gougenot found there the former seals of the King,
     [No doubt it was in order to have the ancient seals ready at a
     moment’s notice, in case of a counter-revolution, that the Queen
     desired me not to quit the Tuileries.  M. Gougenot threw the seals
     into the river, one from above the Pont Neuf, and the other from
     near the Pont Royal.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
such as they were before the Assembly had changed the inscription.  At
this moment we heard a great noise; he agreed to tie up the portfolio,
take it again under his cloak, and go to a safe place to execute what I
had taken upon me to determine.  He made me swear, by all I held most
sacred, that I would affirm, under every possible emergency, that the
course I was pursuing had not been dictated to me by anybody; and that,
whatever might be the result, I would take all the credit or all the
blame upon myself.  I lifted up my hand and took the oath he required;
he went out.  Half an hour afterwards a great number of armed men came to
my house; they placed sentinels at all the outlets; they broke open
secretaires and closets of which they had not the keys; they ’searched
the flower-pots and boxes; they examined the cellars; and the commandant
repeatedly said, “Look particularly for papers.”  In the afternoon M.
Gougenot returned.  He had still the seals of France about him, and he
brought me a statement of all that he had burnt.
The portfolio contained twenty letters from Monsieur, eighteen or
nineteen from the Comte d’Artois, seventeen from Madame Adelaide,
eighteen from Madame Victoire, a great many letters from Comte Alexandre
de Lameth, and many from M. de Malesherbes, with documents annexed to
them.  There were also some from M. de Montmorin and other ex-ministers
or ambassadors.  Each correspondence had its title written in the King’s
own hand upon the blank paper which contained it.  The most voluminous
was that from Mirabeau.  It was tied up with a scheme for an escape,
which he thought necessary.  M. Gougenot, who had skimmed over these
letters with more attention than the rest, told me they were of so
interesting a nature that the King had no doubt kept them as documents
exceedingly valuable for a history of his reign, and that the
correspondence with the Princes, which was entirely relative to what was
going forward abroad, in concert with the King, would have been fatal to
him if it had been seized.  After he had finished he placed in my hands
the proces-verbal, signed by all the ministers, to which the King
attached so much importance, because he had given his opinion against the
declaration of war; a copy of the letter written by the King to the
Princes, his brothers, inviting them to return to France; an account of
the diamonds which the Queen had sent to Brussels (these two documents
were in my handwriting); and a receipt for four hundred thousand francs,
under the hand of a celebrated banker.  This sum was part of the eight
hundred thousand francs which the Queen had gradually saved during her
reign, out of her pension of three hundred thousand francs per annum, and
out of the one hundred thousand francs given by way of present on the
birth of the Dauphin.
This receipt, written on a very small piece of paper, was in the cover of
an almanac.  I agreed with M. Gougenot, who was obliged by his office to
reside in Paris, that he should retain the proces-verbal of the Council
and the receipt for the four hundred thousand francs, and that we should
wait either for orders or for the means of transmitting these documents
to the King or Queen; and I set out for Versailles.
The strictness of the precautions taken to guard the illustrious
prisoners was daily increased.  The idea that I could not inform the King
of the course I had adopted of burning his papers, and the fear that I
should not be able to transmit to him that which he had pointed out as
necessary, tormented me to such a degree that it is wonderful my health
endured the strain.
The dreadful trial drew near.  Official advocates were granted to the
King; the heroic virtue of M. de Malesherbes induced him to brave the
most imminent dangers, either to save his master or to perish with him.
I hoped also to be able to find some means of informing his Majesty of
what I had thought it right to do.  I sent a man, on whom I could rely,
to Paris, to request M. Gougenot to come to me at Versailles he came
immediately.  We agreed that he should see M. de Malesherbes without
availing himself of any intermediate person for that purpose.
M. Gougenot awaited his return from the Temple at the door of his hotel,
and made a sign that he wished to speak to him.  A moment afterwards a
servant came to introduce him into the magistrates’ room.  He imparted to
M. de Malesherbes what I had thought it right to do with respect to the
King’s papers, and placed in his hands the proces-verbal of the Council,
which his Majesty had preserved in order to serve, if occasion required
it, for a ground of his defence.  However, that paper is not mentioned in
either of the speeches of his advocate; probably it was determined not to
make use of it.
I stop at that terrible period which is marked by the assassination of a
King whose virtues are well known; but I cannot refrain from relating
what he deigned to say in my favour to M. de Malesherbes:
“Let Madame Campan know that she did what I should myself have ordered
her to do; I thank her for it; she is one of those whom I regret I have
it not in my power to recompense for their fidelity to my person, and for
their good services.”  I did not hear of this until the morning after he
had suffered, and I think I should have sunk under my despair if this
honourable testimony had not given me some consolation.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part B, also see Part A) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Memoirs of Marie AntoinetteBy Madame CampanAt Amazon
