


Shortly after the public mind had been thrown into agitation by the
performance of the “Mariage de Figaro,” an obscure plot, contrived by
swindlers, and matured in a corrupted society, attacked the Queen’s
character in a vital point and assailed the majesty of the throne.
I am about to speak of the notorious affair of the necklace purchased, as
it was said, for the Queen by Cardinal de Rohan.  I will narrate all that
has come to my knowledge relating to this business; the most minute
particulars will prove how little reason the Queen had to apprehend the
blow by which she was threatened, and which must be attributed to a
fatality that human prudence could not have foreseen, but from which, to
say the truth, she might have extricated herself with more skill.
I have already said that in 1774 the Queen purchased jewels of Boehmer to
the value of three hundred and sixty thousand franca, that she paid for
them herself out of her own private funds, and that it required several
years to enable her to complete the payment.  The King afterwards
presented her with a set of rubies and diamonds of a fine water, and
subsequently with a pair of bracelets worth two hundred thousand francs.
The Queen, after having her diamonds reset in new patterns, told Boehmer
that she found her jewel case rich enough, and was not desirous of making
any addition to it.
     [Except on those days when the assemblies at Court were particularly
     attended, such as the 1st of January and the 2d of February, devoted
     to the procession of the Order of the Holy Ghost, and on the
     festivals of Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas, the Queen no longer
     wore any dresses but muslin or white Florentine taffety.  Her head-
     dress was merely a hat; the plainest were preferred; and her
     diamonds never quitted their caskets but for the dresses of
     ceremony, confined to the days I have mentioned.  Before the Queen
     was five and twenty she began to apprehend that she might be induced
     to make too frequent use of flowers and of ornaments, which at that
     time were exclusively reserved for youth.  Madame Bertin having
     brought a wreath for the head and neck, composed of roses, the Queen
     feared that the brightness of the flowers might be disadvantageous
     to her complexion.  She was unquestionably too severe upon herself,
     her beauty having as yet experienced no alteration; it is easy to
     conceive the concert of praise and compliment that replied to the
     doubt she had expressed.  The Queen, approaching me, said, “I charge
     you, from this day, to give me notice when flowers shall cease to
     become me."–"I shall do no such thing,” I replied, immediately;
     “I have not read ’Gil Bias’ without profiting in some degree from
     it, and I find your Majesty’s order too much like that given him by
     the Archbishop of Granada, to warn him of the moment when he should
     begin to fall off in the composition of his homilies."–"Go,” said
     the Queen; “You are less sincere than Gil Blas; and I world have
     been more amenable than the Archbishop."–MADAME CAMPAN.]
Still, this jeweller busied himself for some years in forming a
collection of the finest diamonds circulating in the trade, in order to
compose a necklace of several rows, which he hoped to induce her Majesty
to purchase; he brought it to M. Campan, requesting him to mention it to
the Queen, that she might ask to see it, and thus be induced to wish to
possess it.  This M. Campan refused to do, telling him that he should be
stepping out of the line of his duty were he to propose to the Queen an
expense of sixteen hundred thousand francs, and that he believed neither
the lady of honour nor the tirewoman would take upon herself to execute
such a commission.  Boehmer persuaded the King’s first gentleman for the
year to show this superb necklace to his Majesty, who admired it so much
that he himself wished to see the Queen adorned with it, and sent the
case to her; but she assured him she should much regret incurring so
great an expense for such an article, that she had already very beautiful
diamonds, that jewels of that description were now worn at Court not more
than four or five times a year, that the necklace must be returned, and
that the money would be much better employed in building a man-of-war.
     [Messieurs Boehmer and Bassange, jewellers to the Crown, were
     proprietors of a superb diamond necklace, which had, as it was said,
     been intended for the Comtesse du Barry.  Being under the necessity
     of selling it, they offered it, during the last war, to the king and
     Queen; but their Majesties made the following prudent answer: “We
     stand more in need of ships than of jewels."–"Secret Correspondence
     of the Court of Louis XVI."]
Boehmer, in sad tribulation at finding his expectations delusive,
endeavoured for some time, it is said, to dispose of his necklace among
the various Courts of Europe.
A year after his fruitless attempts, Boehmer again caused his diamond
necklace to be offered to the King, proposing that it should be paid for
partly by instalments, and partly in life annuities; this proposal was
represented as highly advantageous, and the King, in my presence,
mentioned the matter once more to the Queen.  I remember the Queen told
him that, if the bargain really was not bad, he might make it, and keep
the necklace until the marriage of one of his children; but that, for her
part, she would never wear it, being unwilling that the world should have
to reproach her with having coveted so expensive an article.  The King
replied that their children were too young to justify such an expense,
which would be greatly increased by the number of years the diamonds
would remain useless, and that he would finally decline the offer.
Boehmer complained to everybody of his misfortune, and all reasonable
people blamed him for having collected diamonds to so considerable an
amount without any positive order for them.  This man had purchased the
office of jeweller to the Crown, which gave him some rights of entry at
Court.  After several months spent in ineffectual attempts to carry his
point, and in idle complaints, he obtained an audience of the Queen, who
had with her the young Princess, her daughter; her Majesty did not know
for what purpose Boehmer sought this audience, and had not the slightest
idea that it was to speak to her again about an article twice refused by
herself and the King.
Boehmer threw himself upon his knees, clasped his hands, burst into
tears, and exclaimed, “Madame, I am ruined and disgraced if you do not
purchase my necklace.  I cannot outlive so many misfortunes.  When I go
hence I shall throw myself into the river.”
“Rise, Boehmer,” said the Queen, in a tone sufficiently severe to recall
him to himself; “I do not like these rhapsodies; honest men have no
occasion to fall on their knees to make their requests.  If you were to
destroy yourself I should regret you as a madman in whom I had taken an
interest, but I should not be in any way responsible for that misfortune.
Not only have I never ordered the article which causes your present
despair, but whenever you have talked to me about fine collections of
jewels I have told you that I should not add four diamonds to those which
I already possessed.  I told you myself that I declined taking the
necklace; the King wished to give it to me, but I refused him also; never
mention it to me again.  Divide it and try to sell it piecemeal, and do
not drown yourself.  I am very angry with you for acting this scene of
despair in my presence and before this child.  Let me never see you
behave thus again.  Go.”  Baehmer withdrew, overwhelmed with confusion,
and nothing further was then heard of him.
When Madame Sophie was born the Queen told me M. de Saint-James, a rich
financier, had apprised her that Boehmer was still intent upon the sale
of his necklace, and that she ought, for her own satisfaction, to
endeavour to learn what the man had done with it; she desired me the
first time I should meet him to speak to him about it, as if from the
interest I took in his welfare.  I spoke to him about his necklace, and
he told me he had been very fortunate, having sold it at Constantinople
for the favourite sultana.  I communicated this answer to the Queen, who
was delighted with it, but could not comprehend how the Sultan came to
purchase his diamonds in Paris.
The Queen long avoided seeing Boehmer, being fearful of his rash
character; and her valet de chambre, who had the care of her jewels, made
the necessary repairs to her ornaments unassisted.  On the baptism of the
Duc d’Angouleme, in 1785, the King gave him a diamond epaulet and
buckles, and directed Baehmer to deliver them to the Queen.  Boehmer
presented them on her return from mass, and at the same time gave into
her hands a letter in the form of a petition.  In this paper he told the
Queen that he was happy to see her “in possession of the finest diamonds
known in Europe,” and entreated her not to forget him.  The Queen read
Boehmer’s address to her aloud, and saw nothing in it but a proof of
mental aberration; she lighted the paper at a wax taper standing near
her, as she had some letters to seal, saying, “It is not worth keeping."
She afterwards much regretted the loss of this enigmatical memorial.
After having burnt the paper, her Majesty said to me, “That man is born
to be my torment; he has always some mad scheme in his head; remember,
the first time you see him, to tell him that I do not like diamonds now,
and that I will buy no more so long as I live; that if I had any money to
spare I would rather add to my property at St. Cloud by the purchase of
the land surrounding it; now, mind you enter into all these particulars
and impress them well upon him.”  I asked her whether she wished me to
send for him; she replied in the negative, adding that it would be
sufficient to avail myself of the first opportunity afforded by meeting
him; and that the slightest advance towards such a man would be
misplaced.
On the 1st of August I left Versailles for my country house at Crespy; on
the 3d came Boehmer, extremely uneasy at not having received any answer
from the Queen, to ask me whether I had any commission from her to him; I
replied that she had entrusted me with none; that she had no commands for
him, and I faithfully repeated all she had desired me to say to him.
“But,” said Boehmer, “the answer to the letter I presented to her,–to
whom must I apply for that?”
“To nobody,” answered I; “her Majesty burnt your memorial without even
comprehending its meaning.”
“Ah! madame,” exclaimed he, “that is impossible; the Queen knows that she
has money to pay me!”
“Money, M. Boehmer?  Your last accounts against the Queen were discharged
long ago.”
“Madame, you are not in the secret.  A man who is ruined for want of
payment of fifteen hundred thousand francs cannot be said to be
satisfied.”
“Have you lost your senses?” said I.  “For what can the Queen owe you so
extravagant a sum?”
“For my necklace, madame,” replied Boehmer, coolly.
“What!” I exclaimed, “that necklace again, which you have teased the
Queen about so many years!  Did you not tell me you had sold it at
Constantinople?”
“The Queen desired me to give that answer to all who should speak to me
on the subject,” said the wretched dupe.  He then told me that the Queen
wished to have the necklace, and had had it purchased for her by
Monseigneur, the Cardinal de Rohan.
“You are deceived,” I exclaimed; “the Queen has not once spoken to the
Cardinal since his return from Vienna; there is not a man at her Court
less favourably looked upon.”
“You are deceived yourself, madame,” said Boehmer; “she sees him so much
in private that it was to his Eminence she gave thirty thousand francs,
which were paid me as an instalment; she took them, in his presence, out
of the little secretaire of Sevres porcelain next the fireplace in her
boudoir.”
“And the Cardinal told you all this?”
“Yes, madame, himself.”
“What a detestable plot!”  cried I.
“Indeed, to say the truth, madame, I begin to be much alarmed, for his
Eminence assured me that the Queen would wear the necklace on Whit-
Sunday, but I did not see it upon her, and it was that which induced me
to write to her Majesty.”
He then asked me what he ought to do.  I advised him to go on to
Versailles, instead of returning to Paris, whence he had just arrived;
to obtain an immediate audience from the Baron de Breteuil, who, as head
of the King’s household, was the minister of the department to which
Boehmer belonged, and to be circumspect; and I added that he appeared to
me extremely culpable,–not as a diamond merchant, but because being a
sworn officer it was unpardonable of him to have acted without the direct
orders of the King, the Queen, or the Minister.  He answered, that he had
not acted without direct orders; that he had in his possession all the
notes signed by the Queen, and that he had even been obliged to show them
to several bankers in order to induce them to extend the time for his
payments.  I urged his departure for Versailles, and he assured me he
would go there immediately.  Instead of following my advice, he went to
the Cardinal, and it was of this visit of Boehmer’s that his Eminence
made a memorandum, found in a drawer overlooked by the Abbe Georgel when
he burnt, by order of the Cardinal, all the papers which the latter had
at Paris.  The memorandum was thus worded: “On this day, 3d August,
Boehmer went to Madame Campan’s country house, and she told him that the
Queen had never had his necklace, and that he had been deceived.”
When Boehmer was gone, I wanted to follow him, and go to the Queen; my
father-in-law prevented me, and ordered me to leave the minister to
elucidate such an important affair, observing that it was an infernal
plot; that I had given Boehmer the best advice, and had nothing more to
do with the business.  Boehmer never said one word to me about the woman
De Lamotte, and her name was mentioned for the first time by the Cardinal
in his answers to the interrogatories put to him before the King.  After
seeing the Cardinal, Boehmer went to Trianon, and sent a message to the
Queen, purporting that I had advised him to come and speak to her.  His
very words were repeated to her Majesty, who said, “He is mad; I have
nothing to say to him, and will not see him.”  Two or three days
afterwards the Queen sent for me to Petit Trianon, to rehearse with me
the part of Rosina, which she was to perform in the “Barbier de Seville."
I was alone with her, sitting upon her couch; no mention was made of
anything but the part.  After we had spent an hour in the rehearsal, her
Majesty asked me why I had sent Boehmer to her; saying he had been in my
name to speak to her, and that she would not see him.  It was in this
manner I learnt that he had not followed my advice in the slightest
degree.  The change of my countenance, when I heard the man’s name, was
very perceptible; the Queen perceived it, and questioned me.  I entreated
her to see him, and assured her it was of the utmost importance for her
peace of mind; that there was a plot going on, of which she was not
aware; and that it was a serious one, since engagements signed by herself
were shown about to people who had lent Boehmer money.  Her surprise and
vexation were great.  She desired me to remain at Trianon, and sent off a
courier to Paris, ordering Boehmer to come to her upon some pretext which
has escaped my recollection.  He came next morning; in fact it was the
day on which the play was performed, and that was the last amusement the
Queen allowed herself at that retreat.
The Queen made him enter her closet, and asked him by what fatality it
was that she was still doomed to hear of his foolish pretence of selling
her an article which she had steadily refused for several years.  He
replied that he was compelled, being unable to pacify his creditors any
longer.  “What are your creditors to me?”  said her Majesty.  Boehmer
then regularly related to her all that he had been made to believe had
passed between the Queen and himself through the intervention of the
Cardinal.  She was equally incensed and surprised at each thing she
heard.  In vain did she speak; the jeweller, equally importunate and
dangerous, repeated incessantly, “Madame, there is no longer time for
feigning; condescend to confess that you have my necklace, and let some
assistance be given to me, or my bankruptcy will soon bring the whole to
light.”
It is easy to imagine how the Queen must have suffered.  On Boehmer’s
going away, I found her in an alarming condition; the idea that any one
could have believed that such a man as the Cardinal possessed her full
confidence; that she should have employed him to deal with a tradesman
without the King’s knowledge, for a thing which she had refused to accept
from the King himself, drove her to desperation.  She sent first for the
Abbe de Vermond, and then for the Baron de Breteuil.  Their hatred and
contempt for the Cardinal made them too easily forget that the lowest
faults do not prevent the higher orders of the empire from being defended
by those to whom they have the honour to belong; that a Rohan, a Prince
of the Church, however culpable he might be, would be sure to have a
considerable party which would naturally be joined by all the
discontented persons of the Court, and all the frondeurs of Paris.
They too easily believed that he would be stripped of all the advantages
of his rank and order, and given up to the disgrace due to his irregular
conduct; they deceived themselves.
I saw the Queen after the departure of the Baron and the Abbe; her
agitation made me shudder.  “Fraud must be unmasked,” said she; “when the
Roman purple and the title of Prince cover a mere money-seeker, a cheat
who dares to compromise the wife of his sovereign, France and all Europe
should know it.”  It is evident that from that moment the fatal plan was
decided on.  The Queen perceived my alarm; I did not conceal it from her.
I knew too well that she had many enemies not to be apprehensive on
seeing her attract the attention of the whole world to an intrigue that
they would try to complicate still more.  I entreated her to seek the
most prudent and moderate advice.  She silenced me by desiring me to make
myself easy, and to rest satisfied that no imprudence would be committed.
On the following Sunday, the 15th of August, being the Assumption, at
twelve o’clock, at the very moment when the Cardinal, dressed in his
pontifical garments, was about to proceed to the chapel, he was sent for
into the King’s closet, where the Queen then was.
The King said to him, “You have purchased diamonds of Boehmer?”
“Yes, Sire.”
“What have you done with them?”
“I thought they had been delivered to the Queen.”
“Who commissioned you?”
“A lady, called the Comtesse de Lamotte-Valois, who handed me a letter
from the Queen; and I thought I was gratifying her Majesty by taking this
business on myself.”
The Queen here interrupted him and said, “How, monsieur, could you
believe that I should select you, to whom I have not spoken for eight
years, to negotiate anything for me, and especially through the mediation
of a woman whom I do not even know?”
“I see plainly,” said the Cardinal, “that I have been duped.  I will pay
for the necklace; my desire to please your Majesty blinded me; I
suspected no trick in the affair, and I am sorry for it.”
He then took out of his pocket-book a letter from the Queen to Madame de
Lamotte, giving him this commission.  The King took it, and, holding it
towards the Cardinal, said:
“This is neither written nor signed by the Queen.  How could a Prince of
the House of Rohan, and a Grand Almoner of France, ever think that the
Queen would sign Marie Antoinette de France?  Everybody knows that queens
sign only by their baptismal names.  But, monsieur,” pursued the King,
handing him a copy of his letter to Baehmer, “have you ever written such
a letter as this?”
Having glanced over it, the Cardinal said, “I do not remember having
written it.”
“But what if the original, signed by yourself, were shown to you?”
“If the letter be signed by myself it is genuine.”
He was extremely confused, and repeated several times, “I have been
deceived, Sire; I will pay for the necklace.  I ask pardon of your
Majesties.”
“Then explain to me,” resumed the King, “the whole of this enigma.  I do
not wish to find you guilty; I had rather you would justify yourself.
Account for all the manoeuvres with Baehmer, these assurances and these
letters.”
The Cardinal then, turning pale, and leaning against the table, said,
“Sire, I am too much confused to answer your Majesty in a way–”
“Compose yourself, Cardinal, and go into my cabinet; you will there find
paper, pens, and ink,–write what you have to say to me.”
The Cardinal went into the King’s cabinet, and returned a quarter of an
hour afterwards with a document as confused as his verbal answers had
been.  The King then said, “Withdraw, monsieur.”  The Cardinal left the
King’s chamber, with the Baron de Breteuil, who gave him in custody to a
lieutenant of the Body Guard, with orders to take him to his apartment.
M. d’Agoult, aide-major of the Body Guard, afterwards took him into
custody, and conducted him to his hotel, and thence to the Bastille.  But
while the Cardinal had with him only the young lieutenant of the Body
Guard, who was much embarrassed at having such an order to execute, his
Eminence met his heyduc at the door of the Salon of Hercules; he spoke to
him in German and then asked the lieutenant if he could lend him a
pencil; the officer gave him that which he carried about him, and the
Cardinal wrote to the Abbe Georgel, his grand vicar and friend, instantly
to burn all Madame de Lamotte’s correspondence, and all his other
letters.
     [The Abbe Georgel thus relates the circumstance: The Cardinal, at
     that trying moment, gave an astonishing proof of his presence of
     mind; notwithstanding the escort which surrounded him, favoured by
     the attendant crowd, he stopped, and stooping down with his face
     towards the wall, as if to fasten his buckle, snatched out his
     pencil and hastily wrote a few words upon a scrap of paper placed
     under his hand in his square red cap.  He rose again and proceeded.
     on entering his house, his people formed a lane; he slipped this
     paper, unperceived, into the hand of a confidential valet de
     chambre, who waited for him at the door of his apartment.”  This
     story is scarcely credible; it is not at the moment of a prisoner’s
     arrest, when an inquisitive crowd surrounds and watches him, that he
     can stop and write secret messages.  However, the valet de chambre
     posts off to Paris.  He arrives at the palace of the Cardinal
     between twelve and one o’clock; and his horse falls dead in the
     stable.  “I was in my apartment,” said the Abbe Georgel, “the valet
     de chambre entered wildly, with a deadly paleness on his
     countenance, and exclaimed, ’All is lost; the Prince is arrested.’
     He instantly fell, fainting, and dropped the note of which he was
     the bearer.”  The portfolio containing the papers which might
     compromise the Cardinal was immediately placed beyond the reach of
     all search.  Madame de Lamotte also was foolishly allowed sufficient
     time after she heard of the arrest of the Cardinal to burn all the
     letters she had received from him.  Assisted by Beugnot, she
     completed this at three the same morning that she was: arrested at
     four.–See “Memoirs of Comte de Beugnot,” vol i., p. 74.]
This commission was executed before M. de Crosne, lieutenant of police,
had received an order from the Baron de Breteuil to put seals upon the
Cardinal’s papers.  The destruction of all his Eminence’s correspondence,
and particularly that with Madame de Lamotte, threw an impenetrable cloud
over the whole affair.
From that moment all proofs of this intrigue disappeared.  Madame de
Lamotte was apprehended at Bar-sur-Aube; her husband had already gone to
England.  From the beginning of this fatal affair all the proceedings of
the Court appear to have been prompted by imprudence and want of
foresight; the obscurity resulting left free scope for the fables of
which the voluminous memorials written on one side and the other
consisted.  The Queen so little imagined what could have given rise to
the intrigue, of which she was about to become the victim, that, at the
moment when the King was interrogating the Cardinal, a terrific idea
entered her mind.  With that rapidity of thought caused by personal
interest and extreme agitation, she fancied that, if a design to ruin her
in the eyes of the King and the French people were the concealed motive
of this intrigue, the Cardinal would, perhaps, affirm that she had the
necklace; that he had been honoured with her confidence for this
purchase, made without the King’s knowledge; and point out some secret
place in her apartment, where he might have got some villain to hide it.
Want of money and the meanest swindling were the sole motives for this
criminal affair.  The necklace had already been taken to pieces and sold,
partly in London, partly in Holland, and the rest in Paris.
The moment the Cardinal’s arrest was known a universal clamour arose.
Every memorial that appeared during the trial increased the outcry.
On this occasion the clergy took that course which a little wisdom and
the least knowledge of the spirit of such a body ought to have foreseen.
The Rohans and the House of Conde, as well as the clergy, made their
complaints heard everywhere.  The King consented to having a legal
judgment, and early in September he addressed letters-patent to the
Parliament, in which he said that he was “filled with the most just
indignation on seeing the means which, by the confession of his Eminence
the Cardinal, had been employed in order to inculpate his most dear
spouse and companion.”
Fatal moment!  in which the Queen found herself, in consequence of this
highly impolitic step, on trial with a subject, who ought to have been
dealt with by the power of the King alone.  The Princes and Princesses of
the House of Conde, and of the Houses of Rohan, Soubise, and Guemenee,
put on mourning, and were seen ranged in the way of the members of the
Grand Chamber to salute them as they proceeded to the palace, on the days
of the Cardinal’s trial; and Princes of the blood openly canvassed
against the Queen of France.
The Pope wished to claim, on behalf of the Cardinal de Rohan, the right
belonging to his ecclesiastical rank, and demanded that he should be
judged at Rome.  The Cardinal de Bernis, ambassador from France to his
Holiness, formerly Minister for Foreign Affairs, blending the wisdom of
an old diplomatist with the principles of a Prince of the Church, wished
that this scandalous affair should be hushed up.  The King’s aunts, who
were on very intimate terms with the ambassador, adopted his opinion, and
the conduct of the King and Queen was equally and loudly censured in the
apartments of Versailles and in the hotels and coffee-houses of Paris.
Madame, the King’s sister-in-law, had been the sole protectress of De
Lamotte, and had confined her patronage to granting her a pension of
twelve to fifteen hundred francs.  Her brother was in the navy, but the
Marquis de Chabert, to whom he had been recommended, could never train a
good officer.  The Queen in vain endeavoured to call to mind the features
of this person, of whom she had often heard as an intriguing woman, who
came frequently on Sundays to the gallery of Versailles.  At the time
when all France was engrossed by the persecution against the Cardinal,
the portrait of the Comtesse de Lamotte  Valois was publicly sold.  Her
Majesty desired me one day, when I was going to Paris, to buy her the
engraving, which was said to be a tolerable likeness, that she might
ascertain whether she could recognise in it any person whom she might
have seen in the gallery.
     [The public, with the exception of the lowest class, were admitted
     into the gallery and larger apartments of Versailles, as they were
     into the park.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
The woman De Lamotte’s father was a peasant at Auteuil, though he called
himself Valois.  Madame de Boulainvilliers once saw from her terrace two
pretty little peasant girls, each labouring under a heavy bundle of
sticks.  The priest of the village, who was walking with her, told her
that the children possessed some curious papers, and that he had no doubt
they were descendants of a Valois, an illegitimate son of one of the
princes of that name.
The family of Valois had long ceased to appear in the world.  Hereditary
vices had gradually plunged them into the deepest misery.  I have heard
that the last Valois then known occupied the estate called Gros Bois;
that as he seldom came to Court, Louis XIII. asked him what he was about
that he remained so constantly in the country; and that this M. de Valois
merely answered, “Sire, I only do there what I ought.”  It was shortly
afterwards discovered that he was coining.
Neither the Queen herself nor any one near her ever had the slightest
connection with the woman De Lamotte; and during her prosecution she
could point out but one of the Queen’s servants, named Desclos, a valet
of the Queen’s bedchamber, to whom she pre tended she had delivered
Boehmer’s necklace.  This Desclos was a very honest man; upon being
confronted with the woman De Lamotte, it was proved that she had never
seen him but once, which was at the house of the wife of a surgeon-
accoucheur at Versailles, the only person she visited at Court; and that
she had not given him the necklace.  Madame de Lamotte married a private
in Monsieur’s body-guard; she lodged at Versailles at the Belle Image, a
very inferior furnished house; and it is inconceivable how so obscure a
person could succeed in making herself believed to be a friend of the
Queen, who, though so extremely affable, seldom granted audiences, and
only to titled persons.
The trial of the Cardinal is too generally known to require me to repeat
its details here.  The point most embarrassing to him was the interview
he had in February, 1785, with M. de Saint-James, to whom he confided the
particulars of the Queen’s pretended commission, and showed the contract
approved and signed Marie Antoinette de France.  The memorandum found in
a drawer of the Cardinal’s bureau, in which he had himself written what
Baehmer told him after having seen me at my country house, was likewise
an unfortunate document for his Eminence.
I offered to the King to go and declare that Baehmer had told me that the
Cardinal assured him he had received from the Queen’s own hand the thirty
thousand francs given on account upon the bargain being concluded, and
that his Eminence had seen her Majesty take that sum in bills from the
porcelain secretaire in her boudoir.  The King declined my offer, and
said to me, “Were you alone when Boehmer told you this?”  I answered that
I was alone with him in my garden.  “Well,” resumed he, “the man would
deny the fact; he is now sure of being paid his sixteen hundred thousand
francs, which the Cardinal’s family will find it necessary to make good
to him; we can no longer rely upon his sincerity; it would look as if you
were sent by the Queen, and that would not be proper.”
     [The guilty woman no sooner knew that all was about to be discovered
     than she sent for the jewellers, and told them the Cardinal had
     perceived that the agreement, which he believed to have been signed
     by the Queen, was a false and forged document.  “However,” added
     she, “the Cardinal possesses a considerable fortune, and he can very
     well pay you.”  These words reveal the whole secret.  The Countess
     had taken the necklace to herself, and flattered herself that M. de
     Rohan, seeing himself deceived and cruelly imposed upon, would
     determine to pay and make the beat terms he could, rather than
     suffer a matter of this nature to become public.-"Secret
     Correspondence of the Court of Louis XVI."]
The procureur general’s information was severe on the Cardinal.  The
Houses of Conde and Rohan and the majority of the nobility saw in this
affair only an attack on the Prince’s rank, the clergy only a blow aimed
at the privileges of a cardinal.  The clergy demanded that the
unfortunate business of the Prince Cardinal de Rohan should be submitted
to ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the Archbishop of Narbonne, then
President of the Convocation, made representations upon the subject to
the King; the bishops wrote to his Majesty to remind him that a private
ecclesiastic implicated in the affair then pending would have a right to
claim his constitutional judges, and that this right was refused to a
cardinal, his superior in the hierarchical order.  In short, the clergy
and the greater part of the nobility were at that time outrageous against
authority, and chiefly against the Queen.
The procureur-general’s conclusions, and those of a part of the heads of
the magistracy, were as severe towards the Cardinal as the information
had been; yet he was fully acquitted by a majority of three voices; the
woman De Lamotte was condemned to be whipped, branded, and imprisoned;
and her husband, for contumacy, was condemned to the galleys for life.
     [The following extract is from the “Memoirs” of the Abbe Georgel:
     “The sittings were long and multiplied; it was necessary to read the
     whole proceedings; more than fifty judges sat; a master of requests;
     a friend of the Prince, wrote down all that was said there, and sent
     it to his advisers, who found means to inform the Cardinal of it,
     and to add the plan of conduct he ought to pursue.”  D’Epremesnil,
     and other young counsellors, showed upon that occasion but too much
     audacity in braving the Court, too much eagerness in seizing an
     opportunity of attacking it.  They were the first to shake that
     authority which their functions made it a duty in them to respect.-
     NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
M. Pierre de Laurencel, the procureur general’s substitute, sent the
Queen a list of the names of the members of the Grand Chamber, with the
means made use of by the friends of the Cardinal to gain their votes
during the trial.  I had this list to keep among the papers which the
Queen deposited in the house of M. Campan, my father-in-law, and which,
at his death, she ordered me to preserve.  I burnt this statement, but I
remember ladies performed a part not very creditable to their principles;
it was by them, in consideration of large sums which they received, that
some of the oldest and most respected members were won over.  I did not
see a single name amongst the whole Parliament that was gained directly.
The belief confirmed by time is, that the Cardinal was completely duped
by the woman De Lamotte and Cagliostro.  The King may have been in error
in thinking him an accomplice in this miserable and criminal scheme, but
I have faithfully repeated his Majesty’s judgment about it.
However, the generally received opinion that the Baron de Breteuil’s
hatred for the Cardinal was the cause of the scandal and the unfortunate
result of this affair contributed to the disgrace of the former still
more than his refusal to give his granddaughter in marriage to the son of
the Duc de Polignac.  The Abbe de Vermond threw the whole blame of the
imprudence and impolicy of the affair of the Cardinal de Rohan upon the
minister, and ceased to be the friend and supporter of the Baron de
Breteuil with the Queen.
In the early part of the year 1786, the Cardinal, as has been said,
was fully acquitted, and came out of the Bastille, while Madame de
Lamotte was condemned to be whipped, branded, and imprisoned.  The Court,
persisting in the erroneous views which had hitherto guided its measures,
conceived that the Cardinal and the woman De Lamotte were equally
culpable and unequally punished, and sought to restore the balance of
justice by exiling the Cardinal to La Chaise-Dieu, and suffering Madame
de Lamotte to escape a few days after she entered l’Hopital.  This new
error confirmed the Parisians in the idea that the wretch De Lamotte, who
had never been able to make her way so far as to the room appropriated to
the Queen’s women, had really interested the Queen herself.
     [Further particulars will be found in the “Memoirs of the Comte de
     Beugnot” (London: Hurst & Blackett, 1871), as he knew Madame de
     Lamotte from the days of her early childhood (when the three
     children, the Baron de Valois, who died captain of a frigate, and
     the two Mademoiselles de Saint-Remi, the last descendants of the
     Baron de Saint-Remi, a natural son of Henri II., were almost
     starving) to the time of her temporary prosperity.  In fact, he was
     with her when she burnt the correspondence of the Cardinal, in the
     interval the Court foolishly allowed between his arrest and her
     capture, and De Beugnot believed he had met at her house, at the
     moment of their return from their successful trick, the whole party
     engaged in deluding the Cardinal.  It is worth noting that he was
     then struck by the face of Mademoiselle d’Oliva, who had just
     personated the Queen in presenting a rose to the Cardinal.  It may
     also be cited as a pleasing quality of Madame de Lamotte that she,
     “in her ordinary conversation, used the words stupid and honest as
     synonymous."–See “Beugnot,” vol. i., p. 60.]
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
