


A superb pavilion had been prepared upon the frontier near Kehl.  It
consisted of a vast salon, connected with two apartments, one of which
was assigned to the lords and ladies of the Court of Vienna, and the
other to the suite of the Dauphiness, composed of the Comtesse de
Noailles, her lady of honour; the Duchesse de Cosse, her dame d’atours;
four ladies of the palace; the Comte de Saulx-Tavannes, chevalier
d’honneur; the Comte de Tesse, first equerry; the Bishop of Chartres,
first almoner; the officers of the Body Guard, and the equerries.
When the Dauphiness had been entirely undressed, in order that she might
retain nothing belonging to a foreign Court (an etiquette always observed
on such an occasion), the doors were opened; the young Princess came
forward, looking round for the Comtesse de Noailles; then, rushing into
her arms, she implored her, with tears in her eyes, and with heartfelt
sincerity, to be her guide and support.
While doing justice to the virtues of the Comtesse de Noailles, those
sincerely attached to the Queen have always considered it as one of her
earliest misfortunes not to have found, in the person of her adviser,
a woman indulgent, enlightened, and administering good advice with that
amiability which disposes young persons to follow it.  The Comtesse de
Noailles had nothing agreeable in her appearance; her demeanour was stiff
and her mien severe.  She was perfect mistress of etiquette; but she
wearied the young Princess with it, without making her sensible of its
importance.  It would have been sufficient to represent to the Dauphiness
that in France her dignity depended much upon customs not necessary at
Vienna to secure the respect and love of the good and submissive
Austrians for the imperial family; but the Dauphiness was perpetually
tormented by the remonstrances of the Comtesse de Noailles, and at the
same time was led by the Abbe de Vermond to ridicule both the lessons
upon etiquette and her who gave them.  She preferred raillery to
argument, and nicknamed the Comtesse de Noailles Madame l’Etiquette.
The fetes which were given at Versailles on the marriage of the Dauphin
were very splendid.  The Dauphiness arrived there at the hour for her
toilet, having slept at La Muette, where Louis XV. had been to receive
her; and where that Prince, blinded by a feeling unworthy of a sovereign
and the father of a family, caused the young Princess, the royal family,
and the ladies of the Court, to sit down to supper with Madame du Barry.
The Dauphiness was hurt at this conduct; she spoke of it openly enough to
those with whom she was intimate, but she knew how to conceal her
dissatisfaction in public, and her behaviour showed no signs of it.
She was received at Versailles in an apartment on the ground floor, under
that of the late Queen, which was not ready for her until six months
after her marriage.
The Dauphiness, then fifteen years of age, beaming with freshness,
appeared to all eyes more than beautiful.  Her walk partook at once of
the dignity of the Princesses of her house, and of the grace of the
French; her eyes were mild, her smile amiable.  When she went to chapel,
as soon as she had taken the first few steps in the long gallery, she
discerned, all the way to its extremity, those persons whom she ought to
salute with the consideration due to their rank; those on whom she should
bestow an inclination of the head; and lastly, those who were to be
satisfied with a smile, calculated to console them for not being entitled
to greater honours.
Louis XV. was enchanted with the young Dauphiness; all his conversation
was about her graces, her vivacity, and the aptness of her repartees.
She was yet more successful with the royal family when they beheld her
shorn of the splendour of the diamonds with which she had been adorned
during the first days of her marriage.  When clothed in a light dress of
gauze or taffety she was compared to the Venus dei Medici, and the
Atalanta of the Marly Gardens.  Poets sang her charms; painters attempted
to copy her features.  One artist’s fancy led him to place the portrait
of Marie Antoinette in the heart of a full-blown rose.  His ingenious
idea was rewarded by Louis XV.
The King continued to talk only of the Dauphiness; and Madame du Barry
ill-naturedly endeavoured to damp his enthusiasm.  Whenever Marie
Antoinette was the topic, she pointed out the irregularity of her
features, criticised the ’bons mots’ quoted as hers, and rallied the King
upon his prepossession in her favour.  Madame du Barry was affronted at
not receiving from the Dauphiness those attentions to which she thought
herself entitled; she did not conceal her vexation from the King; she was
afraid that the grace and cheerfulness of the young Princess would make
the domestic circle of the royal family more agreeable to the old
sovereign, and that he would escape her chains; at the same time, hatred
to the Choiseul party contributed powerfully to excite the enmity of the
favourite.
The fall of that minister took place in November, 1770, six months after
his long influence in the Council had brought about the alliance with the
House of Austria and the arrival of Marie Antoinette at the Court of
France.  The Princess, young, frank, volatile, and inexperienced, found
herself without any other guide than the Abbe de Vermond, in a Court
ruled by the enemy of the minister who had brought her there, and in the
midst of people who hated Austria, and detested any alliance with the
imperial house.
The Duc d’Aiguillon, the Duc de La Vauguyon, the Marechal de Richelieu,
the Rohans, and other considerable families, who had made use of Madame
du Barry to overthrow the Duke, could not flatter themselves,
notwithstanding their powerful intrigues, with a hope of being able to
break off an alliance solemnly announced, and involving such high
political interests.  They therefore changed their mode of attack, and it
will be seen how the conduct of the Dauphin served as a basis for their
hopes.
The Dauphiness continually gave proofs of both sense and feeling.
Sometimes she even suffered herself to be carried away by those
transports of compassionate kindness which are not to be controlled by
the customs which rank establishes.
In consequence of the fire in the Place Louis XV., which occurred at the
time of the nuptial entertainments, the Dauphin and Dauphiness sent
their, whole income for the year to the relief of the unfortunate
families who lost their relatives on that disastrous day.
This was one of those ostentatious acts of generosity which are dictated
by the policy of princes, at least as much as by their compassion; but
the grief of Marie Antoinette was profound, and lasted several days;
nothing could console her for the loss of so many innocent victims; she
spoke of it, weeping, to her ladies, one of whom, thinking, no doubt, to
divert her mind, told her that a great number of thieves had been found
among the bodies, and that their pockets were filled with watches and
other valuables.  “They have at least been well punished,” added the
person who related these particulars.  “Oh, no, no, madame!” replied the
Dauphiness; “they died by the side of honest people.”
The Dauphiness had brought from Vienna a considerable number of white
diamonds; the King added to them the gift of the diamonds and pearls of
the late Dauphiness, and also put into her hands a collar of pearls, of a
single row, the smallest of which was as large as a filbert, and which
had been brought into France by Anne of Austria, and appropriated by that
Princess to the use of the Queens and Dauphinesses of France.
The three Princesses, daughters of Louis XV., joined in making her
magnificent presents.  Madame Adelaide at the same time gave the young
Princess a key to the private corridors of the Chateau, by means of
which, without any suite, and without being perceived, she could get to
the apartments of her aunts, and see them in private.  The Dauphiness,
on receiving the key, told them, with infinite grace, that if they had
meant to make her appreciate the superb presents they were kind enough to
bestow upon her, they should not at the same time have offered her one of
such inestimable value; since to that key she should be indebted for an
intimacy and advice unspeakably precious at her age.  She did, indeed,
make use of it very frequently; but Madame Victoire alone permitted her,
so long as she continued Dauphiness, to visit her familiarly.  Madame
Adelaide could not overcome her prejudices against Austrian princesses,
and was wearied with the somewhat petulant gaiety of the Dauphiness.
Madame Victoire was concerned at this, feeling that their society and
counsel would have been highly useful to a young person otherwise likely
to meet with none but sycophants.  She endeavoured, therefore, to induce
her to take pleasure in the society of the Marquise de Durfort, her lady
of honour and favourite.  Several agreeable entertainments took place at
the house of this lady, but the Comtesse de Noailles and the Abbe de
Vermond soon opposed these meetings.
A circumstance which happened in hunting, near the village of Acheres,
in the forest of Fontainebleau, afforded the young Princess an
opportunity of displaying her respect for old age, and her compassion for
misfortune.  An aged peasant was wounded by the stag; the Dauphiness
jumped out of her calash, placed the peasant, with his wife and children,
in it, had the family taken back to their cottage, and bestowed upon them
every attention and every necessary assistance.  Her heart was always
open to the feelings of compassion, and the recollection of her rank
never restrained her sensibility.  Several persons in her service entered
her room one evening, expecting to find nobody there but the officer in
waiting; they perceived the young Princess seated by the side of this
man, who was advanced in years; she had placed near him a bowl full of
water, was stanching the blood which issued from a wound he had received
in his hand with her handkerchief, which she had torn up to bind it, and
was fulfilling towards him all the duties of a pious sister of charity.
The old man, affected even to tears, out of respect allowed his august
mistress to act as she thought proper.  He had hurt himself in
endeavouring to move a rather heavy piece of furniture at the Princess’s
request.
In the month of July, 1770, an unfortunate occurrence that took place in
a family which the Dauphiness honoured with her favour contributed again
to show not only her sensibility but also the benevolence of her
disposition.  One of her women in waiting had a son who was an officer in
the gens d’armes of the guard; this young man thought himself affronted
by a clerk in the War Department, and imprudently sent him a challenge;
he killed his adversary in the forest of Compiegne.  The family of the
young man who was killed, being in possession of the challenge, demanded
justice.  The King, distressed on account of several duels which had
recently taken place, had unfortunately declared that he would show no
mercy on the first event of that kind which could be proved; the culprit
was therefore arrested.  His mother, in the deepest grief, hastened to
throw herself at the feet of the Dauphiness, the Dauphin, and the young
Princesses.  After an hour’s supplication they obtained from the King the
favour so much desired.  On the next day a lady of rank, while
congratulating the Dauphiness, had the malice to add that the mother had
neglected no means of success on the occasion, having solicited not only
the royal family, but even Madame du Barry.  The Dauphiness replied that
the fact justified the favourable opinion she had formed of the worthy
woman; that the heart of a mother should hesitate at nothing for the
salvation of her son; and that in her place, if she had thought it would
be serviceable, she would have thrown herself at the feet of Zamor.
     [A little Indian who carried the Comtesse du Barry’s train.  Louis
     XV.  often amused himself with the little marmoset, and jestingly
     made him Governor of Louveciennes; he received an annual income of
     3,000 francs.]
Some time after the marriage entertainments the Dauphiness made her entry
into Paris, and was received with transports of joy.  After dining in the
King’s apartment at the Tuileries, she was forced, by the reiterated
shouts of the multitude, with whom the garden was filled, to present
herself upon the balcony fronting the principal walk.  On seeing such a
crowd of heads with their eyes fixed upon her, she exclaimed, “Grand-
Dieu! what a concourse!"–"Madame,” said the old Duc de Brissac, the
Governor of Paris, “I may tell you, without fear of offending the
Dauphin, that they are so many lovers.”  2 The Dauphin took no umbrage at
either acclamations or marks of homage of which the Dauphiness was the
object.  The most mortifying indifference, a coldness which frequently
degenerated into rudeness, were the sole feelings which the young Prince
then manifested towards her.  Not all her charms could gain even upon his
senses.  This estrangement, which lasted a long time, was said to be the
work of the Duc de La Vauguyon.
The Dauphiness, in fact, had no sincere friends at Court except the Duc
de Choiseul and his party.  Will it be credited that the plans laid
against Marie Antoinette went so far as divorce?  I have been assured of
it by persons holding high situations at Court, and many circumstances
tend to confirm the opinion.  On the journey to Fontainebleau, in the
year of the marriage, the inspectors of public buildings were gained over
to manage so that the apartment intended for the Dauphin, communicating
with that of the Dauphiness, should not be finished, and a room at the
extremity of the building was temporarily assigned to him.  The
Dauphiness, aware that this was the result of intrigue, had the courage
to complain of it to Louis XV., who, after severe reprimands, gave orders
so positive that within the week the apartment was ready.  Every method
was tried to continue or augment the indifference which the Dauphin long
manifested towards his youthful spouse.  She was deeply hurt at it, but
she never suffered herself to utter the slightest complaint on the
subject.  Inattention to, even contempt for, the charms which she heard
extolled on all sides, nothing induced her to break silence; and some
tears, which would involuntarily burst from her eyes, were the sole
symptoms of her inward sufferings discoverable by those in her service.
Once only, when tired out with the misplaced remonstrances of an old lady
attached to her person, who wished to dissuade her from riding on
horseback, under the impression that it would prevent her producing heirs
to the crown, “Mademoiselle,” said she, “in God’s name, leave me in
peace; be assured that I can put no heir in danger.”
The Dauphiness found at the Court of Louis XV., besides the three
Princesses, the King’s daughters, the Princes also, brothers of the
Dauphin, who were receiving their education, and Clotilde and Elisabeth,
still in the care of Madame de Marsan, governess of the children of
France.  The elder of the two latter Princesses, in 1777, married the
Prince of Piedmont, afterwards King of Sardinia.  This Princess was in
her infancy, so extremely large that the people nicknamed her ’gros
Madame.’
     [Madame Clotilde of France, a sister of the King, was
     extraordinarily fat for her height and age.  One of her playfellows,
     having been indiscreet enough even in her presence to make use of
     the nickname given to her, received a severe reprimand from the
     Comtesse de Marsan, who hinted to her that she would do well in not
     making her appearance again before the Princess.  Madame Clotilde
     sent for her the next day: “My governess,” said she, “has done her
     duty, and I will do mine; come and see me as usual, and think no
     more of a piece of inadvertence, which I myself have forgotten."
     This Princess, so heavy in body, possessed the most agreeable and
     playful wit.  Her affability and grace rendered her dear to all who
     came near her.–NOTE BY THE EDITOR]
The second Princess was the pious Elisabeth, the victim of her respect
and tender attachment for the King, her brother.  She was still scarcely
out of her leading-strings at the period of the Dauphin’s marriage.  The
Dauphiness showed her marked preference.  The governess, who sought to
advance the Princess to whom nature had been least favourable, was
offended at the Dauphiness’s partiality for Madame Elisabeth, and by her
injudicious complaints weakened the friendship which yet subsisted
between Madame Clotilde and Marie Antoinette.  There even arose some
degree of rivalry on the subject of education; and that which the Empress
Maria Theresa bestowed on her daughters was talked of openly and
unfavourably enough.  The Abbe de Vermond thought himself affronted,
took a part in the quarrel, and added his complaints and jokes to those
of the Dauphiness on the criticisms of the governess; he even indulged
himself in his turn in reflections on the tuition of Madame Clotilde.
Everything becomes known at Court.  Madame de Marsan was informed of all
that had been said in the Dauphiness’s circle, and was very angry with
her on account of it.
From that moment a centre of intrigue, or rather gossip, against Marie
Antoinette was established round Madame de Marsan’s fireside; her most
trifling actions were there construed ill; her gaiety, and the harmless
amusements in which she sometimes indulged in her own apartments with the
more youthful ladies of her train, and even with the women in her
service, were stigmatised as criminal.  Prince Louis de Rohan, sent
through the influence of this clique ambassador to Vienna, was the echo
there of these unmerited comments, and threw himself into a series of
culpable accusations which he proffered under the guise of zeal.  He
ceaselessly represented the young Dauphiness as alienating all hearts by
levities unsuitable to the dignity of the French Court.  The Princess
frequently received from the Court of Vienna remonstrances, of the origin
of which she could not long remain in ignorance.  From this period must
be dated that aversion which she never ceased to manifest for the Prince
de Rohan.
About the same time the Dauphiness received information of a letter
written by Prince Louis to the Duc d’Aiguillon, in which the ambassador
expressed himself in very free language respecting the intentions of
Maria Theresa with relation to the partition of Poland.  This letter of
Prince Louis had been read at the Comtesse du Barry’s; the levity of the
ambassador’s correspondence wounded the feelings and the dignity of the
Dauphiness at Versailles, while at Vienna the representations which he
made to Maria Theresa against the young Princess terminated in rendering
the motives of his incessant complaints suspected by the Empress.
Maria Theresa at length determined on sending her private secretary,
Baron de Neni, to Versailles, with directions to observe the conduct of
the Dauphiness with attention, and form a just estimate of the opinion of
the Court and of Paris with regard to that Princess.  The Baron de Neni,
after having devoted sufficient time and intelligence to the subject,
undeceived his sovereign as to the exaggerations of the French
ambassador; and the Empress had no difficulty in detecting, among the
calumnies which he had conveyed to her under the specious excuse of
anxiety for her august daughter, proofs of the enmity of a, party which
had never approved of the alliance of the House of Bourbon with her own.
At this period the Dauphiness, though unable to obtain any influence over
the heart of her husband, dreading Louis XV., and justly mistrusting
everything connected with Madame du Barry and the Duc d’Aiguillon, had
not deserved the slightest reproach for that sort of levity which hatred
and her misfortunes afterwards construed into crime.  The Empress,
convinced of the innocence of Marie Antoinette, directed the Baron de
Neni to solicit the recall of the Prince de Rohan, and to inform the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of all the motives which made her require
it; but the House of Rohan interposed between its protege and the
Austrian envoy, and an evasive answer merely was given.
It was not until two months after the death of Louis XV.  that the Court
of Vienna obtained his recall.  The avowed grounds for requiring it were,
first, the public gallantries of Prince Louis with some ladies of the
Court and others; secondly, his surliness and haughtiness towards other
foreign ministers, which would have had more serious consequences,
especially with the ministers of England and Denmark, if the Empress
herself had not interfered; thirdly, his contempt for religion in a
country where it was particularly necessary to show respect for it.
He had been seen frequently to dress himself in clothes of different
colours, assuming the hunting uniforms of various noblemen whom he
visited, with so much audacity that one day in particular, during the
Fete-Dieu, he and all his legation, in green uniforms laced with gold,
broke through a procession which impeded them, in order to make their way
to a hunting party at the Prince de Paar’s; and fourthly, the immense
debts contracted by him and his people, which were tardily and only in
part discharged.
The succeeding marriages of the Comte de Provence and the Comte d’Artois
with two daughters of the King of Sardinia procured society for the
Dauphiness more suitable to her age, and altered her mode of life.
A pair of tolerably fine eyes drew forth, in favour of the Comtesse de
Provence, upon her arrival at Versailles, the only praises which could
reasonably be bestowed upon her.  The Comtesse d’Artois, though not
deformed, was very small; she had a fine complexion; her face, tolerably
pleasing, was not remarkable for anything except the extreme length of
the nose.  But being good and generous, she was beloved by those about
her, and even possessed some influence so long as she was the only
Princess who had produced heirs to the crown.
From this time the closest intimacy subsisted between the three young
families.  They took their meals together, except on those days when they
dined in public.  This manner of living en famille continued until the
Queen sometimes indulged herself in going to dine with the Duchesse de
Polignac, when she was governess; but the evening meetings at supper were
never interrupted; they took place at the house of the Comtesse de
Provence.  Madame Elisabeth made one of the party when she had finished
her education, and sometimes Mesdames, the King’s aunts, were invited.
The custom, which had no precedent at Court, was the work of Marie
Antoinette, and she maintained it with the utmost perseverance.
The Court of Versailles saw no change in point of etiquette during the
reign of Louis XV.  Play took place at the house of the Dauphiness, as
being the first lady of the State.  It had, from the death of Queen Maria
Leczinska to the marriage of the Dauphin, been held at the abode of
Madame Adelade.  This removal, the result of an order of precedence not
to be violated, was not the less displeasing to Madame Adelaide, who
established a separate party for play in her apartments, and scarcely
ever went to that which not only the Court in general, but also the royal
family, were expected to attend.  The full-dress visits to the King on
his ’debotter’ were continued.  High mass was attended daily.  The
airings of the Princesses were nothing more than rapid races in berlins,
during which they were accompanied by Body Guards, equerries, and pages
on horseback.  They galloped for some leagues from Versailles.  Calashes
were used only in hunting.
The young Princesses were desirous to infuse animation into their circle
of associates by something useful as well as pleasant.  They adopted the
plan of learning and performing all the best plays of the French theatre.
The Dauphin was the only spectator.  The three Princesses, the two
brothers of the King, and Messieurs Campan, father and son, were the sole
performers, but they endeavoured to keep this amusement as secret as an
affair of State; they dreaded the censure of Mesdames, and they had no
doubt that Louis XV. would forbid such pastimes if he knew of them.  They
selected for their performance a cabinet in the entresol which nobody had
occasion to enter.
A kind of proscenium, which could be taken down and shut up in a closet,
formed the whole theatre.  The Comte de Provence always knew his part
with imperturbable accuracy; the Comte d’Artois knew his tolerably well,
and recited elegantly; the Princesses acted badly.  The Dauphiness
acquitted herself in some characters with discrimination and feeling.
The chief pleasure of this amusement consisted in all the costumes being
elegant and accurate.  The Dauphin entered into the spirit of these
diversions, and laughed heartily at the comic characters as they came on
the scene; from these amusements may be dated his discontinuance of the
timid manner of his youth, and his taking pleasure in the society of the
Dauphiness.
It was not till a long time afterwards that I learnt these particulars,
M. Campan having kept the secret; but an unforeseen event had well-nigh
exposed the whole mystery.  One day the Queen desired M. Campan to go
down into her closet to fetch something that she had forgotten; he was
dressed for the character of Crispin, and was rouged.  A private
staircase led direct to the entresol through the dressing-room.  M.
Campan fancied he heard some noise, and remained still, behind the door,
which was shut.  A servant belonging to the wardrobe, who was, in fact,
on the staircase, had also heard some noise, and, either from fear or
curiosity, he suddenly opened the door; the figure of Crispin frightened
him so that he fell down backwards, shouting with his might, “Help!
help!”  My father-in-law raised him up, made him recognise his voice,
and laid upon him an injunction of silence as to what he had seen.
He felt himself, however, bound to inform the Dauphiness of what had
happened, and she was afraid that a similar occurrence might betray their
amusements.  They were therefore discontinued.
The Princess occupied her time in her own apartment in the study of music
and the parts in plays which she had to learn; the latter exercise, at
least, produced the beneficial effect of strengthening her memory and
familiarising her with the French language.
While Louis XV.  reigned, the enemies of Marie Antoinette made no attempt
to change public opinion with regard to her.  She was always popular with
the French people in general, and particularly with the inhabitants of
Paris, who went on every opportunity to Versailles, the majority of them
attracted solely by the pleasure of seeing her.  The courtiers did not
fully enter into the popular enthusiasm which the Dauphiness had
inspired; the disgrace of the Duc de Choiseul had removed her real
support from her; and the party which had the ascendency at Court since
the exile of that minister was, politically, as much opposed to her
family as to herself.  The Dauphiness was therefore surrounded by enemies
at Versailles.
Nevertheless everybody appeared outwardly desirous to please her; for the
age of Louis XV., and the apathetic character of the Dauphin,
sufficiently warned courtiers of the important part reserved for the
Princess during the following reign, in case the Dauphin should become
attached to her.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
