


MARIE ANTOINETTE JOSEPHE JEANNE DE LORRAINE, Archduchess of Austria,
daughter of Francois de Lorraine and of Maria Theresa, was born on the
2d of November, 1755, the day of the earthquake at Lisbon; and this
catastrophe, which appeared to stamp the era of her birth with a fatal
mark, without forming a motive for superstitious fear with the Princess,
nevertheless made an impression upon her mind.  As the Empress already
had a great number of daughters, she ardently desired to have another
son, and playfully wagered against her wish with the Duc de Tarouka,
who had insisted that she would give birth to an archduke.  He lost by
the birth of the Princess, and had executed in porcelain a figure with
one knee bent on the earth, and presenting tablets, upon which the
following lines by Metastasio were engraved:
               I lose by your fair daughter’s birth
               Who prophesied a son;
               But if she share her mother’s worth,
               Why, all the world has won!
The Queen was fond of talking of the first years of her youth.  Her
father, the Emperor Francis, had made a deep impression upon her heart;
she lost him when she was scarcely seven years old.  One of those
circumstances which fix themselves strongly in the memories of children
frequently recalled his last caresses to her.  The Emperor was setting
out for Innspruck; he had already left his palace, when he ordered a
gentleman to fetch the Archduchess Marie Antoinette, and bring her to his
carriage.  When she came, he stretched out his arms to receive her, and
said, after having pressed her to his bosom, “I wanted to embrace this
child once more.”  The Emperor died suddenly during the journey, and
never saw his beloved daughter again.
The Queen often spoke of her mother, and with profound respect, but she
based all her schemes for the education of her children on the essentials
which had been neglected in her own.  Maria Theresa, who inspired awe by
her great qualities, taught the Archduchesses to fear and respect rather
than to love her; at least I observed this in the Queen’s feelings
towards her august mother.  She therefore never desired to place between
her own children and herself that distance which had existed in the
imperial family.  She cited a fatal consequence of it, which had made
such a powerful impression upon her that time had never been able to
efface it.
The wife of the Emperor Joseph II. was taken from him in a few days by
an attack of smallpox of the most virulent kind.  Her coffin had recently
been deposited in the vault of the imperial family.  The Archduchess
Josepha, who had been betrothed to the King of Naples, at the instant she
was quitting Vienna received an order from the Empress not to set off
without having offered up a prayer in the vault of her forefathers.  The
Archduchess, persuaded that she should take the disorder to which her
sister-in-law had just fallen a victim, looked upon this order as her
death-warrant.  She loved the young Archduchess Marie Antoinette
tenderly; she took her upon her knees, embraced her with tears, and told
her she was about to leave her, not for Naples, but never to see her
again; that she was going down then to the tomb of her ancestors, and
that she should shortly go again there to remain.  Her anticipation was
realised; confluent smallpox carried her off in a very few days, and her
youngest sister ascended the throne of Naples in her place.
The Empress was too much taken up with high political interests to have
it in her power to devote herself to maternal attentions.  The celebrated
Wansvietten, her physician, went daily, to visit the young imperial
family, and afterwards to Maria Theresa, and gave the most minute details
respecting the health of the Archdukes and Archduchesses, whom she
herself sometimes did not see for eight or ten days at a time.  As soon
as the arrival of a stranger of rank at Vienna was made known, the
Empress brought her family about her, admitted them to her table, and by
this concerted meeting induced a belief that she herself presided over
the education of her children.
The chief governesses, being under no fear of inspection from Maria
Theresa, aimed at making themselves beloved by their pupils by the common
and blamable practice of indulgence, so fatal to the future progress and
happiness of children.  Marie Antoinette was the cause of her governess
being dismissed, through a confession that all her copies and all her
letters were invariably first traced out with pencil; the Comtesse de
Brandes was appointed to succeed her, and fulfilled her duties with great
exactness and talent.  The Queen looked upon having been confided to her
care so late as a misfortune, and always continued upon terms of
friendship with that lady.  The education of Marie Antoinette was
certainly very much neglected.  With the exception of the Italian
language, all that related to belles lettres, and particularly to
history, even that of her own country, was almost entirely unknown to
her.  This was soon found out at the Court of France, and thence arose
the generally received opinion that she was deficient in sense.  It will
be seen in the course of these “Memoirs” whether that opinion was well or
ill founded.  The public prints, however, teemed with assertions of the
superior talents of Maria Theresa’s children.  They often noticed the
answers which the young Princesses gave in Latin to the harangues
addressed to them; they uttered them, it is true, but without
understanding them; they knew not a single word of that language.
Mention was one day made to the Queen of a drawing made by her, and
presented by the Empress to M. Gerard, chief clerk of Foreign Affairs, on
the occasion of his going to Vienna to draw up the articles for her
marriage-contract.  “I should blush,” said she, “if that proof of the
quackery of my education were shown to me.  I do not believe that I ever
put a pencil to that drawing.”  However, what had been taught her she
knew perfectly well.  Her facility of learning was inconceivable, and if
all her teachers had been as well informed and as faithful to their duty
as the Abbe Metastasio, who taught her Italian, she would have attained
as great a superiority in the other branches of her education.  The Queen
spoke that language with grace and ease, and translated the most
difficult poets.  She did not write French correctly, but she spoke it
with the greatest fluency, and even affected to say that she had lost
German.  In fact she attempted in 1787 to learn her mother-tongue, and
took lessons assiduously for six weeks; she was obliged to relinquish
them, finding all the difficulties which a Frenchwoman, who should take
up the study too late, would have to encounter.  In the same manner she
gave up English, which I had taught her for some time, and in which she
had made rapid progress.  Music was the accomplishment in which the Queen
most delighted.  She did not play well on any instrument, but she had
become able to read at sight like a first-rate professor.  She attained
this degree of perfection in France, this branch of her education having
been neglected at Vienna as much as the rest.  A few days after her
arrival at Versailles, she was introduced to her singing-master, La
Garde, author of the opera of “Egle.”  She made a distant appointment
with him, needing, as she said, rest after the fatigues of the journey
and the numerous fetes which had taken place at Versailles; but her
motive was her desire to conceal how ignorant she was of the rudiments of
music.  She asked M. Campan whether his son, who was a good musician,
could give her lessons secretly for three months.  “The Dauphiness,"
added she, smiling, “must be careful of the reputation of the
Archduchess.”  The lessons were given privately, and at the end of three
months of constant application she sent for M. la Garde, and surprised
him by her skill.
The desire to perfect Marie Antoinette in the study of the French
language was probably the motive which determined Maria Theresa to
provide for her as teachers two French actors: Aufresne, for
pronunciation and declamation, and Sainville, for taste in French
singing; the latter had been an officer in France, and bore a bad
character.  The choice gave just umbrage to our Court.  The Marquis de
Durfort, at that time ambassador at Vienna, was ordered to make a
representation to the Empress upon her selection.  The two actors were
dismissed, and the Princess required that an ecclesiastic should be sent
to her.  Several eminent ecclesiastics declined taking upon themselves so
delicate an office; others who were pointed out by Maria Theresa (among
the rest the Abbe Grisel) belonged to parties which sufficed to exclude
them.
The Archbishop of Toulouse one day went to the Duc de Choiseul at the
moment when he was much embarrassed upon the subject of this nomination;
he proposed to him the Abby de Vermond, librarian of the College des
Quatre Nations.  The eulogistic manner in which he spoke of his protege
procured the appointment for the latter on that very day; and the
gratitude of the Abbe de Vermond towards the prelate was very fatal to
France, inasmuch as after seventeen years of persevering attempts to
bring him into the ministry, he succeeded at last in getting him named
Comptroller-General and President of the Council.–[Comte de Brienne,
later Archbishop of Sens.]
This Abbe de Vermond directed almost all the Queen’s actions.  He
established his influence over her at an age when impressions are most
durable; and it was easy to see that he had taken pains only to render
himself beloved by his pupil, and had troubled himself very little with
the care of instructing her.  He might have even been accused of having,
by a sharp-sighted though culpable policy, purposely left her in
ignorance.  Marie Antoinette spoke the French language with much grace,
but wrote it less perfectly.  The Abbe de Vermond revised all the letters
which she sent to Vienna.  The insupportable folly with which he boasted
of it displayed the character of a man more flattered at being admitted
into her intimate secrets than anxious to fulfil worthily the high office
of her preceptor.
     [The Abbe de Vermond encouraged the impatience of etiquette shown by
     Marie Antoinette while she was Dauphiness.  When she became Queen he
     endeavoured openly to induce her to shake off the restraints she
     still respected.  If he chanced to enter her apartment at the time
     she was preparing to go out, “For whom,” he would say, in a tone of
     raillery, “is this detachment of warriors which I found in the
     court? Is it some general going to inspect his army?  Does all this
     military display become a young Queen adored by her subjects?”  He
     would call to her mind the simplicity with which Maria Theresa
     lived; the visits she made without guards, or even attendants, to
     the Prince d’Esterhazy, to the Comte de Palfi, passing whole days
     far from the fatiguing ceremonies of the Court.  The Abbe thus
     artfully flattered the inclinations of Marie Antoinette, and showed
     her how she might disguise, even from herself, her aversion for the
     ceremonies observed by the descendants of Louis XIV.-MADAME CAMPAN.]
His pride received its birth at Vienna, where Maria Theresa, as much to
give him authority with the Archduchess as to make herself acquainted
with his character, permitted him to mix every evening with the private
circle of her family, into which the future Dauphiness had been admitted
for some time.  Joseph II., the elder Archduchess, and a few noblemen
honoured by the confidence of Maria Theresa, composed the party; and
reflections on the world, on courts, and the duties of princes were the
usual topics of conversation.  The Abbe de Vermond, in relating these
particulars, confessed the means which he had made use of to gain
admission into this private circle.  The Empress, meeting him at the
Archduchess’s, asked him if he had formed any connections in Vienna.
“None, Madame,” replied he; “the apartment of the Archduchess and the
hotel of the ambassador of France are the only places which the man
honoured with the care of the Princess’s education should frequent."
A month afterwards Maria Theresa, through a habit common enough among
sovereigns, asked him the same question, and received precisely the same
answer.  The next day he received an order to join the imperial family
every evening.
It is extremely probable, from the constant and well-known intercourse
between this man and Comte de Mercy, ambassador of the Empire during the
whole reign of Louis XVI., that he was useful to the Court of Vienna, and
that he often caused the Queen to decide on measures, the consequences of
which she did not consider.  Not of high birth, imbued with all the
principles of the modern philosophy, and yet holding to the hierarchy of
the Church more tenaciously than any other ecclesiastic; vain, talkative,
and at the same time cunning and abrupt; very ugly and affecting
singularity; treating the most exalted persons as his equals, sometimes
even as his inferiors, the Abbe de Vermond received ministers and bishops
when in his bath; but said at the same time that Cardinal Dubois was a
fool; that a man such as he, having obtained power, ought to make
cardinals, and refuse to be one himself.
Intoxicated with the reception he had met with at the Court of Vienna,
and having till then seen nothing of high life, the Abbe de Vermond
admired no other customs than those of the imperial family; he ridiculed
the etiquette of the House of Bourbon incessantly; the young Dauphiness
was constantly incited by his sarcasms to get rid of it, and it was he
who first induced her to suppress an infinity of practices of which he
could discern neither the prudence nor the political aim.  Such is the
faithful portrait of that man whom the evil star of Marie Antoinette had
reserved to guide her first steps upon a stage so conspicuous and so full
of danger as that of the Court of Versailles.
It will be thought, perhaps, that I draw the character of the Abbe de
Vermond too unfavourably; but how can I view with any complacency one
who, after having arrogated to himself the office of confidant and sole
counsellor of the Queen, guided her with so little prudence, and gave us
the mortification of seeing that Princess blend, with qualities which
charmed all that surrounded her, errors alike injurious to her glory and
her happiness?
While M. de Choiseul, satisfied with the person whom M. de Brienne had
presented, despatched him to Vienna with every eulogium calculated to
inspire unbounded confidence, the Marquis de Durfort sent off a
hairdresser and a few French fashions; and then it was thought sufficient
pains had been taken to form the character of a princess destined to
share the throne of France.
The marriage of Monseigneur the Dauphin with the Archduchess was
determined upon during the administration of the Duc de Choiseul.
The Marquis de Durfort, who was to succeed the Baron de Breteuil in the
embassy to Vienna, was appointed proxy for the marriage ceremony; but six
months after the Dauphin’s marriage the Duc de Choiseul was disgraced,
and Madame de Marsan and Madame de Guemenee, who grew more powerful
through the Duke’s disgrace, conferred that embassy, upon Prince Louis
de Rohan, afterwards cardinal and grand almoner.
Hence it will be seen that the Gazette de France is a sufficient answer
to those libellers who dared to assert that the young Archduchess was
acquainted with the Cardinal de Rohan before the period of her marriage.
A worse selection in itself, or one more disagreeable to Maria Theresa,
than that which sent to her, in quality, of ambassador, a man so
frivolous and so immoral as Prince Louis de Rohan, could not have been
made.  He possessed but superficial knowledge upon any subject, and was
totally ignorant of diplomatic affairs.  His reputation had gone before
him to Vienna, and his mission opened under the most unfavourable
auspices.  In want of money, and the House of Rohan being unable to make
him any considerable advances, he obtained from his Court a patent which
authorised him to borrow the sum of 600,000 livres upon his benefices,
ran in debt above a million, and thought to dazzle the city and Court of
Vienna by the most indecent and ill-judged extravagance.  He formed a
suite of eight or ten gentlemen, of names sufficiently high-sounding;
twelve pages equally well born, a crowd of officers and servants, a
company of chamber musicians, etc.  But this idle pomp did not last;
embarrassment and distress soon showed themselves; his people, no longer
receiving pay, in order to make money, abused the privileges of
ambassadors, and smuggled
     [I have often heard the Queen say that, at Vienna, in the office of
     the secretary of the Prince de Rohan, there were sold in one year
     more silk stockings than at Lyons and Paris together.–MADAME
     CAMPAN.]
with so much effrontery that Maria Theresa, to put a stop to it without
offending the Court of France, was compelled to suppress the privileges
in this respect of all the diplomatic bodies, a step which rendered the
person and conduct of Prince Louis odious in every foreign Court.  He
seldom obtained private audiences from the Empress, who did not esteem
him, and who expressed herself without reserve upon his conduct both as a
bishop and as an ambassador.  He thought to obtain favour by assisting to
effect the marriage of the Archduchess Elizabeth, the elder sister of
Marie Antoinette, with Louis XV., an affair which was awkwardly
undertaken, and of which Madame du Barry had no difficulty in causing the
failure.  I have deemed it my duty to omit no particular of the moral and
political character of a man whose existence was subsequently so
injurious to the reputation of Marie Antoinette.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
