


From the time of Louis XVI.’s accession to the throne, the Queen had been
expecting a visit from her brother, the Emperor Joseph II.  That Prince
was the constant theme of her discourse.  She boasted of his
intelligence, his love of occupation, his military knowledge, and the
perfect simplicity of his manners.  Those about her Majesty ardently
wished to see at Versailles a prince so worthy of his rank.  At length
the coming of Joseph II., under the title of Count Falkenstein, was
announced, and the very day on which he would be at Versailles was
mentioned.  The first embraces between the Queen and her august brother
took place in the presence of all the Queen’s household.  The sight of
their emotion was extremely affecting.
The Emperor was at first generally admired in France; learned men, well-
informed officers, and celebrated artists appreciated the extent of his
information.  He made less impression at Court, and very little in the
private circle of the King and Queen.  His eccentric manners, his
frankness, often degenerating into rudeness, and his evidently affected
simplicity,–all these characteristics caused him to be looked upon as a
prince rather singular than admirable.  The Queen spoke to him about the
apartment she had prepared for him in the Chateau; the Emperor answered
that he would not accept it, and that while travelling he always lodged
at a cabaret (that was his very expression); the Queen insisted, and
assured him that he should be at perfect liberty, and placed out of the
reach of noise.  He replied that he knew the Chateau of Versailles was
very large, and that so many scoundrels lived there that he could well
find a place; but that his valet de chambre had made up his camp-bed in a
lodging-house, and there he would stay.
He dined with the King and Queen, and supped with the whole family.  He
appeared to take an interest in the young Princesse Elisabeth, then just
past childhood, and blooming in all the freshness of that age.  An
intended marriage between him and this young sister of the King was
reported at the time, but I believe it had no foundation in truth.
The table was still served by women only, when the Queen dined in private
with the King, the royal family, or crowned heads.
     [The custom was, even supposing dinner to have commenced, if a
     princess of the blood arrived, and she was asked to sit down at the
     Queen’s table, the comptrollers and gentlemen-in-waiting came
     immediately to attend, and the Queen’s women withdrew.  These had
     succeeded the maids of honour in several parts of their service, and
     had preserved some of their privileges.  One day the Duchesse
     d’Orleans arrived at Fontainebleau, at the Queen’s dinner-hour.  The
     Queen invited her to the table, and herself motioned to her women to
     leave the room, and let the men take their places.  Her Majesty said
     she was resolved to continue a privilege which kept places of that
     description most honourable, and render them suitable for ladies of
     nobility without fortune.  Madame de Misery, Baronne de Biache, the
     Queen’s first lady of the chamber, to whom I was made reversioner,
     was a daughter of M. le Comte de Chemant, and her grandmother was a
     Montmorency.  M. le Prince de Tingry, in the presence of the Queen,
     used to call her cousin.  The ancient household of the Kings of
     France had prerogatives acknowledged in the state.  Many of the
     offices were tenable only by those of noble blood, and were sold at
     from 40,000 to 300,000 franca.  A collection of edicts of the Kings
     in favour of the prerogatives and right of precedence of the persons
     holding office in the royal household is still in existence.]
I was present at the Queen’s dinner almost every day.  The Emperor would
talk much and fluently; he expressed himself in French with facility, and
the singularity, of his expressions added a zest to his conversation.  I
have often heard him say that he liked spectacculous objects, when he
meant to express such things as formed a show, or a scene worthy of
interest.  He disguised none of his prejudices against the etiquette and
customs of the Court of France; and even in the presence of the King made
them the subject of his sarcasms.  The King smiled, but never made any
answer; the Queen appeared pained.  The Emperor frequently terminated his
observations upon the objects in Paris which he had admired by
reproaching the King for suffering himself to remain in ignorance of
them.  He could not conceive how such a wealth of pictures should remain
shut up in the dust of immense stores; and told him one day that but for
the practice of placing some of them in the apartments of Versailles he
would not know even the principal chef d’oeuvres that he possessed.
     [The Emperor loudly censured the existing practice of allowing
     shopkeepers to erect shops near the outward walls of all the
     palaces, and even to establish something like a fair in the
     galleries of Versailles and Fontainebleau, and even upon the
     landings of the staircases.]
He also reproached him for not having visited the Hotel des Invalides nor
the Ecole Militaire; and even went so far as to tell him before us that
he ought not only to know what Paris contained, but to travel in France,
and reside a few days in each of his large towns.
At last the Queen was really hurt at the Emperor’s remarks, and gave him
a few lectures upon the freedom with which he allowed himself to lecture
others.  One day she was busied in signing warrants and orders for
payment for her household, and was conversing with M. Augeard, her
secretary for such matters, who presented the papers one after another to
be signed, and replaced them in his portfolio.  While this was going
forward, the Emperor walked about the room; all at once he stood still,
to reproach the Queen rather severely for signing all those papers
without reading them, or, at least, without running her eye over them;
and he spoke most judiciously to her upon the danger of signing her name
inconsiderately.  The Queen answered that very wise principles might be
very ill applied; that her secretary, who deserved her implicit
confidence, was at that moment laying before her nothing but orders for
payment of the quarter’s expenses of her household, registered in the
Chamber of Accounts; and that she ran no risk of incautiously giving her
signature.
The Queen’s toilet was likewise a never-failing subject for animadversion
with the Emperor.  He blamed her for having introduced too many new
fashions; and teased her about her use of rouge.  One day, while she was
laying on more of it than usual, before going to the play, he pointed out
a lady who was in the room, and who was, in truth, highly painted.  “A
little more under the eyes,” said the Emperor to the Queen; “lay on the
rouge like a fury, as that lady does.”  The Queen entreated her brother
to refrain from his jokes, or at all events to address them, when they
were so outspoken, to her alone.
The Queen had made an appointment to meet her brother at the Italian
theatre; she changed her mind, and went to the French theatre, sending a
page to the Italian theatre to request the Emperor to come to her there.
He left his box, lighted by the comedian Clairval, and attended by M. de
la Ferte, comptroller of the Queen’s privy purse, who was much hurt at
hearing his Imperial Majesty, after kindly expressing his regret at not
being present during the Italian performance, say to Clairval, “Your
young Queen is very giddy; but, luckily, you Frenchmen have no great
objection to that.”
I was with my father-in-law in one of the Queen’s apartments when the
Emperor came to wait for her there, and, knowing that M. Campan was
librarian, he conversed with him about such books as would of course be
found in the Queen’s library.  After talking of our most celebrated
authors, he casually said, “There are doubtless no works on finance or
on administration here?”
These words were followed by his opinion on all that had been written on
those topics, and the different systems of our two famous ministers,
Sully and Colbert; on errors which were daily committed in France, in
points essential to the prosperity of the Empire; and on the reform he
himself would make at Vienna.  Holding M. Campan by the button, he spent
more than an hour, talking vehemently, and without the slightest reserve,
about the French Government.  My father-in-law and myself maintained
profound silence, as much from astonishment as from respect; and when we
were alone we agreed not to speak of this interview.
The Emperor was fond of describing the Italian Courts that he had
visited.  The jealous quarrels between the King and Queen of Naples
amused him highly; he described to the life the manner and speech of that
sovereign, and the simplicity with which he used to go and solicit the
first chamberlain to obtain permission to return to the nuptial bed, when
the angry Queen had banished him from it.  The time which he was made to
wait for this reconciliation was calculated between the Queen and her
chamberlain, and always proportioned to the gravity of the offence.  He
also related several very amusing stories relative to the Court of Parma,
of which he spoke with no little contempt.  If what this Prince said of
those Courts, and even of Vienna, had been written down, the whole would
have formed an interesting collection.  The Emperor told the King that
the Grand Duke of Tuscany and the King of Naples being together, the
former said a great deal about the changes he had effected in his State.
The Grand Duke had issued a mass of new edicts, in order to carry the
precepts of the economists into execution, and trusted that in so doing
he was labouring for the welfare of his people.  The King of Naples
suffered him to go on speaking for a long time, and then casually asked
how many Neapolitan families there were in Tuscany.  The Duke soon
reckoned them up, as they were but few.  “Well, brother,” replied the
King of Naples, “I do not understand the indifference of your people
towards your great reforms; for I have four times the number of Tuscan
families settled in my States that you have of Neapolitan families in
yours.”
The Queen being at the Opera with the Emperor, the latter did not wish to
show himself; but she took him by the hand, and gently drew him to the
front of the box.  This kind of presentation to the public was most
warmly received.  The performance was “Iphigenia in Aulis,” and for the
second time.  the chorus, “Chantons, celebrons notre Reine!” was called
for with universal plaudits.
A fete of a novel description was given at Petit Trianon.  The art with
which the English garden was not illuminated, but lighted, produced a
charming effect.  Earthen lamps, concealed by boards painted green, threw
light upon the beds of shrubs and flowers, and brought out their varied
tints.  Several hundred burning fagots in the moat behind the Temple of
Love made a blaze of light, which rendered that spot the most brilliant
in the garden.  After all, this evening’s entertainment had nothing
remarkable about it but the good taste of the artists, yet it was much
talked of.  The situation did not allow the admission of a great part of
the Court; those who were uninvited were dissatisfied; and the people,
who never forgive any fetes but those they share in, so exaggerated the
cost of this little fete as to make it appear that the fagots burnt in
the moat had required the destruction of a whole forest.  The Queen being
informed of these reports, was determined to know exactly how much wood
had been consumed; and she found that fifteen hundred fagots had sufficed
to keep up the fire until four o’clock in the morning.
After staying a few months the Emperor left France, promising his sister
to come and see her again.  All the officers of the Queen’s chamber had
many opportunities of serving him during his stay, and expected that he
would make them presents before his departure.  Their oath of office
positively forbade them to receive a gift from any foreign prince; they
had therefore agreed to refuse the Emperor’s presents at first, but to
ask the time necessary for obtaining permission to accept them.  The
Emperor, probably informed of this custom, relieved the good people from
their difficulty by setting off without making a single present.
About the latter end of 1777 the Queen, being alone in her closet, sent
for my father-in-law and myself, and, giving us her hand to kiss; told us
that, looking upon us both as persons deeply interested in her happiness,
she wished to receive our congratulations,–that at length she was the
Queen of France, and that she hoped soon to have children; that till now
she had concealed her grief, but that she had shed many tears in secret.
Dating from this happy but long-delayed moment, the King’s attachment to
the Queen assumed every characteristic of love.  The good Lassone, first
physician to the King and Queen, frequently spoke to me of the uneasiness
that the King’s indifference, the cause of which he had been so long in
overcoming, had given him, and appeared to me at that time to entertain
no anxiety except of a very different description.
In the winter of 1778 the King’s permission for the return of Voltaire;
after an absence of twenty-seven years, was obtained.  A few strict
persons considered this concession on the part of the Court very
injudicious.  The Emperor, on leaving France, passed by the Chateau of
Ferney without stopping there.  He had advised the Queen not to suffer
Voltaire to be presented to her.  A lady belonging to the Court learned
the Emperor’s opinion on that point, and reproached him with his want of
enthusiasm towards the greatest genius of the age.  He replied that for
the good of the people he should always endeavour to profit by the
knowledge of the philosophers; but that his own business of sovereign
would always prevent his ranking himself amongst that sect.  The clergy
also took steps to hinder Voltaire’s appearance at Court.  Paris,
however, carried to the highest pitch the honours and enthusiasm shown to
the great poet.
It was very unwise to let Paris pronounce with such transport an opinion
so opposite to that of the Court.  This was pointed out to the Queen,
and she was told that, without conferring on Voltaire the honour of a
presentation, she might see him in the State apartments.  She was not
averse to following this advice, and appeared embarrassed solely about
what she should say to him.  She was recommended to talk about nothing
but the “Henriade,” “Merope,” and “Zaira.”  The Queen replied that she
would still consult a few other persons in whom she had great confidence.
The next day she announced that it was irrevocably decided Voltaire
should not see any member of the royal family,–his writings being too
antagonistic to religion and morals.  “It is, however, strange,” said the
Queen, “that while we refuse to admit Voltaire into our presence as the
leader of philosophical writers, the Marechale de Mouchy should have
presented to me some years ago Madame Geoffrin, who owed her celebrity to
the title of foster-mother of the philosophers.”
On the occasion of the duel of the Comte d’Artois with the Prince de
Bourbon the Queen determined privately to see the Baron de Besenval,
who was to be one of the witnesses, in order to communicate the King’s
intentions.  I have read with infinite pain the manner in which that
simple fact is perverted in the first volume of M. de Besenval’s
“Memoirs.”  He is right in saying that M. Campan led him through the
upper corridors of the Chateau, and introduced him into an apartment
unknown to him; but the air of romance given to the interview is equally
culpable and ridiculous.  M. de Besenval says that he found himself,
without knowing how he came there, in an apartment unadorned, but very
conveniently furnished, of the existence of which he was till then
utterly ignorant.  He was astonished, he adds, not that the Queen should
have so many facilities, but that she should have ventured to procure
them.  Ten printed sheets of the woman Lamotte’s libels contain nothing
so injurious to the character of Marie Antoinette as these lines, written
by a man whom she honoured by undeserved kindness.  He could not have had
any opportunity of knowing the existence of the apartments, which
consisted of a very small antechamber, a bedchamber, and a closet.  Ever
since the Queen had occupied her own apartment, these had been
appropriated to her Majesty’s lady of honour in cases of illness, and
were actually so used when the Queen was confined.  It was so important
that it should not be known the Queen had spoken to the Baron before the
duel that she had determined to go through her inner room into this
little apartment, to which M. Campan was to conduct him.  When men write
of recent times they should be scrupulously exact, and not indulge in
exaggerations or inventions.
The Baron de Besenval appears mightily surprised at the Queen’s sudden
coolness, and refers it to the fickleness of her disposition.  I can
explain the reason for the change by repeating what her Majesty said to
me at the time; and I will not alter one of her expressions.  Speaking of
the strange presumption of men, and the reserve with which women ought
always to treat them, the Queen added that age did not deprive them of
the hope of pleasing, if they retained any agreeable qualities; that she
had treated the Baron de Besenval as a brave Swiss, agreeable, polished,
and witty, whose gray hairs had induced her to look upon him as a man
whom she might see without harm; but that she had been much deceived.
Her Majesty, after having enjoined me to the strictest secrecy, told me
that, finding herself alone with the Baron, he began to address her with
so much gallantry that she was thrown into the utmost astonishment, and
that he was mad enough to fall upon his knees, and make her a declaration
in form.  The Queen added that she said to him: “Rise, monsieur; the King
shall be ignorant of an offence which would disgrace you for ever;” that
the Baron grew pale and stammered apologies; that she left her closet
without saying another word, and that since that time she hardly ever
spoke to him.  “It is delightful to have friends,” said the Queen; “but
in a situation like mine it is sometimes difficult for the friends of our
friends to suit us.”
In the beginning of the year 1778 Mademoiselle d’Eon obtained permission
to return to France, on condition that she should appear there in female
dress.  The Comte de Vergennes entreated my father, M. Genet, chief clerk
of Foreign Affairs, who had long known the Chevalier d’Eon, to receive
that strange personage at his house, to guide and restrain, if possible,
her ardent disposition.  The Queen, on learning her arrival at
Versailles, sent a footman to desire my father to bring her into her
presence; my father thought it his duty first to inform the Minister of
her Majesty’s wish.  The Comte de Vergennes expressed himself pleased
with my father’s prudence, and desired that he would accompany him to the
Queen.  The Minister had a few minutes’ audience; her Majesty came out of
her closet with him, and condescended to express to my father the regret
she felt at having troubled him to no purpose; and added, smiling, that a
few words from M. de Vergennes had for ever cured her of her curiosity.
The discovery in London of the true sex of this pretended woman makes it
probable that the few words uttered by the Minister contained a solution
of the enigma.
The Chevalier d’Eon had been useful in Russia as a spy of Louis XV.
while very young he had found means to introduce himself at the Court of
the Empress Elizabeth, and served that sovereign in the capacity of
reader.  Resuming afterwards his military dress, he served with honour
and was wounded.  Appointed chief secretary of legation, and afterwards
minister plenipotentiary at London, he unpardonably insulted Comte de
Guerchy, the ambassador.  The official order for the Chevalier’s return
to France was actually delivered to the King’s Council; but Louis XV.
delayed the departure of the courier who was to be its bearer, and sent
off another courier privately, who gave the Chevalier d’Eon a letter in
his own writing, in which he said, “I know that you have served me as
effectually in the dress of a woman as in that which you now wear.
Resume it instantly; withdraw into the city; I warn you that the King
yesterday signed an order for your return to France; you are not safe in
your hotel, and you would here find too powerful enemies.”  I heard the
Chevalier d’Eon repeat the contents of this letter, in which Louis XV.
thus separated himself from the King of France, several times at my
father’s.  The Chevalier, or rather the Chevalaere d’Eon had preserved
all the King’s letters.  Messieurs de Maurepas and de Vergennes wished to
get them out of his hands, as they were afraid he would print them.  This
eccentric being had long solicited permission to return to France; but it
was necessary to find a way of sparing the family he had offended the
insult they would see in his return; he was therefore made to resume the
costume of that sex to which in France everything is pardoned.  The
desire to see his native land once more determined him to submit to the
condition, but he revenged himself by combining the long train of his
gown and the three deep ruffles on his sleeves with the attitude and
conversation of a grenadier, which made him very disagreeable company.
     [The account given by Madame Campan of the Chevalier d’Eon is now
     known to be incorrect in many particulars.  Enough details for most
     readers will be found in the Duc de Broglie’s “Secret of the King,"
     vol.  ii., chaps.  vi.  and g., and at p.  89, vol.  ii.  of that
     work, where the Duke refers to the letter of most dubious
     authenticity spoken of by Madame Campan.  The following details will
     be sufficient for these memoirs: The Chevalier Charles d’Eon de
     Beaumont (who was born in 1728) was an ex-captain of dragoons,
     employed in both the open and secret diplomacy of Louis XV.  When at
     the embassy in London he quarrelled with the ambassador, his
     superior, the Comte de Guerchy (Marquis do Nangis), and used his
     possession of papers concerning the secret diplomacy to shield
     himself.  It was when hiding in London, in 1765, on account of this
     business, that he seems first to have assumed woman’s dress, which
     he retained apparently chiefly from love of notoriety.  In 1775 a
     formal agreement with the French Court, made by the instrumentality
     of Beaumarchais, of all people in the world, permitted him to return
     to France, retaining the dress of a woman.  He went back to France,
     but again came to England, and died there, at his residence in
     Millman Street, near the Foundling Hospital, May 22, 1710.  He had
     been a brave and distinguished officer, but his form and a certain
     coldness of temperament always remarked in him assisted him in his
     assumption of another sex.  There appears to be no truth in the
     story of his proceedings at the Russian Court, and his appearing in
     female attire was a surprise to those who must have known of any
     earlier affair of the sort.]
At last, the event so long desired by the Queen, and by all those who
wished her well, took place; her Majesty became enceinte.  The King was
in ecstasies.  Never was there a more united or happier couple.  The
disposition of Louis XVI. entirely altered, and became prepossessing and
conciliatory; and the Queen was amply compensated for the uneasiness
which the King’s indifference during the early part of their union had
caused her.
The summer of 1778 was extremely hot.  July and August passed, but the
air was not cooled by a single storm.  The Queen spent whole days in
close rooms, and could not sleep until she had breathed the fresh night
air, walking with the Princesses and her brothers upon the terrace under
her apartments.  These promenades at first gave rise to no remark; but it
occurred to some of the party to enjoy the music of wind instruments
during these fine summer nights.  The musicians belonging to the chapel
were ordered to perform pieces suited to instruments of that description,
upon steps constructed in the middle of the garden.  The Queen, seated on
one of the terrace benches, enjoyed the effect of this music, surrounded
by all the royal family with the exception of the King, who joined them
but, twice, disliking to change his hour of going to bed.
Nothing could be more innocent than these parties; yet Paris, France,
nay, all Europe, were soon canvassing them in a manner most
disadvantageous to the reputation of Marie Antoinette.  It is true that
all the inhabitants of Versailles enjoyed these serenades, and that there
was a crowd near the spot from eleven at night until two or three in the
morning.  The windows of the ground floor occupied by Monsieur and Madame
–[The wife of Monsieur, the Comte de Provence.]– were kept open, and
the terrace was perfectly well lighted by the numerous wax candles
burning in the two apartments.  Lamps were likewise placed in the garden,
and the lights of the orchestra illuminated the rest of the place.
I do not know whether a few incautious women might not have ventured
farther, and wandered to the bottom of the park; it may have been so; but
the Queen, Madame, and the Comtesse d’Artois were always arm-in-arm, and
never left the terrace.  The Princesses were not remarkable when seated
on the benches, being dressed in cambric muslin gowns, with large straw
hats and muslin veils, a costume universally adopted by women at that
time; but when standing up their different figures always distinguished
them; and the persons present stood on one side to let them pass.  It is
true that when they seated themselves upon the benches private
individuals would sometimes, to their great amusement, sit down by
their side.
A young clerk in the War Department, either not knowing or pretending not
to know the Queen, spoke to her of the beauty of the night, and the
delightful effect of the music.  The Queen, fancying she was not
recognised, amused herself by keeping up the incognito, and they talked
of several private families of Versailles, consisting of persons
belonging to the King’s household or her own.  After a few minutes the
Queen and Princesses rose to walk, and on leaving the bench curtsied to
the clerk.  The young man knowing, or having subsequently discovered,
that he had been conversing with the Queen, boasted of it in his office.
He was merely, desired to hold his tongue; and so little attention did he
excite that the Revolution found him still only a clerk.
Another evening one of Monsieur’s body-guard seated himself near the
Princesses, and, knowing them, left the place where he was sitting, and
placed himself before the Queen, to tell her that he was very fortunate
in being able to seize an opportunity of imploring the kindness of his
sovereign; that he was “soliciting at Court"–at the word soliciting the
Queen and Princesses rose hastily and withdrew into Madame’s apartment.–
[Soulavie has most criminally perverted these two facts.-MADAME CAMPAN.]-
I was at the Queen’s residence that day.  She talked of this little
occurrence all the time of her ’coucher’; though she only complained that
one of Monsieur’s guards should have had the effrontery to speak to her.
Her Majesty added that he ought to have respected her incognito; and that
that was not the place where he should have ventured to make a request.
Madame had recognised him, and talked of making a complaint to his
captain; the Queen opposed it, attributing his error to his ignorance and
provincial origin.
The most scandalous libels were based on these two insignificant
occurrences, which I have related with scrupulous exactness.  Nothing
could be more false than those calumnies.  It must be confessed, however,
that such meetings were liable to ill consequences.  I ventured to say as
much to the Queen, and informed her that one evening, when her Majesty
beckoned to me to go and speak to her, I thought I recognised on the
bench on which she was sitting two women deeply veiled, and keeping
profound silence; that those women were the Comtesse du Barry and her
sister-in-law; and that my suspicions were confirmed, when, at a few
paces from the seat, and nearer to her Majesty, I met a tall footman
belonging to Madame du Barry, whom I had seen in her service all the time
she resided at Court.
My advice was disregarded.  Misled by the pleasure she found in these
promenades, and secure in the consciousness of blameless conduct, the
Queen would not see the lamentable results which must necessarily follow.
This was very unfortunate; for besides the mortifications they brought
upon her, it is highly probable that they prompted the vile plot which
gave rise to the Cardinal de Rohan’s fatal error.
Having enjoyed these evening promenades about a month, the Queen ordered
a private concert within the colonnade which contained the group of Pluto
and Proserpine.  Sentinels were placed at all the entrances, and ordered
to admit within the colonnade only such persons as should produce tickets
signed by my father-in-law.  A fine concert was performed there by the
musicians of the chapel and the female musicians belonging to the.
Queen’s chamber.  The Queen went with Mesdames de Polignac, de Chalon,
and d’Andlau, and Messieurs de Polignac, de Coigny, de Besenval, and de
Vaudreuil; there were also a few equerries present.  Her Majesty gave me
permission to attend the concert with some of my female relations.  There
was no music upon the terrace.  The crowd of inquisitive people, whom the
sentinels kept at a distance from the enclosure of the colonnade, went
away highly discontented; the small number of persons admitted no doubt
occasioned jealousy, and gave rise to offensive comments which were
caught up by the public with avidity.  I do not pretend to apologise for
the kind of amusements with which the Queen indulged herself during this
and the following summer; the consequences were so lamentable that the
error was no doubt very great; but what I have said respecting the
character of these promenades may be relied on as true.
When the season for evening walks was at an end, odious couplets were
circulated in Paris; the ’Queen was treated in them in the most insulting
manner; her situation ranked among her enemies persons attached to the
only prince who for several years had appeared likely to give heirs to
the crown.  People uttered the most inconsiderate language; and those
improper conversations took place in societies wherein the imminent
danger of violating to so criminal an extent both truth and the respect
due to sovereigns ought to have been better understood.  A few days
before the Queen’s confinement a whole volume of manuscript songs,
concerning her and all the ladies about her remarkable for rank or
station was, thrown down in the oiel-de-boeuf.–[A large room at
Versailles lighted by a bull’s-eye window, and used as a waiting-room.]–
This manuscript was immediately put into the hands of the King, who was
highly incensed at it, and said that he had himself been at those
promenades; that he had seen nothing connected with them but what was
perfectly harmless; that such songs would disturb the harmony of twenty
families in the Court and city; that it was a capital crime to have made
any against the Queen herself; and that he wished the author of the
infamous libels to be discovered and punished.  A fortnight afterwards it
was known publicly that the verses were by M. Champcenetz de Riquebourg,
who was not even reprimanded.
     [The author of a great many songs, some of which are very well
     written.  Lively and satirical by nature, he did not lose either his
     cheerfulness or his carelessness before the revolutionary tribunal.
     After hearing his own sentence read, he asked his judges if he might
     not be allowed to find a substitute.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
I knew for a certainty that the King spoke to M. de Maurepas, before two
of his most confidential servants, respecting the risk which he saw the
Queen ran from these night walks upon the terrace of Versailles, which
the public ventured to censure thus openly, and that the old minister had
the cruelty to advise that she should be suffered to go on; she possessed
talent; her friends were very ambitious, and longed to see her take a
part in public affairs; and to let her acquire the reputation of levity
would do no harm.  M. de Vergennes was as hostile to the Queen’s
influence as M. de Maurepas.  It may therefore be fairly presumed, since
the Prime Minister durst point out to his King an advantage to be gained
by the Queen’s discrediting herself, that he and M. de Vergennes employed
all means within the reach of powerful ministers in order to ruin her in
the opinion of the public.
The Queen’s accouchement approached; Te Deums were sung and prayers
offered up in all the cathedrals.  On the 11th of December, 1778, the
royal family, the Princes of the blood, and the great officers of State
passed the night in the rooms adjoining the Queen’s bedchamber.  Madame,
the King’s daughter, came into the world before mid-day on the 19th of
December.–[Marie Therese Charlotte (1778-1861), Madame Royale; married
in 1799 Louis, Duc d’Angouleme, eldest son of the Comte d’Artois.]–
The etiquette of allowing all persons indiscriminately to enter at the
moment of the delivery of a queen was observed with such exaggeration
that when the accoucheur said aloud, “La Reine va s’accoucher,” the
persons who poured into the chamber were so numerous that the rush nearly
destroyed the Queen.  During the night the King had taken the precaution
to have the enormous tapestry screens which surrounded her Majesty’s bed
secured with cords; but for this they certainly would have been thrown
down upon her.  It was impossible to move about the chamber, which was
filled with so motley a crowd that one might have fancied himself in some
place of public amusement.  Two Savoyards got upon the furniture for a
better sight of the Queen, who was placed opposite the fireplace.
The noise and the sex of the infant, with which the Queen was made
acquainted by a signal previously agreed on, as it is said, with the
Princesse do Lamballe, or some error of the accoucheur, brought on
symptoms which threatened fatal consequences; the accoucheur exclaimed,
“Give her air–warm water–she must be bled in the foot!”  The windows
were stopped up; the King opened them with a strength which his affection
for the Queen gave him at the moment.  They were of great height, and
pasted over with strips of paper all round.  The basin of hot water not
being brought quickly enough, the accoucheur desired the chief surgeon to
use his lancet without waiting for it.  He did so; the blood streamed out
freely, and the Queen opened her eyes.  The Princesse de Lamballe was
carried through the crowd in a state of insensibility.  The valets de
chambre and pages dragged out by the collar such inconsiderate persons as
would not leave the room.  This cruel custom was abolished afterwards.
The Princes of the family, the Princes of the blood, the chancellor, and
the ministers are surely sufficient to attest the legitimacy of an
hereditary prince.  The Queen was snatched from the very jaws of death;
she was not conscious of having been bled, and on being replaced in bed
asked why she had a linen bandage upon her foot.
The delight which succeeded the moment of fear was equally lively and
sincere.  We were all embracing each other, and shedding tears of joy.
The Comte d’Esterhazy and the Prince de Poix, to whom I was the first to
announce that the Queen was restored to life, embraced me in the midst of
the cabinet of nobles.  We little imagined, in our happiness at her
escape from death, for how much more terrible a fate our beloved Princess
was reserved.
NOTE.  The two following specimens of the Emperor Joseph’s correspondence
forcibly demonstrate the vigour, shrewdness, and originality of his mind,
and complete the portrait left of him by Madame Campan.
Few sovereigns have given their reasons for refusing appointments with
the fullness and point of the following letter
                                To a Lady.
MADAM.–I do not think that it is amongst the duties of a monarch to
grant places to one of his subjects merely because he is a gentleman.
That, however, is the inference from the request you have made to me.
Your late husband was, you say, a distinguished general, a gentleman of
good family, and thence you conclude that my kindness to your family can
do no less than give a company of foot to your second son, lately
returned from his travels.
Madam, a man may be the son of a general and yet have no talent for
command.  A man may be of a good family and yet possess no other merit
than that which he owes to chance,–the name of gentleman.
I know your son, and I know what makes the soldier; and this twofold
knowledge convinces me that your son has not the disposition of a
warrior, and that he is too full of his birth to leave the country a hope
of his ever rendering it any important service.
What you are to be pitied for, madam, is, that your son is not fit either
for an officer, a statesman or a priest; in a word, that he is nothing
more than a gentleman in the most extended acceptation of the word.
You may be thankful to that destiny, which, in refusing talents to your
son, has taken care to put him in possession of great wealth, which will
sufficiently compensate him for other deficiencies, and enable him at the
same time to dispense with any favour from me.
I hope you will be impartial enough to see the reasons which prompt me to
refuse your request.  It may be disagreeable to you, but I consider it
necessary.  Farewell, madam.–Your sincere well-wisher,
                                                       JOSEPH
LACHSENBURG, 4th August, 1787.
The application of another anxious and somewhat covetous mother was
answered with still more decision and irony:
                                To a Lady.
MADAM.–You know my disposition; you are not ignorant that the society of
the ladies is to me a mere recreation, and that I have never sacrificed
my principles to the fair sex.  I pay but little attention to
recommendations, and I only take them into consideration when the person
in whose behalf I may be solicited possesses real merit.
Two of your sons are already loaded with favours.  The eldest, who is not
yet twenty, is chief of a squadron in my army, and the younger has
obtained a canonry at Cologne, from the Elector, my brother.  What would
you have more?  Would you have the first a general and the second a
bishop?
In France you may see colonels in leading-strings, and in Spain the royal
princes command armies even at eighteen; hence Prince Stahremberg forced
them to retreat so often that they were never able all the rest of their
lives to comprehend any other manoeuvre.
It is necessary to be sincere at Court, and severe in the field, stoical
without obduracy, magnanimous without weakness, and to gain the esteem of
our enemies by the justice of our actions; and this, madam, is what I aim
at.
                                             JOSEPH
VIENNA, September, 1787.
(From the inedited Letters of Joseph IL, published at Paris, by Persan,
1822.)
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
