


During the first few months of his reign Louis XVI. dwelt at La Muette,
Marly, and Compiegne.  When settled at Versailles he occupied himself
with a general examination of his grandfather’s papers.  He had promised
the Queen to communicate to her all that he might discover relative to
the history of the man with the iron mask, who, he thought, had become so
inexhaustible a source of conjecture only in consequence of the interest
which the pen of a celebrated writer had excited respecting the detention
of a prisoner of State, who was merely a man of whimsical tastes and
habits.
I was with the Queen when the King, having finished his researches,
informed her that he had not found anything among the secret papers
elucidating the existence of this prisoner; that he had conversed on the
matter with M. de Maurepas, whose age made him contemporary with the
epoch during which the story must have been known to the ministers;
and that M. de Maurepas had assured him he was merely a prisoner of a
very dangerous character, in consequence of his disposition for intrigue.
He was a subject of the Duke of Mantua, and was enticed to the frontier,
arrested there, and kept prisoner, first at Pignerol, and afterwards in
the Bastille.  This transfer took place in consequence of the appointment
of the governor of the former place to the government of the latter.
It was for fear the prisoner should profit by the inexperience of a new
governor that he was sent with the Governor of Pignerol to the Bastille.
Such was, in fact, the truth about the man on whom people have been
pleased to fix an iron mask.  And thus was it related in writing, and
published by M. ––- twenty years ago.  He had searched the archives of
the Foreign Office, and laid the real story before the public; but the
public, prepossessed in favour of a marvellous version, would not
acknowledge the authenticity of his account.  Every man relied upon the
authority of Voltaire; and it was believed that a natural or a twin
brother of Louis XIV. lived many years in prison with a mask over his
face.  The story of this mask, perhaps, had its origin in the old custom,
among both men and women in Italy, of wearing a velvet mask when they
exposed themselves to the sun.  It is possible that the Italian captive
may have sometimes shown himself upon the terrace of his prison with his
face thus covered.  As to the silver plate which this celebrated prisoner
is said to have thrown from his window, it is known that such a
circumstance did happen, but it happened at Valzin, in the time of
Cardinal Richelieu.  This anecdote has been mixed up with the inventions
respecting the Piedmontese prisoner.
In this survey of the papers of Louis XV. by his grandson some very
curious particulars relative to his private treasury were found.  Shares
in various financial companies afforded him a revenue, and had in course
of time produced him a capital of some amount, which he applied to his
secret expenses.  The King collected his vouchers of title to these
shares, and made a present of them to M. Thierry de Ville d’Avray, his
chief valet de chambre.
The Queen was desirous to secure the comfort of Mesdames, the daughters
of Louis XV., who were held in the highest respect.  About this period
she contributed to furnish them with a revenue sufficient to provide them
an easy, pleasant existence: The King gave them the Chateau of Bellevue;
and added to the produce of it, which was given up to them, the expenses
of their table and equipage, and payment of all the charges of their
household, the number of which was even increased.  During the lifetime
of Louis XV., who was a very selfish prince, his daughters, although they
had attained forty years of age, had no other place of residence than
their apartments in the Chateau of Versailles; no other walks than such
as they could take in the large park of that palace; and no other means
of gratifying their taste for the cultivation of plants but by having
boxes and vases, filled with them, in their balconies or their closets.
They had, therefore, reason to be much pleased with the conduct of Marie
Antoinette, who had the greatest influence in the King’s kindness towards
his aunts.
Paris did not cease, during the first years of the reign, to give proofs
of pleasure whenever the Queen appeared at any of the plays of the
capital.  At the representation of “Iphigenia in Aulis,” the actor who
sang the words, “Let us sing, let us celebrate our Queen!”  which were
repeated by the chorus, directed by a respectful movement the eyes of the
whole assembly upon her Majesty.  Reiterated cries of ’Bis’! and clapping
of hands, were followed by such a burst of enthusiasm that many of the
audience added their voices to those of the actors in order to celebrate,
it might too truly be said, another Iphigenia.  The Queen, deeply
affected, covered her eyes with her handkerchief; and this proof of
sensibility raised the public enthusiasm to a still higher pitch.
The King gave Marie Antoinette Petit Trianon.
     [The Chateau of Petit Trianon, which was built for Louis XV., was
     not remarkably handsome as a building.  The luxuriance of the
     hothouses rendered the place agreeable to that Prince.  He spent a
     few days there several times in the year.  It was when he was
     setting off from Versailles for Petit Trianon that he was struck in
     the side by the knife of Damiens, and it was there that he was
     attacked by the smallpox, of which he died on the 10th of May,
     1774.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
Henceforward she amused herself with improving the gardens, without
allowing any addition to the building, or any change in the furniture,
which was very shabby, and remained, in 1789, in the same state as during
the reign of Louis XV.  Everything there, without exception, was
preserved; and the Queen slept in a faded bed, which had been used by the
Comtesse du Barry.  The charge of extravagance, generally made against
the Queen, is the most unaccountable of all the popular errors respecting
her character.  She had exactly the contrary failing; and I could prove
that she often carried her economy to a degree of parsimony actually
blamable, especially in a sovereign.  She took a great liking for
Trianon, and used to go there alone, followed by a valet; but she found
attendants ready to receive her,–a concierge and his wife, who served
her as femme de chambre, women of the wardrobe, footmen, etc.
When she first took possession of Petit Trianon, it was reported that she
changed the name of the seat which the King had given her, and called it
Little Vienna, or Little Schoenbrunn.  A person who belonged to the
Court, and was silly enough to give this report credit, wishing to visit
Petit Trianon with a party, wrote to M. Campan, requesting the Queen’s
permission to do so.  In his note he called Trianon Little Vienna.
Similar requests were usually laid before the Queen just as they were
made: she chose to give the permissions to see her gardens herself,
liking to grant these little favours.  When she came to the words I have
quoted she was very, much offended, and exclaimed, angrily, that there
were too many, fools ready, to aid the malicious; that she had been told
of the report circulated, which pretended that she had thought of nothing
but her own country, and that she kept an Austrian heart, while the
interests of France alone ought to engage her.  She refused the request
so awkwardly made, and desired M. Campan to reply, that Trianon was not
to be seen for some time, and that the Queen was astonished that any man
in good society should believe she would do so ill-judged a thing as to
change the French names of her palaces to foreign ones.
Before the Emperor Joseph II’s first visit to France the Queen received a
visit from the Archduke Maximilian in 1775.  A stupid act of the
ambassador, seconded on the part of the Queen by the Abbe de Vermond,
gave rise at that period to a discussion which offended the Princes of
the blood and the chief nobility of the kingdom.  Travelling incognito,
the young Prince claimed that the first visit was not due from him to the
Princes of the blood; and the Queen supported his pretension.
From the time of the Regency, and on account of the residence of the
family of Orleans in the bosom of the capital, Paris had preserved a
remarkable degree of attachment and respect for that branch of the royal
house; and although the crown was becoming more and more remote from the
Princes of the House of Orleans, they had the advantage (a great one with
the Parisians) of being the descendants of Henri IV.  An affront to that
popular family was a serious ground of dislike to the Queen.  It was at
this period that the circles of the city, and even of the Court,
expressed themselves bitterly about her levity, and her partiality for
the House of Austria.  The Prince for whom the Queen had embarked in an
important family quarrel–and a quarrel involving national prerogatives–
was, besides, little calculated to inspire interest.  Still young,
uninformed, and deficient in natural talent, he was always making
blunders.
He went to the Jardin du Roi; M. de Buffon, who received him there,
offered him a copy of his works; the Prince declined accepting the book,
saying to M. de Buffon, in the most polite manner possible, “I should be
very sorry to deprive you of it.”
     [Joseph II, on his visit to France, also went to see M. de Buffon,
     and said to that celebrated man, “I am come to fetch the copy of
     your works which my brother forgot."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
It may be supposed that the Parisians were much entertained with this
answer.
The Queen was exceedingly mortified at the mistakes made by her brother;
but what hurt her most was being accused of preserving an Austrian heart.
Marie Antoinette had more than once to endure that imputation during the
long course of her misfortunes.  Habit did not stop the tears such
injustice caused; but the first time she was suspected of not loving
France, she gave way to her indignation.  All that she could say on the
subject was useless; by seconding the pretensions of the Archduke she had
put arms into her enemies’ hands; they were labouring to deprive her of
the love of the people, and endeavoured, by all possible means, to spread
a belief that the Queen sighed for Germany, and preferred that country to
France.
Marie Antoinette had none but herself to rely on for preserving the
fickle smiles of the Court and the public.  The King, too indifferent to
serve her as a guide, as yet had conceived no love for her,
notwithstanding the intimacy that grew between them at Choisy.  In his
closet Louis XVI. was immersed in deep study.  At the Council he was
busied with the welfare of his people; hunting and mechanical occupations
engrossed his leisure moments, and he never thought on the subject of an
heir.
The coronation took place at Rheims, with all the accustomed pomp.  At
this period the people’s love for Louis XVI.  burst forth in transports
not to be mistaken for party demonstrations or idle curiosity.  He
replied to this enthusiasm by marks of confidence, worthy of a people
happy in being governed by a good King; he took a pleasure in repeatedly
walking without guards, in the midst of the crowd which pressed around
him, and called down blessings on his head.  I remarked the impression
made at this time by an observation of Louis XVI.  On the day of his
coronation he put his hand up to his head, at the moment of the crown
being placed upon it, and said, “It pinches me.”  Henri III. had
exclaimed, “It pricks me.”  Those who were near the King were struck with
the similarity between these two exclamations, though not of a class
likely to be blinded by the superstitious fears of ignorance.
While the Queen, neglected as she was, could not even hope for the
happiness of being a mother, she had the mortification of seeing the
Comtesse d’Artois give birth to the Duc d’Angouleme.
Custom required that the royal family and the whole Court should be
present at the accouchement of the Princesses; the Queen was therefore
obliged to stay a whole day in her sister-in-law’s chamber.  The moment
the Comtesse d’Artois was informed a prince was born, she put her hand to
her forehead and exclaimed with energy, “My God, how happy I am!”  The
Queen felt very differently at this involuntary and natural exclamation.
Nevertheless, her behaviour was perfect.  She bestowed all possible marks
of tenderness upon the young mother, and would not leave her until she
was again put into bed; she afterwards passed along the staircase, and
through the hall of the guards, with a calm demeanour, in the midst of an
immense crowd.  The poissardes, who had assumed a right of speaking to
sovereigns in their own vulgar language, followed her to the very doors
of her apartments, calling out to her with gross expressions, that she
ought to produce heirs.  The Queen reached her inner room, hurried and
agitated; he shut herself up to weep with me alone, not from jealousy of
her sister-in-law’s happiness,–of that he was incapable,–but from
sorrow at her own situation.
Deprived of the happiness of giving an heir to the crown, the Queen
endeavoured to interest herself in the children of the people of her
household.  She had long been desirous to bring up one of them herself,
and to make it the constant object of her care.  A little village boy,
four or five years old, full of health, with a pleasing countenance,
remarkably large blue eyes, and fine light hair, got under the feet of
the Queen’s horses, when she was taking an airing in a calash, through
the hamlet of St. Michel, near Louveciennes.  The coachman and postilions
stopped the horses, and the child was rescued without the slightest
injury.  Its grandmother rushed out of the door of her cottage to take
it; but the Queen, standing up in her calash and extending her arms,
called out that the child was hers, and that destiny had given it to her,
to console her, no doubt, until she should have the happiness of having
one herself.  “Is his mother alive?” asked the Queen.  “No, Madame; my
daughter died last winter, and left five small children upon my hands."
“I will take this one, and provide for all the rest; do you consent?"
“Ah, Madame, they are too fortunate,” replied the cottager; “but Jacques
is a bad boy.  I hope he will stay with you!”  The Queen, taking little
Jacques upon her knee, said that she would make him used to her, and gave
orders to proceed.  It was necessary, however, to shorten the drive, so
violently did Jacques scream, and kick the Queen and her ladies.
The arrival of her Majesty at her apartments at Versailles, holding the
little rustic by the hand, astonished the whole household; he cried out
with intolerable shrillness that he wanted his grandmother, his brother
Louis, and his sister Marianne; nothing could calm him.  He was taken
away by the wife of a servant, who was appointed to attend him as nurse.
The other children were put to school.  Little Jacques, whose family name
was Armand, came back to the Queen two days afterwards; a white frock
trimmed with lace, a rose-coloured sash with silver fringe, and a hat
decorated with feathers, were now substituted for the woollen cap, the
little red frock, and the wooden shoes.  The child was really very
beautiful.  The Queen was enchanted with him; he was brought to her every
morning at nine o’clock; he breakfasted and dined with her, and often
even with the King.  She liked to call him my child,
     [This little unfortunate was nearly twenty in 1792; the fury of the
     people and the fear of being thought a favourite of the Queen’s had
     made him the most sanguinary terrorist of Versailles.  He was killed
     at the battle of Jemappes.]
and lavished caresses upon him, still maintaining a deep silence
respecting the regrets which constantly occupied her heart.
This child remained with the Queen until the time when Madame was old
enough to come home to her august mother, who had particularly taken upon
herself the care of her education.
The Queen talked incessantly of the qualities which she admired in Louis
XVI., and gladly attributed to herself the slightest favourable change in
his manner; perhaps she displayed too unreservedly the joy she felt, and
the share she appropriated in the improvement.  One day Louis XVI.
saluted her ladies with more kindness than usual, and the Queen
laughingly said to them, “Now confess, ladies, that for one so badly
taught as a child, the King has saluted you with very good grace!”
The Queen hated M. de La Vauguyon; she accused him alone of those points
in the habits, and even the sentiments, of the King which hurt her.
A former first woman of the bedchamber to Queen Maria Leczinska had
continued in office near the young Queen.  She was one of those people
who are fortunate enough to spend their lives in the service of kings
without knowing anything of what is passing at Court.  She was a great
devotee; the Abbe Grisel, an ex-Jesuit, was her director.  Being rich
from her savings and an income of 50,000 livres, she kept a very good
table; in her apartment, at the Grand Commun, the most distinguished
persons who still adhered to the Order of Jesuits often assembled.  The
Duc de La Vauguyon was intimate with her; their chairs at the Eglise des
Reollets were placed near each other; at high mass and at vespers they
sang the “Gloria in Excelsis” and the “Magnificat” together; and the
pious virgin, seeing in him only one of God’s elect, little imagined him
to be the declared enemy of a Princess whom she served and revered.
On the day of his death she ran in tears to relate to the Queen the
piety, humility, and repentance of the last moments of the Duc de La
Vauguyon.  He had called his people together, she said, to ask their
pardon.  “For what?”  replied the Queen, sharply; “he has placed and
pensioned off all his servants; it was of the King and his brothers that
the holy man you bewail should have asked pardon, for having paid so
little attention to the education of princes on whom the fate and
happiness of twenty-five millions of men depend.  Luckily,” added she,
“the King and his brothers, still young, have incessantly laboured to
repair the errors of their preceptor.”
The progress of time, and the confidence with which the King and the
Princes, his brothers, were inspired by the change in their situation
since the death of Louis XV., had developed their characters.  I will
endeavour to depict them.
The features of Louis XVI.  were noble enough, though somewhat melancholy
in expression; his walk was heavy and unmajestic; his person greatly
neglected; his hair, whatever might be the skill of his hairdresser,
was soon in disorder.  His voice, without being harsh, was not agreeable;
if he grew animated in speaking he often got above his natural pitch,
and became shrill.  The Abbe de Radonvilliers, his preceptor, one of the
Forty of the French Academy, a learned and amiable man, had given him and
Monsieur a taste for study.  The King had continued to instruct himself;
he knew the English language perfectly; I have often heard him translate
some of the most difficult passages in Milton’s poems.  He was a skilful
geographer, and was fond of drawing and colouring maps; he was well
versed in history, but had not perhaps sufficiently studied the spirit of
it.  He appreciated dramatic beauties, and judged them accurately.  At
Choisy, one day, several ladies expressed their dissatisfaction because
the French actors were going to perform one of Moliere’s pieces.  The
King inquired why they disapproved of the choice.  One of them answered
that everybody must admit that Moliere had very bad taste; the King
replied that many things might be found in Moliere contrary to fashion,
but that it appeared to him difficult to point out any in bad taste?
     [The King, having purchased the Chateau of Rambouillet from the Duc
     de Penthievre, amused himself with embellishing it.  I have seen a
     register entirely in his own handwriting, which proves that he
     possessed a great variety of information on the minutiae of various
     branches of knowledge.  In his accounts he would not omit an outlay
     of a franc.  His figures and letters, when he wished to write
     legibly, were small and very neat, but in general he wrote very ill.
     He was so sparing of paper that he divided a sheet into eight, six,
     or four pieces, according to the length of what he had to write.
     Towards the close of the page he compressed the letters, and avoided
     interlineations.  The last words were close to the edge of the
     paper; he seemed to regret being obliged to begin another page.  He
     was methodical and analytical; he divided what he wrote into
     chapters and sections.  He had extracted from the works of Nicole
     and Fenelon, his favourite authors, three or four hundred concise
     and sententious phrases; these he had classed according to subject,
     and formed a work of them in the style of Montesquieu.  To this
     treatise he had given the following general title: “Of Moderate
     Monarchy” (De la Monarchie temperee), with chapters entitled, “Of
     the Person of the Prince;”  “Of the Authority of Bodies in the
     State;”  “Of the Character of the Executive Functions of the
     Monarchy.”  Had he been able to carry into effect all the grand
     precepts he had observed in Fenelon, Louis XVI. would have been an
     accomplished monarch, and France a powerful kingdom.  The King used
     to accept the speeches his ministers presented to him to deliver on
     important occasions; but he corrected and modified them; struck out
     some parts, and added others; and sometimes consulted the Queen on
     the subject.  The phrase of the minister erased by the King was
     frequently unsuitable, and dictated by the minister’s private
     feelings; but the King’s was always the natural expression.  He
     himself composed, three times or oftener, his famous answers to the
     Parliament which he banished.  But in his letters he was negligent,
     and always incorrect.  Simplicity was the characteristic of the
     King’s style; the figurative style of M. Necker did not please him;
     the sarcasms of Maurepas were disagreeable to him.  Unfortunate
     Prince! he would predict, in his observations, that if such a
     calamity should happen, the monarchy would be ruined; and the next
     day he would consent in Council to the very measure which he had
     condemned the day before, and which brought him nearer the brink of
     the precipice.–SOULAVIE, “Historical and Political Memoirs of the
     Reign of Louis XVI.,” vol.  ii.]
This Prince combined with his attainments the attributes of a good
husband, a tender father, and an indulgent master.
Unfortunately he showed too much predilection for the mechanical arts;
masonry and lock-making so delighted him that he admitted into his
private apartment a common locksmith, with whom he made keys and locks;
and his hands, blackened by that sort of work, were often, in my
presence, the subject of remonstrances and even sharp reproaches from
the Queen, who would have chosen other amusements for her husband.?
     [Louis XVI. saw that the art of lock-making was capable of
     application to a higher study, He was an excellent geographer.  The
     most valuable and complete instrument for the study of that science
     was begun by his orders and under his direction.  It was an immense
     globe of copper, which was long preserved, though unfinished, in the
     Mazarine library.  Louis XVI.  invented and had executed under his
     own eyes the ingenious mechanism required for this globe.–NOTE BY
     THE EDITOR.]
Austere and rigid with regard to himself alone, the King observed the
laws of the Church with scrupulous exactness.  He fasted and abstained
throughout the whole of Lent.  He thought it right that the queen should
not observe these customs with the same strictness.  Though sincerely
pious, the spirit of the age had disposed his mind to toleration.
Turgot, Malesherbes, and Necker judged that this Prince, modest and
simple in his habits, would willingly sacrifice the royal prerogative to
the solid greatness of his people.  His heart, in truth, disposed him
towards reforms; but his prejudices and fears, and the clamours of pious
and privileged persons, intimidated him, and made him abandon plans which
his love for the people had suggested.
Monsieur–
     [During his stay at Avignon, Monsieur, afterwards Louis XVIII,
     lodged with the Duc de Crillon; he refused the town-guard which was
     offered him, saying, “A son of France, under the roof of a Crillon,
     needs no guard."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
had more dignity of demeanour than the King; but his corpulence rendered
his gait inelegant.  He was fond of pageantry and magnificence.  He
cultivated the belles lettres, and under assumed names often contributed
verses to the Mercury and other papers.
His wonderful memory was the handmaid of his wit, furnishing him with the
happiest quotations.  He knew by heart a varied repertoire, from the
finest passages of the Latin classics to the Latin of all the prayers,
from the works of Racine to the vaudeville of “Rose et Colas.”
The Comte d’Artoisi had an agreeable countenance, was well made, skilful
in bodily exercises, lively, impetuous, fond of pleasure, and very
particular in his dress.  Some happy observations made by him were
repeated with approval, and gave a favourable idea of his heart.  The
Parisians liked the open and frank character of this Prince, which they
considered national, and showed real affection for him.
The dominion that the Queen gained over the King’s mind, the charms of a
society in which Monsieur displayed his wit, and to which the Comte
d’Artois–[Afterwards Charles X.]– gave life by the vivacity of youth,
gradually softened that ruggedness of manner in Louis XVI. which a
better-conducted education might have prevented.  Still, this defect
often showed itself, and, in spite of his extreme simplicity, the King
inspired those who had occasion to speak to him with diffidence.
Courtiers, submissive in the presence of their sovereign, are only the
more ready to caricature him; with little good breeding, they called
those answers they so much dreaded, Les coups de boutoir du Roi.–[The
literal meaning of the phrase “coup de boutoir,” is a thrust from the
snout of a boar.]
Methodical in all his habits, the King always went to bed at eleven
precisely.  One evening the Queen was going with her usual circle to a
party, either at the Duc de Duras’s or the Princesse de Glumenee’s.
The hand of the clock was slily put forward to hasten the King’s
departure by a few minutes; he thought bed-time was come, retired, and
found none of his attendants ready to wait on him.  This joke became
known in all the drawing-rooms of Versailles, and was disapproved of
there.  Kings have no privacy.  Queens have no boudoirs.  If those who
are in immediate attendance upon sovereigns be not themselves disposed to
transmit their private habits to posterity, the meanest valet will relate
what he has seen or heard; his gossip circulates rapidly, and forms
public opinion, which at length ascribes to the most august persons
characters which, however untrue they may be, are almost always
indelible.
NOTE.  The only passion ever shown by Louis XVI. was for hunting.  He was
so much occupied by it that when I went up into his private closets at
Versailles, after the 10th of August, I saw upon the staircase six
frames, in which were seen statements of all his hunts, when Dauphin and
when King.  In them was detailed the number, kind, and quality of
the game he had killed at each hunting party during every month, every
season, and every year of his reign.
The interior of his private apartments was thus arranged: a salon,
ornamented with gilded mouldings, displayed the engravings which had been
dedicated to him, drawings of the canals he had dug, with the model of
that of Burgundy, and the plan of the cones and works of Cherbourg.  The
upper hall contained his collection of geographical charts, spheres,
globes, and also his geographical cabinet.  There were to be seen
drawings of maps which he had begun, and some that he had finished.  He
had a clever method of washing them in.  His geographical memory was
prodigious.  Over the hall was the turning and joining room, furnished
with ingenious instruments for working in wood.  He inherited some from
Louis XV., and he often busied himself, with Duret’s assistance, in
keeping them clean and bright.  Above was the library of books published
during his reign.  The prayer books and manuscript books of Anne of
Brittany, Francois I, the later Valois, Louis XIV., Louis XV., and the
Dauphin formed the great hereditary library of the Chateau.  Louis XVI.
placed separately, in two apartments communicating with each other, the
works of his own time, including a complete collection of Didot’s
editions, in vellum, every volume enclosed in a morocco case.  There were
several English works, among the rest the debates of the British
Parliament, in a great number of volumes in folio (this is the Moniteur
of England, a complete collection of which is so valuable and so scarce).
By the side of this collection was to be seen a manuscript history of all
the schemes for a descent upon that island, particularly that of Comte de
Broglie.  One of the presses of this cabinet was full of cardboard boxes,
containing papers relative to the House of Austria, inscribed in the
King’s own hand: “Secret papers of my family respecting the House of
Austria; papers of my family respecting the Houses of Stuart and
Hanover.”  In an adjoining press were kept papers relative to Russia.
Satirical works against Catherine II.  and against Paul I.  were sold in
France under the name of histories; Louis XVIII. collected and sealed up
with his small seal the scandalous anecdotes against Catherine II., as
well as the works of Rhulieres, of which he had a copy, to be certain
that the secret life of that Princess, which attracted the curiosity of
her contemporaries, should not be made public by his means.
Above the King’s private library were a forge, two anvils, and a vast
number of iron tools; various common locks, well made and perfect; some
secret locks, and locks ornamented with gilt copper.  It was there that
the infamous Gamin, who afterwards accused the King of having tried to
poison him, and was rewarded for his calumny with a pension of twelve
thousand livres, taught him the art of lock-making.  This Gamin, who
became our guide, by order of the department and municipality of
Versailles, did not, however, denounce the King on the 20th December,
1792.  He had been made the confidant of that Prince in an immense number
of important commissions; the King had sent him the “Red Book,” from
Paris, in a parcel; and the part which was concealed during the
Constituent Assembly still remained so in 1793.  Gamin hid it in a part
of the Chateau inaccessible to everybody, and took it from under the
shelves of a secret press before our eyes.  This is a convincing proof
that Louis XVI. hoped to return to his Chiteau.  When teaching Louis XVI.
his trade Gamin took upon himself the tone and authority of a master.
“The King was good, forbearing, timid, inquisitive, and addicted to
sleep,” said Gamin to me; “he was fond to excess of lock-making, and he
concealed himself from the Queen and the Court to file and forge with me.
In order to convey his anvil and my own backwards and forwards we were
obliged to use a thousand stratagems, the history of which would: never
end.”  Above the King’s and Gamin’s forges and anvils was an,
observatory, erected upon a platform covered with lead.  There, seated on
an armchair, and assisted by a telescope, the King observed all that was
passing in the courtyards of Versailles, the avenue of Paris, and the
neighbouring gardens.  He had taken a liking to Duret, one of the indoor
servants of the palace, who sharpened his tools, cleaned his anvils,
pasted his maps, and adjusted eyeglasses to the King’s sight, who was
short-sighted.  This good Duret, and indeed all the indoor servants,
spoke of their master with regret and affection, and with tears in their
eyes.
The King was born weak and delicate; but from the age of twenty-four he
possessed a robust constitution, inherited from his mother, who was of
the House of Saxe, celebrated for generations for its robustness.  There
were two men in Louis XVI., the man of knowledge and the man of will.
The King knew the history of his own family and of the first houses of
France perfectly.  He composed the instructions for M. de la Peyrouse’s
voyage round the world, which the minister thought were drawn up by
several members of the Academy of Sciences.  His memory retained an
infinite number of names and situations.  He remembered quantities and
numbers wonderfully.  One day an account was presented to him in which
the minister had ranked among the expenses an item inserted in the
account of the preceding year.  “There is a double charge,” said the
King; “bring me last year’s account, and I will show it yet there.”  When
the King was perfectly master of the details of any matter, and saw
injustice, he was obdurate even to harshness.  Then he would be obeyed
instantly, in order to be sure that he was obeyed.
But in important affairs of state the man of will was not to be found.
Louis XVI. was upon the throne exactly what those weak temperaments whom
nature has rendered incapable of an opinion are in society.  In his
pusillanimity, he gave his confidence to a minister; and although amidst
various counsels he often knew which was the best, he never had the
resolution to say, “I prefer the opinion of such a one.”  Herein
originated the misfortunes of the State.–SOULAVIE’S “Historical and
Political Memoirs Of the Reign Of LOUIS XVI.,” VOL ii.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
