


In the beginning of the spring of 1791, the King, tired of remaining at
the Tuileries, wished to return to St. Cloud.  His whole household had
already gone, and his dinner was prepared there.  He got into his
carriage at one; the guard mutinied, shut the gates, and declared they
would not let him pass.  This event certainly proceeded from some
suspicion of a plan to escape.  Two persons who drew near the King’s
carriage were very ill treated.  My father-in-law was violently laid hold
of by the guards, who took his sword from him.  The King and his family
were obliged to alight and return to their apartments.
They did not much regret this outrage in their hearts; they saw in it a
justification, even in the eyes of the people, of their intention to
leave Paris.
So early as the month of March in the same year, the Queen began to busy
herself in preparing for her departure.  I spent that month with her,
and executed a great number of secret orders which she gave me respecting
the intended event.  It was with uneasiness that I saw her occupied with
cares which seemed to me useless, and even dangerous, and I remarked to
her that the Queen of France would find linen and gowns everywhere.
My observations were made in vain; she determined to have a complete
wardrobe with her at Brussels, as well for her children as herself.
I went out alone and almost disguised to purchase the articles necessary
and have them made up.
I ordered six chemises at the shop of one seamstress, six at that of
another, gowns, combing cloths, etc.  My sister had a complete set of
clothes made for Madame, by the measure of her eldest daughter, and I
ordered clothes for the Dauphin from those of my son.  I filled a trunk
with these things, and addressed them, by the Queen’s orders, to one of
her women, my aunt, Madame Cardon,–a widow living at Arras, by virtue of
an unlimited leave of absence,–in order that she might be ready to start
for Brussels, or any other place, as soon as she should be directed to do
so.  This lady had landed property in Austrian Flanders, and could at any
time quit Arras unobserved.
The Queen was to take only her first woman in attendance with her from
Paris.  She apprised me that if I should not be on duty at the moment of
departure, she would make arrangements for my joining her.  She
determined also to take her travelling dressing-case.  She consulted me
on her idea of sending it off, under pretence of making a present of it
to the Archduchess Christina, Gouvernante of the Netherlands.  I ventured
to oppose this plan strongly, and observed that, amidst so many people
who watched her slightest actions, there would be found a sufficient
number sharp-sighted enough to discover that it was only a pretext for
sending away the property in question before her own departure;
she persisted in her intention, and all I could arrange was that the
dressing-case should not be removed from her apartment, and that M. de
charge d’afaires from the Court of Vienna during the absence of the Comte
de Mercy, should come and ask her, at her toilet, before all her people,
to order one exactly like her own for Madame the Gouvernante of the
Netherlands.  The Queen, therefore, commanded me before the charge
d’affaires to order the article in question.  This occasioned only an
expense of five hundred louis, and appeared calculated to lull suspicion
completely.
About the middle of May, 1791, a month after the Queen had ordered me to
bespeak the dressing-case, she asked me whether it would soon be
finished.  I sent for the ivory-turner who had it in hand.  He could not
complete it for six weeks.  I informed the Queen of this, and she told me
she should not be able to wait for it, as she was to set out in the
course of June.  She added that, as she had ordered her sister’s
dressing-case in the presence of all her attendants, she had taken a
sufficient precaution, especially by saying that her sister was out of
patience at not receiving it, and that therefore her own must be emptied
and cleaned, and taken to the charge d’affaires, who would send it off.
I executed this order without any, appearance of mystery.  I desired the
wardrobe woman to take out of the dressing-case all that it contained,
because that intended for the Archduchess could not be finished for some
time; and to take great care to leave no remains of the perfumes which
might not suit that Princess.
The woman in question executed her commission punctually; but, on the
evening of that very day, the 15th of May, 1791, she informed M. Bailly,
the Mayor of Paris, that preparations were making at the Queen’s
residence for a departure; and that the dressing-case was already sent
off, under pretence of its being presented to the Archduchess Christina.
     [After the return from Varennes M. Bailly put this woman’s
     deposition into the Queen’s hands.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
It was necessary, likewise, to send off all the diamonds belonging to the
Queen.  Her Majesty shut herself up with me in a closet in the entresol,
looking into the garden of the Tuileries, and we packed all the diamonds,
rubies, and pearls she possessed in a small chest.  The cases containing
these ornaments, being altogether of considerable bulk, had been
deposited, ever since the 6th of October, 1789, with the valet de chambre
who had the care of the Queen’s jewels.  That faithful servant, himself
detecting the use that was to be made of the valuables, destroyed all the
boxes, which were, as usual, covered with red morocco, marked with the
cipher and arms of France.  It would have been impossible for him to hide
them from the eyes of the popular inquisitors during the domiciliary
visits in January, 1793, and the discovery might have formed a ground of
accusation against the Queen.
I had but a few articles to place in the box when the Queen was compelled
to desist from packing it, being obliged to go down to cards, which began
at seven precisely.  She therefore desired me to leave all the diamonds
upon the sofa, persuaded that, as she took the key of her closet herself,
and there was a sentinel under the window, no danger was to be
apprehended for that night, and she reckoned upon returning very early
next day to finish the work.
The same woman who had given information of the sending away of the
dressing-case was also deputed by the Queen to take care of her more
private rooms.  No other servant was permitted to enter them; she renewed
the flowers, swept the carpets, etc.  The Queen received back the key,
when the woman had finished putting them in order, from her own hands;
but, desirous of doing her duty well, and sometimes having the key in her
possession for a few minutes only, she had probably on that account
ordered one without the Queen’s knowledge.  It is impossible not to
believe this, since the despatch of the diamonds was the subject of a
second accusation which the Queen heard of after the return from
Varennes.  She made a formal declaration that her Majesty, with the
assistance of Madame Campan, had packed up all her jewelry some time
before the departure; that she was certain of it, as she had found the
diamonds, and the cotton which served to wrap them, scattered upon the
sofa in the Queen’s closet in the ’entresol’; and most assuredly she
could only have seen these preparations in the interval between seven in
the evening and seven in the morning.  The Queen having met me next day
at the time appointed, the box was handed over to Leonard, her Majesty’s
hairdresser,–[This unfortunate man, after having emigrated for some
time, returned to France, and perished upon the scaffold.–NOTE BY
EDITOR]–who left the country with the Duc de Choiseul.  The box
remained a long time at Brussels, and at length got into the hands of
Madame la Duchesse d’Angouleme, being delivered to her by the Emperor on
her arrival at Vienna.
In order not to leave out any of the Queen’s diamonds, I requested the
first tirewoman to give me the body of the full dress, and all the
assortment which served for the stomacher of the full dress on days of
state, articles which always remained at the wardrobe.
The superintendent and the dame d’honneur being absent, the first
tirewoman required me to sign a receipt, the terms of which she dictated,
and which acquitted her of all responsibility for these diamonds.
She had the prudence to burn this document on the 10th of August, 1792.
–[The date of the sack of the Tuileries and slaughter of the Swiss
Guard]–The Queen having determined, upon the arrest at Varennes, not to
have her diamonds brought back to France, was often anxious about them
during the year which elapsed between that period and the 10th of August,
and dreaded above all things that such a secret should be discovered.
In consequence of a decree of the Assembly, which deprived the King of
the custody of the Crown diamonds, the Queen had at this time already
given up those which she generally used.
She preferred the twelve brilliants called Hazarins, from the name of the
Cardinal who had enriched the treasury with them, a few rose-cut
diamonds, and the Sanci.  She determined to deliver, with her own hands,
the box containing them to the commissioner nominated by the National
Assembly to place them with the Crown diamonds.  After giving them to
him, she offered him a row of pearls of great beauty, saying to him that
it had been brought into France by Anne of Austria; that it was
invaluable, on account of its rarity; that, having been appropriated by
that Princess to the use of the Queens and Dauphinesses, Louis XV.  had
placed it in her hands on her arrival in France; but that she considered
it national property.  “That is an open question, Madame,” said the
commissary.  “Monsieur,” replied the Queen, “it is one for me to decide,
and is now settled.”
My father-in-law, who was dying of the grief he felt for the misfortunes
of his master and mistress, strongly interested and occupied the thoughts
of the Queen.  He had been saved from the fury of the populace in the
courtyard of the Tuileries.
On the day on which the King was compelled by an insurrection to give up
a journey to St. Cloud, her Majesty looked upon this trusty servant as
inevitably lost, if, on going away, she should leave him in the apartment
he occupied in the Tuileries.  Prompted by her apprehensions, she ordered
M. Vicq-d’Azyr, her physician, to recommend him the waters of Mont d’Or
in Auvergne, and to persuade him to set off at the latter end of May.
At the moment of my going away the Queen assured me that the grand
project would be executed between the 15th and the 20th of June; that as
it was not my month to be on duty, Madame Thibaut would take the journey;
but that she had many directions to give me before I went.  She then
desired me to write to my aunt, Madame Cardon, who was by that time in
possession of the clothes which I had ordered, that as soon as she should
receive a letter from M. Augur, the date of which should be accompanied
with a B, an L, or an M, she was to proceed with her property to
Brussels, Luxembourg, or Montmedy.  She desired me to explain the meaning
of these three letters clearly to my sister, and to leave them with her
in writing, in order that at the moment of my going away she might be
able to take my place in writing to Arras.
The Queen had a more delicate commission for me; it was to select from
among my acquaintance a prudent person of obscure rank, wholly devoted to
the interests of the Court, who would be willing to receive a portfolio
which she was to give up only to me, or some one furnished with a note
from the Queen.  She added that she would not travel with this portfolio,
and that it was of the utmost importance that my opinion of the fidelity
of the person to whom it was to be entrusted should be well founded.  I
proposed to her Madame Vallayer Coster, a painter of the Academy, and an
amiable and worthy artist, whom I had known from my infancy.  She lived
in the galleries of the Louvre.  The choice seemed a good one.  The Queen
remembered that she had made her marriage possible by giving her a place
in the financial offices, and added that gratitude ought sometimes to be
reckoned on.  She then pointed out to me the valet belonging to her
toilet, whom I was to take with me, to show him the residence of Madame
Coster, so that he might not mistake it when he should take the portfolio
to her.  The day before her departure the Queen particularly recommended
me to proceed to Lyons and the frontiers as soon as she should have
started.  She advised me to take with me a confidential person, fit to
remain with M. Campan when I should leave him, and assured me that she
would give orders to M. ––– to set off as soon as she should be known
to be at the frontiers in order to protect me in going out.  She
condescended to add that, having a long journey to make in foreign
countries, she determined to give me three hundred louis.
I bathed the Queen’s hands with tears at the moment of this sorrowful
separation; and, having money at my disposal, I declined accepting her
gold.  I did not dread the road I had to travel in order to rejoin her;
all my apprehension was that by treachery or miscalculation a scheme, the
safety of which was not sufficiently clear to me, should fail.  I could
answer for all those who belonged to the service immediately about the
Queen’s person, and I was right; but her wardrobe woman gave me well-
founded reason for alarm.  I mentioned to the Queen many revolutionary
remarks which this woman had made to me a few days before.  Her office
was directly under the control of the first femme de chambre, yet she had
refused to obey the directions I gave her, talking insolently to me about
“hierarchy overturned, equality among men,” of course more especially
among persons holding offices at Court; and this jargon, at that time in
the mouths of all the partisans of the Revolution, was terminated by an
observation which frightened me.  “You know many important secrets,
madame,” said this woman to me, “and I have guessed quite as many.  I am
not a fool; I see all that is going forward here in consequence of the
bad advice given to the King and Queen; I could frustrate it all if I
chose.”  This argument, in which I had been promptly silenced, left me
pale and trembling.  Unfortunately, as I began my narrative to the Queen
with particulars of this woman’s refusal to obey me,–and sovereigns are
all their lives importuned with complaints upon the rights of places,–
she believed that my own dissatisfaction had much to do with the step
I was taking; and she did not sufficiently fear the woman.  Her office,
although a very inferior one, brought her in nearly fifteen thousand
francs a year.  Still young, tolerably handsome, with comfortable
apartments in the entresols of the Tuileries, she saw a great deal of
company, and in the evening had assemblies, consisting of deputies of the
revolutionary party.  M. de Gouvion, major-general of the National Guard,
passed almost every day with her; and it is to be presumed that she had
long worked for the party in opposition to the Court.  The Queen asked
her for the key of a door which led to the principal vestibule of the
Tuileries, telling her she wished to have a similar one, that she might
not be under the necessity of going out through the pavilion of Flora.
M. de Gouvion and M. de La Fayette would, of course, be apprised of this
circumstance, and well-informed persons have assured me that on the very
night of the Queen’s departure this wretched woman had a spy with her,
who saw the royal family set off.
As soon as I had executed all the Queen’s orders, on the 30th of May,
1791, I set out for Auvergne, and was settled in the gloomy narrow valley
of Mont d’Or, when, about four in the afternoon of the 25th of June,
I heard the beat of a drum to call the inhabitants of the hamlet
together.  When it had ceased I heard a hairdresser from Bresse proclaim
in the provincial dialect of Auvergne: “The King and Queen were taking
flight in order to ruin France, but I come to tell you that they are
stopped, and are well guarded by a hundred thousand men under arms.”  I
still ventured to hope that he was repeating only a false report, but he
went on: “The Queen,” with her well-known haughtiness, lifted up the veil
which covered her face, and said to the citizens who were upbraiding the
King, “Well, since you recognise your sovereign, respect him.”  Upon
hearing these expressions, which the Jacobin club of Clermont could not
have invented, I exclaimed, “The news is true!”
I immediately learnt that, a courier being come from Paris to Clermont,
the ’procureur’ of the commune had sent off messengers to the chief
places of the canton; these again sent couriers to the districts, and the
districts in like manner informed the villages and hamlets which they
contained.  It was through this ramification, arising from the
establishment of clubs, that the afflicting intelligence of the
misfortune of my sovereigns reached me in the wildest part of France,
and in the midst of the snows by which we were environed.
On the 28th I received a note written in a hand which I recognised as
that of M. Diet,–[This officer was slain in the Queen’s chamber on the
10th of August]–usher of the Queen’s chamber, but dictated by her
Majesty.  It contained these words: “I am this moment arrived; I have
just got into my bath; I and my family exist, that is all.  I have
suffered much.  Do not return to Paris until I desire you.  Take good
care of my poor Campan, soothe his sorrow.  Look for happier times."
This note was for greater safety addressed to my father-in-law’s valet-de
-chambre.  What were my feelings on perceiving that after the most
distressing crisis we were among the first objects of the kindness of
that unfortunate Princess!
M. Campan having been unable to benefit by the waters of Mont d’Or, and
the first popular effervescence having subsided, I thought I might return
to Clermont.  The committee of surveillance, or that of general safety,
had resolved to arrest me there; but the Abbe Louis, formerly a
parliamentary counsellor, and then a member of the Constituent Assembly,
was kind enough to affirm that I was in Auvergne solely for the purpose
of attending my father-in-law, who was extremely ill.  The precautions
relative to my absence from Paris were limited to placing us under the
surveillance of the ’procureur’ of the commune, who was at the same time
president of the Jacobin club; but he was also a physician of repute, and
without having any doubt that he had received secret orders relative to
me, I thought it would favour the chances of our safety if I selected him
to attend my patient.  I paid him according to the rate given to the best
Paris physicians, and I requested him to visit us every morning and every
evening.  I took the precaution to subscribe to no other newspaper than
the Moniteur.  Doctor Monestier (for that was the physician’s name)
frequently took upon himself to read it to us.  Whenever he thought
proper to speak of the King and Queen in the insulting and brutal terms
at that time unfortunately adopted throughout France, I used to stop him
and say, coolly, “Monsieur, you are here in company with the servants of
Louis XVI.  and Marie Antoinette.  Whatever may be the wrongs with which
the nation believes it has to reproach them, our principles forbid our
losing sight of the respect due to them from us.”  Notwithstanding that
he was an inveterate patriot, he felt the force of this remark, and even
procured the revocation of a second order for our arrest, becoming
responsible for us to the committee of the Assembly, and to the Jacobin
society.
The two chief women about the Dauphin, who had accompanied the Queen to
Varennes, Diet, her usher, and Camot, her garcon de toilette,–the women
on account of the journey, and the men in consequence of the denunciation
of the woman belonging to the wardrobe,–were sent to the prisons of the
Abbaye.  After my departure the garcon de toilette whom I had taken to
Madame Vallayer Coster’s was sent there with the portfolio she had agreed
to receive.  This commission could not escape the detestable spy upon the
Queen.  She gave information that a portfolio had been carried out on the
evening of the departure, adding that the King had placed it upon the
Queen’s easy-chair, that the garcon de toilette wrapped it up in a napkin
and took it under his arm, and that she did not know where he had carried
it.  The man, who was remarkable for his fidelity, underwent three
examinations without making the slightest disclosure.  M. Diet, a man of
good family, a servant on whom the Queen placed particular reliance,
likewise experienced the severest treatment.  At length, after a lapse of
three weeks, the Queen succeeded in obtaining the release of her
servants.
The Queen, about the 15th of August, had me informed by letter that I
might come back to Paris without being under any apprehension of arrest
there, and that she greatly desired my return.  I brought my father-in-
law back in a dying state, and on the day preceding that of the
acceptation of the constitutional act, I informed the Queen that he was
no more.  “The loss of Lassonne and Campan,” said she, as she applied her
handkerchief to her streaming eyes, “has taught me how valuable such
subjects are to their masters.  I shall never find their equals.”
I resumed my functions about the Queen on the 1st of September, 1791.
She was unable then to converse with me on all the lamentable events
which had occurred since the time of my leaving her, having on guard near
her an officer whom she dreaded more than all the others.  She merely
told me that I should have some secret services to perform for her, and
that she would not create uneasiness by long conversations with me, my
return being a subject of suspicion.  But next day the Queen, well
knowing the discretion of the officer who was to be on guard that night,
had my bed placed very near hers, and having obtained the favour of
having the door shut, when I was in bed she began the narrative of the
journey, and the unfortunate arrest at Varennes.  I asked her permission
to put on my gown, and kneeling by her bedside I remained until three
o’clock in the morning, listening with the liveliest and most sorrowful
interest to the account I am about to repeat, and of which I have seen
various details, of tolerable exactness, in papers of the time.
The King entrusted Count Fersen with all the preparations for departure.
The carriage was ordered by him; the passport, in the name of Madame de
Korf, was procured through his connection with that lady, who was a
foreigner.  And lastly, he himself drove the royal family, as their
coachman, as far as Bondy, where the travellers got into their berlin.
Madame Brunier and Madame Neuville, the first women of Madame and the
Dauphin, there joined the principal carriage.  They were in a cabriolet.
Monsieur and Madame set out from the Luxembourg and took another road.
They as well as the King were recognised by the master of the last post
in France, but this man, devoting himself to the fortunes of the Prince,
left the French territory, and drove them himself as postilion.  Madame
Thibaut, the Queen’s first woman, reached Brussels without the slightest
difficulty.  Madame Cardon, from Arras, met with no hindrance; and
Leonard, the Queen’s hairdresser, passed through Varennes a few hours
before the royal family.  Fate had reserved all its obstacles for the
unfortunate monarch.
Nothing worthy of notice occurred in the beginning of the journey.  The
travellers were detained a short time, about twelve leagues from Paris,
by some repairs which the carriage required.  The King chose to walk up
one of the hills, and these two circumstances caused a delay of three
hours, precisely at the time when it was intended that the berlin should
have been met, just before reaching Varennes, by the detachment commanded
by M. de Goguelat.  This detachment was punctually stationed upon the
spot fixed on, with orders to wait there for the arrival of certain
treasure, which it was to escort; but the peasantry of the neighbourhood,
alarmed at the sight of this body of troops, came armed with staves, and
asked several questions, which manifested their anxiety.  M. de Goguelat,
fearful of causing a riot, and not finding the carriage arrive as he
expected, divided his men into two companies, and unfortunately made them
leave the highway in order to return to Varennes by two cross roads.
The King looked out of the carriage at Ste. Menehould, and asked several
questions concerning the road.  Drouet, the post-master, struck by the
resemblance of Louis to the impression of his head upon the assignats,
drew near the carriage, felt convinced that he recognised the Queen also,
and that the remainder of the travellers consisted of the royal family
and their suite, mounted his horse, reached Varennes by cross roads
before the royal fugitives, and gave the alarm.–[Varennes lies between
Verdun and Montmedy, and not far from the French frontier.]
The Queen began to feel all the agonies of terror; they were augmented by
the voice of a person unknown, who, passing close to the carriage in full
gallop, cried out, bending towards the window without slackening his
speed, “You are recognised!”  They arrived with beating hearts at the
gates of Varennes without meeting one of the horsemen by whom they were
to have been escorted into the place.  They were ignorant where to find
their relays, and some minutes were lost in waiting, to no purpose.  The
cabriolet had preceded them, and the two ladies in attendance found the
bridge already blocked up with old carts and lumber.  The town guards
were all under arms.  The King at last entered Varennes.  M. de Goguelat
had arrived there with his detachment.  He came up to the King and asked
him if he chose to effect a passage by force!  What an unlucky question
to put to Louis XVI., who from the very beginning of the Revolution had
shown in every crisis the fear he entertained of giving the least order
which might cause an effusion of blood!  “Would it be a brisk action?"
said the King.  “It is impossible that it should be otherwise, Sire,"
replied the aide-decamp.  Louis XVI. was unwilling to expose his family.
They therefore went to the house of a grocer, Mayor of Varennes.  The
King began to speak, and gave a summary of his intentions in departing,
analogous to the declaration he had made at Paris.  He spoke with warmth
and affability, and endeavoured to demonstrate to the people around him
that he had only put himself, by the step he had taken, into a fit
situation to treat with the Assembly, and to sanction with freedom the
constitution which he would maintain, though many of its articles were
incompatible with the dignity of the throne, and the force by which it
was necessary that the sovereign should be surrounded.  Nothing could be
more affecting, added the Queen, than this moment, in which the King felt
bound to communicate to the very humblest class of his subjects his
principles, his wishes for the happiness of his people, and the motives
which had determined him to depart.
Whilst the King was speaking to this mayor, whose name was Sauce, the
Queen, seated at the farther end of the shop, among parcels of soap and
candles, endeavoured to make Madame Sauce understand that if she would
prevail upon her husband to make use of his municipal authority to cover
the flight of the King and his family, she would have the glory of having
contributed to restore tranquillity to France.  This woman was moved;
she could not, without streaming eyes, see herself thus solicited by her
Queen; but she could not be got to say anything more than, “Bon Dieu,
Madame, it would be the destruction of M. Sauce; I love my King, but I
love my husband too, you must know, and he would be answerable, you see."
Whilst this strange scene was passing in the shop, the people, hearing
that the King was arrested, kept pouring in from all parts.  M. de
Goguelat, making a last effort, demanded of the dragoons whether they
would protect the departure of the King; they replied only by murmurs,
dropping the points of their swords.  Some person unknown fired a pistol
at M. de Goguelat; he was slightly wounded by the ball.  M. Romeuf, aide-
de-camp to M. de La Fayette, arrived at that moment.  He had been chosen,
after the 6th of October, 1789, by the commander of the Parisian guard to
be in constant attendance about the Queen.  She reproached him bitterly
with the object of his mission.  “If you wish to make your name
remarkable, monsieur,” said the Queen to him, “you have chosen strange
and odious means, which will produce the most fatal consequences.”  This
officer wished to hasten their departure.  The Queen, still cherishing
the hope of seeing M. de Bouille arrive with a sufficient force to
extricate the King from his critical situation, prolonged her stay at
Varennes by every means in her power.
The Dauphin’s first woman pretended to be taken ill with a violent colic,
and threw herself upon a bed, in the hope of aiding the designs of her
superiors; she went and implored for assistance.  The Queen understood
her perfectly well, and refused to leave one who had devoted herself to
follow them in such a state of suffering.  But no delay in departing was
allowed.  The three Body Guards (Valory, Du Moustier, and Malden) were
gagged and fastened upon the seat of the carriage.  A horde of National
Guards, animated with fury and the barbarous joy with which their fatal
triumph inspired them, surrounded the carriage of the royal family.
The three commissioners sent by the Assembly to meet the King, MM. de
Latour-Maubourg, Barnave, and Potion, joined them in the environs of
Epernay.  The two last mentioned got into the King’s carriage.  The Queen
astonished me by the favourable opinion she had formed of Barnave.
When I quitted Paris a great many persons spoke of him only with horror.
She told me he was much altered, that he was full of talent and noble
feeling.  “A feeling of pride which I cannot much blame in a young man
belonging to the Tiers Etat,” she said, “made him applaud everything
which smoothed the road to rank and fame for that class in which he was
born.  And if we get the power in our own hands again, Barnave’s pardon
is already written on our hearts.”  The Queen added, that she had not the
same feeling towards those nobles who had joined the revolutionary party,
who had always received marks of favour, often to the injury of those
beneath them in rank, and who, born to be the safeguard of the monarchy,
could never be pardoned for having deserted it.  She then told me that
Barnave’s conduct upon the road was perfectly correct, while Potion’s
republican rudeness was disgusting; that the latter ate and drank in the
King’s berlin in a slovenly manner, throwing the bones of the fowls out
through the window at the risk of sending them even into the King’s face;
lifting up his glass, when Madame Elisabeth poured him out wine, to show
her that there was enough, without saying a word; that this offensive
behaviour must have been intentional, because the man was not without
education; and that Barnave was hurt at it.  On being pressed by the
Queen to take something, “Madame,” replied Barnave, “on so solemn an
occasion the deputies of the National Assembly ought to occupy your
Majesties solely about their mission, and by no means about their wants."
In short, his respectful delicacy, his considerate attentions, and all
that he said, gained the esteem not only of the Queen, but of Madame
Elisabeth also.
The King began to talk to Petion about the situation of France, and the
motives of his conduct, which were founded upon the necessity of giving
to the executive power a strength necessary for its action, for the good
even of the constitutional act, since France could not be a republic.
“Not yet, ’tis true,” replied Petion, “because the French are not ripe
enough for that.”  This audacious and cruel answer silenced the King, who
said no more until his arrival at Paris.  Potion held the little Dauphin
upon his knees, and amused himself with curling the beautiful light hair
of the interesting child round his fingers; and, as he spoke with much
gesticulation, he pulled his locks hard enough to make the Dauphin cry
out.  “Give me my son,” said the Queen to him; “he is accustomed to
tenderness and delicacy, which render him little fit for such
familiarity.”
The Chevalier de Dampierre was killed near the King’s carriage upon
leaving Varennes.  A poor village cure, some leagues from the place where
the crime was committed, was imprudent enough to draw near to speak to
the King; the cannibals who surrounded the carriage rushed upon him.
“Tigers,” exclaimed Barnave, “have you ceased to be Frenchmen?  Nation of
brave men, are you become a set of assassins?”  These words alone saved
the cure, who was already upon the ground, from certain death.  Barnave,
as he spoke to them, threw himself almost out of the coach window, and
Madame Elisabeth, affected by this noble burst of feeling, held him by
the skirt of his coat.  The Queen, while speaking of this event, said
that on the most momentous occasions whimsical contrasts always struck
her, and that even at such a moment the pious Elisabeth holding Barnave
by the flap of his coat was a ludicrous sight.
The deputy was astonished in another way.  Madame Elisabeth’s comments
upon the state of France, her mild and persuasive eloquence, and the,
ease and simplicity with which she talked to him, yet without sacrificing
her dignity in the slightest degree, appeared to him unique, and his
heart, which was doubtless inclined to right principles though he had
followed the wrong path, was overcome by admiration.  The conduct of the
two deputies convinced the Queen of the total separation between the
republican and constitutional parties.  At the inns where she alighted
she had some private conversation with Barnave.  The latter said a great
deal about the errors committed by the royalists during the Revolution,
adding that he had found the interest of the Court so feebly and so badly
defended that he had been frequently tempted to go and offer it, in
himself, an aspiring champion, who knew the spirit of the age and nation.
The Queen asked him what was the weapon he would have recommended her to
use.
“Popularity, Madame.”
“And how could I use that,” replied her Majesty, “of which I have been
deprived?”
“Ah!  Madame, it was much more easy for you to regain it, than for me to
acquire it.”
The Queen mainly attributed the arrest at Varennes to M. de Goguelat; she
said he calculated the time that would be spent in the journey
erroneously.  He performed that from Montmedy to Paris before taking the
King’s last orders, alone in a post-chaise, and he founded all his
calculations upon the time he spent thus.  The trial has been made since,
and it was found that a light carriage without any courier was nearly
three hours less in running the distance than a heavy carriage preceded
by a courier.
The Queen also blamed him for having quitted the high-road at Pont-de-
Sommevelle, where the carriage was to meet the forty hussars commanded by
him.  She thought that he ought to have dispersed the very small number
of people at Varennes, and not have asked the hussars whether they were
for the King or the nation; that, particularly, he ought to have avoided
taking the King’s orders, as he was previously aware of the reply
M. d’Inisdal had received when it was proposed to carry off the King.
After all that the Queen had said to me respecting the mistakes made by
M. de Goguelat, I thought him of course disgraced.  What was my surprise
when, having been set at liberty after the amnesty which followed the
acceptance of the constitution, he presented himself to the Queen, and
was received with the greatest kindness!  She said he had done what he
could, and that his zeal ought to form an excuse for all the rest.
     [Full details of the preparations for the flight to Varennes will be
     found in “Le Comte de Fersen et La Cour de France,” Paris, Didot et
     Cie, 1878 (a review of which was given in the Quarterly Review for
     July, 1880), and in the “Memoirs of the Marquis de Bouille”, London,
     Cadell and Davis, 1797; Count Fersen being the person who planned
     the actual escape, and De Bouille being in command of the army which
     was to receive the King.  The plan was excellent, and would
     certainly have succeeded, if it had not been for the royal family
     themselves.  Marie Antoinette, it will have been seen by Madame
     Campan’s account, nearly wrecked the plan from inability to do
     without a large dressing or travelling case.  The King did a more
     fatal thing.  De Bouille had pointed out the necessity for having in
     the King’s carriage an officer knowing the route, and able to show
     himself to give all directions, and a proper person had been
     provided.  The King, however, objected, as “he could not have the
     Marquis d’Agoult in the same carriage with himself; the governess of
     the royal children, who was to accompany them, having refused to
     abandon her privilege of constantly remaining with her charge.”  See
     “De Bouille,” pp. 307 and 334.  Thus, when Louis was recognised at
     the window of the carriage by Drouet, he was lost by the very danger
     that had been foreseen, and this wretched piece of etiquette led to
     his death.]
When the royal family was brought back from Varennes to the Tuileries,
the Queen’s attendants found the greatest difficulty in making their way
to her apartments; everything had been arranged so that the wardrobe
woman, who had acted as spy, should have the service; and she was to be
assisted in it only by her sister and her sister’s daughter.
M. de Gouvion, M. de La Fayette’s aide-de-camp, had this woman’s portrait
placed at the foot of the staircase which led to the Queen’s apartments,
in order that the sentinel should not permit any other women to make
their way in.  As soon as the Queen was informed of this contemptible
precaution, she told the King of it, who sent to ascertain the fact.
His Majesty then called for M. de La Fayette, claimed freedom in his
household, and particularly in that of the Queen, and ordered him to send
a woman in, whom no one but himself could confide out of the palace.
M. de La Fayette was obliged to comply.
On the day when the return of the royal family was expected, there were
no carriages in motion in the streets of Paris.  Five or six of the
Queen’s women, after being refused admittance at all the other gates,
went with one of my sisters to that of the Feuillans, insisting that the
sentinel should admit them.  The poissardes attacked them for their
boldness in resisting the order excluding them.  One of them seized my
sister by the arm, calling her the slave of the Austrian.  “Hear me,"
said my sister to her, “I have been attached to the Queen ever since I
was fifteen years of age; she gave me my marriage portion; I served her
when she was powerful and happy.  She is now unfortunate.  Ought I to
abandon her?"–"She is right,” cried the poissardes; “she ought not to
abandon her mistress; let us make an entry for them.”  They instantly
surrounded the sentinel, forced the passage, and introduced the Queen’s
women, accompanying them to the terrace of the Feuillans.  One of these
furies, whom the slightest impulse would have driven to tear my sister to
pieces, taking her under her protection, gave her advice by which she
might reach the palace in safety.  “But of all things, my dear friend,"
said she to her, “pull off that green ribbon sash; it is the color of
that D’Artois, whom we will never forgive.”
The measures adopted for guarding the King were rigorous with respect to
the entrance into the palace, and insulting as to his private apartments.
The commandants of battalion, stationed in the salon called the grand
cabinet, and which led to the Queen’s bedchamber, were ordered to keep
the door of it always open, in order that they might have their eyes
upon the royal family.  The King shut this door one day; the officer of
the guard opened it, and told him such were his orders, and that he would
always open it; so that his Majesty in shutting it gave himself useless
trouble.  It remained open even during the night, when the Queen was in
bed; and the officer placed himself in an armchair between the two doors,
with his head turned towards her Majesty.  They only obtained permission
to have the inner door shut when the Queen was rising.  The Queen had the
bed of her first femme de chambre placed very near her own; this bed,
which ran on casters, and was furnished with curtains, hid her from the
officer’s sight.
Madame de Jarjaye, my companion, who continued her functions during the
whole period of my absence, told me that one night the commandant of
battalion, who slept between the two doors, seeing that she was sleeping
soundly, and that the Queen was awake, quitted his post and went close to
her Majesty, to advise her as to the line of conduct she should pursue.
Although she had the kindness to desire him to speak lower in order that
he might not disturb Madame de Jarjaye’s rest, the latter awoke, and
nearly died with fright at seeing a man in the uniform of the Parisian
guard so near the Queen’s bed.  Her Majesty comforted her, and told her
not to rise; that the person she saw was a good Frenchman, who was
deceived respecting the intentions and situation of his sovereign and
herself, but whose conversation showed sincere attachment to the King.
There was a sentinel in the corridor which runs behind the apartments in
question, where there is a staircase, which was at that time an inner
one, and enabled the King and Queen to communicate freely.  This post,
which was very onerous, because it was to be kept four and twenty hours,
was often claimed by Saint Prig, an actor belonging to the Theatre
Francais.  He took it upon himself sometimes to contrive brief interviews
between the King and Queen in this corridor.  He left them at a distance,
and gave them warning if he heard the slightest noise.  M. Collot,
commandant of battalion of the National Guard, who was charged with the
military duty of the Queen’s household, in like manner softened down,
so far as he could with prudence, all, the revolting orders he received;
for instance, one to follow the Queen to the very door of her wardrobe
was never executed.  An officer of the Parisian guard dared to speak
insolently of the Queen in her own apartment.  M. Collot wished to make a
complaint to M. de La Fayette against him, and have him dismissed.  The
Queen opposed it, and condescended to say a few words of explanation and
kindness to the man; he instantly became one of her most devoted
partisans.
The first time I saw her Majesty after the unfortunate catastrophe of the
Varennes journey, I found her getting out of bed; her features were not
very much altered; but after the first kind words she uttered to me she
took off her cap and desired me to observe the effect which grief had
produced upon her hair.  It had become, in one single night, as white as
that of a woman of seventy.  Her Majesty showed me a ring she had just
had mounted for the Princesse de Lamballe; it contained a lock of her
whitened hair, with the inscription, “Blanched by sorrow.”  At the period
of the acceptance of the constitution the Princess wished to return to
France.  The Queen, who had no expectation that tranquillity would be
restored, opposed this; but the attachment of Madame de Lamballe to the
royal family impelled her to come and seek death.
When I returned to Paris most of the harsh precautions were abandoned;
the doors were not kept open; greater respect was paid to the sovereign;
it was known that the constitution soon to be completed would be
accepted, and a better order of things was hoped for.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part B, also see Part A) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Memoirs of Marie AntoinetteBy Madame CampanAt Amazon
