


The Duc de Choiseul had reappeared at Court on the ceremony of the King’s
coronation for the first time after his disgrace under Louis XV. in 1770.
The state of public feeling on the subject gave his friends hope of
seeing him again in administration, or in the Council of State; but the
opposite party was too firmly seated at Versailles, and the young Queen’s
influence was outweighed, in the mind of the King, by long-standing
prejudices; she therefore gave up for ever her attempt to reinstate the
Duke.  Thus this Princess, who has been described as so ambitious, and so
strenuously supporting the interest of the House of Austria, failed twice
in the only scheme which could forward the views constantly attributed to
her; and spent the whole of her reign surrounded by enemies of herself
and her house.
Marie Antoinette took little pains to promote literature and the fine
arts.  She had been annoyed in consequence of having ordered a
performance of the “Connstable de Bourbon,” on the celebration of the
marriage of Madame Clotilde with the Prince of Piedmont.  The Court and
the people of Paris censured as indecorous the naming characters in the
piece after the reigning family, and that with which the new alliance was
formed.  The reading of this piece by the Comte de Guibert in the Queen’s
closet had produced in her Majesty’s circle that sort of enthusiasm which
obscures the judgment.  She promised herself she would have no more
readings.  Yet, at the request of M. de Cubieres, the King’s equerry,
the Queen agreed to hear the reading of a comedy written by his brother.
She collected her intimate circle, Messieurs de Coigny, de Vaudreuil, de
Besenval, Mesdames de Polignac, de Chalon, etc., and to increase the
number of judges, she admitted the two Parnys, the Chevalier de Bertin,
my father-in-law, and myself.
Mold read for the author.  I never could satisfy myself by what magic the
skilful reader gained our unanimous approbation of a ridiculous work.
Surely the delightful voice of Mold, by awakening our recollection of the
dramatic beauties of the French stage, prevented the wretched lines of
Dorat Cubieres from striking on our ears.  I can assert that the
exclamation Charming! charming! repeatedly interrupted the reader.  The
piece was admitted for performance at Fontainebleau; and for the first
time the King had the curtain dropped before the end of the play.  It was
called the “Dramomane” or “Dramaturge.”  All the characters died of
eating poison in a pie.  The Queen, highly disconcerted at having
recommended this absurd production, announced that she would never hear
another reading; and this time she kept her word.
The tragedy of “Mustapha and Mangir,” by M. de Chamfort, was highly
successful at the Court theatre at Fontainebleau.  The Queen procured the
author a pension of 1,200 francs, but his play failed on being performed
at Paris.
The spirit of opposition which prevailed in that city delighted in
reversing the verdicts of the Court.  The Queen determined never again to
give any marked countenance to new dramatic works.  She reserved her
patronage for musical composers, and in a few years their art arrived at
a perfection it had never before attained in France.
It was solely to gratify the Queen that the manager of the Opera brought
the first company of comic actors to Paris.  Gluck, Piccini, and Sacchini
were attracted there in succession.  These eminent composers were treated
with great distinction at Court.  Immediately on his arrival in France,
Gluck was admitted to the Queen’s toilet, and she talked to him all the
time he remained with her.  She asked him one day whether he had nearly
brought his grand opera of “Armide” to a conclusion, and whether it
pleased him.  Gluck replied very coolly, in his German accent, “Madame,
it will soon be finished, and really it will be superb.”  There was a
great outcry against the confidence with which the composer had spoken of
one of his own productions.  The Queen defended him warmly; she insisted
that he could not be ignorant of the merit of his works; that he well
knew they were generally admired, and that no doubt he was afraid lest a
modesty, merely dictated by politeness, should look like affectation in
him.
     [Gluck often had to deal with self-sufficiency equal to his own.
     He was very reluctant to introduce long ballets into “Iphigenia."
     Vestris deeply regretted that the opera was not terminated by a
     piece they called a chaconne, in which he displayed all his power.
     He complained to Gluck about it.  Gluck, who treated his art with
     all the dignity it merits, replied that in so interesting a subject
     dancing would be misplaced.  Being pressed another time by Vestris
     on the same subject, “A chaconne!  A chaconne!”  roared out the
     enraged musician; “we must describe the Greeks; and had the Greeks
     chaconnes?”  “They had not?”  returned the astonished dancer; “why,
     then, so much the worse for them!"–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
The Queen did not confine her admiration to the lofty style of the French
and Italian operas; she greatly valued Gretry’s music, so well adapted to
the spirit and feeling of the words.  A great deal of the poetry set to
music by Gretry is by Marmontel.  The day after the first performance of
“Zemira and Azor,” Marmontel and Gretry were presented to the Queen as
she was passing through the gallery of Fontainebleau to go to mass.  The
Queen congratulated Gretry on the success of the new opera, and told him
that she had dreamed of the enchanting effect of the trio by Zemira’s
father and sisters behind the magic mirror.  Gretry, in a transport of
joy, took Marmontel in his arms, “Ah! my friend,” cried he, “excellent
music may be made of this."–"And execrable words,” coolly observed
Marmontel, to whom her Majesty had not addressed a single compliment.
The most indifferent artists were permitted to have the honour of
painting the Queen.  A full-length portrait, representing her in all the
pomp of royalty, was exhibited in the gallery of Versailles.  This
picture, which was intended for the Court of Vienna, was executed by a
man who does not deserve even to be named, and disgusted all people of
taste.  It seemed as if this art had, in France, retrograded several
centuries.
The Queen had not that enlightened judgment, or even that mere taste,
which enables princes to foster and protect great talents.  She confessed
frankly that she saw no merit in any portrait beyond the likeness.  When
she went to the Louvre, she would run hastily over all the little “genre"
pictures, and come out, as she acknowledged, without having once raised
her eyes to the grand compositions.
There is no good portrait of the Queen, save that by Werthmuller, chief
painter to the King of Sweden, which was sent to Stockholm, and that by
Madame Lebrun, which was saved from the revolutionary fury by the
commissioners for the care of the furniture at Versailles.
     [A sketch of very great interest made when the Queen was in the
     Temple and discovered many years afterwards there, recently
     reproduced in the memoirs of the Marquise de Tourzel (Paris, Plon),
     is the last authentic portrait of the unhappy Queen.  See also the
     catalogue of portraits made by Lord Ronald Gower.]
The composition of the latter picture resembles that of Henriette of
France, the wife of the unfortunate Charles I., painted by Vandyke.  Like
Marie Antoinette, she is seated, surrounded by her children, and that
resemblance adds to the melancholy interest raised by this beautiful
production.
While admitting that the Queen gave no direct encouragement to any art
but that of music, I should be wrong to pass over in silence the
patronage conferred by her and the Princes, brothers of the King, on the
art of printing.
     [In 1790 the King gave a proof of his particular good-will to the
     bookselling trade.  A company consisting of the first Parisian
     booksellers, being on the eve of stopping payment, succeeded in
     laying before the King a statement of their distressed situation.
     The monarch was affected by it; he took from the civil list the sum
     of which the society stood in immediate need, and became security
     for the repayment of the remainder of the 1,200,000 livres, which
     they wanted to borrow, and for the repayment of which he fixed no
     particular time.]
To Marie Antoinette we are indebted for a splendid quarto edition of the
works of Metastasio; to Monsieur, the King’s brother, for a quarto Tasso,
embellished with engravings after Cochin; and to the Comte d’Artois for a
small collection of select works, which is considered one of the chef
d’oeuvres of the press of the celebrated Didot.
In 1775, on the death of the Marechal du Muy, the ascendency obtained by
the sect of innovators occasioned M. de Saint-Germain to be recalled to
Court and made Minister of War.  His first care was the destruction of
the King’s military household establishment, an imposing and effectual
rampart round the sovereign power.
When Chancellor Maupeou obtained from Louis XV. the destruction of the
Parliament and the exile of all the ancient magistrates, the
Mousquetaires were charged with the execution of the commission for this
purpose; and at the stroke of midnight, the presidents and members were
all arrested, each by two Mousquetaires.  In the spring of 1775 a popular
insurrection had taken place in consequence of the high price of bread.
M. Turgot’s new regulation, which permitted unlimited trade in corn, was
either its cause or the pretext for it; and the King’s household troops
again rendered the greatest services to public tranquillity.
I have never be enable to discover the true cause of the support given to
M. de Saint-Germain’s policy by the Queen, unless in the marked favour
shown to the captains and officers of the Body Guards, who by this
reduction became the only soldiers of their rank entrusted with the
safety of the sovereign; or else in the Queen’s strong prejudice against
the Duc d’Aiguillon, then commander of the light-horse.  M. de Saint-
Germain, however, retained fifty gens d’armes and fifty light-horse to
form a royal escort on state occasions; but in 1787 the King reduced both
these military bodies.  The Queen then said with satisfaction that at
last she should see no more red coats in the gallery of Versailles.
From 1775 to 1781 were the gayest years of the Queen’s life.  In the
little journeys to Choisy, performances frequently took place at the
theatre twice in one day: grand opera and French or Italian comedy at the
usual hour; and at eleven at night they returned to the theatre for
parodies in which the best actors of the Opera presented themselves in
whimsical parts and costumes.  The celebrated dancer Guimard always took
the leading characters in the latter performance; she danced better than
she acted; her extreme leanness, and her weak, hoarse voice added to the
burlesque in the parodied characters of Ernelinde and Iphigenie.
The most magnificent fete ever given to the Queen was one prepared for
her by Monsieur, the King’s brother, at Brunoy.  That Prince did me the
honour to admit me, and I followed her Majesty into the gardens, where
she found in the first copse knights in full armour asleep at the foot of
trees, on which hung their spears and shields.  The absence of the
beauties who had incited the nephews of Charlemagne and the gallants of
that period to lofty deeds was supposed to occasion this lethargic
slumber.  But when the Queen appeared at the entrance of the copse they
were on foot in an instant, and melodious voices announced their
eagerness to display their valour.  They then hastened into a vast arena,
magnificently decorated in the exact style of the ancient tournaments.
Fifty dancers dressed as pages presented to the knights twenty-five
superb black horses, and twenty-five of a dazzling whiteness, all most
richly caparisoned.  The party led by Augustus Vestris wore the Queen’s
colours.  Picq, balletmaster at the Russian Court, commanded the opposing
band.  There was running at the negro’s head, tilting, and, lastly,
combats ’a outrance’, perfectly well imitated.  Although the spectators
were aware that the Queen’s colours could not but be victorious, they did
not the less enjoy the apparent uncertainty.
Nearly all the agreeable women of Paris were ranged upon the steps which
surrounded the area of the tourney.  The Queen, surrounded by the royal
family and the whole Court, was placed beneath an elevated canopy.  A
play, followed by a ballet-pantomime and a ball, terminated the fete.
Fireworks and illuminations were not spared.  Finally, from a
prodigiously high scaffold, placed on a rising ground, the words ’Vive
Louis!  Vive Marie Antoinette!’  were shown in the air in the midst of a
very dark but calm night.
Pleasure was the sole pursuit of every one of this young family, with the
exception of the King.  Their love of it was perpetually encouraged by a
crowd of those officious people who, by anticipating the desires and even
the passions of princes, find means of showing their zeal, and hope to
gain or maintain favour for themselves.
Who would have dared to check the amusements of a queen, young, lively,
and handsome?  A mother or a husband alone would have had the right to do
it; and the King threw no impediment in the way of Marie Antoinette’s
inclinations.  His long indifference had been followed by admiration and
love.  He was a slave to all the wishes of the Queen, who, delighted with
the happy change in the heart and habits of the King, did not
sufficiently conceal the ascendency she was gaining over him.
The King went to bed every night at eleven precisely; he was very
methodical, and nothing was allowed to interfere with his rules.  The
noise which the Queen unavoidably made when she returned very late from
the evenings which she spent with the Princesse de Gugmenee or the Duc de
Duras, at last annoyed the King, and it was amicably agreed that the
Queen should apprise him when she intended to sit up late.  He then began
to sleep in his own apartment, which had never before happened from the
time of their marriage.
During the winter the Queen attended the Opera balls with a single lady
of the palace, and always found there Monsieur and the Comte d’Artois.
Her people concealed their liveries under gray cloth greatcoats.  She
never thought she was recognized, while all the time she was known to the
whole assembly, from the first moment she entered the theatre; they
pretended, however, not to recognise her, and some masquerade manoeuvre
was always adopted to give her the pleasure of fancying herself
incognito.
Louis XVI. determined once to accompany the Queen to a masked ball;
it was agreed that the King should hold not only the grand but the petit
coucher, as if actually going to bed.  The Queen went to his apartment
through the inner corridors of the palace, followed by one of her women
with a black domino; she assisted him to put it on, and they went alone
to the chapel court, where a carriage waited for them, with the captain
of the Guard of the quarter, and a lady of the palace.  The King was but
little amused, spoke only to two or three persons, who knew him
immediately, and found nothing to admire at the masquerade but Punches
and Harlequins, which served as a joke against him for the royal family,
who often amused themselves with laughing at him about it.
An event, simple in itself, brought dire suspicion upon the Queen.  She
was going out one evening with the Duchesse de Lupnes, lady of the
palace, when her carriage broke down at the entrance into Paris; she was
obliged to alight; the Duchess led her into a shop, while a footman
called a ’fiacre’.  As they were masked, if they had but known how to
keep silence, the event would never have been known; but to ride in a
fiacre is so unusual an adventure for a queen that she had hardly entered
the Opera-house when she could not help saying to some persons whom she
met there: “That I should be in a fiacre!  Is it not droll?”
From that moment all Paris was informed of the adventure of the fiacre.
It was said that everything connected with it was mysterious; that the
Queen had kept an assignation in a private house with the Duc de Coigny.
He was indeed very well received at Court, but equally so by the King and
Queen.  These accusations of gallantry once set afloat, there were no
longer any bounds to the calumnies circulated at Paris.  If, during the
chase or at cards, the Queen spoke to Lord Edward Dillon, De Lambertye,
or others, they were so many favoured lovers.  The people of Paris did
not know that none of those young persons were admitted into the Queen’s
private circle of friends; the Queen went about Paris in disguise, and
had made use of a fiacre; and a single instance of levity gives room for
the suspicion of others.
Conscious of innocence, and well knowing that all about her must do
justice to her private life, the Queen spoke of these reports with
contempt, contenting herself with the supposition that some folly in the
young men mentioned had given rise to them.  She therefore left off
speaking to them or even looking at them.  Their vanity took alarm at
this, and revenge induced them either to say, or to leave others to
think, that they were unfortunate enough to please no longer.  Other
young coxcombs, placing themselves near the private box which the Queen
occupied incognito when she attended the public theatre at Versailles,
had the presumption to imagine that they were noticed by her; and I have
known such notions entertained merely on account of the Queen’s
requesting one of those gentlemen to inquire behind the scenes whether it
would be long before the commencement of the second piece.
The list of persons received into the Queen’s closet which I gave in the
preceding chapter was placed in the hands of the ushers of the chamber by
the Princesse de Lamballe; and the persons there enumerated could present
themselves to enjoy the distinction only on those days when the Queen
chose to be with her intimates in a private manner; and this was only
when she was slightly indisposed.  People of the first rank at Court
sometimes requested special audiences of her; the Queen then received
them in a room within that called the closet of the women on duty, and
these women announced them in her Majesty’s apartment.
The Duc de Lauzun had a good deal of wit, and chivalrous manners.  The
Queen was accustomed to see him at the King’s suppers, and at the house
of the Princesse de Guemenee, and always showed him attention.  One day
he made his appearance at Madame de Guemenee’s in uniform, and with the
most magnificent plume of white heron’s feathers that it was possible to
behold.  The Queen admired the plume, and he offered it to her through
the Princesse de Guemenee.  As he had worn it the Queen had not imagined
that he could think of giving it to her; much embarrassed with the
present which she had, as it were, drawn upon herself, she did not like
to refuse it, nor did she know whether she ought to make one in return;
afraid, if she did give anything, of giving either too much or too
little, she contented herself with once letting M. de Lauzun see her
adorned with the plume.  In his secret “Memoirs” the Duke attaches an
importance to his present, which proves him utterly unworthy of an honour
accorded only to his name and rank
A short time afterwards he solicited an audience; the Queen granted it,
as she would have done to any other courtier of equal rank.  I was in the
room adjoining that in which he was received; a few minutes after his
arrival the Queen reopened the door, and said aloud, and in an angry tone
of voice, “Go, monsieur.”  M. de Lauzun bowed low, and withdrew.  The
Queen was much agitated.  She said to me: “That man shall never again
come within my doors.”  A few years before the Revolution of 1789 the
Marechal de Biron died.  The Duc de Lauzun, heir to his name, aspired to
the important post of colonel of the regiment of French guards.  The
Queen, however, procured it for the Duc du Chaatelet.  The Duc de Biron
espoused the cause of the Duc d’Orleans, and became one of the most
violent enemies of Marie Antoinette.
It is with reluctance that I enter minutely on a defence of the Queen
against two infamous accusations with which libellers have dared to swell
their envenomed volumes.  I mean the unworthy suspicions of too strong an
attachment for the Comte d’Artois, and of the motives for the tender
friendship which subsisted between the Queen, the Princesse de Lamballe,
and the Duchesse de Polignac.  I do not believe that the Comte d’Artois
was, during his own youth and that of the Queen, so much smitten as has
been said with the loveliness of his sister-in-law; I can affirm that I
always saw that Prince maintain the most respectful demeanour towards the
Queen; that she always spoke of his good-nature and cheerfulness with
that freedom which attends only the purest sentiments; and that none of
those about the Queen ever saw in the affection she manifested towards
the Comte d’Artois more than that of a kind and tender sister for her
youngest brother.  As to the intimate connection between Marie Antoinette
and the ladies I have named, it never had, nor could have, any other
motive than the very innocent wish to secure herself two friends in the
midst of a numerous Court; and notwithstanding this intimacy, that tone
of respect observed by persons of the most exalted rank towards majesty
never ceased to be maintained.
The Queen, much occupied with the society of Madame de Polignac, and an
unbroken series of amusements, found less time for the Abbe de Vermond;
he therefore resolved to retire from Court.  The world did him the honour
to believe that he had hazarded remonstrances upon his august pupil’s
frivolous employment of her time, and that he considered himself, both as
an ecclesiastic and as instructor, now out of place at Court.  But the
world was deceived his dissatisfaction arose purely from the favour shown
to the Comtesse Jules.  After a fortnight’s absence we saw him at
Versailles again, resuming his usual functions.
The Queen could express herself with winning graciousness to persons who
merited her praise.  When M. Loustonneau was appointed to the reversion
of the post of first surgeon to the King, he came to make his
acknowledgments.  He was much beloved by the poor, to whom he had chiefly
devoted his talents, spending nearly thirty thousand francs a year on
indigent sufferers.  The Queen replied to his thanks by saying: “You are
satisfied, Monsieur; but I am far from being so with the inhabitants of
Versailles.  On the news of your appointment the town should have been
illuminated."–"How so, Madame?” asked the astonished surgeon, who was
very modest.  “Why,” replied the Queen, “if the poor whom you have
succoured for the past twenty years had each placed a single candle in
their windows it would have been the most beautiful illumination ever
witnessed.”
The Queen did not limit her kindness to friendly words.  There was
frequently seen in the apartments of Versailles a veteran captain of the
grenadiers of France, called the Chevalier d’Orville, who for four years
had been soliciting from the Minister of War the post of major, or of
King’s lieutenant.  He was known to be very poor; but he supported his
lot without complaining of this vexatious delay in rewarding his
honourable services.  He regularly attended the Marechal de Segur,
at the hour appointed for receiving the numerous solicitations in his
department.  One day the Marshal said to him: “You are still at
Versailles, M. d’Orville?"–"Monsieur,” he replied, “you may observe that
by this board of the flooring where I regularly place myself; it is
already worn down several lines by the weight of my body.”  The Queen
frequently stood at the window of her bedchamber to observe with her
glass the people walking in the park.  Sometimes she inquired the names
of those who were unknown to her.  One day she saw the Chevalier
d’Orville passing, and asked me the name of that knight of Saint Louis,
whom she had seen everywhere for a long time past.  I knew who he was,
and related his history.  “That must be put an end to,” said the Queen,
with some vivacity.  “Such an example of indifference is calculated to
discourage our soldiers.”  Next day, in crossing the gallery to go to
mass, the Queen perceived the Chevalier d’Orville; she went directly
towards him.  The poor man fell back in the recess of a window, looking
to the right and left to discover the person whom the Queen was seeking,
when she thus addressed him: “M. d’Orville, you have been several years
at Versailles, soliciting a majority or a King’s lieutenancy.  You must
have very powerless patrons."–"I have none, Madame,” replied the
Chevalier, in great confusion.  “Well! I will take you under my
protection.  To-morrow at the same hour be here with a petition, and a
memorial of your services.”  A fortnight after, M. d’Orville was
appointed King’s lieutenant, either at La Rochelle or at Rochefort.
     [Louis XVI. vied with his Queen in benevolent actions of this kind.
     An old officer had in vain solicited a pension during the
     administration of the Duc de Choiseul.  He returned to the charge in
     the times of the Marquis de Montesnard and the Duc d’Aiguillon.  He
     urged his claims, to Comte du Muy, who made a note of them.  Tired
     of so many fruitless efforts, he at last appeared at the King’s
     supper, and, having placed himself so as to be seen and heard, cried
     out at a moment when silence prevailed, “Sire.”  The people near him
     said, “What are you about?  This is not the way to speak to the
     King."–"I fear nothing,” said he, and raising his voice, repeated,
     “Sire.”  The King, much surprised, looked at him and said, “What do
     you want, monsieur."–"Sire,” answered he, “I am seventy years of
     age; I have served your Majesty more than fifty years, and I am
     dying for want."–"Have you a memorial?”  replied the King.  “Yes,
     Sire, I have."–"Give it to me;” and his Majesty took it without
     saying anything more.  Next morning he was sent for by the, King,
     who said, “Monsieur, I grant you an annuity of 1,500 livres out of
     my privy purse, and you may go and receive the first year’s payment,
     which is now due.”  ("Secret Correspondence of the Court: Reign of
     Louis XVI.”) The King preferred to spend money in charity rather
     than in luxury or magnificence.  Once during his absence, M.
     d’Augivillers caused an unused room in the King’s apartment to be
     repaired at a cost of 30,000 francs.  On his return the King made
     Versailles resound with complaints against M. d’Augivillers: “With
     that sum I could have made thirty families happy,” he said.]
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
