


After the 14th of July, by a manoeuvre for which the most skilful
factions of any age might have envied the Assembly, the whole population
of France was armed and organised into a National Guard.  A report was
spread throughout France on the same day, and almost at the same hour,
that four thousand brigands were marching towards such towns or villages
as it was wished to induce to take arms.  Never was any plan better laid;
terror spread at the same moment all over the kingdom.  In 1791 a peasant
showed me a steep rock in the mountains of the Mont d’Or on which his
wife concealed herself on the day when the four thousand brigands were to
attack their village, and told me they had been obliged to make use of
ropes to let her down from the height which fear alone had enabled her to
climb.
Versailles was certainly the place where the national military uniform
appeared most offensive.  All the King’s valets, even of the lowest
class, were metamorphosed into lieutenants or captains; almost all the
musicians of the chapel ventured one day to make their appearance at the
King’s mass in a military costume; and an Italian soprano adopted the
uniform of a grenadier captain.  The King was very much offended at this
conduct, and forbade his servants to appear in his presence in so
unsuitable a dress.
The departure of the Duchesse de Polignac naturally left the Abbe de
Vermond exposed to all the dangers of favouritism.  He was already talked
of as an adviser dangerous to the nation.  The Queen was alarmed at it,
and recommended him to remove to Valenciennes, where Count Esterhazy was
in command.  He was obliged to leave that place in a few days and set off
for Vienna, where he remained.
On the night of the 17th of July the Queen, being unable to sleep, made
me watch by her until three in the morning.  I was extremely surprised to
hear her say that it would be a very long time before the Abbe de Vermond
would make his appearance at Court again, even if the existing ferment
should subside, because he would not readily be forgiven for his
attachment to the Archbishop of Sens; and that she had lost in him a very
devoted servant.  Then she suddenly remarked to me, that although he was
not much prejudiced against me I could not have much regard for him,
because he could not bear my father-in-law to hold the place of secretary
of the closet.  She went on to say that I must have studied the Abbe’s
character, and, as I had sometimes drawn her portraits of living
characters, in imitation of those which were fashionable in the time of
Louis XIV., she desired me to sketch that of the Abbe, without any
reserve.  My astonishment was extreme; the Queen spoke of the man who,
the day before, had been in the greatest intimacy with her with the
utmost coolness, and as a person whom, perhaps, she might never see
again!  I remained petrified; the Queen persisted, and told me that he
had been the enemy of my family for more than twelve years, without
having been able to injure it in her opinion; so that I had no occasion
to dread his return, however severely I might depict him.  I promptly
summarised my ideas about the favourite; but I only remember that the
portrait was drawn with sincerity, except that everything which could
denote antipathy was kept out of it.  I shall make but one extract from
it: I said that he had been born talkative and indiscreet, and had
assumed a character of singularity and abruptness in order to conceal
those two failings.  The Queen interrupted me by saying, “Ah! how true
that is!”  I have since discovered that, notwithstanding the high favour
which the Abbe de Vermond enjoyed, the Queen took precautions to guard
herself against an ascendency the consequences of which she could not
calculate.
On the death of my father-in-law his executors placed in my hands a box
containing a few jewels deposited by the Queen with M. Campan on the
departure from Versailles of the 6th of October, and two sealed packets,
each inscribed, “Campan will take care of these papers for me.”  I took
the two packets to her Majesty, who kept the jewels and the larger
packet, and, returning me the smaller, said, “Take care of that for me as
your father-in-law did.”
After the fatal 10th of August, 1792,–[The day of the attack on the
Tuileries, slaughter of the Swiss guard, and suspension of the King from
his functions.]–when my house was about to be surrounded, I determined
to burn the most interesting papers of which I was the depositary; I
thought it my duty, however, to open this packet, which it might perhaps
be necessary for me to preserve at all hazards.
I saw that it contained a letter from the Abbe de Vermond to the Queen.
I have already related that in the earlier days of Madame de Polignac’s
favour he determined to remove from Versailles, and that the Queen
recalled him by means of the Comte de Mercy.  This letter contained
nothing but certain conditions for his return; it was the most whimsical
of treaties; I confess I greatly regretted being under the necessity of
destroying it.  He reproached the Queen for her infatuation for the
Comtesse Jules, her family, and society; and told her several truths
about the possible consequences of a friendship which ranked that lady
among the favourites of the Queens of France, a title always disliked by
the nation.  He complained that his advice was neglected, and then came
to the conditions of his return to Versailles; after strong assurances
that he would never, in all his life, aim at the higher church dignities,
he said that he delighted in an unbounded confidence; and that he asked
but two things of her Majesty as essential: the first was, not to give
him her orders through any third person, and to write to him herself; he
complained much that he had had no letter in her own hand since he had
left Vienna; then he demanded of her an income of eighty thousand livres,
in ecclesiastical benefices; and concluded by saying that, if she
condescended to assure him herself that she would set about procuring him
what he wished, her letter would be sufficient in itself to show him that
her Majesty had accepted the two conditions he ventured to make
respecting his return.  No doubt the letter was written; at least it is
very certain that the benefices were granted, and that his absence from
Versailles lasted only a single week.
In the course of July, 1789, the regiment of French guards, which had
been in a state of insurrection from the latter end of June, abandoned
its colours.  One single company of grenadiers remained faithful, to its
post at Versailles.  M. le Baron de Leval was the captain of this
company.  He came every evening to request me to give the Queen an
account of the disposition of his soldiers; but M. de La Fayette having
sent them a note, they all deserted during the night and joined their
comrades, who were enrolled in the Paris guard; so that Louis XVI. on
rising saw no guard whatever at the various posts entrusted to them.
The decrees of the 4th of August, by which all privileges were abolished,
are well known.
     ["It was during the night of the 4th of August,” says Rivarol, “that
     the demagogues of the nobility, wearied with a protracted discussion
     upon the rights of man, and burning to signalise their zeal, rose
     all at once, and with loud exclamations called for the last sighs of
     the feudal system.  This demand electrified the Assembly.  All heads
     were frenzied.  The younger sons of good families, having nothing,
     were delighted to sacrifice their too fortunate elders upon the
     altar of the country; a few country cures felt no less pleasure in
     renouncing the benefices of others; but what posterity will hardly
     believe is that the same enthusiasm infected the whole nobility;
     zeal walked hand in hand with malevolence; they made sacrifice upon
     sacrifice.  And as in Japan the point of honour lies in a man’s
     killing himself in the presence of the person who has offended him,
     so did the deputies of the nobility vie in striking at themselves
     and their constituents.  The people who were present at this noble
     contest increased the intoxication of their new allies by their
     shouts; and the deputies of the commons, seeing that this memorable
     night would only afford them profit without honour, consoled their
     self-love by wondering at what Nobility, grafted upon the Third
     Estate, could do.  They named that night the ’night of dupes’; the
     nobles called it the ’night of sacrifices’."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
The King sanctioned all that tended to the diminution of his own personal
gratifications, but refused his consent to the other decrees of that
tumultuous night; this refusal was one of the chief causes of the
ferments of the month of October.
In the early part of September meetings were held at the Palais Royal,
and propositions made to go to Versailles; it was said to be necessary to
separate the King from his evil counsellors, and keep him, as well as the
Dauphin, at the Louvre.  The proclamations by the officers of the commune
for the restoration of tranquillity were ineffectual; but M. de La
Fayette succeeded this time in dispersing the populace.  The Assembly
declared itself permanent; and during the whole of September, in which no
doubt the preparations were made for the great insurrections of the
following month, the Court was not disturbed.
The King had the Flanders regiment removed to Versailles; unfortunately
the idea of the officers of that regiment fraternising with the Body
Guards was conceived, and the latter invited the former to a dinner,
which was given in the great theatre of Versailles, and not in the Salon
of Hercules, as some chroniclers say.  Boxes were appropriated to various
persons who wished to be present at this entertainment.  The Queen told
me she had been advised to make her appearance on the occasion, but that
under existing circumstances she thought such a step might do more harm
than good; and that, moreover, neither she nor the King ought directly to
have anything to do with such a festival.  She ordered me to go, and
desired me to observe everything closely, in order to give a faithful
account of the whole affair.
The tables were set out upon the stage; at them were placed one of the
Body Guard and an officer of the Flanders regiment alternately.  There
was a numerous orchestra in the room, and the boxes were filled with
spectators.  The air, “O Richard, O mon Roi!” was played, and shouts of
“Vive de Roi!” shook the roof for several minutes.  I had with me one of
my nieces, and a young person brought up with Madame by her Majesty.
They were crying “Vive le Roi!” with all their might when a deputy of the
Third Estate, who was in the next box to mine, and whom I had never seen,
called to them, and reproached them for their exclamations; it hurt him,
he said, to see young and handsome Frenchwomen brought up in such servile
habits, screaming so outrageously for the life of one man, and with true
fanaticism exalting him in their hearts above even their dearest
relations; he told them what contempt worthy American women would feel on
seeing Frenchwomen thus corrupted from their earliest infancy.  My niece
replied with tolerable spirit, and I requested the deputy to put an end
to the subject, which could by no means afford him any satisfaction,
inasmuch as the young persons who were with me lived, as well as myself,
for the sole purpose of serving and loving the King.  While I was
speaking what was my astonishment at seeing the King, the Queen, and the
Dauphin enter the chamber!  It was M. de Luxembourg who had effected this
change in the Queen’s determination.
The enthusiasm became general; the moment their Majesties arrived the
orchestra repeated the air I have just mentioned, and afterwards played a
song in the “Deserter,” “Can we grieve those whom we love?”  which also
made a powerful impression upon those present: on all sides were heard
praises of their Majesties, exclamations of affection, expressions of
regret for what they had suffered, clapping of hands, and shouts of “Vive
le Roi! Vive la Reine! Vive le Dauphin!”  It has been said that white
cockades were worn on this occasion; that was not the case; the fact is,
that a few young men belonging to the National Guard of Versailles, who
were invited to the entertainment, turned the white lining of their
national cockades outwards.  All the military men quitted the hall,
and reconducted the King and his family to their apartments.  There was
intoxication in these ebullitions of joy: a thousand extravagances were
committed by the military, and many of them danced under the King’s
windows; a soldier belonging to the Flanders regiment climbed up to the
balcony of the King’s chamber in order to shout “Vive le Roi!”  nearer
his Majesty; this very soldier, as I have been told by several officers
of the corps, was one of the first and most dangerous of their insurgents
in the riots of the 5th and 6th of October.  On the same evening another
soldier of that regiment killed himself with a sword.  One of my
relations, chaplain to the Queen, who supped with me, saw him stretched
out in a corner of the Place d’Armes; he went to him to give him
spiritual assistance, and received his confession and his last sighs.
He destroyed himself out of regret at having suffered himself to be
corrupted by the enemies of his King, and said that, since he had seen
him and the Queen and the Dauphin, remorse had turned his brain.
I returned home, delighted with all that I had seen.
I found a great many people there.  M. de Beaumetz, deputy for Arras,
listened to my description with a chilling air, and, when I had finished,
told me that all that had passed was terrific; that he knew the
disposition of the Assembly, and that the greatest misfortunes would
follow the drama of that night; and he begged my leave to withdraw that
he might take time for deliberate reflection whether he should on the
very next day emigrate, or pass over to the left side of the Assembly.
He adopted the latter course, and never appeared again among my
associates.
On the 2d of October the military entertainment was followed up by a
breakfast given at the hotel of the Body Guards.  It is said that a
discussion took place whether they should not march against the Assembly;
but I am utterly ignorant of what passed at that breakfast.  From that
moment Paris was constantly in commotion; there were continual mobs,
and the most virulent proposals were heard in all public places; the
conversation was invariably about proceeding to Versailles.  The King and
Queen did not seem apprehensive of such a measure, and took no precaution
against it; even when the army had actually left Paris, on the evening of
the 5th of October, the King was shooting at Meudon, and the Queen was
alone in her gardens at Trianon, which she then beheld for the last time
in her life.  She was sitting in her grotto absorbed in painful
reflection, when she received a note from the Comte de Saint-Priest,
entreating her to return to Versailles.  M. de Cubieres at the same time
went off to request the King to leave his sport and return to the palace;
the King did so on horseback, and very leisurely.  A few minutes
afterwards he was informed that a numerous body of women, which preceded
the Parisian army, was at Chaville, at the entrance of the avenue from
Paris.
The scarcity of bread and the entertainment of the Body Guards were the
pretexts for the insurrection of the 5th and 6th of October, 1789; but it
is clear to demonstration that this new movement of the people was a part
of the original plan of the factious, insomuch as, ever since the
beginning of September, a report had been industriously circulated that
the King intended to withdraw, with his family and ministers, to some
stronghold; and at all the popular assemblies there had been always a
great deal said about going to Versailles to seize the King.
At first only women showed themselves; the latticed doors of the Chateau
were closed, and the Body Guard and Flanders regiment were drawn up in
the Place d’Armes.  As the details of that dreadful day are given with
precision in several works, I will only observe that general
consternation and disorder reigned throughout the interior of the palace.
I was not in attendance on the Queen at this time.  M. Campan remained
with her till two in the morning.  As he was leaving her she
condescendingly, and with infinite kindness, desired him to make me easy
as to the dangers of the moment, and to repeat to me M. de La Fayette’s
own words, which he had just used on soliciting the royal family to
retire to bed, undertaking to answer for his army.
The Queen was far from relying upon M. de La Fayette’s loyalty; but she
has often told me that she believed on that day, that La Fayette, having
affirmed to the King, in the presence of a crowd of witnesses, that he
would answer for the army of Paris, would not risk his honour as a
commander, and was sure of being able to redeem his pledge.  She also
thought the Parisian army was devoted to him, and that all he said about
his being forced to march upon Versailles was mere pretence.
On the first intimation of the march of the Parisians, the Comte de
Saint-Priest prepared Rambouillet for the reception of the King, his
family, and suite, and the carriages were even drawn out; but a few cries
of “Vive le Roi!”  when the women reported his Majesty’s favourable
answer, occasioned the intention of going away to be given up, and orders
were given to the troops to withdraw.
     [Compare this account with the particulars given in the “Memoirs” of
     Ferribres, Weber, Bailly, and Saint-Priest, from the latter of which
     the following sentence is taken:
     “M. d’Estaing knew not what to do with the Body Guards beyond
     bringing them into the courtyard of the ministers, and shutting the
     grilles.  Thence they proceeded to the terrace of the Chateau, then
     to Trianon, and lastly to Rambouillet.
     “I could not refrain from expressing to M. d’Estaing, when he came
     to the King, my astonishment at not seeing him make any military
     disposition.  ’Monsieur,’ replied he, ’I await the orders of the
     King’ (who did not open his mouth).  ’When the King gives no
     orders,’ pursued I, ’a general should decide for himself in a
     soldierly manner.’  This observation remained unanswered."]
The Body Guards were, however, assailed with stones and musketry while
they were passing from the Place d’Armes to, their hotel.  Alarm revived;
again it was thought necessary that the royal family should go away; some
carriages still remained ready for travelling; they were called for; they
were stopped by a wretched player belonging to the theatre of the town,
seconded by the mob: the opportunity for flight had been lost.
The insurrection was directed against the Queen in particular; I shudder
even now at the recollection of the poissardes, or rather furies, who
wore white aprons, which they screamed out were intended to receive the
bowels of Marie Antoinette, and that they would make cockades of them,
mixing the most obscene expressions with these horrible threats.
The Queen went to bed at two in the morning, and even slept, tired out
with the events of so distressing a day.  She had ordered her two women
to bed, imagining there was nothing to dread, at least for that night;
but the unfortunate Princess was indebted for her life to that feeling of
attachment which prevented their obeying her.  My sister, who was one of
the ladies in question, informed me next day of all that I am about to
relate.
On leaving the Queen’s bedchamber, these ladies called their femmes de
chambre, and all four remained sitting together against her Majesty’s
bedroom door.  About half-past four in the morning they heard horrible
yells and discharges of firearms; one ran to the Queen to awaken her and
get her out of bed; my sister flew to the place from which the tumult
seemed to proceed; she opened the door of the antechamber which leads to
the great guard-room, and beheld one of the Body Guard holding his musket
across the door, and attacked by a mob, who were striking at him; his
face was covered with blood; he turned round and exclaimed: “Save the
Queen, madame; they are come to assassinate her!”  She hastily shut the
door upon the unfortunate victim of duty, fastened it with the great
bolt, and took the same precaution on leaving the next room.  On reaching
the Queen’s chamber she cried out to her, “Get up, Madame!  Don’t stay to
dress yourself; fly to the King’s apartment!”  The terrified Queen threw
herself out of bed; they put a petticoat upon her without tying it, and
the two ladies conducted her towards the oile-de-boeuf.  A door, which
led from the Queen’s dressing-room to that apartment, had never before
been fastened but on her side.  What a dreadful moment!  It was found to
be secured on the other side.  They knocked repeatedly with all their
strength; a servant of one of the King’s valets de chambre came and
opened it; the Queen entered the King’s chamber, but he was not there.
Alarmed for the Queen’s life, he had gone down the staircases and through
the corridors under the oeil-de-boeuf, by means of which he was
accustomed to go to the Queen’s apartments without being under the
necessity of crossing that room.  He entered her Majesty’s room and found
no one there but some Body Guards, who had taken refuge in it.  The King,
unwilling to expose their lives, told them to wait a few minutes, and
afterwards sent to desire them to go to the oeil-de-boeuf.  Madame de
Tourzel, at that time governess of the children of France, had just taken
Madame and the Dauphin to the King’s apartments.  The Queen saw her
children again.  The reader must imagine this scene of tenderness and
despair.
It is not true that the assassins penetrated to the Queen’s chamber and
pierced the bed with their swords.  The fugitive Body Guards were the
only persons who entered it; and if the crowd had reached so far they
would all have been massacred.  Besides, when the rebels had forced the
doors of the antechamber, the footmen and officers on duty, knowing that
the Queen was no longer in her apartments, told them so with that air of
truth which always carries conviction.  The ferocious horde instantly
rushed towards the oeil-de-boeuf, hoping, no doubt, to intercept her on
her way.
Many have asserted that they recognised the Duc d’Orleans in a greatcoat
and slouched hat, at half-past four in the morning, at the top of the
marble staircase, pointing out with his hand the guard-room, which led to
the Queen’s apartments.  This fact was deposed to at the Chatelet by
several individuals in the course of the inquiry instituted respecting
the transactions of the 5th and 6th of October.
     [The National Assembly was sitting when information of the march of
     the Parisians was given to it by one of the deputies who came from
     Paris.  A certain number of the members were no strangers, to this
     movement.  It appears that Mirabeau wished to avail himself of it to
     raise the Duc d’Orleans to the throne.  Mounier, who presided over
     the National Assembly, rejected the idea with horror.  “My good
     man,” said Mirabeau to him, “what difference will it make to you to
     have Louis XVII. for your King instead of Louis XVI.?” (The Duc
     d’Orleans was baptised Louis.)]
The prudence and honourable feeling of several officers of the Parisian
guards, and the judicious conduct of M. de Vaudreuil, lieutenant-general
of marine, and of M. de Chevanne, one of the King’s Guards, brought about
an understanding between the grenadiers of the National Guard of Paris
and the King’s Guard.  The doors of the oeil-de-boeuf were closed, and
the antechamber which precedes that room was filled with grenadiers who
wanted to get in to massacre the Guards.  M. de Chevanne offered himself
to them as a victim if they wished for one, and demanded what they would
have.  A report had been spread through their ranks that the Body Guards
set them at defiance, and that they all wore black cockades.  M. de
Chevanne showed them that he wore, as did the corps, the cockade of their
uniform; and promised that the Guards should exchange it for that of the
nation.  This was done; they even went so far as to exchange their
grenadiers’ caps for the hats of the Body Guards; those who were on guard
took off their shoulder-belts; embraces and transports of fraternisation
instantly succeeded to the savage eagerness to murder the band which had
shown so much fidelity to its sovereign.  The cry was now “Vivent le Roi,
la Nation, et les Gardes-du-corps!”
The army occupied the Place d’Armes, all the courtyards of the Chateau,
and the entrance to the avenue.  They called for the Queen to appear in
the balcony: she came forward with Madame and the Dauphin.  There was a
cry of “No children!”  Was this with a view to deprive her of the
interest she inspired, accompanied as she was by her young family, or did
the leaders of the democrats hope that some madman would venture to aim a
mortal blow at her person?  The unfortunate Princess certainly was
impressed with the latter idea, for she sent away her children, and with
her hands and eyes raised towards heaven, advanced upon the balcony like
a self-devoted victim.
A few voices shouted “To Paris!”  The exclamation soon became general.
Before the King agreed to this removal he wished to consult the National
Assembly, and caused that body to be invited to sit at the Chateau.
Mirabeau opposed this measure.  While these discussions were going
forward it became more and more difficult to restrain the immense
disorderly multitude.  The King, without consulting any one, now said to
the people: “You wish, my children, that I should follow you to Paris: I
consent, but on condition that I shall not be separated from my wife and
family.”  The King added that he required safety also for his Guards; he
was answered by shouts of “Vivo le Roi!  Vivent les Gardes-du-corps!"
The Guards, with their hats in the air, turned so as to exhibit the.
cockade, shouted “Vive le Roi!  Vive la Nation!”  shortly afterwards a
general discharge of all the muskets took place, in token of joy.  The
King and Queen set off from Versailles at one o’clock.  The Dauphin,
Madame, the King’s daughter, Monsieur, Madame,–[Madame, here, the wife
of Monsieur le Comte de Provence.]– Madame Elisabeth, and Madame de
Tourzel, were in the carriage; the Princesse de Chimay and the ladies of
the bedchamber for the week, the King’s suite and servants, followed in
Court carriages; a hundred deputies in carriages, and the bulk of the
Parisian army, closed the procession.
The poissardes went before and around the carriage of their Majesties,
Crying, “We shall no longer want bread!  We have the baker, the baker’s
wife, and the baker’s boy with us!”  In the midst of this troop of
cannibals the heads of two murdered Body Guards were carried on poles.
The monsters, who made trophies of them, conceived the horrid idea of
forcing a wigmaker of Sevres to dress them up and powder their bloody
locks.  The unfortunate man who was forced to perform this dreadful work
died in consequence of the shock it gave him.
     [The King did not leave Versailles till one o’clock.  The Queen, the
     Dauphin, Madame Royale, Monsieur, Madame Elisabeth, and Madame de
     Tourzel were in his Majesty’s carriage.  The hundred deputies in
     their carriages came next.  A detachment of brigands, bearing the
     heads of the two Body Guards in triumph, formed the advance guard,
     and set out two hours earlier.  These cannibals stopped a moment at
     Sevres, and carried their cruelty to the length of forcing an
     unfortunate hairdresser to dress the gory heads; the bulk of the
     Parisian army followed them closely.  The King’s carriage was
     preceded by the ’poissardes’, who had arrived the day before from
     Paris, and a rabble of prostitutes, the vile refuse of their sex,
     still drunk with fury and wine.  Several of them rode astride upon
     cannons, boasting, in the most horrible songs, of the crimes they
     had committed themselves, or seen others commit.  Those who were
     nearest the King’s carriage sang ballads, the allusions in which by
     means of their vulgar gestures they applied to the Queen.  Wagons,
     full of corn and flour,–which had been brought into Versailles,
     formed a train escorted by grenadiers, and surrounded by women and
     bullies, some armed with pikes, and some carrying long branches of
     poplar.  At some distance this part of the procession had a most
     singular effect: it looked like a moving forest, amidst which shone
     pike-heads and gun-barrels.  In the paroxysms of their brutal joy
     the women stopped passengers, and, pointing to the King’s carriage,
     howled in their ears: “Cheer up, friends; we shall no longer be in
     want of bread!  We bring you the baker, the baker’s wife, and the
     baker’s little boy!”  Behind his Majesty’s carriage were several of
     his faithful Guards, some on foot, and some on horseback, most of
     them uncovered, all unarmed, and worn out with hunger and fatigue;
     the dragoons, the Flanders regiment, the hundred Swiss, and the
     National Guards preceded, accompanied, or followed the file of
     carriages.  I witnessed this heartrending spectacle; I saw the
     ominous procession.  In the midst of all the tumult, clamour, and
     singing, interrupted by frequent discharges of musketry, which the
     hand of a monster or a bungler might so easily render fatal, I saw
     the Queen preserving most courageous tranquillity of soul, and an
     air of nobleness and inexpressible dignity, and my eyes were
     suffused with tears of admiration and grief.–"Memoirs of Bertrand
     de Molleville."]
The progress of the procession was so slow that it was near six in the
evening when this august family, made prisoners by their own people,
arrived at the Hotel de Ville.  Bailly received them there; they
were placed upon a throne, just when that of their ancestors had been
overthrown.  The King spoke in a firm yet gracious manner; he said that
he always came with pleasure and confidence among the inhabitants of his
good city of Paris.  M. Bailly repeated this observation to the
representatives of the commune, who came to address the King; but he
forgot the word confidence.  The Queen instantly and loudly reminded him
of the omission.  The King and Queen, their children, and Madame
Elisabeth, retired to the Tuileries.  Nothing was ready for their
reception there.  All the living-rooms had been long given up to persons
belonging to the Court; they hastily quitted them on that day, leaving
their furniture, which was purchased by the Court.  The Comtesse de la
Marck, sister to the Marechaux de Noailles and de Mouchy, had occupied
the apartments now appropriated to the Queen.  Monsieur and Madame
retired to the Luxembourg.
The Queen had sent for me on the morning of the 6th of October, to leave
me and my father-in-law in charge of her most valuable property.  She
took away only her casket of diamonds.  Comte Gouvernet de la Tour-du-
Pin, to whom the military government of Versailles was entrusted ’pro
tempore’, came and gave orders to the National Guard, which had taken
possession of the apartments, to allow us to remove everything that we
should deem necessary for the Queen’s accommodation.
I saw her Majesty alone in her private apartments a moment before her
departure for Paris; she could hardly speak; tears bedewed her face, to
which all the blood in her body seemed to have rushed; she condescended
to embrace me, gave her hand to M. Campan to kiss, and said to us, “Come
immediately and settle at Paris; I will lodge you at the Tuileries; come,
and do not leave me henceforward; faithful servants at moments like these
become useful friends; we are lost, dragged away, perhaps to death; when
kings become prisoners they are very near it.”
I had frequent opportunities during the course of our misfortunes of
observing that the people never entirely give their allegiance to
factious leaders, but easily escape their control when some cause reminds
them of their duty.  As soon as the most violent Jacobins had an
opportunity of seeing the Queen near at hand, of speaking to her, and of
hearing her voice, they became her most zealous partisans; and even when
she was in the prison of the Temple several of those who had contributed
to place her there perished for having attempted to get her out again.
On the morning of the 7th of October the same women who the day before
surrounded the carriage of the august prisoners, riding on cannons and
uttering the most abusive language, assembled under the Queen’s windows,
upon the terrace of the Chateau, and desired to see her.  Her Majesty
appeared.  There are always among mobs of this description orators, that
is to say, beings who have more assurance than the rest; a woman of this
description told the Queen that she must now remove far from her all such
courtiers as ruin kings, and that she must love the inhabitants of her
good city.  The Queen answered that she had loved them at Versailles, and
would likewise love them at Paris.  “Yes, yes,” said another; “but on the
14th of July you wanted to besiege the city and have it bombarded; and on
the 6th of October you wanted to fly to the frontiers.”  The Queen
replied, affably, that they had been told so, and had believed it; that
there lay the cause of the unhappiness of the people and of the best of
kings.  A third addressed a few words to her in German: the Queen told
her she did not understand it; that she had become so entirely French as
even to have forgotten her mother tongue.  This declaration was answered
with “Bravo!” and clapping of hands; they then desired her to make a
compact with them.  “Ah,” said she, “how can I make a compact with you,
since you have no faith in that which my duty points out to me, and which
I ought for my own happiness to respect?”  They asked her for the ribbons
and flowers out of her hat; her Majesty herself unfastened them and gave
them; they were divided among the party, which for above half an hour
cried out, without ceasing, “Marie Antoinette for ever!  Our good Queen
for ever!”
Two days after the King’s arrival at Paris, the city and the National
Guard sent to request the Queen to appear at the theatre, and prove by
her presence and the King’s that it was with pleasure they resided in
their capital.  I introduced the deputation which came to make this
request.  Her Majesty replied that she should have infinite pleasure in
acceding to the invitation of the city of Paris; but that time must be
allowed her to soften the recollection of the distressing events which
had just occurred, and from which she had suffered too much.  She added,
that having come into Paris preceded by the heads of the faithful Guards
who had perished before the door of their sovereign, she could not think
that such an entry into the capital ought to be followed by rejoicings;
but that the happiness she had always felt in appearing in the midst of
the inhabitants of Paris was not effaced from her memory, and that she
should enjoy it again as soon as she found herself able to do so.
Their Majesties found some consolation in their private life: from
Madame’s–[Madame, here, the Princesse Marie Therese, daughter of Marie
Antoinette.]–gentle manners and filial affection, from the
accomplishments and vivacity of the little Dauphin, and the attention and
tenderness of the pious Princess Elisabeth, they still derived moments of
happiness.  The young Prince daily gave proofs of sensibility and
penetration; he was not yet beyond female care, but a private tutor, the
Abbe Davout, gave him all the instruction suitable to his age; his memory
was highly cultivated, and he recited verses with much grace and feeling.
     [On the 19th of October, that is to say, thirteen days after he had
     taken up his abode at Paris, the King went, on foot and almost
     alone, to review some detachments of the National Guard.  After the
     review Louis XVI. met with a child sweeping the street, who asked
     him for money.  The child called the King “M. le Chevalier.”  His
     Majesty gave him six francs.  The little sweeper, surprised at
     receiving so large a sum, cried out, “Oh! I have no change; you will
     give me money another time.”  A person who accompanied the monarch
     said to the child, “Keep it all, my friend; the gentleman is not
     chevalier, he is the eldest of the family."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
The day after the arrival of the Court at Paris, terrified at hearing
some noise in the gardens of the Tuileries, the young prince threw
himself into the arms of the Queen, crying out, “Grand-Dieu, mamma! will
it be yesterday over again?”  A few days after this affecting
exclamation, he went up to the King, and looked at him with a pensive
air.  The King asked him what he wanted; he answered, that he had
something very serious to say to him.  The King having prevailed on him
to explain himself, the young Prince asked why his people, who formerly
loved him so well, were all at once angry with him; and what he had done
to irritate them so much.  His father took him upon his knees, and spoke
to him nearly as follows: “I wished, child, to render the people still
happier than they were; I wanted money to pay the expenses occasioned by
wars.  I asked my people for money, as my predecessors have always done;
magistrates, composing the Parliament, opposed it, and said that my
people alone had a right to consent to it.  I assembled the principal
inhabitants of every town, whether distinguished by birth, fortune, or
talents, at Versailles; that is what is called the States General.  When
they were assembled they required concessions of me which I could not
make, either with due respect for myself or with justice to you, who will
be my successor; wicked men inducing the people to rise have occasioned
the excesses of the last few days; the people must not be blamed for
them.”
The Queen made the young Prince clearly comprehend that he ought to treat
the commanders of battalions, the officers of the National Guard, and all
the Parisians who were about him, with affability; the child took great
pains to please all those people, and when he had had an opportunity of
replying obligingly to the mayor or members of the commune he came and
whispered in his mother’s ear, “Was that right?”
He requested M. Bailly to show him the shield of Scipio, which is in the
royal library; and M. Bailly asking him which he preferred, Scipio or
Hannibal, the young Prince replied, without hesitation, that he preferred
him who had defended his own country.  He gave frequent proofs of ready
wit.  One day, while the Queen was hearing Madame repeat her exercises in
ancient history, the young Princess could not at the moment recollect the
name of the Queen of Carthage; the Dauphin was vexed at his sister’s want
of memory, and though he never spoke to her in the second person
singular, he bethought himself of the expedient of saying to her, “But
’dis donc’ the name of the Queen, to mamma; ’dis donc’ what her name
was.”
Shortly after the arrival of the King and his family at Paris the
Duchesse de Luynes came, in pursuance of the advice of a committee of the
Constitutional Assembly, to propose to the Queen a temporary retirement
from France, in order to leave the constitution to perfect itself, so
that the patriots should not accuse her of influencing the King to oppose
it.  The Duchess knew how far the schemes of the conspirers extended,
and her attachment to the Queen was the principal cause of the advice she
gave her.  The Queen perfectly comprehended the Duchesse de Luynes’s
motive; but replied that she would never leave either the King or her
son; that if she thought herself alone obnoxious to public hatred she
would instantly offer her life as a sacrifice;–but that it was the
throne which was aimed at, and that, in abandoning the King, she should
be merely committing an act of cowardice, since she saw no other
advantage in it than that of saving her own life.
One evening, in the month of November, 1790, I returned home rather late;
I there found the Prince de Poix; he told me he came to request me to
assist him in regaining his peace of mind; that at the commencement of
the sittings of the National Assembly he had suffered himself to be
seduced into the hope of a better order of things; that he blushed for
his error, and that he abhorred plans which had already produced such
fatal results; that he broke with the reformers for the rest of his life;
that he had given in his resignation as a deputy of the National
Assembly; and, finally, that he was anxious that the Queen should not
sleep in ignorance of his sentiments.  I undertook his commission, and
acquitted myself of it in the best way I could; but I was totally
unsuccessful.  The Prince de Poix remained at Court; he there suffered
many mortifications, never ceasing to serve the King in the most
dangerous commissions with that zeal for which his house has always been
distinguished.
When the King, the Queen, and the children were suitably established at
the Tuileries, as well as Madame Elisabeth and the Princesse de Lamballe,
the Queen resumed her usual habits; she employed her mornings in
superintending the education of Madame, who received all her lessons in
her presence, and she herself began to work large pieces of tapestry.
Her mind was too much occupied with passing events and surrounding
dangers to admit her of applying herself to reading; the needle was the
only employment which could divert her.
     [There was long preserved at Paris, in the house of Mademoiselle
     Dubuquois, a tapestry-worker, a carpet worked by the Queen and
     Madame Elisabeth for the large room of her Majesty’s ground-floor
     apartments at the Tuileries.  The Empress Josephine saw and admired
     this carpet, and desired it might be taken care of, in the hope of
     one day sending it to Madame–MADAME CAMPAN.]
She received the Court twice a week before going to mass, and on those
days dined in public with the King; she spent the rest of the time with
her family and children; she had no concert, and did not go to the play
until 1791, after the acceptation of the constitution.  The Princesse de
Lamballe, however, had some evening parties in her apartments at the
Tuileries, which were tolerably brilliant in consequence of the great
number of persons who attended them.  The Queen was present at a few of
these assemblies; but being soon convinced that her present situation
forbade her appearing much in public, she remained at home, and conversed
as she sat at work.  The sole topic of her discourse was, as may well be
supposed, the Revolution.  She sought to discover the real opinions of
the Parisians respecting her, and how she could have so completely lost
the affections of the people, and even of many persons in the higher
ranks.  She well knew that she ought to impute the whole to the spirit of
party, to the hatred of the Duc d’Orleans, and the folly of the French,
who desired to have a total change in the constitution; but she was not
the less desirous of ascertaining the private feelings of all the people
in power.
From the very commencement of the Revolution General Luckner indulged in
violent sallies against her.  Her Majesty, knowing that I was acquainted
with a lady who had been long connected with the General, desired me to
discover through that channel what was the private motive on which
Luckner’s hatred against her was founded.  On being questioned upon this
point, he answered that Marechal de Segur had assured him he had proposed
him for the command of a camp of observation, but that the Queen had made
a bar against his name; and that this ’par’, as he called it, in his
German accent, he could not forget.
The Queen ordered me to repeat this reply to the King myself, and said to
him: “See, Sire, whether I was not right in telling you that your
ministers, in order to give themselves full scope in the distribution of
favours, persuaded the French that I interfered in everything; there was
not a single license given out in the country for the sale of salt or
tobacco but the people believed it was given to one of my favourites.”
“That is very, true,” replied the King; “but I find it very difficult to
believe that Marechal de Segur ever said any such thing to Luckner; he
knew too well that you never interfered in the distribution of favours.
“That Luckner is a good-for-nothing fellow, and Segur is a brave and
honourable man who never uttered such a falsehood; however, you are
right; and because you provided for a few dependents, you are most
unjustly reported to have disposed of all offices, civil and military.”
All the nobility who had not left Paris made a point of presenting
themselves assiduously to the King, and there was a considerable influx
to the Tuileries.  Marks of attachment were exhibited even in external
symbols; the women wore enormous bouquets of lilies in their bosoms and
upon their heads, and sometimes even bunches of white ribbon.  At the
play there were often disputes between the pit and the boxes about
removing these ornaments, which the people thought dangerous emblems.
National cockades were sold in every corner of Paris; the sentinels
stopped all who did not wear them; the young men piqued themselves upon
breaking through this regulation, which was in some degree sanctioned by
the acquiescence of Louis XVI.  Frays took place, which were to be
regretted, because they excited a spirit of lawlessness.  The King
adopted conciliatory measures with the Assembly in order to promote
tranquillity; the revolutionists were but little disposed to think him
sincere; unfortunately the royalists encouraged this incredulity by
incessantly repeating that the King was not free, and that all that he
did was completely null, and in no way bound him for the time to come.
Such was the heat and violence of party spirit that persons the most
sincerely attached to the King were not even permitted to use the
language of reason, and recommend greater reserve in conversation.
People would talk and argue at table without considering that all the
servants belonged to the hostile army; and it may truly be said there was
as much imprudence and levity in the party assailed as there was cunning,
boldness, and perseverance in that which made the attack.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part B, also see Part A) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Memoirs of Marie AntoinetteBy Madame CampanAt Amazon
