


During July the correspondence of M. Bertrand de Molleville with the King
and Queen was most active.  M. de Marsilly, formerly a lieutenant of the
Cent-Suisses of the Guard, was the bearer of the letters.
     [I received by night only the King’s answer, written with his own
     hand, in the margin of my letter.  I always sent him back with the
     day’s letter that to which he had replied the day before, so that my
     letters and his answers, of which I contented myself with taking
     notes only, never remained with me twenty-four hours.  I proposed
     this arrangement to his Majesty to remove all uneasiness from his
     mind; my letters were generally delivered to the King or the Queen
     by M. de Marsilly, captain of the King’s Guard, whose attachment and
     fidelity were known to their Majesties.  I also sometimes employed
     M. Bernard de Marigny, who had left Brest for the purpose of sharing
     with his Majesty’s faithful servants the dangers which threatened
     the King.–"Memoirs of Bertrand de Molleville,” vol.  ii., p.  12.]
He came to me the first time with a note from the Queen directed to M.
Bertrand himself.  In this note the Queen said: “Address yourself with
full confidence to Madame Campan; the conduct of her brother in Russia
has not at all influenced her sentiments; she is wholly devoted to us;
and if, hereafter, you should have anything to say to us verbally, you
may rely entirely upon her devotion and discretion.”
The mobs which gathered almost nightly in the faubourgs alarmed the
Queen’s friends; they entreated her not to sleep in her room on the
ground floor of the Tuileries.  She removed to the first floor, to a room
which was between the King’s apartments and those of the Dauphin.  Being
awake always from daybreak, she ordered that neither the shutters nor the
window-blinds should be closed, that her long sleepless nights might be
the less weary.  About the middle of one of these nights, when the moon
was shining into her bedchamber, she gazed at it, and told me that in a
month she should not see that moon unless freed from her chains, and
beholding the King at liberty.  She then imparted to me all that was
concurring to deliver them; but said that the opinions of their intimate
advisers were alarmingly at variance; that some vouched for complete
success, while others pointed out insurmountable dangers.  She added that
she possessed the itinerary of the march of the Princes and the King of
Prussia: that on such a day they would be at Verdun, on another day at
such a place, that Lille was about to be besieged, but that M. de J––-,
whose prudence and intelligence the King, as well as herself, highly
valued, alarmed them much respecting the success of that siege, and made
them apprehensive that, even were the commandant devoted to them, the
civil authority, which by the constitution gave great power to the mayors
of towns, would overrule the military commandant.  She was also very
uneasy as to what would take place at Paris during the interval, and
spoke to me of the King’s want of energy, but always in terms expressive
of her veneration for his virtues and her attachment to himself.–
“The King,” said she, “is not a coward; he possesses abundance of passive
courage, but he is overwhelmed by an awkward shyness, a mistrust of
himself, which proceeds from his education as much as from his
disposition.  He is afraid to command, and, above all things, dreads
speaking to assembled numbers.  He lived like a child, and always ill at
ease under the eyes of Louis XV., until the age of twenty-one.  This
constraint confirmed his timidity.
“Circumstanced as we are, a few well-delivered words addressed to the
Parisians, who are devoted to him, would multiply the strength of our
party a hundredfold: he will not utter them.  What can we expect from
those addresses to the people which he has been advised to post up?
Nothing but fresh outrages.  As for myself, I could do anything, and
would appear on horseback if necessary.  But if I were really to begin to
act, that would be furnishing arms to the King’s enemies; the cry against
the Austrian, and against the sway of a woman, would become general in
France; and, moreover, by showing myself, I should render the King a mere
nothing.  A queen who is not regent ought, under these circumstances, to
remain passive and prepare to die.”
The garden of the Tuileries was full of maddened men, who insulted all
who seemed to side with the Court.  “The Life of Marie Antoinette” was
cried under the Queen’s windows, infamous plates were annexed to the
book, the hawkers showed them to the passersby.  On all sides were heard
the jubilant outcries of a people in a state of delirium almost as
frightful as the explosion of their rage.  The Queen and her children
were unable to breathe the open air any longer.  It was determined that
the garden of the Tuileries should be closed: as soon as this step was
taken the Assembly decreed that the whole length of the Terrace des
Feuillans belonged to it, and fixed the boundary between what was called
the national ground and the Coblentz ground by a tricoloured ribbon
stretched from one end of the terrace to the other.  All good citizens
were ordered, by notices affixed to it, not to go down into the garden,
under pain of being treated in the same manner as Foulon and Berthier.
A young man who did not observe this written order went down into the
garden; furious outcries, threats of la lanterne, and the crowd of people
which collected upon the terrace warned him of his imprudence, and the
danger which he ran.  He immediately pulled off his shoes, took out his
handkerchief, and wiped the dust from their soles.  The people cried out,
“Bravo!  the good citizen for ever!”  He was carried off in triumph.  The
shutting up of the Tuileries did not enable the Queen and her children to
walk in the garden.  The people on the terrace sent forth dreadful
shouts, and she was twice compelled to return to her apartments.
In the early part of August many zealous persons offered the King money;
he refused considerable sums, being unwilling to injure the fortunes of
individuals.  M. de la Ferte, intendant of the ’menus plaisirs’, brought
me a thousand louis, requesting me to lay them at the feet of the Queen.
He thought she could not have too much money at so perilous a time, and
that every good Frenchman should hasten to place all his ready money in
her hands.  She refused this sum, and others of much greater amount which
were offered to her.
     [M. Auguie, my brother-in-law, receiver-general of the finances,
     offered her, through his wife, a portfolio containing one hundred
     thousand crowns in paper money.  On this occasion the Queen said the
     most affecting things to my sister, expressive of her happiness at
     having contributed to the fortunes of such faithful subjects as
     herself and her husband, but declined her offer.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
However, a few days afterwards, she told me she would accept M. de la
Ferte’s twenty-four thousand francs, because they would make up a sum
which the King had to expend.  She therefore directed, me to go and
receive those twenty-four thousand francs, to add them to the one hundred
thousand francs she had placed in my hands, and to change the whole into
assignats to increase their amount.  Her orders were executed, and the
assignats were delivered to the King.  The Queen informed me that Madame
Elisabeth had found a well-meaning man who had engaged to gain over
Petion by the bribe of a large sum of money, and that deputy would, by a
preconcerted signal, inform the King of the success of the project.  His
Majesty soon had an opportunity of seeing Petion, and on the Queen asking
him before me if he was satisfied with him, the King replied, “Neither
more nor less satisfied than usual; he did not make the concerted signal,
and I believe I have been cheated.”  The Queen then condescended to
explain the whole of the enigma to me.  “Petion,” said she, “was, while
talking to the King, to have kept his finger fixed upon his right eye for
at least two seconds."–"He did not even put his hand up to his chin,"
said the King; “after all, it is but so much money stolen: the thief will
not boast of it, and the affair will remain a secret.  Let us talk of
something else.”  He turned to me and said, “Your father was an intimate
friend of Mandat, who now commands the National Guard; describe him to
me; what ought I to expect from him?”  I answered that he was one of his
Majesty’s most faithful subjects, but that with a great deal of loyalty
he possessed very little sense, and that he was involved in the
constitutional vortex.  “I understand,” said the King; “he is a man who
would defend my palace and my person, because that is enjoined by the
constitution which he has sworn to support, but who would fight against
the party in favour of sovereign authority; it is well to know this with
certainty.”
On the next day the Princesse de Lamballe sent for me very early in the
morning.  I found her on a sofa facing a window that looked upon the Pont
Royal.  She then occupied that apartment of the Pavilion of Flora which
was on a level with that of the Queen.  She desired me to sit down by
her.  Her Highness had a writing-desk upon her knees.  “You have had many
enemies,” said she; “attempts have been made to deprive you of the
Queen’s favour; they have been far from successful.  Do you know that
even I myself, not being so well acquainted with you as the Queen, was
rendered suspicious of you; and that upon the arrival of the Court at the
Tuileries I gave you a companion to be a spy upon you; and that I had
another belonging to the police placed at your door!  I was assured that
you received five or six of the most virulent deputies of the Tiers Etat;
but it was that wardrobe woman whose rooms were above you.
“In short,” said the Princess, “persons of integrity have nothing to fear
from the evil-disposed when they belong to so upright a prince as the
King.  As to the Queen, she knows you, and has loved you ever since
she came into France.  You shall judge of the King’s opinion of you: it
was yesterday evening decided in the family circle that, at a time when
the Tuileries is likely to be attacked, it was necessary to have the most
faithful account of the opinions and conduct of all the individuals
composing the Queen’s service.  The King takes the same precaution on his
part respecting all who are about him.  He said there was with him a
person of great integrity, to whom he would commit this inquiry; and
that, with regard to the Queen’s household, you must be spoken to, that
he had long studied your character, and that he esteemed your veracity.”
The Princess had a list of the names of all who belonged to the Queen’s
chamber on her desk.  She asked me for information respecting each
individual.  I was fortunate in having none but the most favourable
information to give.  I had to speak of my avowed enemy in the Queen’s
chamber; of her who most wished that I should be responsible for my
brother’s political opinions.  The Princess, as the head of the chamber,
could not be ignorant of this circumstance; but as the person in
question, who idolised the King and Queen, would not have hesitated to
sacrifice her life in order to save theirs, and as possibly her
attachment to them, united to considerable narrowness of intellect and a
limited education, contributed to her jealousy of me, I spoke of her in
the highest terms.
The Princess wrote as I dictated, and occasionally looked at me with
astonishment.  When I had done I entreated her to write in the margin
that the lady alluded to was my declared enemy.  She embraced me, saying,
“Ah! do not write it!  we should not record an unhappy circumstance which
ought to be forgotten.”  We came to a man of genius who was much attached
to the Queen, and I described him as a man born solely to contradict,
showing himself an aristocrat with democrats, and a democrat among
aristocrats; but still a man of probity, and well disposed to his
sovereign.  The Princess said she knew many persons of that disposition,
and that she was delighted I had nothing to say against this man, because
she herself had placed him about the Queen.
The whole of her Majesty’s chamber, which consisted entirely of persons
of fidelity, gave throughout all the dreadful convulsions of the
Revolution proofs of the greatest prudence and self-devotion.  The same
cannot be said of the antechambers.  With the exception of three or four,
all the servants of that class were outrageous Jacobins; and I saw on
those occasions the necessity of composing the private household of
princes of persons completely separated from the class of the people.
The situation of the royal family was so unbearable during the months
which immediately preceded the 10th of August that the Queen longed for
the crisis, whatever might be its issue.  She frequently said that a long
confinement in a tower by the seaside would seem to her less intolerable
than those feuds in which the weakness of her party daily threatened an
inevitable catastrophe.
     [A few days before the 10th of August the squabbles between the
     royalists and the Jacobins, and between the Jacobins and the
     constitutionalists, increased in warmth; among the latter those men
     who defended the principles they professed with the greatest talent,
     courage, and constancy were at the same time the most exposed to
     danger.  Montjoie says: “The question of dethronement was discussed
     with a degree of frenzy in the Assembly.  Such of the deputies as
     voted against it were abused, ill treated, and surrounded by
     assassins.  They had a battle to fight at every step they took; and
     at length they did not dare to sleep in their own houses.  Of this
     number were Regnault de Beaucaron, Froudiere, Girardin, and
     Vaublanc.  Girardin complained of having been struck in one of the
     lobbies of the Assembly.  A voice cried out to him, ’Say where were
     you struck.’  ’Where?’ replied Girardin, ’what a question!  Behind.
     Do assassins ever strike otherwise?"]
Not only were their Majesties prevented from breathing the open air, but
they were also insulted at the very foot of the altar.  The Sunday before
the last day of the monarchy, while the royal family went through the
gallery to the chapel, half the soldiers of the National Guard exclaimed,
“Long live the King!” and the other half, “No; no King!  Down with the
veto!” and on that day at vespers the choristers preconcerted to use loud
and threatening emphasis when chanting the words, “Deposuit potentes de
sede,” in the “Magnificat.”  Incensed at such an irreverent proceeding,
the royalists in their turn thrice exclaimed, “Et reginam,” after the
“Domine salvum fac regem.”  The tumult during the whole time of divine
service was excessive.
At length the terrible night of the 10th of August, 1792, arrived.  On
the preceding evening Potion went to the Assembly and informed it that
preparations were making for an insurrection on the following day; that
the tocsin would sound at midnight; and that he feared he had not
sufficient means for resisting the attack which was about to take place.
Upon this information the Assembly passed to the order of the day.
Petion, however, gave an order for repelling force by force.
     [Petion was the Mayor of Paris, and Mandat on this day was
     commandant of the National Guard.  Mandat was assassinated that
     night.–"Thiers,” vol. i., p. 260.]
M. Mandat was armed with this order; and, finding his fidelity to the
King’s person supported by what he considered the law of the State, he
conducted himself in all his operations with the greatest energy.  On the
evening of the 9th I was present at the King’s supper.  While his Majesty
was giving me various orders we heard a great noise at the door of the
apartment.  I went to see what was the cause of it, and found the two
sentinels fighting.  One said, speaking of the King, that he was hearty
in the cause of the constitution, and would defend it at the peril of his
life; the other maintained that he was an encumbrance to the only
constitution suitable to a free people.  They were almost ready to cut
one another’s throats.  I returned with a countenance which betrayed my
emotion.  The King desired to know what was going forward at his door; I
could not conceal it from him.  The Queen said she was not at all
surprised at it, and that more than half the guard belonged to the
Jacobin party.
The tocsin sounded at midnight.  The Swiss were drawn up like walls; and
in the midst of their soldierlike silence, which formed a striking
contrast with the perpetual din of the town guard, the King informed
M. de J––-, an officer of the staff, of the plan of defence laid down
by General Viomenil.  M. de J––- said to me, after this private
conference, “Put your jewels and money into your pockets; our dangers are
unavoidable; the means of defence are nil; safety might be obtained by
some degree of energy in the King, but that is the only virtue in which
he is deficient.”
An hour after midnight the Queen and Madame Elisabeth said they would lie
down on a sofa in a room in the entresols, the windows of which commanded
the courtyard of the Tuileries.
The Queen told me the King had just refused to put on his quilted under-
waistcoat; that he had consented to wear it on the 14th of July because
he was merely going to a ceremony where the blade of an assassin was to
be apprehended, but that on a day on which his party might fight against
the revolutionists he thought there was something cowardly in preserving
his life by such means.
During this time Madame Elisabeth disengaged herself from some of her
clothing which encumbered her in order to lie down on the sofa: she took
a cornelian pin out of her cape, and before she laid it down on the table
she showed it to me, and desired me to read a motto engraved upon it
round a stalk of lilies.  The words were, “Oblivion of injuries; pardon
for offences."–"I much fear,” added that virtuous Princess, “this maxim
has but little influence among our enemies; but it ought not to be less
dear to us on that account.”
     [The exalted piety of Madame Elisabeth gave to all she said and did
     a noble character, descriptive of that of her soul.  On the day on
     which this worthy descendant of Saint Louis was sacrificed, the
     executioner, in tying her hands behind her, raised up one of the
     ends of her handkerchief.  Madame Elisabeth, with calmness, and in a
     voice which seemed not to belong to earth, said to him, “In the name
     of modesty, cover my bosom.”  I learned this from Madame de Serilly,
     who was condemned the same day as the Princess, but who obtained a
     respite at the moment of the execution, Madame de Montmorin, her
     relation, declaring that her cousin was enceinte.-MADAME CAMPAN.]
The Queen desired me to sit down by her; the two Princesses could not
sleep; they were conversing mournfully upon their situation when a musket
was discharged in the courtyard.  They both quitted the sofa, saying,
“There is the first shot, unfortunately it will not be the last; let us
go up to the King.”  The Queen desired me to follow her; several of her
women went with me.
At four o’clock the Queen came out of the King’s chamber and told us she
had no longer any hope; that M. Mandat, who had gone to the Hotel de
Ville to receive further orders, had just been assassinated, and that the
people were at that time carrying his head about the streets.  Day came.
The King, the Queen, Madame Elisabeth, Madame, and the Dauphin went down
to pass through the ranks of the sections of the National Guard; the cry
of “Vive le Roi!” was heard from a few places.  I was at a window on the
garden side; I saw some of the gunners quit their posts, go up to the
King, and thrust their fists in his face, insulting him by the most
brutal language.  Messieurs de Salvert and de Bridges drove them off in a
spirited manner.  The King was as pale as a corpse.  The royal family
came in again.  The Queen told me that all was lost; that the King had
shown no energy; and that this sort of review had done more harm than
good.
I was in the billiard-room with my companions; we placed ourselves upon
some high benches.  I then saw M. d’Hervilly with a drawn sword in his
hand, ordering the usher to open the door to the French noblesse.  Two
hundred persons entered the room nearest to that in which the family
were; others drew up in two lines in the preceding rooms.  I saw a few
people belonging to the Court, many others whose features were unknown to
me, and a few who figured technically without right among what was called
the noblesse, but whose self-devotion ennobled them at once.  They were
all so badly armed that even in that situation the indomitable French
liveliness indulged in jests.  M. de Saint-Souplet, one of the King’s
equerries, and a page, carried on their shoulders instead of muskets the
tongs belonging to the King’s antechamber, which they had broken and
divided between them.  Another page, who had a pocket-pistol in his hand,
stuck the end of it against the back of the person who stood before him,
and who begged he would be good enough to rest it elsewhere.  A sword and
a pair of pistols were the only arms of those who had had the precaution
to provide themselves with arms at all.  Meanwhile, the numerous bands
from the faubourgs, armed with pikes and cutlasses, filled the Carrousel
and the streets adjacent to the Tuileries.  The sanguinary Marseillais
were at their head, with cannon pointed against the Chateau.  In this
emergency the King’s Council sent M. Dejoly, the Minister of Justice, to
the Assembly to request they would send the King a deputation which might
serve as a safeguard to the executive power.  His ruin was resolved on;
they passed to the order of the day.  At eight o’clock the department
repaired to the Chateau.  The procureur-syndic, seeing that the guard
within was ready to join the assailants, went into the King’s closet and
requested to speak to him in private.  The King received him in his
chamber; the Queen was with him.  There M. Roederer told him that the
King, all his family, and the people about them would inevitably perish
unless his Majesty immediately determined to go to the National Assembly.
The Queen at first opposed this advice, but the procureur-syndic told her
that she rendered herself responsible for the deaths of the King, her
children, and all who were in the palace.  She no longer objected.  The
King then consented to go to the Assembly.  As he set out, he said to the
minister and persons who surrounded him, “Come, gentlemen, there is
nothing more to be done here.”
     ["The King hesitated, the Queen manifested the highest
     dissatisfaction.  ’What!’ said she,’ are we alone; is there nobody
     who can act?’–’Yes, Madame, alone; action is useless–resistance is
     impossible.’ One of the members of the department, M. Gerdrot,
     insisted on the prompt execution of the proposed measure.  ’Silence,
     monsieur,’ said the Queen to him; ’silence; you are the only person
     who ought to be silent here; when the mischief is done, those who
     did it should not pretend to wish to remedy it.’ .  .  .
     “The King remained mute; nobody spoke.  It was reserved for me to
     give the last piece of advice.  I had the firmness to say, ’Let us
     go, and not deliberate; honour commands it, the good of the State
     requires it.  Let us go to the National Assembly; this step ought to
     have been taken long ago: ’Let us go,’ said the King, raising his
     right hand; ’let us start; let us give this last mark of self-
     devotion, since it is necessary.’  The Queen was persuaded.  Her
     first anxiety was for the King, the second for her son; the King had
     none.  ’M. Roederer–gentlemen,’ said the Queen, ’you answer for the
     person of the King; you answer for that of my son.’–’Madame,’
     replied M. Roederer, ’we pledge ourselves to die at your side; that
     is all we can engage for.’"–MONTJOIE, “History of Marie
     Antoinette."]
The Queen said to me as she left the King’s chamber, “Wait in my
apartments; I will come to you, or I will send for you to go I know not
whither.”  She took with her only the Princesse de Lamballe and Madame de
Tourzel.  The Princesse de Tarente and Madame de la Roche-Aymon were
inconsolable at being left at the Tuileries; they, and all who belonged
to the chamber, went down into the Queen’s apartments.
We saw the royal family pass between two lines formed by the Swiss
grenadiers and those of the battalions of the Petits-Peres and the Filles
Saint Thomas.  They were so pressed upon by the crowd that during that
short passage the Queen was robbed of her watch and purse.  A man of
great height and horrible appearance, one of such as were to be seen at
the head of all the insurrections, drew near the Dauphin, whom the Queen
was leading by the hand, and took him up in his arms.  The Queen uttered
a scream of terror, and was ready to faint.  The man said to her, “Don’t
be frightened, I will do him no harm;” and he gave him back to her at
the entrance of the chamber.
I leave to history all the details of that too memorable day, confining
myself to recalling a few of the frightful scenes acted in the interior
of the Tuileries after the King had quitted the palace.
The assailants did not know that the King and his family had betaken
themselves to the Assembly; and those who defended the palace from the
aide of the courts were equally ignorant of it.  It is supposed that if
they had been aware of the fact the siege would never have taken place.
     [In reading of the events of the 10th of August, 1792, the reader
     must remember that there was hardly any armed force to resist the
     mob.  The regiments that had shown signs of being loyal to the King
     had been removed from Paris by the Assembly.  The Swiss had been
     deprived of their own artillery, and the Court had sent one of their
     battalions into Normandy at a time when there was an idea of taking
     refuge there.  The National Guard were either disloyal or
     disheartened, and the gunners, especially of that force at the
     Tuileries, sympathised with the mob.  Thus the King had about 800 or
     900 Swiss and little more than one battalion of the National Guard.
     Mandat, one of the six heads of the legions of the National Guard,
     to whose turn the command fell on that day, was true to his duty,
     but was sent for to the Hotel de Ville and assassinated.  Still the
     small force, even after the departure of the King, would have
     probably beaten off the mob had not the King given the fatal order
     to the Swiss to cease firing.  (See Thiers’s “Revolution Francaise,"
     vol.  i., chap.  xi.) Bonaparte’s opinion of the mob may be judged
     by his remarks on the 20th June, 1792, when, disgusted at seeing the
     King appear with the red cap on his head, he exclaimed, “Che
     coglione!  Why have they let in all that rabble?  Why don’t they
     sweep off 400 or 500 of them with the cannon?  The rest would then
     set off.”  ("Bourrienne,” vol. i., p.13, Bentley, London, 1836.)
     Bonaparte carried out his own plan against a far stronger force of
     assailants on the Jour des Sections, 4th October, 1795.]
The Marseillais began by driving from their posts several Swiss, who
yielded without resistance; a few of the assailants fired upon them; some
of the Swiss officers, seeing their men fall, and perhaps thinking the
King was still at the Tuileries, gave the word to a whole battalion to
fire.  The aggressors were thrown into disorder, and the Carrousel was
cleared in a moment; but they soon returned, spurred on by rage and
revenge.  The Swiss were but eight hundred strong; they fell back into
the interior of the Chateau; some of the doors were battered in by the
guns, others broken through with hatchets; the populace rushed from all
quarters into the interior of the palace; almost all the Swiss were
massacred; the nobles, flying through the gallery which leads to the
Louvre, were either stabbed or shot, and the bodies thrown out of the
windows.
M. Pallas and M. de Marchais, ushers of the King’s chamber, were killed
in defending the door of the council chamber; many others of the King’s
servants fell victims to their fidelity.  I mention these two persons in
particular because, with their hats pulled over their brows and their
swords in their hands, they exclaimed, as they defended themselves with
unavailing courage, “We will not survive!–this is our post; our duty is
to die at it.”  M. Diet behaved in the same manner at the door of the
Queen’s bedchamber; he experienced the same fate.  The Princesse de
Tarente had fortunately opened the door of the apartments; otherwise, the
dreadful band seeing several women collected in the Queen’s salon would
have fancied she was among us, and would have immediately massacred us
had we resisted them.  We were, indeed, all about to perish, when a man
with a long beard came up, exclaiming, in the name of Potion, “Spare the
women; don’t dishonour the nation!”  A particular circumstance placed me
in greater danger than the others.  In my confusion I imagined, a moment
before the assailants entered the Queen’s apartments, that my sister was
not among the group of women collected there; and I went up into an
’entresol’, where I supposed she had taken refuge, to induce her to come
down, fancying it safer that we should not be separated.  I did not find
her in the room in question; I saw there only our two femmes de chambre
and one of the Queen’s two heyducs, a man of great height and military
aspect.  I saw that he was pale, and sitting on a bed.  I cried out to
him, “Fly! the footmen and our people are already safe."–"I cannot,"
said the man to me; “I am dying of fear.”  As he spoke I heard a number
of men rushing hastily up the staircase; they threw themselves upon him,
and I saw him assassinated.
I ran towards the staircase, followed by our women.  The murderers left
the heyduc to come to me.  The women threw themselves at their feet, and
held their sabres.  The narrowness of the staircase impeded the
assassins; but I had already felt a horrid hand thrust into my back to
seize me by my clothes, when some one called out from the bottom of the
staircase, “What are you doing above there?  We don’t kill women.”  I was
on my knees; my executioner quitted his hold of me, and said, “Get up,
you jade; the nation pardons you.”
The brutality of these words did not prevent my suddenly experiencing an
indescribable feeling which partook almost equally of the love of life
and the idea that I was going to see my son, and all that was dear to me,
again.  A moment before I had thought less of death than of the pain
which the steel, suspended over my head, would occasion me.  Death is
seldom seen so close without striking his blow.  I heard every syllable
uttered by the assassins, just as if I had been calm.
Five or six men seized me and my companions, and, having made us get up
on benches placed before the windows, ordered us to call out, “The nation
for ever!”
I passed over several corpses; I recognised that of the old Vicomte de
Broves, to whom the Queen had sent me at the beginning of the night to
desire him and another old man in her name to go home.  These brave men
desired I would tell her Majesty that they had but too strictly obeyed
the King’s orders in all circumstances under which they ought to have
exposed their own lives in order to preserve his; and that for this once
they would not obey, though they would cherish the recollection of the
Queen’s goodness.
Near the grille, on the side next the bridge, the men who conducted me
asked whither I wished to go.  Upon my inquiring, in my turn, whether
they were at liberty to take me wherever I might wish to go, one of them,
a Marseillais, asked me, giving me at the same time a push with the butt
end of his musket, whether I still doubted the power of the people?  I
answered “No,” and I mentioned the number of my brother-in-law’s house.
I saw my sister ascending the steps of the parapet of the bridge,
surrounded by members of the National Guard.  I called to her, and she
turned round.  “Would you have her go with you?” said my guardian to me.
I told him I did wish it.  They called the people who were leading my
sister to prison; she joined me.
Madame de la Roche-Aymon and her daughter, Mademoiselle Pauline de
Tourzel, Madame de Ginestoux, lady to the Princesse de Lamballe, the
other women of the Queen, and the old Comte d’Affry, were led off
together to the Abbaye.
Our progress from the Tuileries to my sister’s house was most
distressing.  We saw several Swiss pursued and killed, and musket-shots
were crossing each other in all directions.  We passed under the walls of
the Louvre; they were firing from the parapet into the windows of the
gallery, to hit the knights of the dagger; for thus did the populace
designate those faithful subjects who had assembled at the Tuileries to
defend the King.
The brigands broke some vessels of water in the Queen’s first
antechamber; the mixture of blood and water stained the skirts of our
white gowns.  The poissardes screamed after us in the streets that we
were attached to the Austrian.  Our protectors then showed some
consideration for us, and made us go up a gateway to pull off our gowns;
but our petticoats being too short, and making us look like persons in
disguise, other poissardes began to bawl out that we were young Swiss
dressed up like women.  We then saw a tribe of female cannibals enter the
street, carrying the head of poor Mandat.  Our guards made us hastily
enter a little public-house, called for wine, and desired us to drink
with them.  They assured the landlady that we were their sisters, and
good patriots.  Happily the Marseillais had quitted us to return to the
Tuileries.  One of the men who remained with us said to me in a low
voice: “I am a gauze-worker in the faubourg.  I was forced to march; I am
not for all this; I have not killed anybody, and have rescued you.  You
ran a great risk when we met the mad women who are carrying Mandat’s
head.  These horrible women said yesterday at midnight, upon the site of
the Bastille, that they must have their revenge for the 6th of October,
at Versailles, and that they had sworn to kill the Queen and all the
women attached to her; the danger of the action saved you all.”
As I crossed the Carrousel, I saw my house in flames; but as soon as the
first moment of affright was over, I thought no more of my personal
misfortunes.  My ideas turned solely upon the dreadful situation of the
Queen.
On reaching my sister’s we found all our family in despair, believing
they should never see us again.  I could not remain in her house; some of
the mob, collected round the door, exclaimed that Marie Antoinette’s
confidante was in the house, and that they must have her head.  I
disguised myself, and was concealed in the house of M. Morel, secretary
for the lotteries.  On the morrow I was inquired for there, in the name
of the Queen.  A deputy, whose sentiments were known to her, took upon
himself to find me out.
I borrowed clothes, and went with my sister to the Feuillans–[A former
monastery near the Tuileries, so called from the Bernardines, one of the
Cistercian orders; later a revolutionary club.]–We got there at the
same time with M. Thierry de Ville d’Avray, the King’s first valet de
chambre.  We were taken into an office, where we wrote down our names and
places of abode, and we received tickets for admission into the rooms
belonging to Camus, the keeper of the Archives, where the King was with
his family.
As we entered the first room, a person who was there said to me, “Ah!
you are a brave woman; but where is that Thierry,
     [M. Thierry, who never ceased to give his sovereign proofs of
     unalterable attachment, was one of the victims of the 2d of
     September.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
that man loaded with his master’s bounties?"–"He is here,” said I; “he
is following me.  I perceive that even scenes of death do not banish
jealousy from among you.”
Having belonged to the Court from my earliest youth, I was known to many
persons whom I did not know.  As I traversed a corridor above the
cloisters which led to the cells inhabited by the unfortunate Louis XVI.
and his family, several of the grenadiers called me by name.  One of them
said to me, “Well, the poor King is lost!  The Comte d’Artois would have
managed it better."–"Not at all,” said another.
The royal family occupied a small suite of apartments consisting of four
cells, formerly belonging to the ancient monastery of the Feuillans.  In
the first were the men who had accompanied the King: the Prince de Poix,
the Baron d’Aubier, M. de Saint-Pardou, equerry to Madame Elisabeth, MM.
de Goguelat, de Chamilly, and de Hue.  In the second we found the King;
he was having his hair dressed; he took two locks of it, and gave one to
my sister and one to me.  We offered to kiss his hand; he opposed it, and
embraced us without saying anything.  In the third was the Queen, in bed,
and in indescribable affliction.  We found her accompanied only by a
stout woman, who appeared tolerably civil; she was the keeper of the
apartments.  She waited upon the Queen, who as yet had none of her own
people about her.  Her Majesty stretched out her arms to us, saying,
“Come, unfortunate women; come, and see one still more unhappy than
yourselves, since she has been the cause of all your misfortunes.  We are
ruined,” continued she; “we have arrived at that point to which they have
been leading us for three years, through all possible outrages; we shall
fall in this dreadful revolution, and many others will perish after us.
All have contributed to our downfall; the reformers have urged it like
mad people, and others through ambition, for the wildest Jacobin seeks
wealth and office, and the mob is eager for plunder.  There is not one
real patriot among all this infamous horde.  The emigrant party have
their intrigues and schemes; foreigners seek to profit by the dissensions
of France; every one has a share in our misfortunes.”
The Dauphin came in with Madame and the Marquise de Tourzel.  On seeing
them the Queen said to me, “Poor children!  how heartrending it is,
instead of handing down to them so fine an inheritance, to say it ends
with us!”  She afterwards conversed with me about the Tuileries and the
persons who had fallen; she condescended also to mention the burning of
my house.  I looked upon that loss as a mischance which ought not to
dwell upon her mind, and I told her so.  She spoke of the Princesse de
Tarente, whom she greatly loved and valued, of Madame de la Roche-Aymon
and her daughter, of the other persons whom she had left at the palace,
and of the Duchesse de Luynes, who was to have passed the night at the
Tuileries.  Respecting her she said, “Hers was one of the first heads
turned by the rage for that mischievous philosophy; but her heart brought
her back, and I again found a friend in her.”
     [During the Reign of Terror I withdrew to the Chateau de Coubertin,
     near that of Dampierre.  The Duchesse de Luynes frequently came to
     ask me to tell her what the Queen had said about her at the
     Feuillans.  She would say as she went away, “I have often need to
     request you to repeat those words of the Queen."–MADAME CAMPAN.]
I asked the Queen what the ambassadors from foreign powers had done under
existing circumstances.  She told me that they could do nothing; and that
the wife of the English ambassador had just given her a proof of the
personal interest she took in her welfare by sending her linen for her
son.
I informed her that, in the pillaging of my house, all my accounts with
her had been thrown into the Carrousel, and that every sheet of my
month’s expenditure was signed by her, sometimes leaving four or five
inches of blank paper above her signature, a circumstance which rendered
me very uneasy, from an apprehension that an improper use might be made
of those signatures.  She desired me to demand admission to the committee
of general safety, and to make this declaration there.  I repaired
thither instantly and found a deputy, with whose name I have never become
acquainted.  After hearing me he said that he would not receive my
deposition; that Marie Antoinette was now nothing more than any other
Frenchwoman; and that if any of those detached papers bearing her
signature should be misapplied, she would have, at a future period, a
right to lodge a complaint, and to support her declaration by the facts
which I had just related.  The Queen then regretted having sent me, and
feared that she had, by her very caution, pointed out a method of
fabricating forgeries which might be dangerous to her; then again she
exclaimed, “My apprehensions are as absurd as the step I made you take.
They need nothing more for our ruin; all has been told.”
She gave us details of what had taken place subsequently to the King’s
arrival at the Assembly.  They are all well known, and I have no occasion
to record them; I will merely mention that she told us, though with much
delicacy, that she was not a little hurt at the King’s conduct since he
had quitted the Tuileries; that his habit of laying no restraint upon his
great appetite had prompted him to eat as if he had been at his palace;
that those who did not know him as she did, did not feel the piety and
the magnanimity of his resignation, all which produced so bad an effect
that deputies who were devoted to him had warned him of it; but no change
could be effected.
I still see in imagination, and shall always see, that narrow cell at the
Feuillans, hung with green paper, that wretched couch whence the
dethroned, Queen stretched out her arms to us, saying that our
misfortunes, of which she was the cause, increased her own.  There, for
the last time, I saw the tears, I heard the sobs of her whom high birth,
natural endowments, and, above all, goodness of heart, had seemed to
destine to adorn any throne, and be the happiness of any people!  It is
impossible for those who lived with Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette not
to be fully convinced, while doing full justice to the King’s virtues,
that if the Queen had been from the moment of her arrival in France the
object of the care and affection of a prince of decision and authority,
she would have only added to the glory of his reign.
What affecting things I have heard the Queen say in the affliction caused
her by the belief of part of the Court and the whole of the people that
she did not love France!  How did that opinion shock those who knew her
heart and her sentiments!  Twice did I see her on the point of going from
her apartments in the Tuileries into the gardens, to address the immense
throng constantly assembled there to insult her.  “Yes,” exclaimed she,
as she paced her chamber with hurried steps, “I will say to them
Frenchmen, they have had the cruelty to persuade you that I do not love
France!–I! the mother of a Dauphin who will reign over this noble
country!–I! whom Providence has seated upon the most powerful throne of
Europe!  Of all the daughters of Maria Theresa am I not that one whom
fortune has most highly favoured?  And ought I not to feel all these
advantages?  What should I find at Vienna?  Nothing but sepulchres!  What
should I lose in France?  Everything which can confer glory!”
I protest I only repeat her own words; the soundness of her judgment soon
pointed out to her the dangers of such a proceeding.  “I should descend
from the throne,” said she, “merely, perhaps, to excite a momentary
sympathy, which the factious would soon render more injurious than
beneficial to me.”
Yes, not only did Marie Antoinette love France, but few women took
greater pride in the courage of Frenchmen.  I could adduce a multitude of
proofs of this; I will relate two traits which demonstrate the noblest
enthusiasm: The Queen was telling me that, at the coronation of the
Emperor Francis II., that Prince, bespeaking the admiration of a French
general officer, who was then an emigrant, for the fine appearance of his
troops, said to him, “There are the men to beat your sans culottes!"
“That remains to be seen, Sire,” instantly replied the officer.  The
Queen added, “I don’t know the name of that brave Frenchman, but I will
learn it; the King ought to be in possession of it.”  As she was reading
the public papers a few days before the 10th of August, she observed that
mention was made of the courage of a young man who died in defending the
flag he carried, and shouting, “Vive la Nation!"–"Ah! the fine lad!"
said the Queen; “what a happiness it would have been for us if such men
had never left off crying, ’Vive de Roi!’”
In all that I have hitherto said of this most unfortunate of women and of
queens, those who did not live with her, those who knew her but
partially, and especially the majority of foreigners, prejudiced by
infamous libels, may imagine I have thought it my duty to sacrifice truth
on the altar of gratitude.  Fortunately I can invoke unexceptionable
witnesses; they will declare whether what I assert that I have seen and
heard appears to them either untrue or improbable.
Continue...

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part B, also see Part A) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Memoirs of Marie AntoinetteBy Madame CampanAt Amazon
