


This is the worst of all the ideas embodied by DRM: that people
who make record-players should be able to spec whose records you
can listen to, and that people who make records should have a
veto over the design of record-players.
We’ve never had this principle: in fact, we’ve always had just
the reverse. Think about all the things that can be plugged into
a parallel or serial interface, which were never envisioned by
their inventors. Our strong economy and rapid innovation are
byproducts of the ability of anyone to make anything that plugs
into anything else: from the Flo-bee electric razor that snaps
onto the end of your vacuum-hose to the octopus spilling out of
your car’s dashboard lighter socket, standard interfaces that
anyone can build for are what makes billionaires out of nerds.
The courts affirm this again and again. It used to be illegal to
plug anything that didn’t come from AT&T into your phone-jack.
They claimed that this was for the safety of the network, but
really it was about propping up this little penny-ante racket
that AT&T had in charging you a rental fee for your phone until
you’d paid for it a thousand times over.
When that ban was struck down, it created the market for
third-party phone equipment, from talking novelty phones to
answering machines to cordless handsets to headsets – billions
of dollars of economic activity that had been supressed by the
closed interface. Note that AT&T was one of the big beneficiaries
of this: they also got into the business of making phone-kit.
DRM is the software equivalent of these closed hardware
interfaces. Robert Scoble is a Softie who has an excellent blog,
where he wrote an essay about the best way to protect your
investment in the digital music you buy. Should you buy Apple
iTunes music, or Microsoft DRM music? Scoble argued that
Microsoft’s music was a sounder investment, because Microsoft
would have more downstream licensees for its proprietary format
and therefore you’d have a richer ecosystem of devices to choose
from when you were shopping for gizmos to play your virtual
records on.
What a weird idea: that we should evaluate our record-purchases
on the basis of which recording company will allow the greatest
diversity of record-players to play its discs! That’s like
telling someone to buy the Betamax instead of the Edison
Kinetoscope because Thomas Edison is a crank about licensing his
patents; all the while ignoring the world’s relentless march to
the more open VHS format.
It’s a bad business. DVD is a format where the guy who makes the
records gets to design the record players. Ask yourself: how much
innovation has there been over the past decade of DVD players?
They’ve gotten cheaper and smaller, but where are the weird and
amazing new markets for DVD that were opened up by the VCR?
There’s a company that’s manufacturing the world’s first
HDD-based DVD jukebox, a thing that holds 30 movies, and they’re
charging $30,000 for this thing. We’re talking about a $300
hard drive and a $300 PC – all that other cost is the cost of
anticompetition.
Continue...

This eText by Cory Doctorow from June 17, 2004, belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
