


Raise your hand if you’re thinking something like, “But DRM
doesn’t have to be proof against smart attackers, only average
individuals! It’s like a speedbump!”
Put your hand down.
This is a fallacy for two reasons: one technical, and one social.
They’re both bad for society, though.
Here’s the technical reason: I don’t need to be a cracker to
break your DRM. I only need to know how to search Google, or
Kazaa, or any of the other general-purpose search tools for the
cleartext that someone smarter than me has extracted.
Raise your hand if you’re thinking something like, “But NGSCB can
solve this problem: we’ll lock the secrets up on the logic board
and goop it all up with epoxy.”
Put your hand down.
Raise your hand if you’re a co-author of the Darknet paper.
Everyone in the first group, meet the co-authors of the Darknet
paper. This is a paper that says, among other things, that DRM
will fail for this very reason. Put your hands down, guys.
Here’s the social reason that DRM fails: keeping an honest user
honest is like keeping a tall user tall. DRM vendors tell us that
their technology is meant to be proof against average users, not
organized criminal gangs like the Ukranian pirates who stamp out
millions of high-quality counterfeits. It’s not meant to be proof
against sophisticated college kids. It’s not meant to be proof
against anyone who knows how to edit her registry, or hold down
the shift key at the right moment, or use a search engine. At the
end of the day, the user DRM is meant to defend against is the
most unsophisticated and least capable among us.
Here’s a true story about a user I know who was stopped by DRM.
She’s smart, college educated, and knows nothing about
electronics. She has three kids. She has a DVD in the living room
and an old VHS deck in the kids’ playroom. One day, she brought
home the Toy Story DVD for the kids. That’s a substantial
investment, and given the generally jam-smeared character of
everything the kids get their paws on, she decided to tape the
DVD off to VHS and give that to the kids – that way she could
make a fresh VHS copy when the first one went south. She cabled
her DVD into her VHS and pressed play on the DVD and record on
the VCR and waited.
Before I go farther, I want us all to stop a moment and marvel at
this. Here is someone who is practically technophobic, but who
was able to construct a mental model of sufficient accuracy that
she figured out that she could connect her cables in the right
order and dub her digital disc off to analog tape. I imagine that
everyone in this room is the front-line tech support for someone
in her or his family: wouldn’t it be great if all our non-geek
friends and relatives were this clever and imaginative?
I also want to point out that this is the proverbial honest user.
She’s not making a copy for the next door neighbors. She’s not
making a copy and selling it on a blanket on Canal Street. She’s
not ripping it to her hard-drive, DivX encoding it and putting it
in her Kazaa sharepoint. She’s doing something honest – moving
it from one format to another. She’s home taping.
Except she fails. There’s a DRM system called Macrovision
embedded – by law – in every DVD player and VHS that messes
with the vertical blanking interval in the signal and causes any
tape made in this fashion to fail. Macrovision can be defeated
for about $10 with a gadget readily available on eBay. But our
infringer doesn’t know that. She’s “honest.” Technically
unsophisticated. Not stupid, mind you – just naive.
The Darknet paper addresses this possibility: it even predicts
what this person will do in the long run: she’ll find out about
Kazaa and the next time she wants to get a movie for the kids,
she’ll download it from the net and burn it for them.
In order to delay that day for as long as possible, our lawmakers
and big rightsholder interests have come up with a disastrous
policy called anticircumvention.
Here’s how anticircumvention works: if you put a lock – an
access control – around a copyrighted work, it is illegal to
break that lock. It’s illegal to make a tool that breaks that
lock. It’s illegal to tell someone how to make that tool. It’s
illegal to tell someone where she can find out how to make that
tool.
Remember Schneier’s Law? Anyone can come up with a security
system so clever that he can’t see its flaws. The only way to
find the flaws in security is to disclose the system’s workings
and invite public feedback. But now we live in a world where any
cipher used to fence off a copyrighted work is off-limits to that
kind of feedback. That’s something that a Princeton engineering
prof named Ed Felten discovered when he submitted a paper to an
academic conference on the failings in the Secure Digital Music
Initiative, a watermarking scheme proposed by the recording
industry. The RIAA responded by threatening to sue his ass if he
tried it. We fought them because Ed is the kind of client that
impact litigators love: unimpeachable and clean-cut and the RIAA
folded. Lucky Ed. Maybe the next guy isn’t so lucky.
Matter of fact, the next guy wasn’t. Dmitry Skylarov is a Russian
programmer who gave a talk at a hacker con in Vegas on the
failings in Adobe’s e-book locks. The FBI threw him in the slam
for 30 days. He copped a plea, went home to Russia, and the
Russian equivalent of the State Department issued a blanket
warning to its researchers to stay away from American
conferences, since we’d apparently turned into the kind of
country where certain equations are illegal.
Anticircumvention is a powerful tool for people who want to
exclude competitors. If you claim that your car engine firmware
is a “copyrighted work,” you can sue anyone who makes a tool for
interfacing with it. That’s not just bad news for mechanics –
think of the hotrodders who want to chip their cars to tweak the
performance settings. We have companies like Lexmark claiming
that their printer cartridges contain copyrighted works –
software that trips an “I am empty” flag when the toner runs out,
and have sued a competitor who made a remanufactured cartridge
that reset the flag. Even garage-door opener companies have
gotten in on the act, claiming that their receivers’ firmware are
copyrighted works. Copyrighted cars, print carts and garage-door
openers: what’s next, copyrighted light-fixtures?
Even in the context of legitimate – excuse me, “traditional” –
copyrighted works like movies on DVDs, anticircumvention is bad
news. Copyright is a delicate balance. It gives creators and
their assignees some rights, but it also reserves some rights to
the public. For example, an author has no right to prohibit
anyone from transcoding his books into assistive formats for the
blind. More importantly, though, a creator has a very limited say
over what you can do once you lawfully acquire her works. If I
buy your book, your painting, or your DVD, it belongs to me. It’s
my property. Not my “intellectual property” – a whacky kind of
pseudo-property that’s swiss-cheesed with exceptions, easements
and limitations – but real, no-fooling, actual tangible
property – the kind of thing that courts have been managing
through tort law for centuries.
But anticirumvention lets rightsholders invent new and exciting
copyrights for themselves – to write private laws without
accountability or deliberation – that expropriate your interest
in your physical property to their favor. Region-coded DVDs are
an example of this: there’s no copyright here or in anywhere I
know of that says that an author should be able to control where
you enjoy her creative works, once you’ve paid for them. I can
buy a book and throw it in my bag and take it anywhere from
Toronto to Timbuktu, and read it wherever I am: I can even buy
books in America and bring them to the UK, where the author may
have an exclusive distribution deal with a local publisher who
sells them for double the US shelf-price. When I’m done with it,
I can sell it on or give it away in the UK. Copyright lawyers
call this “First Sale,” but it may be simpler to think of it as
“Capitalism.”
The keys to decrypt a DVD are controlled by an org called
DVD-CCA, and they have a bunch of licensing requirements for
anyone who gets a key from them. Among these is something called
region-coding: if you buy a DVD in France, it’ll have a flag set
that says, “I am a French DVD.” Bring that DVD to America and
your DVD player will compare the flag to its list of permitted
regions, and if they don’t match, it will tell you that it’s not
allowed to play your disc.
Remember: there is no copyright that says that an author gets to
do this. When we wrote the copyright statutes and granted authors
the right to control display, performance, duplication,
derivative works, and so forth, we didn’t leave out “geography"
by accident. That was on-purpose.
So when your French DVD won’t play in America, that’s not because
it’d be illegal to do so: it’s because the studios have invented
a business-model and then invented a copyright law to prop it up.
The DVD is your property and so is the DVD player, but if you
break the region-coding on your disc, you’re going to run afoul
of anticircumvention.
That’s what happened to Jon Johansen, a Norweigan teenager who
wanted to watch French DVDs on his Norweigan DVD player. He and
some pals wrote some code to break the CSS so that he could do
so. He’s a wanted man here in America; in Norway the studios put
the local fuzz up to bringing him up on charges of unlawfully
trespassing upon a computer system. When his defense asked,
“Which computer has Jon trespassed upon?” the answer was: “His
own.”
His no-fooling, real and physical property has been expropriated
by the weird, notional, metaphorical intellectual property on his
DVD: DRM only works if your record player becomes the property of
whomever’s records you’re playing.
Continue...

This eText by Cory Doctorow from June 17, 2004, belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
