


But what of the artist? The hardworking filmmaker, the
ink-stained scribbler, the heroin-cured leathery rock-star? We
poor slobs of the creative class are everyone’s favorite
poster-children here: the RIAA and MPAA hold us up and say,
“Won’t someone please think of the children?” File-sharers say,
“Yeah, we’re thinking about the artists, but the labels are The
Man, who cares what happens to you?”
To understand what DRM does to artists, you need to understand
how copyright and technology interact. Copyright is inherently
technological, since the things it addresses – copying,
transmitting, and so on – are inherently technological.
The piano roll was the first system for cheaply copying music. It
was invented at a time when the dominant form of entertainment in
America was getting a talented pianist to come into your living
room and pound out some tunes while you sang along. The music
industry consisted mostly of sheet-music publishers.
The player piano was a digital recording and playback system.
Piano-roll companies bought sheet music and ripped the notes
printed on it into 0s and 1s on a long roll of computer tape,
which they sold by the thousands – the hundreds of thousands –
the millions. They did this without a penny’s compensation to the
publishers. They were digital music pirates. Arrrr!
Predictably, the composers and music publishers went nutso. Sousa
showed up in Congress to say that:
	These talking machines are going to ruin the
	artistic development of music in this
	country. When I was a boy...in front of every
	house in the summer evenings, you would find
	young people together singing the songs of
	the day or old songs. Today you hear these
	infernal machines going night and day. We
	will not have a vocal chord left. The vocal
	chord will be eliminated by a process of
	evolution, as was the tail of man when he
	came from the ape.
The publishers asked Congress to ban the piano roll and to create
a law that said that any new system for reproducing music should
be subject to a veto from their industry association. Lucky for
us, Congress realized what side of their bread had butter on it
and decided not to criminalize the dominant form of entertainment
in America.
But there was the problem of paying artists. The Constitution
sets out the purpose of American copyright: to promote the useful
arts and sciences. The composers had a credible story that they’d
do less composing if they weren’t paid for it, so Congress needed
a fix. Here’s what they came up with: anyone who paid a music
publisher two cents would have the right to make one piano roll
of any song that publisher published. The publisher couldn’t say
no, and no one had to hire a lawyer at $200 an hour to argue
about whether the payment should be two cents or a nickel.
This compulsory license is still in place today: when Joe Cocker
sings “With a Little Help from My Friends,” he pays a fixed fee
to the Beatles’ publisher and away he goes – even if Ringo hates
the idea. If you ever wondered how Sid Vicious talked Anka into
letting him get a crack at “My Way,” well, now you know.
That compulsory license created a world where a thousand times
more money was made by a thousand times more creators who made a
thousand times more music that reached a thousand times more
people.
This story repeats itself throughout the technological century,
every ten or fifteen years. Radio was enabled by a voluntary
blanket license – the music companies got together and asked for
an antitrust exemption so that they could offer all their music
for a flat fee. Cable TV took a compulsory: the only way cable
operators could get their hands on broadcasts was to pirate them
and shove them down the wire, and Congress saw fit to legalize
this practice rather than screw around with their constituents’
TVs.
Sometimes, the courts and Congress decided to simply take away a
copyright – that’s what happened with the VCR. When Sony brought
out the VCR in 1976, the studios had already decided what the
experience of watching a movie in your living room would look
like: they’d licensed out their programming for use on a machine
called a Discovision, which played big LP-sized discs that
disintegrated after a few plays. Proto-DRM.
The copyright scholars of the day didn’t give the VCR very good
odds. Sony argued that their box allowed for a fair use, which is
defined as a use that a court rules is a defense against
infringement based on four factors: whether the use transforms
the work into something new, like a collage; whether it uses all
or some of the work; whether the work is artistic or mainly
factual; and whether the use undercuts the creator’s
business-model.
The Betamax failed on all four fronts: when you time-shifted or
duplicated a Hollywood movie off the air, you made a
non-transformative use of 100 percent of a creative work in a way
that directly undercut the Discovision licensing stream.
Jack Valenti, the mouthpiece for the motion-picture industry,
told Congress in 1982 that the VCR was to the American film
industry “as the Boston Strangler is to a woman home alone.”
But the Supreme Court ruled against Hollywood in 1984, when it
determined that any device capable of a substantial
non-infringing use was legal. In other words, “We don’t buy this
Boston Strangler business: if your business model can’t survive
the emergence of this general-purpose tool, it’s time to get
another business-model or go broke.”
Hollywood found another business model, as the broadcasters had,
as the Vaudeville artists had, as the music publishers had, and
they made more art that paid more artists and reached a wider
audience.
There’s one thing that every new art business-model had in
common: it embraced the medium it lived in.
This is the overweening characteristic of every single successful
new medium: it is true to itself. The Luther Bible didn’t
succeed on the axes that made a hand-copied monk Bible valuable:
they were ugly, they weren’t in Church Latin, they weren’t read
aloud by someone who could interpret it for his lay audience,
they didn’t represent years of devoted-with-a-capital-D labor by
someone who had given his life over to God. The thing that made
the Luther Bible a success was its scalability: it was more
popular because it was more proliferate: all success factors for
a new medium pale beside its profligacy. The most successful
organisms on earth are those that reproduce the most: bugs and
bacteria, nematodes and virii. Reproduction is the best of all
survival strategies.
Piano rolls didn’t sound as good as the music of a skilled
pianist: but they scaled better. Radio lacked the social
elements of live performance, but more people could build a
crystal set and get it aimed correctly than could pack into even
the largest Vaudeville house. MP3s don’t come with liner notes,
they aren’t sold to you by a hipper-than-thou record store clerk
who can help you make your choice, bad rips and truncated files
abound: I once downloaded a twelve-second copy of “Hey Jude” from
the original Napster. Yet MP3 is outcompeting the CD. I don’t
know what to do with CDs anymore: I get them, and they’re like
the especially garment bag they give you at the fancy suit shop:
it’s nice and you feel like a goof for throwing it out, but
Christ, how many of these things can you usefully own? I can put
ten thousand songs on my laptop, but a comparable pile of discs,
with liner notes and so forth – that’s a liability: it’s a piece
of my monthly storage-locker costs.
Here are the two most important things to know about computers
and the Internet:
1. A computer is a machine for rearranging bits
2. The Internet is a machine for moving bits from one place to
another very cheaply and quickly
Any new medium that takes hold on the Internet and with computers
will embrace these two facts, not regret them. A newspaper press
is a machine for spitting out cheap and smeary newsprint at
speed: if you try to make it output fine art lithos, you’ll get
junk. If you try to make it output newspapers, you’ll get the
basis for a free society.
And so it is with the Internet. At the heyday of Napster, record
execs used to show up at conferences and tell everyone that
Napster was doomed because no one wanted lossily compressed MP3s
with no liner notes and truncated files and misspelled metadata.
Today we hear ebook publishers tell each other and anyone who’ll
listen that the barrier to ebooks is screen resolution. It’s
bollocks, and so is the whole sermonette about how nice a book
looks on your bookcase and how nice it smells and how easy it is
to slip into the tub. These are obvious and untrue things, like
the idea that radio will catch on once they figure out how to
sell you hotdogs during the intermission, or that movies will
really hit their stride when we can figure out how to bring the
actors out for an encore when the film’s run out. Or that what
the Protestant Reformation really needs is Luther Bibles with
facsimile illumination in the margin and a rent-a-priest to read
aloud from your personal Word of God.
New media don’t succeed because they’re like the old media, only
better: they succeed because they’re worse than the old media at
the stuff the old media is good at, and better at the stuff the
old media are bad at. Books are good at being paperwhite,
high-resolution, low-infrastructure, cheap and disposable. Ebooks
are good at being everywhere in the world at the same time for
free in a form that is so malleable that you can just pastebomb
it into your IM session or turn it into a page-a-day mailing
list.
The only really successful epublishing – I mean, hundreds of
thousands, millions of copies distributed and read – is the
bookwarez scene, where scanned-and-OCR’d books are distributed on
the darknet. The only legit publishers with any success at
epublishing are the ones whose books cross the Internet without
technological fetter: publishers like Baen Books and my own, Tor,
who are making some or all of their catalogs available in ASCII
and HTML and PDF.
The hardware-dependent ebooks, the DRM use-and-copy-restricted
ebooks, they’re cratering. Sales measured in the tens, sometimes
the hundreds. Science fiction is a niche business, but when
you’re selling copies by the ten, that’s not even a business,
it’s a hobby.
Every one of you has been riding a curve where you read more and
more words off of more and more screens every day through most of
your professional careers. It’s zero-sum: you’ve also been
reading fewer words off of fewer pages as time went by: the
dinosauric executive who prints his email and dictates a reply to
his secretary is info-roadkill.
Today, at this very second, people read words off of screens for
every hour that they can find. Your kids stare at their Game Boys
until their eyes fall out. Euroteens ring doorbells with their
hypertrophied, SMS-twitching thumbs instead of their index
fingers.
Paper books are the packaging that books come in. Cheap
printer-binderies like the Internet Bookmobile that can produce a
full bleed, four color, glossy cover, printed spine,
perfect-bound book in ten minutes for a dollar are the future of
paper books: when you need an instance of a paper book, you
generate one, or part of one, and pitch it out when you’re done.
I landed at SEA-TAC on Monday and burned a couple CDs from my
music collection to listen to in the rental car. When I drop the
car off, I’ll leave them behind. Who needs ’em?
Whenever a new technology has disrupted copyright, we’ve changed
copyright. Copyright isn’t an ethical proposition, it’s a
utilitarian one. There’s nothing moral about paying a composer
tuppence for the piano-roll rights, there’s nothing immoral
about not paying Hollywood for the right to videotape a movie off
your TV. They’re just the best way of balancing out so that
people’s physical property rights in their VCRs and phonographs
are respected and so that creators get enough of a dangling
carrot to go on making shows and music and books and paintings.
Technology that disrupts copyright does so because it simplifies
and cheapens creation, reproduction and distribution. The
existing copyright businesses exploit inefficiencies in the old
production, reproduction and distribution system, and they’ll be
weakened by the new technology. But new technology always gives
us more art with a wider reach: that’s what tech is for.
Tech gives us bigger pies that more artists can get a bite out
of. That’s been tacitly acknowledged at every stage of the
copyfight since the piano roll. When copyright and technology
collide, it’s copyright that changes.
Which means that today’s copyright – the thing that DRM
nominally props up – didn’t come down off the mountain on two
stone tablets. It was created in living memory to accommodate the
technical reality created by the inventors of the previous
generation. To abandon invention now robs tomorrow’s artists of
the new businesses and new reach and new audiences that the
Internet and the PC can give them.
Continue...

This eText by Cory Doctorow from June 17, 2004, belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
