


When Sony brought out the VCR, it made a record player that could
play Hollywood’s records, even if Hollywood didn’t like the idea.
The industries that grew up on the back of the VCR – movie
rentals, home taping, camcorders, even Bar Mitzvah videographers
– made billions for Sony and its cohort.
That was good business – even if Sony lost the Betamax-VHS
format wars, the money on the world-with-VCRs table was enough to
make up for it.
But then Sony acquired a relatively tiny entertainment company
and it started to massively screw up. When MP3 rolled around and
Sony’s walkman customers were clamoring for a solid-state MP3
player, Sony let its music business-unit run its show: instead of
making a high-capacity MP3 walkman, Sony shipped its Music Clips,
low-capacity devices that played brain-damaged DRM formats like
Real and OpenMG. They spent good money engineering “features"
into these devices that kept their customers from freely moving
their music back and forth between their devices. Customers
stayed away in droves.
Today, Sony is dead in the water when it comes to walkmen. The
market leaders are poky Singaporean outfits like Creative Labs –
the kind of company that Sony used to crush like a bug, back
before it got borged by its entertainment unit – and PC
companies like Apple.
That’s because Sony shipped a product that there was no market
demand for. No Sony customer woke up one morning and said, “Damn,
I wish Sony would devote some expensive engineering effort in
order that I may do less with my music.” Presented with an
alternative, Sony’s customers enthusiastically jumped ship.
The same thing happened to a lot of people I know who used to rip
their CDs to WMA. You guys sold them software that produced
smaller, better-sounding rips that the MP3 rippers, but you also
fixed it so that the songs you ripped were device-locked to their
PCs. What that meant is that when they backed up their music to
another hard-drive and reinstalled their OS (something that the
spyware and malware wars has made more common than ever), they
discovered that after they restored their music that they could
no longer play it. The player saw the new OS as a different
machine, and locked them out of their own music.
There is no market demand for this “feature.” None of your
customers want you to make expensive modifications to your
products that make backing up and restoring even harder. And
there is no moment when your customers will be less forgiving
than the moment that they are recovering from catastrophic
technology failures.
I speak from experience. Because I buy a new Powerbook every ten
months, and because I always order the new models the day they’re
announced, I get a lot of lemons from Apple. That means that I
hit Apple’s three-iTunes-authorized-computers limit pretty early
on and found myself unable to play the hundreds of dollars’ worth
of iTunes songs I’d bought because one of my authorized machines
was a lemon that Apple had broken up for parts, one was in the
shop getting fixed by Apple, and one was my mom’s computer, 3,000
miles away in Toronto.
If I had been a less good customer for Apple’s hardware, I would
have been fine. If I had been a less enthusiastic evangelist for
Apple’s products – if I hadn’t shown my mom how iTunes Music
Store worked – I would have been fine. If I hadn’t bought so
much iTunes music that burning it to CD and re-ripping it and
re-keying all my metadata was too daunting a task to consider, I
would have been fine.
As it was Apple rewarded my trust, evangelism and out-of-control
spending by treating me like a crook and locking me out of my own
music, at a time when my Powerbook was in the shop – i.e., at a
time when I was hardly disposed to feel charitable to Apple.
I’m an edge case here, but I’m a leading edge case. If Apple
succeeds in its business plans, it will only be a matter of time
until even average customers have upgraded enough hardware and
bought enough music to end up where I am.
You know what I would totally buy? A record player that let me
play everybody’s records. Right now, the closest I can come to
that is an open source app called VLC, but it’s clunky and buggy
and it didn’t come pre-installed on my computer.
Sony didn’t make a Betamax that only played the movies that
Hollywood was willing to permit – Hollywood asked them to do it,
they proposed an early, analog broadcast flag that VCRs could
hunt for and respond to by disabling recording. Sony ignored them
and made the product they thought their customers wanted.
I’m a Microsoft customer. Like millions of other Microsoft
customers, I want a player that plays anything I throw at it, and
I think that you are just the company to give it to me.
Yes, this would violate copyright law as it stands, but Microsoft
has been making tools of piracy that change copyright law for
decades now. Outlook, Exchange and MSN are tools that abet
widescale digital infringement.
More significantly, IIS and your caching proxies all make and
serve copies of documents without their authors’ consent,
something that, if it is legal today, is only legal because
companies like Microsoft went ahead and did it and dared
lawmakers to prosecute.
Microsoft stood up for its customers and for progress, and won so
decisively that most people never even realized that there was a
fight.
Do it again! This is a company that looks the world’s roughest,
toughest anti-trust regulators in the eye and laughs. Compared to
anti-trust people, copyright lawmakers are pantywaists. You can
take them with your arm behind your back.
In Siva Vaidhyanathan’s book The Anarchist in the Library, he
talks about why the studios are so blind to their customers’
desires. It’s because people like you and me spent the 80s and
the 90s telling them bad science fiction stories about impossible
DRM technology that would let them charge a small sum of money
every time someone looked at a movie – want to fast-forward?
That feature costs another penny. Pausing is two cents an hour.
The mute button will cost you a quarter.
When Mako Analysis issued their report last month advising phone
companies to stop supporting Symbian phones, they were just
writing the latest installment in this story. Mako says that
phones like my P900, which can play MP3s as ringtones, are bad
for the cellphone economy, because it’ll put the extortionate
ringtone sellers out of business. What Mako is saying is that
just because you bought the CD doesn’t mean that you should
expect to have the ability to listen to it on your MP3 player,
and just because it plays on your MP3 player is no reason to
expect it to run as a ringtone. I wonder how they feel about
alarm clocks that will play a CD to wake you up in the morning?
Is that strangling the nascent “alarm tone” market?
The phone companies’ customers want Symbian phones and for now,
at least, the phone companies understand that if they don’t sell
them, someone else will.
The market opportunity for a truly capable devices is enormous.
There’s a company out there charging $30,000 for a $600 DVD
jukebox – go and eat their lunch! Steve Jobs isn’t going to do
it: he’s off at the D conference telling studio execs not to
release hi-def movies until they’re sure no one will make a
hi-def DVD burner that works with a PC.
Maybe they won’t buy into his BS, but they’re also not much
interested in what you have to sell. At the Broadcast Protection
Discussion Group meetings where the Broadcast Flag was hammered
out, the studios’ position was, “We’ll take anyone’s DRM except
Microsoft’s and Philips’.” When I met with UK broadcast wonks
about the European version of the Broadcast Flag underway at the
Digital Video Broadcasters’ forum, they told me, “Well, it’s
different in Europe: mostly they’re worried that some American
company like Microsoft will get their claws into European
television.”
American film studios didn’t want the Japanese electronics
companies to get a piece of the movie pie, so they fought the
VCR. Today, everyone who makes movies agrees that they don’t want
to let you guys get between them and their customers.
Sony didn’t get permission. Neither should you. Go build the
record player that can play everyone’s records.
Because if you don’t do it, someone else will.
Continue...

This eText by Cory Doctorow from June 17, 2004, belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
