




[90] TITIAN, as we see him in what some have thought his noblest
work, the large altar-piece, dated 1522, his forty-fifth year, of SS.
Nazaro e Celso, at Brescia, is certainly a religious–a great,
religious painter.  The famous Gabriel of the Annunciation, aflight,
in all the effortless energy of an angel indeed, and Sebastian,
adapted, it was said, from an ancient statue, yet as novel in design
as if Titian had been the first to handle that so familiar figure in
old religious art–may represent for us a vast and varied amount of
work–in which he expands to their utmost artistic compass the
earlier religious dreams of Mantegna and the Bellini, affording
sufficient proof how sacred themes could rouse his imagination, and
all his manual skill, to heroic efforts.  But he is also the painter
of the Venus of the Tribune and the Triumph of Bacchus; and such
frank acceptance of the voluptuous paganism of the Renaissance, the
motive of a large proportion of his work, [91] might make us think
that religion, grandly dramatic as was his conception of it, can have
been for him only one of many pictorial attitudes.  There are however
painters of that date who, while their work is great enough to be
connected (perhaps groundlessly) with Titian’s personal influence, or
directly attributed to his hand, possess at least this psychological
interest, that about their religiousness there can be no question.
Their work is to be looked for mainly in and about the two sub-alpine
towns of Brescia and Bergamo; in the former of which it becomes
definable as a school–the school of Moretto, in whom the perfected
art of the later Renaissance is to be seen in union with a
catholicism as convinced, towards the middle of the sixteenth
century, as that of Giotto or Angelico.
Moretto of Brescia, for instance, is one of the few painters who have
fully understood the artistic opportunities of the subject of Saint
Paul, for whom, for the most part, art has found only the
conventional trappings of a Roman soldier (a soldier, as being in
charge of those prisoners to Damascus), or a somewhat commonplace old
age.  Moretto also makes him a nobly accoutred soldier–the rim of
the helmet, thrown backward in his fall to the earth, rings the head
already with a faint circle of glory–but a soldier still in
possession of all those resources of unspoiled youth which he is
ready to offer in a [92] moment to the truth that has just dawned
visibly upon him.  The terrified horse, very grandly designed, leaps
high against the suddenly darkened sky above the distant horizon of
Damascus, with all Moretto’s peculiar understanding of the power of
black and white.  But what signs the picture inalienably as Moretto’s
own is the thought of the saint himself, at the moment of his
recovery from the stroke of Heaven.  The pure, pale, beardless face,
in noble profile, might have had for its immediate model some
military monk of a later age, yet it breathes all the joy and
confidence of the Apostle who knows in a single flash of time that he
has found the veritable captain of his soul.  It is indeed the Paul
whose genius of conviction has so greatly moved the minds of men–the
soldier who, bringing his prisoners “bound to Damascus,” is become
the soldier of Jesus Christ.
Moretto’s picture has found its place (in a dark recess, alas!) in
the Church of Santa Maria presso San Celso, in the suburbs of Milan,
hard by the site of the old Roman cemetery, where Ambrose, at a
moment when in one of his many conflicts a “sign” was needed, found
the bodies of Nazarus and Celsus, youthful patrician martyrs in the
reign of Nero, overflowing now with miraculous powers, their blood
still fresh upon them–conspersa recenti sanguine.  The body of Saint
Nazarus he removed into the city: that of Saint Celsus remained
within the little sanctuary [93] which still bears his name, and
beside which, in the fifteenth century, arose the glorious Church of
the Madonna, with spacious atrium after the Ambrosian manner, a
facade richly sculptured in the style of the Renaissance, and
sumptuously adorned within.  Behind the massive silver tabernacle of
the altar of the miraculous picture which gave its origin to this
splendid building, the rare visitor, peeping as into some sacred
bird-nest, detects one of the loveliest works of Luini, a small, but
exquisitely finished “Holy Family.”  Among the fine pictures around
are works by two other very notable religious painters of the cinque-
cento.  Both alike, Ferrari and Borgognone, may seem to have
introduced into fiery Italian latitudes a certain northern
temperature, and somewhat twilight, French, or Flemish, or German,
thoughts.  Ferrari, coming from the neighbourhood of Varallo, after
work at Vercelli and Novara, returns thither to labour, as both
sculptor and painter, in the “stations” of the Sacro Monte, at a form
of religious art which would seem to have some natural kinship with
the temper of a mountain people.  It is as if the living actors in
the “Passion Play” of Oberammergau had been transformed into almost
illusive groups in painted terra-cotta.  The scenes of the Last
Supper, of the Martyrdom of the Innocents, of the Raising of Jairus’
daughter, for instance, are certainly touching in the naive piety of
their life-sized realism.  But Gaudenzio Ferrari had many [94]
helpmates at the Sacro Monte; and his lovelier work is in the
Franciscan Church at the foot of the hill, and in those two, truly
Italian, far-off towns of the Lombard plain.  Even in his great,
many-storied fresco in the Franciscan Church at Varallo there are
traces of a somewhat barbaric hankering after solid form; the armour
of the Roman soldiers, for example, is raised and gilt.  It is as if
this serious soul, going back to his mountain home, had lapsed again
into mountain “grotesque,” with touches also, in truth, of a
peculiarly northern poetry–a mystic poetry, which now and again, in
his treatment, for instance, of angel forms and faces, reminds one of
Blake.  There is something of it certainly in the little white
spectral soul of the penitent thief making its escape from the
dishonoured body along the beam of his cross.
The contrast is a vigorous one when, in the space of a few hours, the
traveller finds himself at Vercelli, half-stifled in its thick
pressing crop of pumpkins and mulberry trees.  The expression of the
prophet occurs to him: “A lodge in a garden of cucumbers.”  Garden of
cucumbers and half-tropical flowers, it has invaded the quiet open
spaces of the town.  Search through them, through the almost
cloistral streets, for the Church of the Umiliati; and there, amid
the soft garden-shadows of the choir, you may find the sentiment of
the neighbourhood expressed with great refinement in what is perhaps
[95] the masterpiece of Ferrari, “Our Lady of the Fruit-garden,” as
we might say–attended by twelve life-sized saints and the monkish
donors of the picture.  The remarkable proportions of the tall panel,
up which the green-stuff is climbing thickly above the mitres and
sacred garniture of those sacred personages, lend themselves
harmoniously to the gigantic stature of Saint Christopher in the
foreground as the patron saint of the church.  With the savour of
this picture in his memory, the visitor will look eagerly in some
half-dozen neighbouring churches and deserted conventual places for
certain other works from Ferrari’s hand; and so, leaving the place
under the influence of his delicate religious ideal, may seem to have
been listening to much exquisite church-music there, violins and the
like, on that perfectly silent afternoon–such music as he may still
really hear on Sundays at the neighbouring town of Novara, famed for
it from of old.  Here, again, the art of Gaudenzio Ferrari reigns.
Gaudenzio!  It is the name of the saintly prelate on whom his pencil
was many times employed, First Bishop of Novara, and patron of the
magnificent basilica hard by which still covers his body, whose
earthly presence in cope and mitre Ferrari has commemorated in the
altar-piece of the “Marriage of St. Catherine,” with its refined
richness of colour, like a bank of real flowers blooming there, and
like nothing else around it in the [96] vast duomo of old Roman
architecture, now heavily masked in modern stucco.  The solemn
mountains, under the closer shadow of which his genius put on a
northern hue, are far away, telling at Novara only as the grandly
theatrical background to an entirely lowland life.  And here, as at
Vercelli so at Novara, Ferrari is not less graciously Italian than
Luini himself.
If the name of Luini’s master, Borgognone, is no proof of northern
extraction, a northern temper is nevertheless a marked element of his
genius–something of the patience, especially, of the masters of
Dijon or Bruges, nowhere more clearly than in the two groups of male
and female heads in the National Gallery, family groups, painted in
the attitude of worship, with a lowly religious sincerity which may
remind us of the contemporary work of M. Legros.  Like those northern
masters, he accepts piously, but can refine, what “has no
comeliness.”  And yet perhaps no painter has so adequately presented
that purely personal beauty (for which, indeed, even profane painters
for the most part have seemed to care very little) as Borgognone in
the two deacons, Stephen and Laurence, who, in one of the altar-
pieces of the Certosa, assist at the throne of Syrus, ancient,
sainted, First Bishop of Pavia–stately youths in quite imperial
dalmatics of black and gold.  An indefatigable worker at many forms
of religious art, here and elsewhere, assisting at last in the [97]
carving and inlaying of the rich marble facade of the Certosa, the
rich carved and inlaid wood-work of Santa Maria at Bergamo, he is
seen perhaps at his best, certainly in his most significantly
religious mood, in the Church of the Incoronata at Lodi, especially
in one picture there, the “Presentation of Christ in the Temple."
The experienced visitor knows what to expect in the sacristies of the
great Italian churches; the smaller, choicer works of Luini, say, of
Della Robbia or Mino of Fiesole, the superb ambries and drawers and
presses of old oak or cedar, the still untouched morsel of fresco–
like sacred priestly thoughts visibly lingering there in the half-
light.  Well! the little octagonal Church of the Incoronata is like
one of these sacristies.  The work of Bramante–you see it, as it is
so rarely one’s luck to do, with its furniture and internal
decoration complete and unchanged, the coloured pavement, the
colouring which covers the walls, the elegant little organ of
Domenico da Lucca (1507), the altar-screens with their dainty rows of
brass cherubs.  In Borgognone’s picture of the “Presentation,” there
the place is, essentially as we see it to-day.  The ceremony,
invested with all the sentiment of a Christian sacrament, takes place
in this very church, this “Temple” of the Incoronata where you are
standing, reflected on the dimly glorious wall, as in a mirror.
Borgognone in his picture has [98] but added in long legend, letter
by letter, on the fascia below the cupola, the Song of Simeon.
The Incoronata however is, after all, the monument less of Ambrogio
Borgognone than of the gifted Piazza family:–Callisto, himself born
at Lodi, his father, his uncle, his brothers, his son Fulvio, working
there in three generations, under marked religious influence, and
with so much power and grace that, quite gratuitously, portions of
their work have been attributed to the master-hand of Titian, in some
imaginary visit here to these painters, who were in truth the
disciples of another–Romanino of Brescia.  At Lodi, the lustre of
Scipione Piazza is lost in that of Callisto, his elder brother; but
he might worthily be included in a list of painters memorable for a
single picture, such pictures as the solemn Madonna of Pierino del
Vaga, in the Duomo of Pisa, or the Holy Family of Pellegrino Piola,
in the Goldsmiths’ Street at Genoa.  A single picture, a single
figure in a picture, signed and dated, over the altar of Saint
Clement, in the Church of San Spirito, at Bergamo, might preserve the
fame of Scipione Piazza, who did not live to be old.  The figure is
that of the youthful Clement of Rome himself, “who had seen the
blessed Apostles,” writing at the dictation of Saint Paul.  For a
moment he looks away from the letters of the book with all the
wistful intelligence of a boy softly touched already by the radiancy
of the [99] celestial Wisdom.  “Her ways are ways of pleasantness!"
That is the lesson this winsome, docile, spotless creature–ingenui
vultus puer ingenuique pudoris–younger brother or cousin of
Borgognone’s noble deacons at the Certosa–seems put there to teach
us.  And in this church, indeed, as it happens, Scipione’s work is
side by side with work of his.
It is here, in fact, at Bergamo and at Brescia, that the late
survival of a really convinced religious spirit becomes a striking
fact in the history of Italian art.  Vercelli and Novara, though
famous for their mountain neighbourhood, enjoy but a distant and
occasional view of Monte Rosa and its companions; and even then those
awful stairways to tracts of airy sunlight may seem hardly real.  But
the beauty of the twin sub-alpine towns further eastward is shaped by
the circumstance that mountain and plain meet almost in their
streets, very effectively for all purposes of the picturesque.
Brescia, immediately below the “Falcon of Lombardy” (so they called
its masterful fortress on the last ledge of the Pie di Monte), to
which you may now ascend by gentle turfed paths, to watch the purple
mystery of evening mount gradually from the great plain up the
mountain-walls close at hand, is as level as a church pavement, home-
like, with a kind of easy walking from point to point about it, rare
in Italian towns–a town full of walled gardens, giving even to [100]
its smaller habitations the retirement of their more sumptuous
neighbours, and a certain English air.  You may peep into them,
pacing its broad streets, from the blaze of which you are glad to
escape into the dim and sometimes gloomy churches, the twilight
sacristies, rich with carved and coloured woodwork.  The art of
Romanino still lights up one of the darkest of those churches with
the altar-piece which is perhaps his most expressive and noblest
work.  The veritable blue sky itself seems to be breaking into the
dark-cornered, low-vaulted, Gothic sanctuary of the Barefoot
Brethren, around the Virgin and Child, the bowed, adoring figures of
Bonaventura, Saint Francis, Saint Antony, the youthful majesty of
Saint Louis, to keep for ever in memory–not the King of France
however, in spite of the fleurs-de-lys on his cope of azure, but
Louis, Bishop of Toulouse.  A Rubens in Italy! you may think, if you
care to rove from the delightful fact before you after vague
supposititious alliances–something between Titian and Rubens!
Certainly, Romanino’s bold, contrasted colouring anticipates
something of the northern freshness of Rubens.  But while the
peculiarity of the work of Rubens is a sense of momentary transition,
as if the colours were even now melting in it, Romanino’s canvas
bears rather the steady glory of broad Italian noonday; while he is
distinguished also for a remarkable clearness of [101] design, which
has perhaps something to do, is certainly congruous with, a markedly
religious sentiment, like that of Angelico or Perugino, lingering
still in the soul of this Brescian painter towards the middle of the
sixteenth century.
Romanino and Moretto, the two great masters of Brescia in successive
generations, both alike inspired above all else by the majesty, the
majestic beauty, of religion–its persons, its events, every
circumstance that belongs to it–are to be seen in friendly rivalry,
though with ten years’ difference of age between them, in the Church
of San Giovanni Evangelista; Romanino approaching there, as near as
he might, in a certain candle-lighted scene, to that harmony in
black, white, and grey preferred by the younger painter.  Before this
or that example of Moretto’s work, in that admirably composed picture
of Saint Paul’s Conversion, for instance, you might think of him as
but a very noble designer in grisaille.  A more detailed study would
convince you that, whatever its component elements, there is a very
complex tone which almost exclusively belongs to him; the “Saint
Ursula” finally, that he is a great, though very peculiar colourist–
a lord of colour who, while he knows the colour resources that may
lie even in black and white, has really included every delicate hue
whatever in that faded “silver grey,” which yet lingers in one’s
memory as their final effect.  For some admirers indeed he is
definable [102] as a kind of really sanctified Titian.  It must be
admitted, however, that whereas Titian sometimes lost a little of
himself in the greatness of his designs, or committed their
execution, in part, to others, Moretto, in his work, is always all
there–thorough, steady, even, in his workmanship.  That, again, was
a result of his late-surviving religious conscience.  And here, as in
other instances, the supposed influence of the greater master is only
a supposition.  As a matter of fact, at least in his earlier life,
Moretto made no visit to Venice; developed his genius at home, under
such conditions for development as were afforded by the example of
the earlier masters of Brescia itself; left his work there
abundantly, and almost there alone, as the thoroughly representative
product of a charming place.  In the little Church of San Clemente he
is still “at home” to his lovers; an intimately religious artist,
full of cheerfulness, of joy.  Upon the airy galleries of his great
altar-piece, the angels dance against the sky above the Mother and
the Child; Saint Clement, patron of the church, being attendant in
pontifical white, with Dominic, Catherine, the Magdalen, and good,
big-faced Saint Florian in complete armour, benign and strong.  He
knows many a saint not in the Roman breviary.  Was there a single
sweet-sounding name without its martyr patron?  Lucia, Agnes, Agatha,
Barbara, Cecilia–holy women, dignified, high-bred, intelligent–
[103] have an altar of their own; and here, as in that festal high
altar-piece, the spectator may note yet another artistic alliance,
something of the pale effulgence of Correggio–an approach, at least,
to that peculiar treatment of light and shade, and a pre-occupation
with certain tricks therein of nature itself, by which Correggio
touches Rembrandt on the one hand, Da Vinci on the other.  Here, in
Moretto’s work, you may think that manner more delightful, perhaps
because more refined, than in Correggio himself.  Those pensive,
tarnished, silver side-lights, like mere reflexions of natural
sunshine, may be noticed indeed in many another painter of that day,
in Lanini, for instance, at the National Gallery.  In his “Nativity"
at the Brera, Procaccini of Verona almost anticipates Correggio’s
Heilige Nacht.  It is, in truth, the first step in the decomposition
of light, a touch of decadence, of sunset, along the whole horizon of
North-Italian art.  It is, however, as the painter of the white-
stoled Ursula and her companions that the great master of Brescia is
most likely to remain in the memory of the visitor; with this fact,
above all, clearly impressed on it, that Moretto had attained full
intelligence of all the pictorial powers of white.  In the clearness,
the cleanliness, the hieratic distinction, of this earnest and
deeply-felt composition, there is something “pre-Raphaelite"; as also
in a certain liturgical formality in the grouping of the virgins–the
[104] looks, “all one way,” of the closely-ranged faces; while in the
long folds of the drapery we may see something of the severe grace of
early Tuscan sculpture–something of severity in the long, thin,
emphatic shadows.  For the light is high, as with the level lights of
early morning, the air of which ruffles the banners borne by Ursula
in her two hands, her virgin companions laying their hands also upon
the tall staves, as if taking share, with a good will, in her self-
dedication, with all the hazard of battle.  They bring us,
appropriately, close to the grave of this manly yet so virginal
painter, born in the year 1500, dead at forty-seven.
Of Moretto and Romanino, whose works thus light up, or refine, the
dark churches of Brescia and its neighbourhood, Romanino is scarcely
to be seen beyond it.  The National Gallery, however, is rich in
Moretto’s work, with two of his rare poetic portraits; and if the
large altar-picture would hardly tell his secret to one who had not
studied him at Brescia, in those who already know him it will awake
many a reminiscence of his art at its best.  The three white mitres,
for instance, grandly painted towards the centre of the picture, at
the feet of Saint Bernardino of Siena–the three bishoprics refused
by that lowly saint–may remind one of the great white mitre which,
in the genial picture of Saint Nicholas, in the Miracoli at Brescia,
one of the children, who as delightfully+ [105] unconventional
acolytes accompany their beloved patron into the presence of the
Madonna, carries along so willingly, laughing almost, with pleasure
and pride, at his part in so great a function.  In the altar-piece at
the National Gallery those white mitres form the key-note from which
the pale, cloistral splendours of the whole picture radiate.  You see
what a wealth of enjoyable colour Moretto, for one, can bring out of
monkish habits in themselves sad enough, and receive a new lesson in
the artistic value of reserve.
Rarer still (the single work of Romanino, it is said, to be seen out
of Italy) is the elaborate composition in five parts on the opposite
side of the doorway.  Painted for the high-altar of one of the many
churches of Brescia, it seems to have passed into secular hands about
a century ago.  Alessandro, patron of the church, one of the many
youthful patrician converts Italy reveres from the ranks of the Roman
army, stands there on one side, with ample crimson banner superbly
furled about his lustrous black armour, and on the other–Saint
Jerome, Romanino’s own namesake–neither more nor less than the
familiar, self-tormenting anchorite; for few painters (Bellini, to
some degree, in his picture of the saint’s study) have perceived the
rare pictorial opportunities of Jerome; Jerome with the true cradle
of the Lord, first of Christian antiquaries, author of the fragrant
Vulgate version of the [106] Scriptures.  Alessandro and Jerome
support the Mother and the Child in the central place.  But the
loveliest subjects of this fine group of compositions are in the
corners above, half-length, life-sized figures–Gaudioso, Bishop of
Brescia, above Saint Jerome; above Alessandro, Saint Filippo Benizzi,
meek founder of the Order of Servites to which that church at Brescia
belonged, with his lily, and in the right hand a book; and what a
book!  It was another very different painter, Giuseppe Caletti, of
Cremona, who, for the truth and beauty of his drawing of them, gained
the title of the “Painter of Books.”  But if you wish to see what can
be made of the leaves, the vellum cover, of a book, observe that in
Saint Philip’s hand.–The writer? the contents? you ask: What may
they be? and whence did it come?–out of embalmed sacristy, or
antique coffin of some early Brescian martyr, or, through that bright
space of blue Italian sky, from the hands of an angel, like his
Annunciation lily, or the book received in the Apocalypse by John the
Divine?  It is one of those old saints, Gaudioso (at home in every
church in Brescia), who looks out with full face from the opposite
corner of the altar-piece, from a background which, though it might
be the new heaven over a new earth, is in truth only the proper,
breathable air of Italy.  As we see him here, Saint Gaudioso is one
of the more exquisite treasures of our National Gallery.  It was thus
that at the magic [107] touch of Romanino’s art the dim, early,
hunted-down Brescian church of the primitive centuries, crushed into
the dust, it might seem, was “brought to her king,” out of those old
dark crypts, “in raiment of needle-work"–the delicate, richly
folded, pontifical white vestments, the mitre and staff and gloves,
and rich jewelled cope, blue or green.  The face, of remarkable
beauty after a type which all feel though it is actually rare in art,
is probably a portrait of some distinguished churchman of Romanino’s
own day; a second Gaudioso, perhaps, setting that later Brescian
church to rights after the terrible French occupation in the
painter’s own time, as his saintly predecessor, the Gaudioso of the
earlier century here commemorated, had done after the invasion of the
Goths.  The eloquent eyes are open upon some glorious vision.  “He
hath made us kings and priests!” they seem to say for him, as the
clean, sensitive lips might do so eloquently.  Beauty and Holiness
had “kissed each other,” as in Borgognone’s imperial deacons at the
Certosa.  At the Renaissance the world might seem to have parted them
again.  But here certainly, once more, Catholicism and the
Renaissance, religion and culture, holiness and beauty, might seem
reconciled, by one who had conceived neither after any feeble way, in
a gifted person.  Here at least, by the skill of Romanino’s hand, the
obscure martyr of the crypts shines as a [108] saint of the later
Renaissance, with a sanctity of which the elegant world itself would
hardly escape the fascination, and which reminds one how the great
Apostle Saint Paul has made courtesy part of the content of the
Divine charity itself.  A Rubens in Italy!–so Romanino has been
called.  In this gracious presence we might think that, like Rubens
also, he had been a courtier.
90. *Published in the New Review, Nov. 1890, and now reprinted by the
kind permission of the proprietors.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of Essays” by Walter Horatio Pater.


Also by this author (on Amazon.com); The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of EssaysBy Walter Horatio PaterAt Amazon
