




[62] ABOUT the middle of the seventeenth century, two opposite views
of a question, upon which neither Scripture, nor Council, nor Pope,
had spoken with authority–the question as to the amount of freedom
left to man by the overpowering work of divine grace upon him–had
seemed likely for a moment to divide the Roman Church into two rival
sects.  In the diocese of Paris, however, the controversy narrowed
itself into a mere personal quarrel between the Jesuit Fathers and
the religious community of Port-Royal, and might have been forgotten
but for the intervention of a new writer in whom French literature
made more than a new step.  It became at once, as if by a new
creation, what it has remained–a pattern of absolutely unencumbered
expressiveness.
In 1656 Pascal, then thirty-three years old, under the form of
“Letters to a Provincial by one of his Friends,” put forth a series
of [63] pamphlets in which all that was vulnerable in the Jesuit
Fathers was laid bare to the profit of their opponents.  At the
moment the quarrel turned on the proposed censure of Antoine Arnauld
by the Sorbonne, by the University of Paris as a religious body.
Pascal, intimate, like many another fine intellect of the day, with
the Port-Royalists, was Arnauld’s friend, and it belonged to the
ardour of his genius, at least as he was then, to be a very active
friend.  He took up the pen as other chivalrous gentlemen of the day
took up the sword, and showed himself a master of the art of fence
therewith.  His delicate exercise of himself with that weapon was
nothing less than a revelation to all the world of the capabilities,
the true genius of the French language in prose.
Those who think of Pascal in his final sanctity, his detachment of
soul from all but the greatest matters, may be surprised, when they
turn to the “Letters,” to find him treating questions, as serious for
the friends he was defending as for their adversaries, ironically,
with a but half-veiled disdain for them, or an affected humility at
being unskilled in them and no theologian.  He does not allow us to
forget that he is, after all, a layman; while he introduces us,
almost avowedly, into a world of unmeaning terms, and unreal
distinctions and suppositions that can never be verified.  The world
in general, indeed, se paye des paroles.  That saying belongs to
Pascal, and [64] he uses it with reference to the Jesuits and their
favourite expression of “sufficient grace.”  In the earliest
“Letters” he creates in us a feeling that, however orthodox one’s
intention, it is scarcely possible to speak of the matters then so
abundantly discussed by religious people without heresy at some
unguarded point.  The suspected proposition of Arnauld, it is
admitted by one of his foes, “would be Catholic in the mouth of any
one but M. Arnauld.”  “The truth,” as it lay between Arnauld and his
opponents, is a thing so delicate that “pour peu qu’on s’en retire,
on tombe dans l’erreur; mais cette erreur est si deliee, que, pour
peu qu’on s’en eloigne, on se trouve dans la verite.”
Some, indeed, may find in the very delicacy, the curiosity, with
which such distinctions are drawn, by Pascal’s friends as well as by
their foes, only the impertinence, the profanities, of the theologian
by profession, all too intimate in laying down the law of the things
he deals with–the things “which eye hath not seen” pressing into the
secrets of God’s sublime commerce with men, in which, it may be, He
differs with every single human soul, by forms of thought adapted
from the poorest sort of men’s dealings with each other, from the
trader, or the attorney.  Pascal notes too the “impious buffooneries"
of his opponents.  The good Fathers, perhaps, only meant them to
promote geniality of temper in the debate.  But of such failures–
failures of taste, of respect towards one’s [65] own point of view–
the world is ever unamiably aware; and in the “Letters” there is much
to move the self-complacent smile of the worldling, as Pascal
describes his experiences, while he went from one authority to
another to find out what was really meant by the distinction between
grace “sufficient,” grace “efficacious,” grace “active,” grace
“victorious.”  He heard, for instance, that all men have sufficient
grace to do God’s will; but it is not always prochain, not always at
hand, at the moment of temptation to do otherwise.  So far, then,
Pascal’s charges are those which may seem to lie ready to hand
against all who study theology, a looseness of thought and language,
that would pass nowhere else, in making what are professedly very
fine distinctions; the insincerity with which terms are carefully
chosen to cover opposite meanings; the fatuity with which opposite
meanings revolve into one another, in the strange vacuous atmosphere
generated by professional divines.
Up to this point, you see, Pascal is the countryman of Rabelais and
Montaigne, smiling with the fine malice of the one, laughing outright
with the gaiety of the other, all the world joining in the laugh–
well, at the silliness of the clergy, who seem indeed not to know
their own business.  It is we, the laity, he would urge, who are
serious, and disinterested, because sincerely interested, in these
great questionings.  Jalousie de metier, the reader may suspect, has
something to do with [66] the Professional leaders on both sides of
the controversy; but at the actual turn controversy took just then,
it was against the Jesuit Fathers that Pascal’s charges came home in
full force.  And their sin is above all that sin, unpardonable with
men of the world sans peur et sans reproche, of a lack of self-
respect, sins against pride, if the paradox may be allowed, all the
undignified faults, in a word, of essentially little people when they
interfere in great matters–faults promoted in the direction of the
consciences of women and children, weak concessions to weak people
who want to be saved in some easy way quite other than Pascal’s high,
fine, chivalrous way of gaining salvation, an incapacity to say what
one thinks with the glove thrown down.  He supposes a Jansenist to
turn upon his opponent who uses the term “sufficient” grace, while
really meaning, as he alleges, insufficient, with the words:–"Your
explanation would be odious to men of the world.  They speak more
sincerely than you on matters of far less importance than this."
With the world, Pascal, in the “Provincial Letters,” had immediate
success.  “All the world,” we read in his friend’s supposed reply to
the second “Letter,” “sees them; all the world understands them.  Men
of the world find them agreeable, and even women intelligible.”  A
century later Voltaire found them very agreeable.  The spirit in
which Pascal deals with his opponents, his irony, may remind us of
the “Apology” of [67] Socrates; the style which secured them
immediate access to people who, as a rule, find the subjects there
treated hopelessly dry, reminds us of the “Apologia” of Newman.
The essence of all good style, whatever its accidents may be, is
expressiveness.  It is mastered in proportion to the justice, the
nicety with which words balance or match their meaning, and their
writer succeeds in saying what he wills, grave or gay, severe or
florid, simple or complex.  Pascal was a master of style because, as
his sister tells us, recording his earliest years, he had a wonderful
natural facility a dire ce qu’il voulait en la maniere qu’il voulait.
Facit indignatio versus.  The indignation which caused Pascal to
write the “Letters” was of a supercilious kind, and what he willed to
say in them led to the development of all those qualities that are
summed up in the French term l’esprit.  Voltaire declared that the
best comedies of Moliere n’ont pas plus de sel que les premieres
lettres.  “Vos maximes,” Pascal assures the Jesuit Fathers, “ont je
ne sais quoi de divertissant, qui rejouit toujours le monde,” and
they lose nothing of that character in his handling of them, so much
so that it was clear from the first that the world in general would
never ask whether Pascal had been quite fair to his opponents:
“N’etes-vous donc pas ridicules, mes Peres?  Qu’on satisfait au
precepte d’ouir la messe en entendant quatre quarts de messe a la
fois de differents pretres!”  When [68] you have the like of that it
is impossible not to laugh, parce que rien n’y porte davantage qu’une
disproportion surprenante entre ce qu’on attend et ce qu’on voit.
He has “salt” also, of another kind.  He drives straight at the
Jesuits, for instance, rather than at those who do but copy them,
because, as he tells us: Les choses valent toujours mieux dans leur
source.  What equity of expression, how brief, how untranslateable!
And the “Letters” abound in such things.
But to his comparison of Pascal with Moliere, Voltaire added that
Bossuet n’a rien de plus sublime que les dernieres.  And in truth the
more serious note of the impassioned servant of religion whose lips
have been touched with altar-fire, whose seriousness came to be like
some incurable malady, a visitation of God, as people used to say, is
presently struck when, in the natural course of his argument, his
thoughts are carried, from a mere passage of arms between one man or
one class of men and another, deep down to those awful encounters of
the individual soul with itself which are formulated in the eternal
problem of predestination.
In their doctrine of “sufficient grace” the Jesuits had presented a
view of the conflict of good and evil in the soul, which is
honourable to God and encouraging to man, and which has catholicity
on its face.  All to whom entrance into the Church, through its
formal ministries, [69] lies open are truly called of God, while
beyond it stretches the ocean of “His uncovenanted mercies.”  That is
a doctrine for the many, for those whose position in the religious
life is mediocrity, who so far as themselves or others can discern
have nothing about them of eternal or necessary or irresistible
reprobation, or of the eternal condition opposite to that.
The so-called Jansenist doctrine, on the other hand, of [   ]+ but
irresistible grace was the appropriate view of the Port-Royalists,
high-pitched, eager souls as they were, and of their friend Pascal
himself, however much in his turn he might refine upon it.  Whether
or not, as a matter of fact, upon which, as distinct from matters of
faith, an infallible pope can be mistaken, the dreary old Dutch
bishop Jansenius had really taught Jansenism, the Port-Royalists had
found in his “Augustinus” an incentive to devotion, and were avowedly
his adherents.  In that somewhat gloomy, that too deeply impressed,
that fanatical age, they were the Calvinists of the Roman Catholic
Church, maintaining, emphasising in it a view, a tradition, really
constant in it from St. Augustin, from St. Paul himself.  It is a
merit of Pascal, his literary merit, to have given a very fine-toned
expression to that doctrine, though mainly in the way of a criticism
of its opponents, to one side or aspect of an eternal controversy,
eternally suspended, as representing two opposite aspects of
experience [70] itself.  Calvin and Arminius, Jansen and Molina sum
up, in fact, respectively, like the respective adherents of the
freedom or of the necessity of the human will, in the more general
question of moral philosophy, two opposed, two counter trains of
phenomena actually observable by us in human action, too large and
complex a matter, as it is, to be embodied or summed up in any one
single proposition or idea.
There are moments of one’s own life, aspects of the life of others,
of which the conclusion that the will is free seems to be the only–
is the natural or reasonable–account.  Yet those very moments on
reflexion, on second thoughts, present themselves again, as but links
in a chain, in an all-embracing network of chains.  In all education
we assume, in some inexplicable combination, at once the freedom and
the necessity of the subject of it.  And who on a survey of life from
outside would willingly lose the dramatic contrasts, the alternating
interests, for which the opposed ideas of freedom and necessity are
our respective points of view?  How significant become the details we
might otherwise pass by almost unobserved, but to which we are put on
the alert by the abstract query whether a man be indeed a freeman or
a slave, as we watch from aside his devious course, his struggles,
his final tragedy or triumph.  So much value at least there may be in
problems insoluble in themselves, such as that great controversy of
Pascal’s day [71] between Jesuit and Jansenist.  And here again who
would forego, in the spectacle of the religious history of the human
soul, the aspects, the details which the doctrines of universal and
particular grace respectively embody?  The Jesuit doctrine of
sufficient grace is certainly, to use the familiar expression, a very
pleasant doctrine conducive to the due feeding of the whole flock of
Christ, as being, as assuming them to be, what they really are, at
the worst, God’s silly sheep.  It has something in it congruous with
the rising of the physical sun on the evil and on the good, while the
wheat and the tares grow naturally, peacefully together.  But how
pleasant also the opposite doctrine, how true, how truly descriptive
of certain distinguished, magnifical, or elect souls, vessels of
election, epris des hauteurs, as we see them pass across the world’s
stage, as if led on by a kind of thirst for God!  Its necessary
counterpart, of course, we may find, at least dramatically true of
some; we can name them in history, perhaps from our own experience;
souls of whom it seems but an obvious story to tell that they seemed
to be in love with eternal death, to have borne on them from the
first signs of reprobation.  Of certain quite visibly elect souls, at
all events, the theory of irresistible grace might seem the almost
necessary explanation.  Most reasonable, most natural, most truly is
it descriptive of Pascal himself.
[72] So far, indeed, up to the year 1656, Pascal’s annus mirabilis,
the year of the “Letters,” the world had been allowed to see only one
side of him.  Early in life he had achieved brilliant overtures in
the abstract sciences, and, inheriting much of the quality of a fine
gentleman, he figures, with his trenchant manner, never at a loss, as
a quite secular person, stirred on occasion to take part in a
religious debate.  But it is after the grand fashion of the mundane
quarrels of that day, the age of the sentiment of personal honour, in
which it was so natural for the good-natured Jesuits, stirring all
Pascal’s satiric power, to excuse as well as they could the act de
tuer pour un simple medisance.  The Church was still an estate of the
realm with all the obligations of the noblesse, and it was still
something worse than bad taste, it was dangerous to express religious
doubts.  About the Catholic religion, as he conceived it, Pascal
displays the assured attitude of an ancient Crusader.  He has the
full courage of his opinions, and by his elegant easy gallantry in
speaking for it he gives to religion then and now a kind of dignity
it had lost with other controversialists in the eyes of the world.
There is abundant gaiety also in the “Letters.”  He quotes from
Tertullian to the effect that c’est proprement a la verite qu’il
appartient de rire parce qu’elle est gaie, et de se jouer de ses
ennemis parce qu’elle est assuree de sa victoire.  For he could find
quotations to his purpose from recondite writers, [73] though he was
not a man of erudition; like a man of the world again, he read
little, but that absorbingly, was the master of two authors,
Epictetus and Montaigne, and, as appeared afterwards, of the
Scriptures in the Vulgate.
So far, his imposing carriage of himself intellectually might lead us
to suspect that the forced humilities of his later years are
indirectly a discovery of what seems one leading quality of the
natural man in him, a pride that could be quite fierce on occasion.
And, like another rich young man whom Jesus loved, he lacked nothing
to make the world also love and confide in, as it already flattered,
him.  He turned from it, decided to live a single life.  Was it the
mere oddity of genius?  Or its last fine dainty touch of difference
from ordinary people and their motives?  Or that sanctity of which,
in some cases, the world itself instinctively feels the distinction,
though it shrinks from the true explanation of it?  Certainly, all
things considered, on the morrow of the “Letters,” Blaise Pascal, at
the age of thirty-three, had a brilliant worldly future before him,
had he cared duly to wait upon, to serve it.  To develop the already
considerable position of his family among the gentry of Auvergne
would have been to follow the way of his time, in which so many noble
names had been founded on professional talents.  Increasingly,
however, from early youth, he had been the subject of a malady so
hopeless [74] and inexplicable that in that superstitious age some
fancied it the result of a malign spell in infancy.  Gradually, the
world almost loses sight of him, hears at last, some time after it
had looked for that event, that he had died, of course very piously,
among those sombre people, his friends and relations of Port-Royal,
with whom he had taken refuge, and seemed already to have been buried
alive.  And in the year 1670, not till eight years after his death,
the “Pensees” appeared–"Pensees de M. Pascal sur la Religion et sur
quelques autres sujets"–or rather a selection from those “Thoughts"
by the Port-Royalists, still in fear of consequences to the
struggling Jansenist party, anxious to present Pascal’s doctrine as
far as possible in conformity with the Jesuit sense, as also to
divert the vaguer parts of it more entirely into their own.  The
incomparable words were altered, the order changed or lost, the
thoughts themselves omitted or retrenched.  Written in short
intervals of relief from suffering, they were contributions to a
large and methodical work–"Pensees de M. Pascal sur la Religion et
sur quelques autres sujets"–on a good many things besides, as the
reader finds, on many of the great things of this world which seemed
to him to come in contact or competition with religion.  In the true
version of the “Thoughts,” edited at last by Faugere, in 1844, from
Pascal’s own MSS., in the National Library, they group themselves
into certain definite trains [75] of speculation and study.  But it
is still, nevertheless, as isolated thoughts, as inspirations, so to
call them, penetrating what seemed hopelessly dark, summarising what
seemed hopelessly confused, sticking fast in men’s memories, floating
lightly, or going far, that they have left so deep a mark in
literature.  For again the manner, also, their style precisely
becomes them.  The merits of Pascal’s style, indeed, as of the French
language itself, still is to say beaucoup de choses en peu de mots;
and the brevity, the discerning edge, the impassioned concentration
of the language are here one with the ardent immediate apprehensions
of his spirit.
One of the literary merits of the “Provincial Letters” is that they
are really like letters; they are essentially a conversation by
writing with other persons.  What we have in the “Thoughts” is the
conversation of the writer with himself, with himself and with God,
or rather concerning Him, for He is, in Pascal’s favourite phrase
from the Vulgate, Deus absconditus, He who never directly shows
Himself.  Choses de coeur the “Thoughts” are, indeed those of an
individual, though they seem to have determined the very outlines of
a great subject for all other persons.  In Pascal, at the summit of
the Puy de Dome in his native Auvergne, experimenting on the weight
of the invisible air, proving it to be ever all around by its
effects, we are presented with one of the more pleasing [76] aspects
of his earlier, more wholesome, open-air life.  In the great work of
which the “Thoughts” are the first head, Pascal conceived himself to
be doing something of the same kind in the spiritual order by a
demonstration of this other invisible world all around us, with its
really ponderable forces, its movement, its attractions and
repulsions, the world of grace, unseen, but, as he thinks, the one
only hypothesis that can explain the experienced, admitted facts.
Whether or not he was fixing permanently in the “Pensees” the
outlines, the principles, of a great system of assent, of conviction,
for acceptance by the intellect, he was certainly fixing these with
all the imaginative depth and sufficiency of Shakespeare himself, the
fancied opposites, the attitudes, the necessary forms of pathos,+ of a
great tragedy in the heart, the soul, the essential human tragedy, as
typical and central in its expression here, as Hamlet–what the  soul
passes, and must pass, through, aux abois with nothingness, or with
those offended mysterious powers that may really occupy it–or when
confronted with the thought of what are called the “four last things"
it yields this way or that.  What might have passed with all its
fiery ways for an esprit de secte et de cabale is now revealed amid
the disputes not of a single generation but of eternal ones, by the
light of a phenomenal storm of blinding and blasting inspirations.
[77] Observe, he is not a sceptic converted, a returned infidel, but
is seen there as if at the very centre of a perpetually maintained
tragic crisis holding the faith steadfastly, but amid the well-poised
points of essential doubt all around him and it.  It is no mere calm
supersession of a state of doubt by a state of faith; the doubts
never die, they are only just kept down in a perpetual agonia.
Everywhere in the “Letters” he had seemed so great a master–a master
of himself–never at a loss, taking the conflict so lightly, with so
light a heart: in the great Atlantean travail of the “Thoughts” his
feet sometimes “are almost gone.”  In his soul’s agony, theological
abstractions seem to become personal powers.  It was as if just below
the surface of the green undulations, the stately woods, of his own
strange country of Auvergne, the volcanic fires had suddenly
discovered themselves anew.  In truth into his typical diagnosis, as
it may seem, of the tragedy of the human soul, there have passed not
merely the personal feelings, the temperament of an individual, but
his malady also, a physical malady.  Great genius, we know, has the
power of elevating, transmuting, serving itself by the accidental
conditions about it, however unpromising–poverty, and the like.  It
was certainly so with Pascal’s long-continued physical sufferings.
That aigreur, which is part of the native colour of Pascal’s genius,
is reinforced in the [78] “Pensees” by insupportable languor,
alternating with supportable pain, as he died little by little
through the eight years of their composition.  They are essentially
the utterance of a soul malade–a soul of great genius, whose malady
became a new quality of that genius, perfecting it thus, by its very
defect, as a type on the intellectual stage, and thereby guiding,
reassuring sympathetically, manning by a sense of good company that
large class of persons who are malade in the same way.  “La maladie
est l’etat naturel des Chretiens,” says Pascal himself.  And we
concede that every one of us more or less is ailing thus, as another
has told us that life itself is a disease of the spirit.
From Port-Royal also came, about the year 1670, a painful book, the
“Life of Pascal,” a portrait painted slowly from the life or living
death, but with an almost exclusive preference for traits expressive
of disease.  The post-mortem examination of Pascal’s brain revealed,
we are now told, the secret, not merely of that long prostration,
those sudden passing torments, but of something analogous to them in
Pascal’s genius and work.  Well! the light cast indirectly on the
literary work of Pascal by Mme. Perier’s “Life” is of a similar kind.
It is a veritable chapter in morbid pathology, though it may have
truly a beauty for experts, the beauty which belongs to all refined
cases even of cerebral disturbance.  That he should [79] have sought
relief from his singular wretchedness, in that sombre company, is
like the second stroke of tragedy upon him.  At moments Pascal
becomes almost a sectarian, and seems to pass out of the genial broad
heaven of the Catholic Church.  He had lent himself in those last
years to a kind of pieties which do not make a winning picture, which
always have about them, even when they show themselves in men
physically strong, something of the small compass of the sick-
chamber.  His medieval or oriental self-tortures, all the painful
efforts at absolute detachment, a perverse asceticism taking all
there still was to spare from the denuded and suffering body, might
well, you may think, have died with him, but are here recorded,
chiefly by way of showing the world, the Jesuits, that the
Jansenists, too, had a saint quite after their mind.
But though, at first sight, you may find a pettiness in those minute
pieties, they have their signification as a testimony to the
wholeness of Pascal’s assent, the entirety of his submission, his
immense sincerity, the heroic grandeur of his achieved faith.  The
seventeenth century presents survivals of the gloomy mental habits of
the Middle Age, but for the most part of a somewhat theatrical kind,
imitations of Francis and Dominic or of their earlier imitators.  In
Pascal they are original, and have all their seriousness.  Que je
n’en sois [80] jamais separe–pas separe eternellement, he repeats,
or makes that strange sort of MS. amulet, of which his sister tells
us, repeat for him.  Cast me not away from Thy presence; and take not
Thy Holy Spirit from me.  It is table rase he is trying to make of
himself, that He might reign there absolutely alone, who, however, as
he was bound to think, had made and blest all those things he
declined to accept.  Deeper and deeper, then, he retreated into the
renuncient life.  He could not, had he wished, deprive himself of
that his greatest gift–literally a gift he might have thought it not
to be buried but accounted for–the gift of le beau dire, of writing
beautifully.  “Il avoit renonce depuis longtemps aux sciences
purement humains.”  To him who had known them so well, and as if by
intuition, those abstract and perdurable forms of service might well
have seemed a part of “the Lord’s doing, marvellous in our eyes,” as
his favourite Psalm cxix., the psalm des petites heures, the cxviii.
of the Vulgate, says.*  These, too, he counts now as but a variety of
le neant and vanity of things.  He no longer records, therefore, the
mathematical apercus that may visit him; and in his scruples, his
suspicions of’ visible beauty, he interests us as precisely an
inversion of what is called the aesthetic life.
[81] Yet his faith, as in the days of the Middle Age, had been
supported, rewarded, by what he believed to be visible miracle among
the strange lights and shades of that retired place.  Pascal’s niece,
the daughter of Madame Perier, a girl ten years of age, suffered from
a disease of the eyes pronounced to be incurable.  The disease was a
peculiarly distressing one, the sort of affliction which, falling on
a young child, may lead one to question the presence of divine
justice in the world, makes one long that miracles were possible.
Well!  Pascal, for one, believed that on occasion that profound
aspiration had been followed up by the power desired.  A thorn from
the crown of Jesus, as was believed, had been lately brought to the
Port-Royal du Faubourg S. Jacques in Paris, and was one day applied
devoutly to the eye of the suffering child.  What followed was an
immediate and complete cure, fully attested by experts.  Ah!  Thou
hast given him his heart’s desire: and hast not denied him the
request of his lips.  Pascal, and the young girl herself, faithfully
to the end of a long life, believed the circumstances to have been
miraculous.  Otherwise, we do not see that Pascal was ever permitted
to enjoy (so to speak) the religion for which he had exchanged so
much; that the sense of acceptance, of assurance, had come to him;
that for him the Spouse had ever penetrated the veil of the ordinary
routine of the means of grace; [82] nothing that corresponded as a
matter of clear personal intercourse of the very senses to the
greatness of his surrender–who had emptied himself of all other
things.  Besides, there was some not wholly-explained delay in his
reception, in those his last days, of the Sacrament.  It was brought
to him just in time–"Voici celui que vous avez tant desire!"–the
ministrant says to the dying man.  Pascal was then aged thirty-nine–
an age you may remember fancifully noted as fatal to genius.
Pascal’s “Thoughts,” then, we shall not rightly measure but as the
outcome, the utterance, of a soul diseased, a soul permanently ill at
ease.  We find in their constant tension something of insomnia, of
that sleeplessness which can never be a quite healthful condition of
mind in a human body.  Sometimes they are cries, cries of obscure
pain rather than thoughts–those great fine sayings which seem to
betray by their depth of sound the vast unseen hollow places of
nature, of humanity, just beneath one’s feet or at one’s side.
Reading them, so modern still are those thoughts, so rich and various
in suggestion, that one seems to witness the mental seed-sowing of
the next two centuries, and perhaps more, as to those matters with
which he concerns himself.  Intuitions of a religious genius, they
may well be taken also as the final considerations of the natural
man, as a religious inquirer on doubt and faith, and their place in
[83] things.  Listen now to some of these “Thoughts” taken at random:
taken at first for their brevity.  Peu de chose nous console, parce
que peu de chose nous afflige.  Par l’espace l’univers me comprend et
m’engloutit comme un point: par la pensee je le comprends.  Things
like these put us en route with Pascal.  Toutes les bonnes maximes
sont dans le monde: on ne manque que de les appliquer.  The great
ascetic was always hard on amusements, on mere pastimes: Le
divertissement nous amuse, one and all of us, et nous fait arriver
insensiblement a la mort.  Nous perdons encore la vie avec joie,
pourvu qu’on en parle.  On ne peut faire une bonne physionomie (in a
portrait) qu’en accordant toutes nos contrarietes.  L’homme n’est
qu’un roseau, le plus foible de la nature, mais c’est un roseau
pensant.  Il ne faut pas que l’univers entier s’arme pour l’ecraser.
Une vapeur, une goutte d’eau, suffit pour le tuer.  Mais quand
l’univers l’ecraseroit, l’homme seroit encore plus noble que se qui
le tue, parce qu’il sait qu’il meurt, et l’avantage que l’univers a
sur lui, l’univers n’en sait rien.  It is not thought by which that
excels, but the convincing force of imagination which sublimates its
very triteness.  Toute notre dignite consiste donc en la pensee.
There, then, you have at random the sort of stuff of which the
“Pensees” are made.  Let me now briefly indicate, also by quotation
again, some of the main leading tendencies in them.  La chose la plus
importante a toute la vie c’est la [84] choix du metier: le hasard en
dispose.  There we recognise the manner of thought of Montaigne.  Now
one of the leading interests in the study of Pascal is to trace the
influence upon him of the typical sceptic of the preceding century.
Pascal’s “Thoughts” we shall never understand unless we realise the
under-texture in them of Montaigne’s very phrases, the fascination
the “Essays” had for Pascal in his capacity of one of the children of
light, as giving a veritable compte rendu of the Satanic course of
this world since the Fall, set forth with all the persuasiveness, the
power and charm, all the gifts of Satan, the veritable light on
things he has at his disposal.
Pascal re-echoes Montaigne then in asserting the paradoxical
character of man and his experience.  The old headings under which
the Port-Royalist editors grouped the “Thoughts” recall the titles of
Montaigne’s “Essays"–"Of the Disproportion of Man,” and the like. As
strongly as Montaigne he delights in asserting the relative, local,
ephemeral and merely provisional character of our ideas of law, vice,
virtue, happiness, and so forth.  Comme la mode fait l’agrement aussi
fait-elle la justice.  La justice et la verite sont deux pointes si
subtiles, que nos instruments sont trop mousses pour y toucher
exactement.  Bien suivant la seule raison n’est juste de soi: tout
branle avec le temps.  Sometimes he strikes the express accent of
Montaigne: Ceux qui sont dans un vaisseau croient que ceux qui sont
[85] au bord fuient.  Le langage est pareil de tous cotes.  Il faut
avoir un point fixe pour en juger.  Le port juge ceux qui sont dans
un vaisseau, mais ou prendrons-nous un port dans la morale?  At times
he seems to forget that he himself and Montaigne are after all not of
the same flock, as his mind grazes in those pleasant places.  Qu’il
(man) se regarde comme egare dans ce canton detourne de la nature, et
de ce petit cachot ou il se trouve loge, qu’il apprenne the earth, et
soi-meme a son juste prix.  Il ffre, mais elle est ployable a tous
sens; et ainsi il n’y en a point.  Un meme sens change selon les
paroles qui l’expriment.  He has touches even of what he calls the
malignity, the malign irony of Montaigne.  Rien que la mediocrite
n’est bon, he says,–epris des hauteurs, as he so conspicuously was–
C’est sortir de l’humanite que de sortir du milieu; la grandeur de
l’ame humaine consiste a savoir s’y tenir.  Rien ne fortifie plus le
pyrrhonisme–that is ever his word for scepticism–que ce qu’il y en
a qui ne sont pas pyrrhoniens: si tous etaient ils auraient tort.
You may even credit him, like Montaigne, with a somewhat Satanic
intimacy with the ways, the cruel ways, the weakness, lachete, of the
human heart, so that, as he says of Montaigne, himself too might be a
pernicious study for those who have a native tendency to corruption.
The paradoxical condition of the world, the natural inconsistency of
man, his strange [86] blending of meanness with ancient greatness,
the caprices of his status here, of his power and attainments, in the
issue of his existence–that is what the study of Montaigne had
enforced on Pascal as the sincere compte rendu of experience.  But
then he passes at a tangent from the circle of the great sceptic’s
apprehension.  That prospect of man and the world, undulant,
capricious, inconsistent, contemptible, lache, full of contradiction,
with a soul of evil in things good, irreducible to law, upon which,
after all, Montaigne looks out with a complacency so entire, fills
Pascal with terror.  It is the world on the morrow of a great
catastrophe, the casual forces of which have by no means spent
themselves.  Yes! this world we see, of which we are a part, with its
thousand dislocations, is precisely what we might expect as resultant
from the Fall of Man, with consequences in full working still.  It
presents the appropriate aspect of a lost world, though with beams of
redeeming grace about it, those, too, distributed somewhat
capriciously to chosen people and elect souls, who, after all, can
have but an ill time of it here.  Under the tragic eclairs of divine
wrath essentially implacable, the gentle, pleasantly undulating,
sunny, earthly prospect of poor loveable humanity which opens out for
one in Montaigne’s “Essays,” becomes for Pascal a scene of harsh
precipices, of threatening heights and depths–the depths of his own
nothingness.  Vanity: nothingness: these [87] are his catchwords:
Nous sommes incapables et du vrai et du bien; nous sommes tous
condamnes.  Ce qui y parait (i.e., what we see in the world) ne
marque ni une exclusion totale ni une presence manifeste de divinite,
mais la presence d’un Dieu qui se cache: (Deus absconditus, that is a
recurrent favourite thought of his) tout porte ce caractere.  In this
world of abysmal dilemmas, he is ready to push all things to their
extremes.  All or nothing; for him real morality will be nothing
short of sanctity.  En Jesus Christ toutes les contradictions sont
accordees.  Yet what difficulties again in the religion of Christ!
Nulle autre religion n’a propose de se hair.  La seule religion
contraire a la nature, contraire au sens commun, est la seule qui ait
toujours ete.
Multitudes in every generation have felt at least the aesthetic charm
of the rites of the Catholic Church.  For Pascal, on the other hand,
a certain weariness, a certain puerility, a certain unprofitableness
in them is but an extra trial of faith.  He seems to have little
sense of the beauty of holiness.  And for his sombre, trenchant,
precipitous philosophy there could be no middle terms; irresistible
election, irresistible reprobation; only sometimes extremes meet, and
again it may be the trial of faith that the justified seem as
loveless and unlovely as the reprobate.  Abetissez-vous!  A nature,
you may think, that would magnify things to the utmost, nurse, expand
them beyond their natural bounds by his [88] reflex action upon them.
Thus revelation is to be received on evidence, indeed, but an
evidence conclusive only on a presupposition or series of
presuppositions, evidence that is supplemented by an act of
imagination, or by the grace of faith, shall we say?  At any rate,
the fact is, that the genius of the great reasoner, of this great
master of the abstract and deductive sciences, turned theologian,
carrying the methods of thought there formed into the things of
faith, was after all of the imaginative order.  Now hear what he says
of imagination: Cette faculte trompeuse, qui semble nous etre donnee
expres pour nous induire a une erreur necessaire.  That has a sort of
necessity in it.  What he says has again the air of Montaigne, and he
says much of the same kind: Cette superbe puissance ennemie de la
raison, combien toutes les richesses de la terre sont insuffisantes
sans son consentement.  The imagination has the disposition of all
things: Elle fait la beaute, la justice, et le bonheur, qui est le
tout du monde.  L’imagination dispose de tout.  And what we have here
to note is its extraordinary power in himself.  Strong in him as the
reasoning faculty, so to speak, it administered the reasoning faculty
in him a son grbut he was unaware of it, that power d’autant plus
fourbe qu’elle ne l’est pas toujours.  Hidden under the apparent
rigidity of his favourite studies, imagination, even in them, played
a large part.  Physics, mathematics were with him largely matters of
intuition, anticipation, [89] precocious discovery, short cuts,
superb guessing.  It was the inventive element in his work and his
way of putting things that surprised those best able to judge.  He
might have discovered the mathematical sciences for himself, it is
alleged, had his father, as he once had a mind to do, withheld him
from instruction in them.
About the time when he was bidding adieu to the world, Pascal had an
accident.  As he drove round a corner on the Seine side to cross the
bridge at Neuilly, the horses were precipitated down the bank into
the water.  Pascal escaped, but with a nervous shock, a certain
hallucination, from which he never recovered.  As he walked or sat he
was apt to perceive a yawning depth beside him; would set stick or
chair there to reassure himself.  We are now told, indeed, that that
circumstance has been greatly exaggerated.  But how true to Pascal’s
temper, as revealed in his work, that alarmed precipitous character
in it!  Intellectually the abyss was evermore at his side.  Nous
avons, he observes, un autre principe d’erreur, les maladies.  Now in
him the imagination itself was like a physical malady, troubling,
disturbing, or in active collusion with it.  .  .  .
62. *Published in the Contemporary Review, Feb. 1895, and now
reprinted by the kind permission of the proprietors.
76. +Transliteration: pathos.
80. *The words here cited are, however, from Psalm cxviii., the
cxvii. of the Vulgate, and not from Pascal’s favourite Psalm.
(C.L.S.)  +C.L.S. stands for Charles Shadwell, editor of the original
volume.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of Essays” by Walter Horatio Pater.


Also by this author (on Amazon.com); The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of EssaysBy Walter Horatio PaterAt Amazon
