




FOR one born in eighteen hundred and three much was recently become
incredible that had at least warmed the imagination even of the
sceptical eighteenth century.  Napoleon, sealing the tomb of the
Revolution, had foreclosed many a problem, extinguished many a hope,
in the sphere of practice.  And the mental parallel was drawn by
Heine.  In the mental world too a great outlook had lately been cut
off.  After Kant’s criticism of the mind, its pretensions to pass
beyond the limits of individual experience seemed as dead as those of
old French royalty.  And Kant did but furnish its innermost theoretic
force to a more general criticism, which had withdrawn from every
department of action, underlying principles once thought eternal.  A
time of disillusion followed.  The typical personality of the day was
Obermann, the very genius of ennui, a Frenchman disabused even of
patriotism, who has hardly strength enough to die.
[12] More energetic souls, however, would recover themselves, and
find some way of making the best of a changed world.  Art: the
passions, above all, the ecstasy and sorrow of love: a purely
empirical knowledge of nature and man: these still remained, at least
for pastime, in a world of which it was no longer proposed to
calculate the remoter issues:–art, passion, science, however, in a
somewhat novel attitude towards the practical interests of life.  The
desillusionne, who had found in Kant’s negations the last word
concerning an unseen world, and is living, on the morrow of the
Revolution, under a monarchy made out of hand, might seem cut off
from certain ancient natural hopes, and will demand, from what is to
interest him at all, something in the way of artificial stimulus.  He
has lost that sense of large proportion in things, that all-embracing
prospect of life as a whole (from end to end of time and space, it
had seemed), the utmost expanse of which was afforded from a
cathedral tower of the Middle Age: by the church of the thirteenth
century, that is to say, with its consequent aptitude for the
co-ordination of human effort.  Deprived of that exhilarating yet
pacific outlook, imprisoned now in the narrow cell of its own
subjective experience, the action of a powerful nature will be
intense, but exclusive and peculiar.  It will come to art, or
science, to the experience of life itself, not as to portions of
human nature’s daily food, but as to [13] something that must be, by
the circumstances of the case, exceptional; almost as men turn in
despair to gambling or narcotics, and in a little while the narcotic,
the game of chance or skill, is valued for its own sake.  The
vocation of the artist, of the student of life or books, will be
realised with something–say! of fanaticism, as an end in itself,
unrelated, unassociated.  The science he turns to will be a science
of crudest fact; the passion extravagant, a passionate love of
passion, varied through all the exotic phases of French fiction as
inaugurated by Balzac; the art exaggerated, in matter or form, or
both, as in Hugo or Baudelaire.  The development of these conditions
is the mental story of the nineteenth century, especially as
exemplified in France.
In no century would Prosper Merimee have been a theologian or
metaphysician.  But that sense of negation, of theoretic insecurity,
was in the air, and conspiring with what was of like tendency in
himself made of him a central type of disillusion.  In him the
passive ennui of Obermann became a satiric, aggressive, almost angry
conviction of the littleness of the world around; it was as if man’s
fatal limitations constituted a kind of stupidity in him, what the
French call betise.  Gossiping friends, indeed, linked what was
constitutional in him and in the age with an incident of his earliest
years.  Corrected for some childish fault, in passionate distress, he
overhears a half-pitying laugh at his expense, and has determined,
[14] in a moment, never again to give credit–to be for ever on his
guard, especially against his own instinctive movements.  Quite
unreserved, certainly, he never was again.  Almost everywhere he
could detect the hollow ring of fundamental nothingness under the
apparent surface of things.  Irony surely, habitual irony, would be
the proper complement thereto, on his part.  In his infallible self-
possession, you might even fancy him a mere man of the world, with a
special aptitude for matters of fact.  Though indifferent in
politics, he rises to social, to political eminence; but all the
while he is feeding all his scholarly curiosity, his imagination, the
very eye, with the, to him ever delightful, relieving, reassuring
spectacle, of those straightforward forces in human nature, which are
also matters of fact.  There is the formula of Merimee! the
enthusiastic amateur of rude, crude, naked force in men and women
wherever it could be found; himself carrying ever, as a mask, the
conventional attire of the modern world–carrying it with an
infinite, contemptuous grace, as if that, too, were an all-sufficient
end in itself.  With a natural gift for words, for expression, it
will be his literary function to draw back the veil of time from the
true greatness of old Roman character; the veil of modern habit from
the primitive energy of the creatures of his fancy, as the Lettres a
une Inconnue discovered to general gaze, after his death, a certain
depth of [15] passionate force which had surprised him in himself.
And how forcible will be their outlines in an otherwise insignificant
world!  Fundamental belief gone, in almost all of us, at least some
relics of it remain–queries, echoes, reactions, after-thoughts; and
they help to make an atmosphere, a mental atmosphere, hazy perhaps,
yet with many secrets of soothing light and shade, associating more
definite objects to each other by a perspective pleasant to the
inward eye against a hopefully receding background of remoter and
ever remoter possibilities.  Not so with Merimee!  For him the
fundamental criticism has nothing more than it can do; and there are
no half-lights.  The last traces of hypothesis, of supposition, are
evaporated.  Sylla, the false Demetrius, Carmen, Colomba, that
impassioned self within himself, have no atmosphere.  Painfully
distinct in outline, inevitable to sight, unrelieved, there they
stand, like solitary mountain forms on some hard, perfectly
transparent day.  What Merimee gets around his singularly
sculpturesque creations is neither more nor less than empty space.
So disparate are his writings that at first sight you might fancy
them only the random efforts of a man of pleasure or affairs, who,
turning to this or that for the relief of a vacant hour, discovers to
his surprise a workable literary gift, of whose scope, however, he is
not precisely aware.  His sixteen volumes nevertheless range
themselves in three compact groups.  There are his letters [16] –
those Lettres a une Inconnue, and his letters to the librarian
Panizzi, revealing him in somewhat close contact with political
intrigue.  But in this age of novelists, it is as a writer of novels,
and of fiction in the form of highly descriptive drama, that he will
count for most:–Colomba, for instance, by its intellectual depth of
motive, its firmly conceived structure, by the faultlessness of its
execution, vindicating the function of the novel as no tawdry light
literature, but in very deed a fine art.  The Chronique du Regne de
Charles IX., an unusually successful specimen of historical romance,
links his imaginative work to the third group of Merimee’s writings,
his historical essays.  One resource of the disabused soul of our
century, as we saw, would be the empirical study of facts, the
empirical science of nature and man, surviving all dead metaphysical
philosophies.  Merimee, perhaps, may have had in him the making of a
master of such science, disinterested, patient, exact: scalpel in
hand, we may fancy, he would have penetrated far.  But quite
certainly he had something of genius for the exact study of history,
for the pursuit of exact truth, with a keenness of scent as if that
alone existed, in some special area of historic fact, to be
determined by his own peculiar mental preferences.  Power here too
again,–the crude power of men and women which mocks, while it makes
its use of, average human nature: it was the magic function of
history to put one in living [17] contact with that.  To weigh the
purely physiognomic import of the memoir, of the pamphlet saved by
chance, the letter, the anecdote, the very gossip by which one came
face to face with energetic personalities: there lay the true
business of the historic student, not in that pretended theoretic
interpretation of events by their mechanic causes, with which he
dupes others if not invariably himself.  In the great hero of the
Social War, in Sylla, studied, indeed, through his environment, but
only so far as that was in dynamic contact with himself, you saw,
without any manner of doubt, on one side, the solitary height of
human genius; on the other, though on the seemingly so heroic stage
of antique Roman story, the wholly inexpressive level of the humanity
of every day, the spectacle of man’s eternal betise.  Fascinated,
like a veritable son of the old pagan Renaissance, by the grandeur,
the concentration, the satiric hardness of ancient Roman character,
it is to Russia nevertheless that he most readily turns–youthful
Russia, whose native force, still unbelittled by our western
civilisation, seemed to have in it the promise of a more dignified
civilisation to come.  It was as if old Rome itself were here again;
as, occasionally, a new quarry is laid open of what was thought long
since exhausted, ancient marble, cipollino or verde antique.
Merimee, indeed, was not the first to discern the fitness for
imaginative service of the career of “the false Demetrius,” pretended
[18] son of Ivan the Terrible; but he alone seeks its utmost force in
a calm, matter-of-fact carefully ascertained presentment of the naked
events.  Yes!  In the last years of the Valois, when its fierce
passions seemed to be bursting France to pieces, you might have seen,
far away beyond the rude Polish dominion of which one of those Valois
princes had become king, a display more effective still of
exceptional courage and cunning, of horror in circumstance, of
betise, of course, of betise and a slavish capacity of being duped,
in average mankind: all that under a mask of solemn Muscovite court-
ceremonial.  And Merimee’s style, simple and unconcerned, but with
the eye ever on its object, lends itself perfectly to such purpose–
to an almost phlegmatic discovery of the facts, in all their crude
natural colouring, as if he but held up to view, as a piece of
evidence, some harshly dyed oriental carpet from the sumptuous floor
of the Kremlin, on which blood had fallen.
A lover of ancient Rome, its great character and incident, Merimee
valued, as if it had been personal property of his, every extant
relic of it in the art that had been most expressive of its genius–
architecture.  In that grandiose art of building, the most national,
the most tenaciously rooted of all the arts in the stable conditions
of life, there were historic documents hardly less clearly legible
than the manuscript chronicle.  By the mouth of those stately
Romanesque [19] churches, scattered in so many strongly characterised
varieties over the soil of France, above all in the hot, half-pagan
south, the people of empire still protested, as he understood,
against what must seem a smaller race.  The Gothic enthusiasm indeed
was already born, and he shared it–felt intelligently the
fascination of the Pointed Style, but only as a further
transformation of old Roman structure; the round arch is for him
still the great architectural form, la forme noble, because it was to
be seen in the monuments of antiquity.  Romanesque, Gothic, the
manner of the Renaissance, of Lewis the Fourteenth:–they were all,
as in a written record, in the old abbey church of Saint-Savin, of
which Merimee was instructed to draw up a report.  Again, it was as
if to his concentrated attention through many months that deserted
sanctuary of Benedict were the only thing on earth.  Its beauties,
its peculiarities, its odd military features, its faded mural
paintings, are no merely picturesque matter for the pencil he could
use so well, but the lively record of a human society.  With what
appetite! with all the animation of George Sand’s Mauprat, he tells
the story of romantic violence having its way there, defiant of law,
so late as the year 1611; of the family of robber nobles perched, as
abbots in commendam, in those sacred places.  That grey, pensive old
church in the little valley of Poitou, was for a time like Santa
Maria del Fiore to [20] Michelangelo, the mistress of his affections-
-of a practical affection; for the result of his elaborate report was
the Government grant which saved the place from ruin.  In
architecture, certainly, he had what for that day was nothing less
than intuition–an intuitive sense, above all, of its logic, of the
necessity which draws  into one all minor changes, as elements in a
reasonable development.  And his care for it, his curiosity about it,
were symptomatic of his own genius.  Structure, proportion, design, a
sort of architectural coherency: that was the aim of his method in
the art of literature, in that form of it, especially, which he will
live by, in fiction.
As historian and archaeologist, as a man of erudition turned artist,
he is well seen in the Chronique du Regne de Charles IX., by which we
pass naturally from Merimee’s critical or scientific work to the
products of his imagination.  What economy in the use of a large
antiquarian knowledge! what an instinct amid a hundred details, for
the detail that carries physiognomy in it, that really tells!  And
again what outline, what absolute clarity of outline!  For the
historian of that puzzling age which centres in the “Eve of Saint
Bartholomew,” outward events themselves seem obscured by the
vagueness of motive of the actors in them.  But Merimee, disposing of
them as an artist, not in love with half-lights, compels events and
actors alike to the clearness he [21] desired; takes his side without
hesitation; and makes his hero a Huguenot of pure blood, allowing its
charm, in that charming youth, even to Huguenot piety.  And as for
the incidents–however freely it may be undermined by historic doubt,
all reaches a perfectly firm surface, at least for the eye of the
reader.  The Chronicle of Charles the Ninth is like a series of
masterly drawings in illustration of a period–the period in which
two other masters of French fiction have found their opportunity,
mainly by the development of its actual historic characters.  Those
characters–Catherine de Medicis and the rest–Merimee, with
significant irony and self-assertion, sets aside, preferring to think
of them as essentially commonplace.  For him the interest lies in the
creatures of his own will, who carry in them, however, so lightly! a
learning equal to Balzac’s, greater than that of Dumas.  He knows
with like completeness the mere fashions of the time–how courtier
and soldier dressed themselves, and the large movements of the
desperate game which fate or chance was playing with those pretty
pieces.  Comparing that favourite century of the French Renaissance
with our own, he notes a decadence of the more energetic passions in
the interest of general tranquillity, and perhaps (only perhaps!) of
general happiness.  “Assassination,” he observes, as if with regret,
“is no longer a part of our manners.”  In fact, the duel, and the
whole [22] morality of the duel, which does but enforce a certain
regularity on assassination, what has been well called le sentiment
du fer, the sentiment of deadly steel, had then the disposition of
refined existence.  It was, indeed, very different, and is, in
Merimee’s romance.  In his gallant hero, Bernard de Mergy, all the
promptings of the lad’s virile goodness are in natural collusion with
that sentiment du fer.  Amid his ingenuous blushes, his prayers, and
plentiful tears between-while, it is a part of his very sex.  With
his delightful, fresh-blown air, he is for ever tossing the sheath
from the sword, but always as if into bright natural sunshine.  A
winsome, yet withal serious and even piteous figure, he conveys his
pleasantness, in spite of its gloomy theme, into Merimee’s one quite
cheerful book.
Cheerful, because, after all, the gloomy passions it presents are but
the accidents of a particular age, and not like the mental conditions
in which Merimee was most apt to look for the spectacle of human
power, allied to madness or disease in the individual.  For him, at
least, it was the office of fiction to carry one into a different if
not a better world than that actually around us; and if the Chronicle
of Charles the Ninth provided an escape from the tame circumstances
of contemporary life into an impassioned past, Colomba is a measure
of the resources for mental alteration which may be found even in the
modern age.  There was a corner of [23] the French Empire, in the
manners of which assassination still had a large part.
“The beauty of Corsica,” says Merimee, “is grave and sad.  The aspect
of the capital does but augment the impression caused by the solitude
that surrounds it.  There is no movement in the streets.  You hear
there none of the laughter, the singing, the loud talking, common in
the towns of Italy.  Sometimes, under the shadow of a tree on the
promenade, a dozen armed peasants will be playing cards, or looking
on at the game.  The Corsican is naturally silent.  Those who walk
the pavement are all strangers: the islanders stand at their doors:
every one seems to be on the watch, like a falcon on its nest.  All
around the gulf there is but an expanse of tanglework; beyond it,
bleached mountains.  Not a habitation!  Only, here and there, on the
heights about the town, certain white constructions detach themselves
from the background of green.  They are funeral chapels or family
tombs.”
Crude in colour, sombre, taciturn, Corsica, as Merimee here describes
it, is like the national passion of the Corsican–that morbid
personal pride, usurping the place even of grief for the dead, which
centuries of traditional violence had concentrated into an all-
absorbing passion for bloodshed, for bloody revenges, in collusion
with the natural wildness, and the wild social condition of the
island still unaffected even by the finer [24] ethics of the duel.
The supremacy of that passion is well indicated by the cry, put into
the mouth of a young man in the presence of the corpse of his father
deceased in the course of nature–a young man meant to be
commonplace.  “Ah!  Would thou hadst died malamorte–by violence!  We
might have avenged thee!”
In Colomba, Merimee’s best known creation, it is united to a
singularly wholesome type of personal beauty, a natural grace of
manner which is irresistible, a cunning intellect patiently diverting
every circumstance to its design; and presents itself as a kind of
genius, allied to fatal disease of mind.  The interest of Merimee’s
book is that it allows us to watch the action of this malignant power
on Colomba’s brother, Orso della Robbia, as it discovers, rouses,
concentrates to the leaping-point, in the somewhat weakly diffused
nature of the youth, the dormant elements of a dark humour akin to
her own.  Two years after his father’s murder, presumably at the
instigation of his ancestral enemies, the young lieutenant is
returning home in the company of two humorously conventional English
people, himself now half Parisianised, with an immense natural
cheerfulness, and willing to believe an account of the crime which
relieves those hated Barricini of all complicity in its guilt.  But
from the first, Colomba, with “voice soft and musical,” is at his
side, gathering every accident and echo and circumstance, the very
lightest circumstance, [25] into the chain of necessity which draws
him to the action every one at home expects of him as the head of his
race.  He is not unaware.  Her very silence on the matter speaks so
plainly.  “You are forming me!” he admits.  “Well! ’Hot shot, or cold
steel!’–you see I have not forgotten my Corsican.”  More and more,
as he goes on his way with her, he finds himself accessible to the
damning thoughts he has so long combated.  In horror, he tries to
disperse them by the memory of his comrades in the regiment, the
drawing-rooms of Paris, the English lady who has promised to be his
bride, and will shortly visit him in the humble manoir of his
ancestors.  From his first step among them the villagers of
Pietranera, divided already into two rival camps, are watching him in
suspense–Pietranera, perched among those deep forests where the
stifled sense of violent death is everywhere.  Colomba places in his
hands the little chest which contains the father’s shirt covered with
great spots of blood.  “Behold the lead that struck him!” and she
laid on the shirt two rusted bullets.  “Orso! you will avenge him!"
She embraces him with a kind of madness, kisses wildly the bullets
and the shirt, leaves him with the terrible relics already exerting
their mystic power upon him.  It is as if in the nineteenth century a
girl, amid Christian habits, had gone back to that primitive old
pagan version of the story of the Grail, which [26] identifies it not
with the Most Precious Blood, but only with the blood of a murdered
relation crying for vengeance.  Awake at last in his old chamber at
Pietranera, the house of the Barricini at the other end of the
square, with its rival tower and rudely carved escutcheons, stares
him in the face.  His ancestral enemy is there, an aged man now, but
with two well-grown sons, like two stupid dumb animals, whose
innocent blood will soon be on his so oddly lighted conscience.  At
times, his better hope seemed to lie in picking a quarrel and killing
at least in fair fight, one of these two stupid dumb animals; with
rude ill-suppressed laughter one day, as they overhear Colomba’s
violent utterances at a funeral feast, for she is a renowned
improvisatrice.  “Your father is an old man,” he finds himself
saying, “I could crush with my hands.  ’Tis for you I am destined,
for you and your brother!”  And if it is by course of nature that the
old man dies not long after the murder of these sons (self-provoked
after all), dies a fugitive at Pisa, as it happens, by an odd
accident, in the presence of Colomba, no violent death by Orso’s own
hand could have been more to her mind.  In that last hard page of
Merimee’s story, mere dramatic propriety itself for a moment seems to
plead for the forgiveness, which from Joseph and his brethren to the
present day, as we know, has been as winning in story as in actual
life.  Such dramatic propriety, however, was by no means [27] in
Merimee’s way.  “What I must have is the hand that fired the shot,"
she had sung, “the eye that guided it; aye! and the mind moreover–
the mind, which had conceived the deed!”  And now, it is in idiotic
terror, a fugitive from Orso’s vengeance, that the last of the
Barricini is dying.
Exaggerated art! you think.  But it was precisely such exaggerated
art, intense, unrelieved, an art of fierce colours, that is needed by
those who are seeking in art, as I said of Merimee, a kind of
artificial stimulus.  And if his style is still impeccably correct,
cold-blooded, impersonal, as impersonal as that of Scott himself, it
does but conduce the better to his one exclusive aim.  It is like the
polish of the stiletto Colomba carried always under her mantle, or
the beauty of the fire-arms, that beauty coming of nice adaptation to
purpose, which she understood so well–a task characteristic also of
Merimee himself, a sort of fanatic joy in the perfect pistol-shot, at
its height in the singular story he has translated from the Russian
of Pouchkine.  Those raw colours he preferred; Spanish, Oriental,
African, perhaps, irritant certainly to cisalpine eyes, he
undoubtedly attained the colouring you associate with sun-stroke,
only possible under a sun in which dead things rot quickly.
Pity and terror, we know, go to the making of the essential tragic
sense.  In Merimee, certainly, we have all its terror, but without
the [28] pity.  Saint-Clair, the consent of his mistress barely
attained at last, rushes madly on self-destruction, that he may die
with the taste of his great love fresh on his lips.  All the
grotesque accidents of violent death he records with visual
exactness, and no pains to relieve them; the ironic indifference, for
instance, with which, on the scaffold or the battle-field, a man will
seem to grin foolishly at the ugly rents through which his life has
passed.  Seldom or never has the mere pen of a writer taken us so
close to the cannon’s mouth as in the Taking of the Redoubt, while
Matteo Falcone–twenty-five short pages–is perhaps the cruellest
story in the world.
Colomba, that strange, fanatic being, who has a code of action, of
self-respect, a conscience, all to herself, who with all her virginal
charm only does not make you hate her, is, in truth, the type of a
sort of humanity Merimee found it pleasant to dream of–a humanity as
alien as the animals, with whose moral affinities to man his
imaginative work is often directly concerned.  Were they so alien,
after all?  Were there not survivals of the old wild creatures in the
gentlest, the politest of us?  Stories that told of sudden freaks of
gentle, polite natures, straight back, not into Paradise, were always
welcome to men’s fancies; and that could only be because they found a
psychologic truth in them.  With much success, with a credibility
insured by his literary tact, Merimee tried his own hand at such
stories: unfrocked the [29] bear in the amorous young Lithuanian
noble, the wolf in the revolting peasant of the Middle Age.  There
were survivals surely in himself, in that stealthy presentment of his
favourite themes, in his own art.  You seem to find your hand on a
serpent, in reading him.
In such survivals, indeed, you see the operation of his favourite
motive, the sense of wild power, under a sort of mask, or assumed
habit, realised as the very genius of nature itself; and that
interest, with some superstitions closely allied to it, the belief in
the vampire, for instance, is evidenced especially in certain
pretended Illyrian compositions–prose translations, the reader was
to understand, of more or less ancient popular ballads; La Guzla, he
called the volume, The Lyre, as we might say; only that the
instrument of the Illyrian minstrel had but one string.  Artistic
deception, a trick of which there is something in the historic
romance as such, in a book like his own Chronicle of Charles the
Ninth, was always welcome to Merimee; it was part of the machinery of
his rooted habit of intellectual reserve.  A master of irony also, in
Madame Lucrezia he seems to wish to expose his own method cynically;
to explain his art–how he takes you in–as a clever, confident
conjuror might do.  So properly were the readers of La Guzla taken in
that he followed up his success in that line by the Theatre of Clara
Gazul, purporting to be from a rare Spanish original, the work [30]
of a nun, who, under tame, conventual reading, had felt the touch of
mundane, of physical passions; had become a dramatic poet, and
herself a powerful actress.  It may dawn on you in reading her that
Merimee was a kind of Webster, but with the superficial mildness of
our nineteenth century.  At the bottom of the true drama there is
ever, logically at least, the ballad: the ballad dealing in a kind of
short-hand (or, say! in grand, simple, universal outlines) with those
passions, crimes, mistakes, which have a kind of fatality in them, a
kind of necessity to come to the surface of the human mind, if not to
the surface of our experience, as in the case of some frankly
supernatural incidents which Merimee re-handled.  Whether human love
or hatred has had most to do in shaping the universal fancy that the
dead come back, I cannot say.  Certainly that old ballad literature
has instances in plenty, in which the voice, the hand, the brief
visit from the grave, is a natural response to the cry of the human
creature.  That ghosts should return, as they do so often in
Merimee’s fiction, is but a sort of natural justice.  Only, in
Merimee’s prose ballads, in those admirable, short, ballad-like
stories, where every word tells, of which he was a master, almost the
inventor, they are a kind of half-material ghosts–a vampire tribe–
and never come to do people good; congruously with the mental
constitution of the writer, which, alike in fact and fiction, [31]
could hardly have horror enough–theme after theme.  Merimee himself
emphasises this almost constant motive of his fiction when he adds to
one of his volumes of short stories some letters on a matter of fact-
-a Spanish bull-fight, in which those old Romans, he regretted, might
seem, decadently, to have survived.  It is as if you saw it.  In
truth, Merimee was the unconscious parent of much we may think of
dubious significance in later French literature.  It is as if there
were nothing to tell of in this world but various forms of hatred,
and a love that is like lunacy; and the only other world, a world of
maliciously active, hideous, dead bodies.
Merimee, a literary artist, was not a man who used two words where
one would do better, and he shines especially in those brief
compositions which, like a minute intaglio, reveal at a glance his
wonderful faculty of design and proportion in the treatment of his
work, in which there is not a touch but counts.  That is an art of
which there are few examples in English; our somewhat diffuse, or
slipshod, literary language hardly lending itself to the
concentration of thought and expression, which are of the essence of
such writing.  It is otherwise in French, and if you wish to know
what art of that kind can come to, read Merimee’s little romances;
best of all, perhaps, La Venus d’Ille and Arsene Guillot.  The former
is a modern version of the beautiful old story of the Ring given to
Venus, given to her, in [32] this case, by a somewhat sordid creature
of the nineteenth century, whom she looks on with more than disdain.
The strange outline of the Canigou, one of the most imposing outlying
heights of the Pyrenees, down the mysterious slopes of which the
traveller has made his way towards nightfall into the great plain of
Toulouse, forms an impressive background, congruous with the many
relics of irrepressible old paganism there, but in entire contrast to
the bourgeois comfort of the place where his journey is to end, the
abode of an aged antiquary, loud and bright just now with the
celebration of a vulgar worldly marriage.  In the midst of this well-
being, prosaic in spite of the neighbourhood, in spite of the pretty
old wedding customs, morsels of that local colour in which Merimee
delights, the old pagan powers are supposed to reveal themselves once
more (malignantly, of course), in the person of a magnificent bronze
statue of Venus recently unearthed in the antiquary’s garden.  On her
finger, by ill-luck, the coarse young bridegroom on the morning of
his marriage places for a moment the bridal ring only too effectually
(the bronze hand closes, like a wilful living one, upon it), and
dies, you are to understand, in her angry metallic embraces on his
marriage night.  From the first, indeed, she had seemed bent on
crushing out men’s degenerate bodies and souls, though the
supernatural horror of the tale is adroitly made credible by a
certain vagueness in the [33] events, which covers a quite natural
account of the bridegroom’s mysterious death.
The intellectual charm of literary work so thoroughly designed as
Merimee’s depends in part on the sense as you read, hastily perhaps,
perhaps in need of patience, that you are dealing with a composition,
the full secret of which is only to be attained in the last
paragraph, that with the last word in mind you will retrace your
steps, more than once (it may be) noting then the minuter structure,
also the natural or wrought flowers by the way.  Nowhere is such
method better illustrated than by another of Merimee’s quintessential
pieces, Arsene Guillotand here for once with a conclusion ethically
acceptable also.  Merimee loved surprises in human nature, but it is
not often that he surprises us by tenderness or generosity of
character, as another master of French fiction, M. Octave Feuillet,
is apt to do; and the simple pathos of Arsene Guillot gives it a
unique place in Merimee’s writings.  It may be said, indeed, that
only an essentially pitiful nature could have told the exquisitely
cruel story of Matteo Falcone precisely as Merimee has told it; and
those who knew him testify abundantly to his own capacity for
generous friendship.  He was no more wanting than others in those
natural sympathies (sending tears to the eyes at the sight of
suffering age or childhood) which happily are no extraordinary
component in men’s natures.  It was, perhaps, no fitting return for a
[34] friendship of over thirty years to publish posthumously those
Lettres a une Inconnue, which reveal that reserved, sensitive, self-
centred nature, a little pusillanimously in the power, at the
disposition of another.  For just there lies the interest, the
psychological interest, of those letters.  An amateur of power, of
the spectacle of power and force, followed minutely but without
sensibility on his part, with a kind of cynic pride rather for the
mainspring of his method, both of thought and expression, you find
him here taken by surprise at last, and somewhat humbled, by an
unsuspected force of affection in himself.  His correspondent,
unknown but for these letters except just by name, figures in them
as, in truth, a being only too much like himself, seen from one side;
reflects his taciturnity, his touchiness, his incredulity except for
self-torment.  Agitated, dissatisfied, he is wrestling in her with
himself, his own difficult qualities.  He demands from her a freedom,
a frankness, he would have been the last to grant.  It is by first
thoughts, of course, that what is forcible and effective in human
nature, the force, therefore, of carnal love, discovers itself; and
for her first thoughts Merimee is always pleading, but always
complaining that he gets only her second thoughts; the thoughts, that
is, of a reserved, self-limiting nature, well under the yoke of
convention, like his own.  Strange conjunction!  At the beginning of
the correspondence he seems to have been [35] seeking only a fine
intellectual companionship; the lady, perhaps, looking for something
warmer.  Towards such companionship that likeness to himself in her
might have been helpful, but was not enough of a complement to his
own nature to be anything but an obstruction in love; and it is to
that, little by little, that his humour turns.  He–the
Megalopsychus, as Aristotle defines him–acquires all the lover’s
humble habits: himself displays all the tricks of love, its
casuistries, its exigency, its superstitions, aye! even its
vulgarities; involves with the significance of his own genius the
mere hazards and inconsequence of a perhaps average nature; but too
late in the day–the years.  After the attractions and repulsions of
half a lifetime, they are but friends, and might forget to be that,
but for his death, clearly presaged in his last weak, touching
letter, just two hours before.  There, too, had been the blind and
naked force of nature and circumstance, surprising him in the
uncontrollable movements of his own so carefully guarded heart.
The intimacy, the effusion, the so freely exposed personality of
those letters does but emphasise the fact that impersonality was, in
literary art, Merimee’s central aim.  Personality versus
impersonality in art:–how much or how little of one’s self one may
put into one’s work: whether anything at all of it: whether one can
put there anything else:–is clearly a far-reaching and complex
question.  Serviceable as [36] the basis of a precautionary maxim
towards the conduct of our work, self-effacement, or impersonality,
in literary or artistic creation, is, perhaps, after all, as little
possible as a strict realism.  “It has always been my rule to put
nothing of myself into my works,” says another great master of French
prose, Gustave Flaubert; but, luckily as we may think, he often
failed in thus effacing himself, as he too was aware.  “It has always
been my rule to put nothing of myself into my works” (to be
disinterested in his literary creations, so to speak), “yet I have
put much of myself into them”: and where he failed Merimee succeeded.
There they stand–Carmen, Colomba, the “False” Demetrius–as detached
from him as from each other, with no more filial likeness to their
maker than if they were the work of another person.  And to his
method of conception, Merimee’s much-praised literary style, his
method of expression, is strictly conformable–impersonal in its
beauty, the perfection of nobody’s style–thus vindicating anew by
its very impersonality that much worn, but not untrue saying, that
the style is the man:–a man, impassible, unfamiliar, impeccable,
veiling a deep sense of what is forcible, nay, terrible, in things,
under the sort of personal pride that makes a man a nice observer of
all that is most conventional.  Essentially unlike other people, he
is always fastidiously in the fashion–an expert in all the little,
half- [37] contemptuous elegances of which it is capable.  Merimee’s
superb self-effacement, his impersonality, is itself but an effective
personal trait, and, transferred to art, becomes a markedly peculiar
quality of literary beauty.  For, in truth, this creature of
disillusion who had no care for half-lights, and, like his creations,
had no atmosphere about him, gifted as he was with pure mind, with
the quality which secures flawless literary structure, had, on the
other hand, nothing of what we call soul in literature:–hence, also,
that singular harshness in his ideal, as if, in theological language,
he were incapable of grace.  He has none of those subjectivities,
colourings, peculiarities of mental refraction, which necessitate
varieties of style–could we spare such?–and render the perfections
of it no merely negative qualities.  There are masters of French
prose whose art has begun where the art of Merimee leaves off.
11. *A lecture delivered at the Taylor Institution, Oxford, and at
the London Institution.  Published in the Fortnightly Review, Dec.
1890, and now reprinted by the kind permission of the proprietors.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of Essays” by Walter Horatio Pater.


Also by this author (on Amazon.com); The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of EssaysBy Walter Horatio PaterAt Amazon
