


Great misconceptions have always prevailed about the Roman dinner.
Dinner [coena] was the only meal which the Romans as a nation took. It
was no accident, but arose out of their whole social economy. This we shall
show by running through the history of a Roman day. Ridentem dicere, verum
quid vetat? And the course of this review will expose one or two important
truths in ancient political economy, which have been wholly overlooked.
With the lark it was that the Roman rose. Not that the earliest lark rises
so early in Latium as the earliest lark in England; that is, during summer:
but then, on the other hand, neither does it ever rise so late. The Roman
citizen was stirring with the dawn–which, allowing for the shorter
longest-day and longer shortest-day of Rome, you may call about four in
summer–about seven in winter. Why did he do this? Because he went to bed
at a very early hour. But why did he do that? By backing in this way, we
shall surely back into the very well of truth: always, if it is possible,
let us have the pourquoi of the pourquoi. The Roman went to bed early
for two special reasons. 1st, Because in Rome, which had been built for a
martial destiny, every habit of life had reference to the usages of war.
Every citizen, if he were not a mere proletarian animal kept at the public
cost, held himself a sort of soldier-elect: the more noble he was, the
more was his liability to military service: in short, all Rome, and at all
times, was consciously “in procinct."[1] Now it was a principle of ancient
warfare, that every hour of daylight had a triple worth, if valued
against hours of darkness. That was one reason–a reason suggested by the
understanding. But there was a second reason, far more remarkable; and this
was a reason dictated by a blind necessity. It is an important fact, that
this planet on which we live, this little industrious earth of ours, has
developed her wealth by slow stages of increase. She was far from being the
rich little globe in Cæsar’s days that she is at present. The earth in our
days is incalculably richer, as a whole, than in the time of Charlemagne:
at that time she was richer, by many a million of acres, than in the era
of Augustus. In that Augustan era we descry a clear belt of cultivation,
averaging about six hundred miles in depth, running in a ring-fence about
the Mediterranean. This belt, and no more, was in decent cultivation.
Beyond that belt, there was only a wild Indian cultivation. At present
what a difference! We have that very belt, but much richer, all things
considered æquatis æquandis, than in the Roman era. The reader must not
look to single cases, as that of Egypt or other parts of Africa, but take
the whole collectively. On that scheme of valuation, we have the old Roman
belt, the Mediterranean riband not much tarnished, and we have all the
rest of Europe to boot–or, speaking in scholar’s language, as a lucro
ponamus. We say nothing of remoter gains. Such being the case, our mother,
the earth, being (as a whole) so incomparably poorer, could not in the
Pagan era support the expense of maintaining great empires in cold
latitudes. Her purse would not reach that cost. Wherever she undertook in
those early ages to rear man in great abundance, it must be where nature
would consent to work in partnership with herself; where warmth was to
be had for nothing; where clothes were not so entirely indispensable but
that a ragged fellow might still keep himself warm; where slight sheltermight serve; and where the soil, if not absolutely richer in reversionary
wealth, was more easily cultured. Nature must come forward liberally, and
take a number of shares in every new joint-stock concern before it could
move. Man, therefore, went to bed early in those ages, simply because his
worthy mother earth could not afford him candles. She, good old lady, (or
good young lady, for geologists know not[2] whether she is in that stage
of her progress which corresponds to gray hairs, or to infancy, or to “a
certain age,”)–she, good lady, would certainly have shuddered to hear
any of her nations asking for candles. “Candles!” She would have said, “Who
ever heard of such a thing? and with so much excellent daylight running to
waste, as I have provided gratis! What will the wretches want next?”
The daylight, furnished gratis, was certainly “neat,” and “undeniable"
in its quality, and quite sufficient for all purposes that were honest.
Seneca, even in his own luxurious period, called those men ’lucifugæ,"
and by other ugly names, who lived chiefly by candle-light. None but rich
and luxurious men, nay, even amongst these, none but idlers did live much
by candle-light. An immense majority of men in Rome never lighted a candle,
unless sometimes in the early dawn. And this custom of Rome was the custom
also of all nations that lived round the great pond of the Mediterranean.
In Athens, Egypt, Palestine, Asia Minor, everywhere, the ancients went to
bed, like good boys, from seven to nine o’clock.[3] The Turks and other
people, who have succeeded to the stations and the habits of the ancients,
do so at this day.
The Roman, therefore, who saw no joke in sitting round a table in the dark,
went off to bed as the darkness began. Everybody did so. Old Numa Pompilius
himself, was obliged to trundle off in the dusk. Tarquinius might be a very
superb fellow; but we doubt whether he ever saw a farthing rushlight. And,
though it may be thought that plots and conspiracies would flourish in
such a city of darkness, it is to be considered, that the conspirators
themselves had no more candles than honest men: both parties were in the
dark.
Being up then, and stirring not long after the lark, what mischief did the
Roman go about first? Now-a-days, he would have taken a pipe or a cigar.
But, alas for the ignorance of the poor heathen creatures! they had neither
one nor the other. In this point, we must tax our mother earth with
being really too stingy. In the case of the candles, we approve of her
parsimony. Much mischief is brewed by candle-light. But, it was coming it
too strong to allow no tobacco. Many a wild fellow in Rome, your Gracchi,
Syllas, Catilines, would not have played “h–– and Tommy” in the way they
did, if they could have soothed their angry stomachs with a cigar–a pipe
has intercepted many an evil scheme. But the thing is past helping now. At
Rome, you must do as “they does” at Rome. So, after shaving, (supposing the
age of the Barbati to be passed), what is the first business that our
Roman will undertake? Forty to one he is a poor man, born to look upwards
to his fellow-men–and not to look down upon anybody but slaves. He goes,
therefore, to the palace of some grandee, some top-sawyer of the Senatorian
order. This great man, for all his greatness, has turned out even sooner
than himself. For he also has had no candles and no cigars; and he well
knows, that before the sun looks into his portals, all his halls will be
overflowing and buzzing with the matin susurrus of courtiers–the “mane
salutantes."[4] it is as much as his popularity is worth to absent himself,
or to keep people waiting. But surely, the reader may think, this poor man
he might keep waiting. No, he might not; for, though poor, being a citizen,
he is a gentleman. That was the consequence of keeping slaves. Wherever
there is a class of slaves, he that enjoys the jus suffragii (no
matter how poor) is a gentleman. The true Latin word for a gentleman is
ingentius–a freeman and the son of a freeman.
Yet even here there were distinctions. Under the Emperors, the courtiers
were divided into two classes: with respect to the superior class, it was
said of the sovereign–that he saw them, (videbat;) with respect to the
other–that he was seen, ("videbatur.”) Even Plutarch mentions it as
a common boast in his times, [Greek: aemas eiden ho basileus]–Cæsar is
in the habit of seeing me; or, as a common plea for evading a suit,
[Greek: ora mallon]–I am sorry to say he is more inclined to look upon
others. And this usage derived itself (mark that well!) from the
republican era. The aulic spirit was propagated by the Empire, but from
a republican root.
Having paid his court, you will suppose that our friend comes home to
breakfast. Not at all: no such discovery as “breakfast” had then been made:
breakfast was not invented for many centuries after that. We have always
admired, and always shall admire, as the very best of all human stories,
Charles Lamb’s account of the origin of roast pig in China. Ching Ping,
it seems, had suffered his father’s house to be burned down; the outhouses
were burned along with the house; and in one of these the pigs, by
accident, were roasted to a turn. Memorable were the results for all future
China and future civilization. Ping, who (like all China beside) had
hitherto eaten his pig raw, now for the first time tasted it in a state
of torrefaction. Of course he made his peace with his father by a part
(tradition says a leg) of the new dish. The father was so astounded with
the discovery, that he burned his house down once a year for the sake of
coming at an annual banquet of roast pig. A curious prying sort of fellow,
one Chang Pang, got to know of this. He also burned down a house with a
pig in it, and had his eyes opened. The secret was ill kept–the discovery
spread–many great conversions were made–houses were blazing in every part
of the Celestial Empire. The insurance offices took the matter up.
One Chong Pong, detected in the very act of shutting up a pig in his
drawing-room, and then firing a train, was indicted on a charge of arson.
The chief justice of Pekin, on that occasion, requested an officer of the
court to hand him a piece of the roast pig, the corpus delicti, for pure
curiosity led him to taste; but within two days after it was observed that
his lordship’s town-house was burned down. In short, all China apostatized
to the new faith; and it was not until some centuries had passed, that a
great genius arose, who established the second era in the history of roast
pig, by showing that it could be had without burning down a house.
No such genius had yet arisen in Rome. Breakfast was not suspected. No
prophecy, no type of breakfast had been published. In fact, it took as much
time and research to arrive at that great discovery as at the Copernican
system. True it is, reader, that you have heard of such a word as
jentaculum; and your dictionary translates that old heathen word by
the Christian word breakfast. But dictionaries, one and all, are dull
deceivers. Between jentaculum and breakfast the differences are as wide
as between a horse-chestnut and chestnut horse; differences in the time
when, in the place where, in the manner how, but preeminently in the
thing which.
Galen is a good authority upon such a subject, since, if (like other
pagans) he ate no breakfast himself, in some sense he may be called the
cause of breakfast to other men, by treating of those things which could
safely be taken upon an empty stomach. As to the time, he (like many other
authors) says, [peri tritaen, ae (to makroteron) peri tetartaen,]
about the third, or at farthest about the fourth hour: and so exact is he,
that he assumes the day to lie exactly between six and six o’clock, and to
be divided into thirteen equal portions. So the time will be a few minutes
before nine, or a few minutes before ten, in the forenoon. That seems fair
enough. But it is not time in respect to its location that we are so
much concerned with, as time in respect to its duration. Now, heaps of
authorities take it for granted, that you are not to sit down–you are to
stand; and, as to the place, that any place will do–"any corner of the
forum,” says Galen, “any corner that you fancy;” which is like referring a
man for his salle à manger to Westminster Hall or Fleet Street. Augustus,
in a letter still surviving, tells us that he jentabat, or took his
jentaculum in his carriage; now in a wheel carriage, (in essedo,) now
in a litter or palanquin (in lecticâ.) This careless and disorderly
way as to time and place, and other circumstances of haste, sufficiently
indicate the quality of the meal you are to expect. Already you are
“sagacious of your quarry from so far.” Not that we would presume,
excellent reader, to liken you to Death, or to insinuate that you are
“a grim feature.” But would it not make a saint “grim,” to hear of such
preparations for the morning meal? And then to hear of such consummations
as panis siccus, dry bread; or, (if the learned reader thinks it will
taste better in Greek,) [Greek: artos xaeros!] And what may this word
dry happen to mean? “Does it mean stale bread?” says Salmasius. “Shall
we suppose,” says he, in querulous words, ’molli et recenti opponi,” and
from that antithesis conclude it to be, ’durum et non recens coctum, eoque
sicciorem?” Hard and stale, and for that reason the more arid! Not quite
so bad as that, we hope. Or again–"siccum pro biscocto, ut hodie vocamus,
sumemus?"[5] By hodie Salmasius means, amongst his countrymen of France,
where biscoctus is verbatim reproduced in the word bis (twice) cuit,
(baked;) whence our own biscuit. Biscuit might do very well, could we be
sure that it was cabin biscuit: but Salmasius argues–that in this case he
takes it to mean ’buccellatum, qui est panis nauticus;” that is, the ship
company’s biscuit, broken with a sledge-hammer. In Greek, for the benefit
again of the learned reader, it is termed [Greek: dipuros], indicating
that it has passed twice under the action of fire.
“Well,” you say, “No matter if it had passed fifty times–and through the
fires of Moloch; only let us have this biscuit, such as it is.” In good
faith, then, fasting reader, you are not likely to see much more than you
have seen. It is a very Barmecide feast, we do assure you–this same
“jentaculum;” at which abstinence and patience are much more exercised than
the teeth: faith and hope are the chief graces cultivated, together with
that species of the magnificum which is founded on the ignotum. Even
this biscuit was allowed in the most limited quantities; for which reason
it is that the Greeks called this apology for a a meal by the name
of [Greek: bouchismos], a word formed (as many words were in the
Post-Augustan ages) from a Latin word–viz., buccea, a mouthful; not
literally such, but so much as a polished man could allow himself to put
into his mouth at once. “We took a mouthful,” says Sir William Waller, the
Parliamentary general, “took a mouthful; paid our reckoning; mounted;
and were off.” But there Sir William means, by his plausible “mouthful,"
something very much beyond either nine or nineteen ordinary quantities of
that denomination, whereas the Roman “jentaculum” was literally such; and,
accordingly, one of the varieties under which the ancient vocabularies
express this model of evanescent quantities is gustatio, a mere tasting;
and again it is called by another variety, gustus, a mere taste: [whence
by the usual suppression of the s, comes the French word for a collation
or luncheon, viz. gouter] Speaking of his uncle, Pliny the Younger
says–"Post solem plerumque lavabatur; deinde gustabat; dormiebat minimum;
mox, quasi alio die, studebat in coenæ tempus”. “After taking the air he
bathed; after that he broke his fast on a bit of biscuit, and took a
very slight siesta: which done, as if awaking to a new day, he set in
regularly to his studies, and pursued them to dinner-time.” Gustabathere meant that nondescript meal which arose at Rome when jentaculum and
prandium were fused into one, and that only a taste or mouthful of
biscuit, as we shall show farther on.
Possibly, however, most excellent reader, like some epicurean traveller,
who, in crossing the Alps, finds himself weather-bound at St. Bernard’s
on Ash-Wednesday, you surmise a remedy: you descry some opening from “the
loopholes of retreat,” through which a few delicacies might be insinuated
to spread verdure on this arid desert of biscuit. Casuistry can do much. A
dead hand at casuistry has often proved more than a match for Lent with all
his quarantines. But sorry we are to say that, in this case, no relief is
hinted at in any ancient author. A grape or two, (not a bunch of grapes,)
a raisin or two, a date, an olive–these are the whole amount of relief[6]
which the chancery of the Roman kitchen granted in such cases. All things
here hang together, and prove each other; the time, the place, the mode,
the thing. Well might man eat standing, or eat in public, such a trifle
as this. Go home to such a breakfast as this! You would as soon think of
ordering a cloth to be laid in order to eat a peach, or of asking a friend
to join you in an orange. No man makes “two bites of a cherry.” So let
us pass on to the other stages of the day. Only in taking leave of this
morning stage, throw your eyes back with us, Christian reader, upon this
truly heathen meal, fit for idolatrous dogs like your Greeks and your
Romans; survey, through the vista of ages, that thrice-cursed biscuit, with
half a fig, perhaps, by way of garnish, and a huge hammer by its side, to
secure the certainty of mastication, by previous comminution. Then turn
your eyes to a Christian breakfast–hot rolls, eggs, coffee, beef; but
down, down, rebellious visions: we need say no more! You, reader, like
ourselves, will breathe a malediction on the classical era, and thank your
stars for making you a Romanticist. Every morning we thank ours for keeping
us back, and reserving us to an age in which breakfast had been already
invented. In the words of Ovid we say:–
“Prisca juvent alios: ego me nunc denique natum Gratulor. Hæc ætas moribus
apta meis.”
Our friend, the Roman cit, has therefore thus far, in his progress through
life, obtained no breakfast, if he ever contemplated an idea so frantic.
But it occurs to you, our faithful reader, that perhaps he will not always
be thus unhappy. We could bring waggon-loads of sentiments, Greek as well
as Roman, which prove, more clearly than the most eminent pikestaff, that,
as the wheel of fortune revolves, simply out of the fact that it has
carried a man downwards, it must subsequently carry him upwards, no matter
what dislike that wheel, or any of its spokes, may bear to that man: “non,
si male nunc sit, et olim sic erit:” and that if a man, through the madness
of his nation, misses coffee and hot rolls at nine, he may easily run into
a leg of mutton at twelve. True it is he may do so: truth is commendable;
and we will not deny that a man may sometimes, by losing a breakfast, gain
a dinner. Such things have been in various ages, and will be again, but not
at Rome. There are reasons against it. We have heard of men who consider
life under the idea of a wilderness–dry as “a remainder biscuit after a
voyage:” and who consider a day under the idea of a little life. Life
is the macrocosm, or world at large; day is the microcosm, or world in
miniature. Consequently, if life is a wilderness, then day, as a little
life, is a little wilderness. And this wilderness can be safely traversed
only by having relays of fountains, or stages for refreshment. Such
stages, they conceive, are found in the several meals which Providence has
stationed at due intervals through the day, whenever the perverseness of
man does not break the chain, or derange the order of succession.
These are the anchors by which man rides in that billowy ocean between
morning and night. The first anchor, viz., breakfast, having given way in
Rome, the more need there is that he should pull up by the second; and
that is often reputed to be dinner. And as your dictionary, good reader,
translated breakfast by that vain word jentaculum, so, doubtless, it
will translate dinner by that still vainer word prandium. Sincerely we
hope that your own dinner on this day, and through all time coming, may
have a better root in fact and substance than this most visionary of all
baseless things–the Roman prandium, of which we shall presently show you
that the most approved translation is moonshine.
Reader, we are not jesting here. In the very spirit of serious truth, we
assure you, that the delusion about “jentaculum” is even exceeded by this
other delusion about “prandium.” Salmasius himself, for whom a natural
prejudice of place and time partially obscured the truth, admits, however,
that prandium was a meal which the ancients rarely took; his very words
are–"raro prandebant veteres.” Now, judge for yourself of the good sense
which is shown in translating by the word dinner, which must of necessity
mean the chief meal–a Roman word which represents a fancy meal, a meal of
caprice, a meal which few people took. At this moment, what is the single
point of agreement between the noon meal of the English laborer and the
evening meal of the English gentleman? What is the single circumstance
common to both, which causes us to denominate them by the common name of
dinner? It is that in both we recognize the principal meal of the
day, the meal upon which is thrown the onus of the day’s support. In
everything else they are as wide asunder as the poles; but they agree in
this one point of their function. Is it credible that, to represent such a
meal amongst ourselves, we select a Roman word so notoriously expressing a
mere shadow, a pure apology, that very few people ever tasted it–nobody
sate down to it–not many washed their hands after it, and gradually the
very name of it became interchangeable with another name, implying the
slightest possible act of trying or sipping? ’Post larationem sine mensâ
prandium,” says Seneca, ’post quod non sunt lavandæ manus;” that is,
“after bathing, I take a prandium without sitting down to table, and such
a prandium as brings after itself no need of washing the hands.” No;
moonshine as little soils the hands as it oppresses the stomach.
Reader! we, as well as Pliny, had an uncle, an East Indian uncle; doubtless
you have such an uncle; everybody has an Indian uncle. Generally such a
person is “rather yellow, rather yellow,” [to quote Canning versus Lord
Durham:] that is the chief fault with his physics; but, as to his morals,
he is universally a man of princely aspirations and habits. He is not
always so orientally rich as he is reputed; but he is always orientally
munificent. Call upon him at any hour from two to five, he insists on your
taking tiffin: and such a tiffin! The English corresponding term is
luncheon: but how meagre a shadow is the European meal to its glowing
Asiatic cousin! Still, gloriously as tiffin shines, does anybody imagine
that it is a vicarious dinner, or ever meant to be the substitute of
dinner? Wait till eight, and you will have your eyes opened on that
subject. So of the Roman prandium: had it been as luxurious as it was
simple, still it was always viewed as something meant only to stay the
stomach, as a prologue to something beyond. The prandium was far enough
from giving the feeblest idea of the English luncheon; yet it stood in the
same relation to the Roman day. Now to Englishmen that meal scarcely
exists; and were it not for women, whose delicacy of organization does
not allow them to fast so long as men, would probably be abolished. It is
singular in this, as in other points, how nearly England and ancient Rome
approximate. We all know how hard it is to tempt a man generally into
spoiling his appetite, by eating before dinner. The same dislike of
violating what they called the integrity of the appetite, [integram
famem,] existed at Rome. Every man who knows anything of Latin critically,
sees the connection of the word integer with in and tetigi: integermeans what is intact, unviolated by touch. Cicero, when protesting
against spoiling his appetite for dinner, by tasting anything beforehand,
says, integram famem ad coenam afferam; I shall bring to dinner an
appetite untampered with. Nay, so much stress did the Romans lay on
maintaining this primitive state of the appetite undisturbed, that any
prelusions with either jentaculum or prandium were said, by a very
strong phrase indeed, polluere famem, to pollute the sanctity of the
appetite. The appetite was regarded as a holy vestal flame, soaring upwards
towards dinner throughout the day: if undebauched, it tended to its natural
consummation in coena: expired like a phoenix, to rise again out of its
own ashes. On this theory, to which language had accommodated itself, the
two prelusive meals of nine o’clock, A.M., and of one, P.M., so far from
being ratified by the public sense, and adopted into the economy of the
day, were regarded gloomily as gross irregularities, enormities, debauchers
of the natural instinct; and, in so far as they thwarted that instinct,
lessened it, or depraved it, were universally held to be full of pollution;
and, finally, to profane a motion of nature. Such was the language.
But we guess what is passing in the reader’s mind. He thinks that all this
proves the prandium to have been a meal of little account; and in very
many cases absolutely unknown. But still he thinks all this might happen to
the English dinner–that might be neglected; supper might be generally
preferred; and, nevertheless, dinner would be as truly entitled to the name
of dinner as before. Many a student neglects his dinner; enthusiasm in any
pursuit must often have extinguished appetite for all of us. Many a time
and oft did this happen to Sir Isaac Newton. Evidence is on record, that
such a deponent at eight o’clock, A.M., found Sir Isaac with one stocking
on, one off; at two, said deponent called him to dinner. Being interrogated
whether Sir Isaac had pulled on the minus stocking, or gartered the
plus stocking, witness replied that he had not. Being asked if Sir Isaac
came to dinner, replied that he did not. Being again asked, “At sunset, did
you look in on Sir Isaac?” Witness replied, “I did.” “And now, upon your
conscience, sir, by the virtue of your oath, in what state were the
stockings?” Ans. “In statu quo ante bellum.” It seems Sir Isaac had
fought through that whole battle of a long day, so trying a campaign to
many people–be had traversed that whole sandy Zaarah, without calling, or
needing to call at one of those fountains, stages, or mansiones,[7] by
which (according to our former explanation) Providence has relieved the
continuity of arid soil, which else disfigures that long dreary level. This
happens to all; but was dinner not dinner, and did supper become dinner,
because Sir Isaac Newton ate nothing at the first, and threw the whole
day’s support upon the last? No, you will say, a rule is not defeated by
one casual deviation, nor by one person’s constant deviation. Everybody
else was still dining at two, though Sir Isaac might not; and Sir Isaac
himself on most days no more deferred his dinner beyond two, than he sate
with one stocking off. But what if everybody, Sir Isaac included, had
deferred his substantial meal until night, and taken a slight refection
only at two? The question put does really represent the very case which has
happened with us in England. In 1700, a large part of London took a meal
at two, P.M., and another at seven or eight, P.M. In 1839, a large part
of London is still doing the very same thing, taking one meal at two, and
another at seven or eight. But the names are entirely changed: the two
o’clock meal used to be called dinner, and is now called luncheon; the
eight o’clock meal used to be called supper, and is now called dinner.
Now the question is easily solved: because, upon reviewing the idea of
dinner, we soon perceive that time has little or no connection with it:
since, both in England and France, dinner has travelled, like the hand of a
clock, through every hour between ten, A.M. and ten, P.M. We have a list,
well attested, of every successive hour between these limits having been
the known established hour for the royal dinner-table within the last three
hundred and fifty years. Time, therefore, vanishes from the equation: it is
a quantity as regularly exterminated as in any algebraic problem. The true
elements of the idea, are evidently these:–1. That dinner is that meal, no
matter when taken, which is the principal meal; i.e. the meal on which
the day’s support is thrown. 2. That it is the meal of hospitality. 3. That
it is the meal (with reference to both Nos 1 and 2) in which animal food
predominates. 4. That it is that meal which, upon necessity arising for the
abolition of all but one, would naturally offer itself as that one. Apply
these four tests to prandium:–How could that meal answer to the first
test, as the day’s support, which few people touched? How could that meal
answer to the second test, as the meal of hospitality, at which nobody
sate down? How could that meal answer to the third test, as the meal of
animal food, which consisted exclusively and notoriously of bread? Or to
the fourth test, of the meal entitled to survive the abolition of the
rest, which was itself abolished at all times in practice?
Tried, therefore, by every test, prandium vanishes. But we have something
further to communicate about this same prandium.
I. It came to pass, by a very natural association of feeling, that
prandium and jentuculum, in the latter centuries of Rome, were
generally confounded. This result was inevitable. Both professed the
same basis Both came in the morning. Both were fictions. Hence they were
confounded.
That fact speaks for itself,–breakfast and luncheon never could have been
confounded; but who would be at the pains of distinguishing two shadows? In
a gambling-house of that class, where you are at liberty to sit down to a
splendid banquet, anxiety probably prevents your sitting down at all; but,
if you do, the same cause prevents your noticing what you eat. So of the
two pseudo meals of Rome, they came in the very midst of the Roman
business; viz. from nine, A.M. to two, P.M. Nobody could give his mind
to them, had they been of better quality. There lay one cause of their
vagueness, viz.–in their position. Another cause was, the common basis of
both. Bread was so notoriously the predominating “feature” in each of these
prelusive banquets, that all foreigners at Rome, who communicated with
Romans through the Greek language, knew both the one and the other by the
name of [Greek: artositos], or the bread repast. Originally this name
had been restricted to the earlier meal. But a distinction without a
difference could not sustain itself: and both alike disguised their
emptiness under this pompous quadrisyllable. In the identity of substance,
therefore, lay a second ground of confusion. And, then, thirdly, even as
to the time, which had ever been the sole real distinction, there arose
from accident a tendency to converge. For it happened that while some had
jentaculum but no prandium, others had prandium but no jentaculum;
a third party had both; a fourth party, by much the largest, had neither.
Out of which varieties (who would think that a nonentity could cut up
into so many somethings?) arose a fifth party of compromisers, who,
because they could not afford a regular coena, and yet were
hospitably disposed, fused the two ideas into one; and so, because the
usual time for the idea of a breakfast was nine to ten, and for the idea
of a luncheon twelve to one, compromised the rival pretensions by what
diplomatists call a mezzo termine; bisecting the time at eleven, and
melting the two ideas into one. But by thus merging the separate times
of each, they abolished the sole real difference that had ever divided
them. Losing that, they lost all.
Perhaps, as two negatives make one affirmative, it may be thought that two
layers of moonshine might coalesce into one pancake; and two Barmecide
banquets might compose one poached egg. Of that the company were the best
judges. But probably, as a rump and dozen, in our land of wagers, is
construed with a very liberal latitude as to the materials, so Martial’s
invitation, “to take bread with him at eleven,” might be understood by the
[Greek: sunetoi] as significant of something better than
[Greek: artositos]. Otherwise, in good truth, “moonshine and turn-out"
at eleven, A.M., would be even worse than “tea and turn-out” at eight,
P.M., which the “fervida juventus” of young England so loudly detests. But
however that might be, in this convergement of the several frontiers, and
the confusion that ensued, one cannot wonder that, whilst the two bladders
collapsed into one idea, they actually expanded into four names, two Latin
and two Greek, gustus and gustatio, [Greek: geusis], and
[Greek: geusma], which all alike express the merely tentative or
exploratory act of a prægustator or professional “taster” in a
king’s household: what, if applied to a fluid, we should denominate
sipping.
At last, by so many steps all in one direction, things had come to such
a pass–the two prelusive meals of the Roman morning, each for itself
separately vague from the beginning, had so communicated and interfused
their several and joint vaguenesses, that at last no man knew or cared to
know what any other man included in his idea of either; how much or how
little. And you might as well have hunted in the woods of Ethiopia for
Prester John, or fixed the parish of the everlasting Jew,[8] as have
attempted to say what “jentaculum” might be, or what “prandium.” Only one
thing was clear–what they were not. Neither was or wished to be anything
that people cared for. They were both empty shadows; but shadows as they
were, we find from Cicero that they had a power of polluting and profaning
better things than themselves.
We presume that no rational man will henceforth look for “dinner"–that
great idea according to Dr. Johnson–that sacred idea according to
Cicero–in a bag of moonshine on one side, or a bag of pollution on
the other. Prandium, so far from being what our foolish dictionaries
pretend–dinner itself–never in its palmiest days was more or other than
a miserable attempt at being luncheon. It was a conatus, what
physiologists call a nisus, a struggle in a very ambitious spark,
or scintilla, to kindle into a fire. This nisus went on for some
centuries; but finally issued in smoke. If prandium had worked out his
ambition, had “the great stream of tendency” accomplished all his wishes,
prandium never could have been more than a very indifferent luncheon. But
now,
II. We have to offer another fact, ruinous to our dictionaries on another
ground. Various circumstances have disguised the truth, but a truth it is,
that “prandium”, in its very origin and incunabula, never was a meal
known to the Roman culina. In that court it was never recognized except
as an alien. It had no original domicile in the city of Rome. It was a vot
casfren-sis, a word and an idea purely martial, and pointing to martial
necessities. Amongst the new ideas proclaimed to the recruit, this was
one–"Look for no ’coenu’, no regular dinner, with us. Resign these
unwarlike notions. It is true that even war has its respites; in these
it would be possible to have our Roman coena with all its equipage of
ministrations. Such luxury untunes the mind for doing and suffering. Let us
voluntarily renounce it; that when a necessity of renouncing it arrives, we
may not feel it among the hardships of war. From the day when you enter the
gates of the camp, reconcile yourself, tyro, to a new fashion of meal, to
what in camp dialect we call prandium.” This “prandium,” this essentially
military meal, was taken standing, by way of symbolizing the necessity of
being always ready for the enemy. Hence the posture in which it was taken
at Rome, the very counter-pole to the luxurious posture of dinner. A writer
of the third century, a period from which the Romans naturally looked back
upon everything connected with their own early habits, and with the same
kind of interest as we extend to our Alfred, (separated from us as Romulus
from them by just a thousand years,) in speaking of prandium, says, “Quod
dictum est parandium, ab eo quod milites ad bellum paret.” Isidorus
again says, “Proprie apud veteres prandium vocatum fuisse oinnem militum
cibum ante pugnam;” i.e. “that, properly speaking, amongst our ancestors
every military meal taken before battle was termed prandium.” According
to Isidore, the proposition is reciprocating, viz., that, as every
prandium was a military meal, so every military meal was called
prandium. But, in fact, the reason of that is apparent. Whether in the
camp or the city, the early Romans had probably but one meal in a day. That
is true of many a man amongst ourselves by choice; it is true also, to our
knowledge, of some horse regiments in our service, and may be of all. This
meal was called coena, or dinner in the city–prandium in camps. In the
city it would always be tending to one fixed hour. In the camp innumerable
accidents of war would make it very uncertain. On this account it would
be an established rule to celebrate the daily meal at noon, if nothing
hindered; not that a later hour would not have been preferred had the
choice been free; but it was better to have a certainty at a bad hour, than
by waiting for a better hour to make it an uncertainty. For it was a camp
proverb–Pransus, paratus; armed with his daily meal, the soldier
is ready for service. It was not, however, that all meals, as Isidore
imagined, were indiscriminately called prandium; but that the one sole
meal of the day, by accidents of war, might, and did, revolve through all
hours of the day.
The first introduction of this military meal into Rome itself, would be
through the honorable pedantry of old centurions, &c., delighting (like the
Trunnions, &c., of our navy) to keep up in peaceful life some image or
memorial of their past experience, so wild, so full of peril, excitement,
and romance, as Roman warfare must have been in those ages. Many
non-military people for health’s sake, many as an excuse for eating early,
many by way of interposing some refreshment between the stages of forensic
business, would adopt this hurried and informal meal. Many would wish to
see their sons adopting such a meal as a training for foreign service in
particular, and for temperance in general. It would also be maintained by a
solemn and very interesting commemoration of this camp repast in Rome.
This commemoration, because it has been grossly misunderstood by Salmasius,
(whose error arose from not marking the true point of a particular
antithesis,) and still more, because it is a distinct confirmation of all
we have said as to the military nature of prandium, we shall detach from
the series of our illustrations, by placing it in a separate paragraph.
On a set day the officers of the army were invited by Cæsar to a banquet;
it was a circumstance expressly noticed in the invitation, by the proper
officers of the palace, that the banquet was not a “coena,” but a
“prandium.” What followed, in consequence? Why, that all the guests sate
down in full military accoutrement; whereas, observes the historian, had it
been a coena, the officers would have unbelted their swords; for, he adds,
even in Cæsar’s presence the officers lay aside their swords. The word
prandium, in short, converted the palace into the imperial tent; and
Cæsar was no longer a civil emperor and princeps senatûs, but became a
commander-in-chief amongst a council of his staff, all belted and plumed,
and in full military fig.
On this principle we come to understand why it is, that, whenever the Latin
poets speak of an army as taking food, the word used is always prandensand pransus; and, when the word used is prandens, then always it is an
army that is concerned. Thus Juvenal in a well-known satire–
  ––"Credimus altos
  Desiccasse amnes, epotaque ftumina, Medo Prandente.”
Not coenante, observe: you might as well talk of an army taking tea
and toast. Nor is that word ever applied to armies. It is true that the
converse is not so rigorously observed: nor ought it, from the explanations
already given. Though no soldier dined, (coenabat,) yet the citizen
sometimes adopted the camp usage and took a prandium. But generally the
poets use the word merely to mark the time of day. In that most humorous
appeal of Perseus–"Cur quis non prandeat, hoc est?” “Is this a sufficient
reason for losing one’s prandium?” He was obliged to say prandium,
because no exhibitions ever could cause a man to lose his coenia, since
none were displayed at a time of day when anybody in Rome would have
attended. Just as, in alluding to a parliamentary speech notoriously
delivered at midnight, an English satirist must have said, Is this a speech
to furnish an argument for leaving one’s bed?–not as what stood foremost
in his regard, but as the only thing that could be lost at the time of
night.
On this principle, also, viz. by going back to the military origin of
prandium, we gain the interpretation of all the peculiarities attached to
it; viz.–1, its early hour–2, its being taken in a standing posture–3,
in the open air–4, the humble quality of its materials–bread and biscuit,
(the main articles of military fare.) In all these circumstances of the
meal, we read, most legibly written, the exotic and military character of
the meal.
Thus we have brought down our Roman friend to noonday, or even one hour
later than noon, and to this moment the poor man has had nothing to eat.
For, supposing him to be not impransus, and supposing him jentâssebeside; yet it is evident, (we hope,) that neither one nor the other means
more than what it was often called, viz. [Greek: Bouchismos], or, in
plain English, a mouthful. How long do we intend to keep him waiting?
Reader, he will dine at three, or (supposing dinner put off to the latest)
at four. Dinner was never known to be later than the tenth hour in Rome,
which in summer would be past five; but for a far greater proportion of
days would be near four in Rome, except for one or two of the emperors,
whom the mere business attached to their unhappy station kept sometimes
dinnerless till six. And so entirely was a Roman the creature of ceremony,
that a national mourning would probably have been celebrated, and the “sad
augurs” would have been called in to expiate the prodigy, had the general
dinner lingered beyond four.
But, meantime, what has our friend been about since perhaps six or seven in
the morning? After paying his little homage to his patronus, in what
way has he fought with the great enemy Time since then? Why, reader, this
illustrates one of the most interesting features in the Roman character.
The Roman was the idlest of men. “Man and boy,” he was “an idler in the
land.” He called himself and his pals “rerum dominos, gentemque togatam;"
the gentry that wore the toga. Yes, and a pretty affair that “toga” was.
Just figure to yourself, reader, the picture of a hardworking man, with
horny hands like our hedgers, ditchers, weavers, porters, &c., setting to
work on the highroad in that vast sweeping toga, filling with a strong
gale like the mainsail of a frigate. Conceive the roars with which this
magnificent figure would be received into the bosom of a poor-house
detachment sent out to attack the stones on some new line of road, or a
fatigue party of dustmen sent upon secret service. Had there been nothing
left as a memorial of the Romans but that one relic–their immeasurable
toga,[9]–we should have known that they were born and bred to idleness. In
fact, except in war, the Roman never did anything at all but sun himself.
Ut se apricaret was the final cause of peace in his opinion; in literal
truth, that he might make an apricot of himself. The public rations at
all times supported the poorest inhabitant of Rome if he were a citizen.
Hence it was that Hadrian was so astonished with the spectacle of
Alexandria, ’civitas opulenta, fæcunda, in qua nemo vivat otiosus.” Here
first he saw the spectacle of a vast city, second only to Rome, where every
man had something to do; ’podagrosi quod agant habent; habent cæci quod
faciant; ne chiragrici” (those with gout in the fingers) ’apud eos otiosi
vivunt.” No poor rates levied upon the rest of the world for the benefit
of their own paupers were there distributed gratis. The prodigious
spectacle (so it seemed to Hadrian) was exhibited in Alexandria, of all men
earning their bread in the sweat of their brow. In Rome only, (and at one
time in some of the Grecian states,) it was the very meaning of citizenthat he could vote and be idle.
In these circumstances, where the whole sum of life’s duties amounted
to voting, all the business a man could have was to attend the public
assemblies, electioneering, or factious. These, and any judicial trial
(public or private) that might happen to interest him for the persons
concerned, or for the questions, amused him through the morning; that
is, from eight till one. He might also extract some diversion from
the columnæ, or pillars of certain porticoes to which they pasted
advertisements. These affiches must have been numerous; for all the girls
in Rome who lost a trinket, or a pet bird, or a lap-dog, took this mode of
angling in the great ocean of the public for the missing articles.
But all this time we take for granted that there were no shows in a course
of exhibition, either the dreadful ones of the amphitheatre, or the
bloodless ones of the circus. If there were, then that became the business
of all Romans; and it was a business which would have occupied him from
daylight until the light began to fail. Here we see another effect from the
scarcity of artificial light amongst the ancients. These magnificent shows
went on by daylight. But how incomparably greater would have been the
splendor by lamp-light! What a gigantic conception! Eighty thousand human
faces all revealed under one blaze of lamp-light! Lord Bacon saw the mighty
advantage of candle-light for the pomps and glories of this world. But the
poverty of the earth was the ultimate cause that the Pagan shows proceeded
by day. Not that the masters of the world, who rained Arabian odors and
perfumed waters of the most costly description from a thousand fountains,
simply to cool the summer heats, would have regarded the expense of light;
cedar and other odorous woods burning upon vast altars, together with every
variety of fragrant torch, would have created light enough to shed a new
day over the distant Adriatic.
However, as there are no public spectacles, we will suppose, and the courts
or political meetings, (if not closed altogether by superstition,) would at
any rate be closed in the ordinary course by twelve or one o’clock, nothing
remains for him to do, before returning home, except perhaps to attend the
palæstra, or some public recitation of a poem written by a friend, but in
any case to attend the public baths. For these the time varied; and many
people have thought it tyrannical in some of the Cæsars that they imposed
restraints on the time open for the baths; some, for instance, would not
suffer them to open at all before two, and in any case, if you were later
than four or five in summer, you would have to pay a fine which most
effectually cleaned out the baths of all raff, since it was a sum that
John Quires could not have produced to save his life. But it should be
considered that the emperor was the steward of the public resources for
maintaining the baths in fuel, oil, attendance, repairs. We are prepared
to show, on a fitting occasion, that every fourth person[10] amongst the
citizens bathed daily, and non-citizens, of course, paid an extra sum.
Now the population of Rome was far larger than has ever been hinted at
except by Lipsius. But certain it is, that during the long peace of the
first Cæsars, and after the annonaria prorisio, (that great pledge of
popularity to a Roman prince,) had been increased by the corn tribute from
the Nile, the Roman population took an immense lurch ahead. The subsequent
increase of baths, whilst no old ones were neglected, proves thatdecisively. And as citizenship expanded by means of the easy terms on which
it could be had, so did the bathers multiply. The population of Rome in the
century after Augustus, was far greater than during that era; and this,
still acting as a vortex to the rest of the world, may have been one great
motive with Constantine for “transferring” the capital eastwards; in
reality, for breaking up one monster capital into two of more manageable
dimensions. Two o’clock was often the earliest hour at which the public
baths were opened. But in Martial’s time a man could go without blushing
(salvâ fronte) at eleven, though even then two o’clock was the meridian
hour for the great uproar of splashing, and swimming, and “larking” in the
endless baths of endless Rome.
And now, at last, bathing finished, and the exercises of the palæstra, at
half-past two, or three, our friend finds his way home–not again to leave
it for that day. He is now a new man; refreshed, oiled with perfumes, his
dust washed off by hot water, and ready for enjoyment. These were the
things that determined the time for dinner. Had there been no other proof
that coena was the Roman dinner, this is an ample one. Now first the
Roman was fit for dinner, in a condition of luxurious ease; business
ever–that day’s load of anxiety laid aside–his cuticle, as he delighted
to talk, cleansed and polished–nothing more to do or to think of until
the next morning, he might now go and dine, and get drunk with a safe
conscience. Besides, if he does not get dinner now, when will he get it?
For most demonstrably he has taken nothing yet which comes near in value
to that basin of soup which many of ourselves take at the Roman hour of
bathing. No; we have kept our man fasting as yet. It is to be hoped that
something is coming at last.
It does come,–dinner, the great meal of “coena;” the meal sacred to
hospitality and genial pleasure, comes now to fill up the rest of the day,
until light fails altogether.
Many people are of opinion that the Romans only understood what the
capabilities of dinner were. It is certain that they were the first great
people that discovered the true secret and meaning of dinner, the great
office which it fulfils, and which we in England are now so generally
acting on. Barbarous nations,–and none were, in that respect, more
barbarous than our own ancestors,–made this capital blunder; the brutes,
if you asked them what was the use of dinner, what it was meant for, stared
at you and replied–as a horse would reply if you put the same question
about his provender–that it was to give him strength for finishing his
work! Therefore, if you point your telescope back to antiquity about twelve
or one o’clock in the daytime, you will descry our most worthy ancestors
all eating for their very lives, eating as dogs eat, viz. in bodily fear
that some other dog will come and take their dinner away. What swelling of
the veins in the temples! (see Boswell’s natural history of Dr. Johnson at
dinner;) what intense and rapid deglutition! what odious clatter of knives
and plates! what silence of the human voice! what gravity! what fury in the
libidinous eyes with which they contemplate the dishes! Positively it was
an indecent spectacle to see Dr. Johnson at dinner. But, above all, what
maniacal haste and hurry, as if the fiend were waiting with red-hot pincers
to lay hold of the hindermost!
Oh, reader, do you recognize in this abominable picture your respected
ancestors and ours? Excuse us for saying–"What monsters!” We have a right
to call our own ancestors monsters; and, if so, we must have the same right
over yours. For Dr. Southey has shown plainly in the “Doctor,” that every
man having four grand parents in the second stage of ascent, (each of whom
having four, therefore,) sixteen in the third, and so on, long before you
get to the Conquest, every man and woman then living in England will be
wanted to make up the sum of my separate ancestors; consequently, you must
take your ancestors out of the very same fund, or (if you are too proud for
that) you must go without ancestors. So that, your ancestors being clearly
mine, I have a right in law to call the whole “kit” of them monsters. Quod
erat demonstrandum. Really and upon our honor, it makes one, for the
moment, ashamed of one’s descent; one would wish to disinherit one’s-self
backwards, and (as Sheridan says in the Rivals) to “cut the connection."
Wordsworth has an admirable picture in Peter Bell of “A snug party in a
parlor,” removed into limbus patrum for their offences in the flesh:–
  “Cramming, as they on earth were cramm’d;
  All sipping wine, all sipping tea;
  But, as you by their faces see,
  All silent, and all d–d.”
How well does that one word describe those venerable ancestral
dinners–"All silent!” Contrast this infernal silence of voice and fury
of eye with the “risus amabilis,” the festivity, the social kindness, the
music, the wine, the “dulcis insania,” of a Roman “coena.” We mentioned
four tests for determining what meal is, and what is not, dinner; we may
now add a fifth, viz. the spirit of festal joy and elegant enjoyment, of
anxiety laid aside, and of honorable social pleasure put on like a marriage
garment.
And what caused the difference between our ancestors and the Romans? Simply
this–the error of interposing dinner in the middle of business, thus
courting all the breezes of angry feeling that may happen to blow from the
business yet to come, instead of finishing, absolutely closing, the account
with this world’s troubles before you sit down. That unhappy interpolation
ruined all. Dinner was an ugly little parenthesis between two still uglier
clauses of a tee-totally ugly sentence. Whereas with us, their enlightened
posterity, to whom they have the honor to be ancestors, dinner is a great
reaction. There lies our conception of the matter. It grew out of the very
excess of the evil. When business was moderate, dinner was allowed to
divide and bisect it. When it swelled into that vast strife and agony, as
one may call it, that boils along the tortured streets of modern London or
other capitals, men began to see the necessity of an adequate counterforce
to push against this overwhelming torrent, and thus maintain the
equilibrium. Were it not for the soft relief of a six o’clock dinner, the
gentle manner succeeding to the boisterous hubbub of the day, the soft
glowing lights, the wine, the intellectual conversation, life in London is
now come to such a pass, that in two years all nerves would sink before it.
But for this periodic reaction, the modern business which draws so cruelly
on the brain, and so little on the hands, would overthrow that organ in
all but those of coarse organization. Dinner it is,–meaning by dinner
the whole complexity of attendant circumstances,–which saves the modern
brain-working men from going mad.
This revolution as to dinner was the greatest in virtue and value ever
accomplished. In fact, those are always the most operative revolutions
which are brought about through social or domestic changes. A nation must
be barbarous, neither could it have much intellectual business, which dined
in the morning. They could not be at ease in the morning. So much must be
granted: every day has its separate quantum, its dose (as the doctrinists
of rent phrase it) of anxiety, that could not be digested so soon as noon.
No man will say it. He, therefore, who dined at noon, was willing to sit
down squalid as he was, with his dress unchanged, his cares not washed off.
And what follows from that? Why, that to him, to such a canine or cynical
specimen of the genus homo, dinner existed only as a physical event, a
mere animal relief, a mere carnal enjoyment. For what, we demand, did this
fleshly creature differ from the carrion crow, or the kite, or the vulture,
or the cormorant? A French judge, in an action upon a wager, laid it down
in law, that man only had a bouche, all other animals had a gueule:
only with regard to the horse, in consideration of his beauty, nobility,
use, and in honor of the respect with which man regarded him, by the
courtesy of Christendom, he might be allowed to have a bouche, and his
reproach of brutality, if not taken away, might thus be hidden. But surely,
of the rabid animal who is caught dining at noonday, the homo ferus, who
affronts the meridian sun like Thyestes and Atreus, by his inhuman meals,
we are, by parity of reason, entitled to say, that he has a “maw,” (so has
Milton’s Death,) but nothing resembling stomach. And to this vile man a
philosopher would say–"Go away, sir, and come back to me two or three
centuries hence, when you have learned to be a reasonable creature, and to
make that physico-intellectual thing out of dinner which it was meant to
be, and is capable of becoming.” In Henry VII.’s time the court dined at
eleven in the forenoon. But even that hour was considered so shockingly
late in the French court, that Louis XII. actually had his gray hairs
brought down with sorrow to the grave, by changing his regular hour of
half-past nine for eleven, in gallantry to his young English bride.[11] He
fell a victim to late hours in the forenoon. In Cromwell’s time they dined
at one, P.M. One century and a half had carried them on by two hours.
Doubtless, old cooks and scullions wondered what the world would come to
next. Our French neighbors were in the same predicament. But they far
surpassed us in veneration for the meal. They actually dated from it.
Dinner constituted the great era of the day. L’apres diner is almost the
sole date which you find in Cardinal De Retz’s memoirs of the Fronde.
Dinner was their Hegira–dinner was their line in traversing the ocean
of day: they crossed the equator when they dined. Our English revolution
came next; it made some little difference, we have heard people say, in
Church and State; but its great effects were perceived in dinner. People
now dined at two. So dined Addison for his last thirty years; so dined
Pope, who was coeval with the revolution through his entire life. Precisely
as the rebellion of 1745 arose, did people (but observe, very great people)
advance to four, P.M. Philosophers, who watch the “semina rerum,” and the
first symptoms of change, had perceived this alteration singing in the
upper air like a coming storm some little time before. About the year 1740,
Pope complains to a friend of Lady Suffolk’s dining so late as four. Young
people may bear those things, he observes; but as to himself, now turned
of fifty, if such doings went on, if Lady Suffolk would adopt such strange
hours, he must really absent himself from Marble Hill. Lady Suffolk had a
right to please herself: he himself loved her. But if she would persist,
all which remained for a decayed poet was respectfully to “cut his stick,
and retire.” Whether Pope ever put up with four o’clock dinners again, we
have vainly sought to fathom. Some things advance continuously, like a
flood or a fire, which always make an end of A, eat and digest it, before
they go on to B. Other things advance per saltum–they do not silently
cancer their way onwards, but lie as still as a snake after they have made
some notable conquest, then when unobserved they make themselves up “for
mischief,” and take a flying bound onwards. Thus advanced dinner, and by
these fits got into the territory of evening. And ever as it made a motion
onwards, it found the nation more civilized, (else the change would not
have been effected,) and raised them to a still higher civilization. The
next relay on that line of road, the next repeating frigate, is Cowper in
his poem on Conversation. He speaks of four o’clock as still the elegant
hour for dinner–the hour for the lautiores and the lepidi homines. Now
this was written about 1780, or a little earlier; perhaps, therefore,
just one generation after Pope’s Lady Suffolk. But then Cowper was living
amongst the rural gentry, not in high life; yet, again, Cowper was nearly
connected by blood with the eminent Whig house of Cowper, and acknowledged
as a kinsman. About twenty-five years after this, we may take Oxford as
a good exponent of the national advance. As a magnificent body of
“foundations,” endowed by kings, and resorted to by the flower of the
national youth, Oxford is always elegant and even splendid in her habits.
Yet, on the other hand, as a grave seat of learning, and feeling the weight
of her position in the commonwealth, she is slow to move: she is inert as
she should be, having the functions of resistance assigned to her against
the popular instinct of movement. Now, in Oxford, about 1804-5, there was
a general move in the dinner hour. Those colleges who dined at three, of
which there were still several, now dined at four; those who had dined
at four, now translated their hour to five. These continued good general
hours, but still amongst the more intellectual orders, till about Waterloo.
After that era, six, which had been somewhat of a gala hour, was promoted
to the fixed station of dinner-time in ordinary; and there perhaps it will
rest through centuries. For a more festal dinner, seven, eight, nine, ten,
have all been in requisition since then; but we have not yet heard of any
man’s dining later than 10, P.M., except in that single classical instance
(so well remembered from our father Joe) of an Irishman who must have dined
much later than ten, because his servant protested, when others were
enforcing the dignity of their masters by the lateness of their dinner
hours, that his master dined “to-morrow.”
Were the Romans not as barbarous as our own ancestors at one time? Most
certainly they were; in their primitive ages they took their coena at
noon,[12] that was before they had laid aside their barbarism; before
they shaved: it was during their barbarism, and in consequence of their
barbarism, that they timed their coena thus unseasonably. And this is
made evident by the fact, that, so long as they erred in the hour, they
erred in the attending circumstances. At this period they had no music
at dinner, no festal graces, and no reposing upon sofas. They sate bolt
upright in chairs, and were as grave as our ancestors, as rabid, and
doubtless as furiously in haste.
With us the revolution has been equally complex. We do not, indeed, adopt
the luxurious attitude of semi-recumbency; our climate makes that less
requisite; and, moreover, the Romans had no knives and forks, which could
scarcely be used in that posture: they ate with their fingers from dishes
already cut up–whence the peculiar force of Seneca’s “post quod non sunt
lavandæ manus.” But exactly in proportion as our dinner has advanced
towards evening, have we and has that advanced in circumstances of
elegance, of taste, of intellectual value.” That by itself would be much.
Infinite would be the gain for any people that it had ceased to be
brutal, animal, fleshly; ceased to regard the chief meal of the day as a
ministration only to an animal necessity; that they had raised it to a far
higher standard; associated it with social and humanizing feelings,
with manners, with graces both moral and intellectual; moral in the
self-restraint; intellectual in the fact, notorious to all men, that the
chief arenas for the easy display of intellectual power are at our dinner
tables. But dinner has now even a greater function than this; as the
fervor of our day’s business increases, dinner is continually more needed
in its office of a great reaction. We repeat that, at this moment, but
for the daily relief of dinner, the brain of all men who mix in the strife
of capitals would be unhinged and thrown off its centre.
If we should suppose the case of a nation taking three equidistant meals
all of the same material and the same quantity, all milk, for instance, it
would be impossible for Thomas Aquinas himself to say which was or was not
dinner. The case would be that of the Roman ancile which dropped from
the skies; to prevent its ever being stolen, the priests made eleven
facsimiles of it, that the thief, seeing the hopelessness of
distinguishing the true one, might let all alone. And the result was, that,
in the next generation, nobody could point to the true one. But our dinner,
the Roman coena, is distinguished from the rest by far more than the
hour; it is distinguished by great functions, and by still greater
capacities. It is most beneficial; it may become more so.
In saying this, we point to the lighter graces of music, and conversation
more varied, by which the Roman coena was chiefly distinguished from
our dinner. We are far from agreeing with Mr. Croly, that the Roman meal
was more “intellectual” than ours. On the contrary, ours is the more
intellectual by much; we have far greater knowledge, far greater means
for making it such. In fact, the fault of our meal is–that it is toointellectual; of too severe a character; too political; too much tending,
in many hands, to disquisition. Reciprocation of question and answer,
variety of topics, shifting of topics, are points not sufficiently
cultivated. In all else we assent to the following passage from Mr. Croly’s
eloquent Salathiel:–
“If an ancient Roman could start from his slumber into the midst of
European life, he must look with scorn on its absence of grace, elegance,
and fancy. But it is in its festivity, and most of all in its banquets,
that he would feel the incurable barbarism of the Gothic blood. Contrasted
with the fine displays that made the table of the Roman noble a picture,
and threw over the indulgence of appetite the colors of the imagination,
with what eyes must he contemplate the tasteless and commonplace dress,
the coarse attendants, the meagre ornament, the want of mirth, music, and
intellectual interest–the whole heavy machinery that converts the feast
into the mere drudgery of devouring!”
Thus far the reader knows already that we dissent violently; and by looking
back he will see a picture of our ancestors at dinner, in which they
rehearse the very part in relation to ourselves that Mr. Croly supposes
all moderns to rehearse in relation to the Romans; but in the rest of the
beautiful description, the positive, though not the comparative part, we
must all concur:–
“The guests before me were fifty or sixty splendidly dressed men,"
(they were in fact Titus and his staff, then occupied with the siege of
Jerusalem,) “attended by a crowd of domestics, attired with scarcely less
splendor; for no man thought of coming to the banquet in the robes of
ordinary life. The embroidered couches, themselves striking objects,
allowed the ease of position at once delightful in the relaxing climates of
the South, and capable of combining with every grace of the human figure.
At a slight distance, the table loaded with plate glittering under a
profusion of lamps, and surrounded by couches thus covered by rich
draperies, was like a central source of light radiating in broad shafts of
every brilliant hue. The wealth of the patricians, and their intercourse
with the Greeks, made them masters of the first performances of the arts.
Copies of the most famous statues, and groups of sculpture in the precious
metals; trophies of victories; models of temples; were mingled with vases
of flowers and lighted perfumes. Finally, covering and closing all, was
a vast scarlet canopy, which combined the groups beneath to the eye, and
threw the whole into the form that a painter would love.”
Mr. Croly then goes on to insist on the intellectual embellishments of the
Roman dinner; their variety, their grace, their adaptation to a festive
purpose. The truth is, our English imagination, more profound than the
Roman, is also more gloomy, less gay, less riante. That accounts for our
want of the gorgeous trictinium, with its scarlet draperies, and for many
other differences both to the eye and to the understanding. But both we and
the Romans agree in the main point; we both discovered the true purpose
which dinner might serve,–1, to throw the grace of intellectual enjoyment
over an animal necessity; 2, to relieve and antagonize the toil of brain
incident to high forms of social life.
Our object has been to point the eye to this fact; to show uses imperfectly
suspected in a recurring accident of life; to show a steady tendency to
that consummation, by holding up, as in a mirror, (together with occasional
glimpses of hidden corners in history,) the corresponding revolution
silently going on in a great people of antiquity.
Notes.
[NOTE 1.
“In procinct."–Milton’s translation (somewhere in The Paradise Regained)
of the technical phrase “in procinctu."]
[note 2.
“Geologists know not."–Observe, reader, we are not at all questioning
the Scriptural Chronology of the earth as a habitation for man, for on
the pre-human earth Scripture is silent: not upon the six thousand years
does our doubt revolve, but upon a very different thing, viz. to what age
in man these six thousand years correspond by analogy in a planet. In man
the sixtieth part is a very venerable age. But as to a planet, as to our
little earth, instead of arguing dotage, six thousand years may have
scarcely carried her beyond babyhood. Some people think she is cutting her
first teeth; some think her in her teens. But, seriously, it is a very
interesting problem. Do the sixty centuries of our earth imply youth,
maturity, or dotage?]
[note 3.
“Everywhere the ancients went to bed, like good boys, from seven to nine
o’clock."–As we are perfectly serious, we must beg the reader, who
fancies any joke in all this, to consider what an immense difference
it must have made to the earth, considered as a steward of her own
resources-whether great nations, in a period when their resources were so
feebly developed, did, or did not, for many centuries, require candles;
and, we may add, fire. The five heads of human expenditure are,–1, Food;
2, Shelter; 3, Clothing; 4, Fuel; 5, Light. All were pitched on a lower
scale in the Pagan era; and the two last were almost banished from ancient
housekeeping. What a great relief this must have been to our good mother
the earth! who, at first, was obliged to request of her children that
they would settle round the Mediterranean. She could not even afford them
water, unless they would come and fetch it themselves out of a common tank
or cistern.]
[note 4.
“The manesalutantes."–There can be no doubt that the levees of modern
princes and ministers have been inherited from this ancient usage of Rome;
one which belonged to Rome republican, as well as Rome imperial. The
fiction in our modern practice is–that we wait upon the levé, or rising
of the prince. In France, at one era, this fiction was realized: the
courtiers did really attend the king’s dressing. And, as to the queen, even
up to the revolution, Marie Antoinette almost from necessity gave audience
at her toilette.]
[note 5.
“Or again, ’siccum pro biscodo, ut hodie vocamus, sumemus?’"–It is odd
enough that a scholar so complete as Salmasius, whom nothing ever escapes,
should have overlooked so obvious an alternative as that of siccus,
meaning without opsonium–Scoticè, without “kitchen."]
[note 6.
“The whole amount of relief;"–from which it appears how grossly Locke
(see his Education) was deceived in fancying that Augustus practised any
remarkable abstinence in taking only a bit of bread and a raisin or two, by
way of luncheon. Augustus did no more than most people did; secondly, he
abstained only with a view to dinner; and, thirdly, for this dinner he
never waited longer than up to four o’clock.]
[note 7.
“Mansiones"–the halts of the Roman legions, the stationary places of
repose which divided the marches, were so called.]
[note 8.
“The everlasting Jew;"–the German name for what we English call the
Wandering Jew. The German imagination has been most struck with the
duration of the man’s life, and his unhappy sanctity from death; the
English by the unrestingness of the man’s life, his incapacity of repose.]
[note 9.
“Immeasurable toga."–It is very true that in the time of Augustus the
toga had disappeared amongst the lowest plebs, and greatly Augustus was
shocked at that spectacle. It is a very curious fact in itself, especially
as expounding the main cause of the civil wars. Mere poverty, and the
absence of bribery from Rome, whilst all popular competition for offices
drooped, can alone explain this remarkable revolution of dress.]
[note 10.
That boys in the Prætexta did not bathe in the public baths, is certain;
and most unquestionably that is the meaning of the expression in Juvenal
so much disputed–"Nisi qui nondum ære lavantur.” By æs he means the
ahenum, a common name for the public bath, which was made of copper; in
our navy, “the coppers” is a name for the boilers. “Nobody believes in
such tales except children,” is the meaning. This one exclusion cut off
three eighths of the Roman males.]
[note 11.
“His young–English bride."–The case of an old man, or one reputed
old, marrying a very girlish wife, is always too much for the gravity of
history; and, rather than lose the joke, the historian prudently disguises
the age, which, after all, was little above fifty. And the very persons
who insist on the late dinner as the proximate cause of death, elsewhere
insinuate something else, not so decorously expressed. It is odd that this
amiable prince, so memorable as having been a martyr to late dining at
eleven, A.M., was the same person who is so equally memorable for the noble
answer about a King of France not remembering the wrongs of a Duke of
Orleans.]
[note 12.
“Took their coena at noon."–And, by the way, in order to show how little
coena had to do with any evening hour (though, in any age but that of our
fathers, four in the afternoon would never have been thought an evening
hour in the sense implied by supper,)–the Roman gourmands and bons
vivants continued through the very last ages of Rome to take their coena,
when more than usually sumptuous, at noon. This, indeed, all people did
occasionally, just as we sometimes give a dinner even now so early as four,
P.M., under the name of a dejeuner à la fourchette. Those who took their
coena so early as this, were said de die coenare–to begin dining from
high day. Just as the line in Horace–"Ut jugulent homines surgunt de
nocte latrones,” does not mean that the robbers rise when others are going
to bed, viz., at nightfall, but at midnight. For, says one of the three
best scholars of this earth, de die, de nocte, mean from that hour
which was most fully, most intensely day or night, viz., the centre, the
meridian. This one fact is surely a clencher as to the question whether
coena meant dinner or supper.]
 

This eBook of “Miscellaneous Essays” by Thomas de Quincey belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous essays, by Thomas De Quincey.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
