




[126] As you discern the long unbroken line of its roof, low-pitched
for France, above the cottages and willow-shaded streams of the
place, you might think the abbey church of Pontigny, the largest
Cistercian church now remaining, only a great farm-building.  On a
nearer view there is something unpretending, something pleasantly
English, in the plain grey walls, pierced with long “lancet” windows,
as if they overlooked the lowlands of Essex, or the meadows of Kent
or Berkshire, the sort of country from which came those saintly
exiles of our race who made the cloisters of Pontigny famous, and one
of whom, Saint Edmund of Abingdon, Saint-Edme, still lies enshrined
here.  The country which the sons of Saint Bernard choose for their
abode is in fact but a patch of scanty pasture-land in the midst of a
heady wine-district.  Like its majestic Cluniac rivals, the church
has its western portico, elegant in structure but of comparatively
humble [127] proportions, under a plain roof of tiles, pent-wise.
Within, a heavy coat of white-wash seems befitting to the simple
forms of the “Transition,” or quite earliest “Pointed," style, to its
remarkable continence of spirit, its uniformity, and cleanness of
build.  The long prospect of nave and choir ends, however, with a
sort of graceful smallness, in a chevet of seven closely packed,
narrow bays.  It is like a nun’s church, or like a nun’s coif.
The church of Pontigny, representative generally of the churches of
the Cistercian order, including some of the loveliest early English
ones, was in truth significant of a reaction, a reaction against
monasticism itself, as it had come to be in the order of Cluny, the
genius of which found its proper expression in the imperious, but
half-barbaric, splendours of the richest form of the Romanesque, the
monastic style pre-eminently, as we may still see it at La Charite-
sur-Loire, at Saint-Benoit, above all, on the hill of Vezelay.  Saint
Bernard, who had lent his immense influence to the order of Citeaux
by way of a monastic reform, though he had a genius for hymns and was
in other ways an eminent religious poet, and though he gave new life
to the expiring romance of the crusades, was, as regards the visible
world, much of a Puritan.  Was it he who, wrapt in thought upon the
world unseen, walked along the shores of Lake Leman without observing
it?–the eternal snows he might have taken for the walls of the New
Jerusalem; the blue waves he [128] might have fancied its pavement of
sapphire.  In the churches, the worship, of his new order he required
simplicity, and even severity, being fortunate in finding so winsome
an exponent of that principle as the early Gothic of Pontigny, or of
the first Cistercian church, now destroyed, at Citeaux itself.
Strangely enough, while Bernard’s own temper of mind was a survival
from the past (we see this in his contest with Abelard), hierarchic,
reactionary, suspicious of novelty, the architectural style of his
preference was largely of secular origin.  It had a large share in
that inventive and innovating genius, that expansion of the natural
human soul, to which the art, the literature, the religious movements
of the thirteenth century in France, as in Italy, where it ends with
Dante, bear witness.
In particular, Bernard had protested against the sculpture, rich and
fantastic, but gloomy, it might be indecent, developed more
abundantly than anywhere else in the churches of Burgundy, and
especially in those of the Cluniac order.  “What is the use,” he
asks, “of those grotesque monsters in painting and sculpture?” and
almost certainly he had in mind the marvellous carved work at
Vezelay, whither doubtless he came often–for example on Good Friday,
1146, to preach, as we know, the second crusade in the presence of
Louis the Seventh.  He too might have wept at the sight of the doomed
multitude (one in ten, it is said, returned from the Holy [129]
Land), as its enthusiasm, under the charm of his fiery eloquence,
rose to the height of his purpose.  Even the aisles of Vezelay were
not sufficient for the multitude of his hearers, and he preached to
them in the open air, from a rock still pointed out on the hillside.
Armies indeed have been encamped many times on the slopes and meadows
of the valley of the Cure, now to all seeming so impregnably
tranquil.  The Cluniac order even then had already declined from its
first intention; and that decline became especially visible in the
Abbey of Vezelay itself not long after Bernard’s day.  Its majestic
immoveable church was complete by the middle of the twelfth century.
And there it still stands in spite of many a threat, while the
conventual buildings around it have disappeared; and the institution
it represented–secularised at its own request at the Reformation–
had dwindled almost to nothing at all, till in the last century the
last Abbot built himself, in place of the old Gothic lodging below
those solemn walls, a sort of Chateau Gaillard, a dainty abode in the
manner of Louis Quinze–swept away that too at the Revolution–where
the great oaks now flourish, with the rooks and squirrels.
Yet the order of Cluny, in its time, in that dark period of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, had deserved well of those to whom
religion, and art, and social order are precious.  The Cluniacs had
in fact represented monasticism in the most [130] legitimate form of
its activity; and, if the church of Vezelay was not quite the
grandest of their churches, it is certainly the grandest of them
which remains.  It is also typical in character.  As Notre-Dame
d’Amiens is pre-eminently the church of the city, of a commune, so
the Madeleine of Vezelay is typically the church of a monastery.
The monastic style proper, then, in its peculiar power and influence,
was Romanesque, and with the Cluniac order; and here perhaps better
than anywhere else we may understand what it really came to, what was
its effect on the spirits, the imagination.
As at Pontigny, the Cistercians, for the most part, built their
churches in lowly valleys, according to the intention of their
founder.  The representative church of the Cluniacs, on the other
hand, lies amid the closely piled houses of the little town, which it
protected and could punish, on a steep hill-top, like a long massive
chest there, heavy above you, as you climb slowly the winding road,
the old unchanged pathway of Saint Bernard.  In days gone by it
threatened the surrounding neighbourhood with four boldly built
towers; had then also a spire at the crossing; and must have been at
that time like a more magnificent version of the buildings which
still crown the hill of Laon.  Externally, the proportions, the
squareness, of the nave (west and east, the vast narthex or porch,
and the [131] Gothic choir, rise above its roof-line), remind one of
another great Romanesque church at home–of the nave of Winchester,
out of which Wykeham carved his richly panelled Perpendicular
interior.
At Vezelay however, the Romanesque, the Romanesque of Burgundy, alike
in the first conception of the whole structure, and in the actual
locking together of its big stones, its masses of almost unbroken
masonry, its inertia, figures as of more imperial character, and
nearer to the Romans of old, than its feebler kindred in England or
Normandy.  We seem to have before us here a Romanesque architecture,
studied, not from Roman basilicas or Roman temples, but from the
arenas, the colossal gateways, the triumphal arches, of the people of
empire, such as remain even now, not in the South of France only.
The simple “flying,” or rather leaning and almost couchant,
buttresses, quadrants of a circle, might be parts of a Roman
aqueduct.  In contrast to the lightsome Gothic manner of the last
quarter of the twelfth century (as we shall presently find it here
too, like an escape for the eye, for the temper, out of some grim
underworld into genial daylight), the Cluniac church might seem a
still active instrument of the iron tyranny of Rome, of its tyranny
over the animal spirits.  As the ghost of ancient Rome still lingers
“over the grave thereof,” in the papacy, the hierarchy, so is it with
the material structures [132] also, the Cluniac and other Romanesque
churches, which most emphatically express the hierarchical, the papal
system.  There is something about this church of Vezelay, in the
long-sustained patience of which it tells, that brings to mind the
labour of slaves, whose occasional Fescennine licence and fresh
memories of a barbaric life also find expression, now and again, in
the strange sculpture of the place.  Yet here for once, around a
great French church, there is the kindly repose of English
“precincts,” and the country which this monastic acropolis overlooks
southwards is a very pleasant one, as we emerge from the shadows of–
yes! of that peculiarly sad place–a country all the pleasanter by
reason of the toil upon it, performed, or exacted from others, by the
monks, through long centuries; Le Morvan, with its distant blue hills
and broken foreground, the vineyards, the patches of woodland, the
roads winding into their cool shadows; though in truth the fortress-
like outline of the monastic church and the sombre hue of its
material lend themselves most readily to the effects of a stormy sky.
By a door, which in the great days opened from a magnificent
cloister, you enter what might seem itself but the ambulatory of a
cloister, superbly vaulted and long and regular, and built of huge
stones of a metallic colour.  It is the southern aisle of the nave, a
nave of ten bays, the grandest Romanesque interior in France, [133]
perhaps in the world.  In its mortified light the very soul of
monasticism, Roman and half-military, as the completest outcome of a
religion of threats, seems to descend upon one.  Monasticism is
indeed the product of many various tendencies of the religious soul,
one or another of which may very properly connect itself with the
Pointed style, as we saw in those lightsome aisles of Pontigny, so
expressive of the purity, the lowly sweetness, of the soul of
Bernard.  But it is here at Vezelay, in this iron place, that
monasticism in its central, its historically most significant
purpose, presents itself as most completely at home.  There is no
triforium.  The monotonous cloistral length of wall above the long-
drawn series of stately round arches, is unbroken save by a plain
small window in each bay, placed as high as possible just below the
cornice, as a mere after-thought, you might fancy.  Those windows
were probably unglazed, and closed only with wooden shutters as
occasion required.  Furnished with the stained glass of the period,
they would have left the place almost in darkness, giving doubtless
full effect to the monkish candle-light in any case needful here.  An
almost perfect cradle-roof, tunnel-like from end to end of the long
central aisle, adds by its simplicity of form to the magnificent
unity of effect.  The bearing-arches, which span it from bay to bay,
being parti-coloured, with voussures of alternate white and a kind of
grey or green, [134] being also somewhat flat at the keystone, and
literally eccentric, have, at least for English eyes, something of a
Saracenic or other Oriental character.  Again, it is as if the
architects–the engineers–who worked here, had seen things undreamt
of by other Romanesque builders, the builders in England and
Normandy.
Here then, scarcely relieving the almost savage character of the
work, abundant on tympanum and doorway without, above all on the
immense capitals of the nave within, is the sculpture which offended
Bernard.  A sumptuous band of it, a carved guipure of singular
boldness, passes continuously round the arches, and along the
cornices from bay to bay, and with the large bossy tendency of the
ornament throughout may be regarded as typical of Burgundian
richness.  Of sculptured capitals, to like, or to dislike with Saint
Bernard, there are nearly a hundred, unwearied in variety, unique in
the energy of their conception, full of wild promise in their coarse
execution, cruel, you might say, in the realisation of human form and
features.  Irresistibly they rivet attention.
The subjects are for the most part Scriptural, chosen apparently as
being apt for strongly satiric treatment, the suicide of Judas, the
fall of Goliath.  The legend of Saint Benedict, naturally at home in
a Benedictine church, presented the sculptor with a series of
forcible grotesques ready-made.  Some monkish story, [135] half
moral, half facetious, perhaps a little coarse, like that of Sainte
Eugenie, from time to time makes variety; or an example of the
punishment of the wicked by men or by devils, who play a large, and
to themselves thoroughly enjoyable and merry, part here.  The
sculptor would seem to have witnessed the punishment of the
blasphemer; how adroitly the executioner planted knee on the
culprit’s bosom, as he lay on the ground, and out came the sinful
tongue, to meet the iron pincers.  The minds of those who worked thus
seem to have been almost insanely preoccupied just then with the
human countenance, but by no means exclusively in its pleasantness or
dignity.  Bold, crude, original, their work indicates delight in the
power of reproducing fact, curiosity in it, but little or no sense of
beauty.  The humanity therefore here presented, as in the Cluniac
sculpture generally, is wholly unconventional.  M. Viollet-le-Duc
thinks he can trace in it individual types still actually existing in
the peasantry of Le Morvan.  Man and morality, however, disappearing
at intervals, the acanthine capitals have a kind of later Venetian
beauty about them, as the Venetian birds also, the conventional
peacocks, or birds wholly of fantasy, amid the long fantastic
foliage.  There are still however no true flowers of the field here.
There is pity, it must be confessed, on the other hand, and the
delicacy, the beauty, which that always brings [136] with it, where
Jephtha peeps at the dead daughter’s face, lifting timidly the great
leaves that cover it; in the hanging body of Absalom; in the child
carried away by the eagle, his long frock twisted in the wind as he
goes.  The parents run out in dismay, and the devil grins, not
because it is the punishment of the child or of them; but because he
is the author of all mischief everywhere, as the monkish carver
conceived–so far wholesomely.
We must remember that any sculpture less emphatic would have been
ineffective, because practically invisible, in this sombre place.
But at the west end there is an escape for the eye, for the soul,
towards the unhindered, natural, afternoon sun; not however into the
outer and open air, but through an arcade of three bold round arches,
high above the great closed western doors, into a somewhat broader
and loftier place than this, a reservoir of light, a veritable camera
lucida.  The light is that which lies below the vault and within the
tribunes of the famous narthex (as they say), the vast fore-church or
vestibule, into which the nave is prolonged.  A remarkable feature of
many Cluniac churches, the great western porch, on a scale which is
approached in England only at Peterborough, is found also in some of
the churches of the Cistercians.  It is characteristic, in fact,
rather of Burgundy than of either of those religious orders
especially.
[137] At Pontigny itself, for instance, there is a good one; and a
very early one at Paray-le-Monial.  Saint-Pere-sous-Vezelay, daughter
of the great church, in the vale below, has a late Gothic example;
Semur also, with fantastic lodges above it.  The cathedral of Autun,
a secular church in rivalry of the “religious,” presents, by way of
such western porch or vestibule, two entire bays of the nave,
unglazed, with the vast western arch open to the air; the west front,
with its rich portals, being thrown back into the depths of the great
fore-church thus produced.
The narthex of Vezelay, the largest of these singular structures, is
glazed, and closed towards the west by what is now the facade.  It is
itself in fact a great church, a nave of three magnificent bays, and
of three aisles, with a spacious triforium.  With their fantastic
sculpture, sheltered thus from accident and weather, in all its
original freshness, the great portals of the primitive facade serve
now for doorways, as a second, solemn, door of entrance, to the
church proper within.  The very structure of the place, and its
relation to the main edifice, indicate that it was for use on
occasion, when, at certain great feasts, that of the Magdalen
especially, to whom the church of Vezelay is dedicated, the monastery
was swollen with pilgrims, too poor, too numerous, to be lodged in
the town, come hither to worship before the [138] relics of the
friend of Jesus, enshrined in a low-vaulted crypt, the floor of which
is the natural rocky surface of the hill-top.  It may be that the
pilgrims were permitted to lie for the night, not only on the
pavement, but (if so favoured) in the high and dry chamber formed by
the spacious triforium over the north aisle, awaiting an early Mass.
The primitive west front, then, had become but a wall of partition;
and above its central portal, where the round arched west windows had
been, ran now a kind of broad, arcaded tribune, in full view of the
entire length of the church.  In the midst of it stood an altar; and
here perhaps, the priest who officiated being visible to the whole
assembled multitude east and west, the early Mass was said.
The great vestibule was finished about forty years after the
completion of the nave, towards the middle of the twelfth century.
And here, in the great pier-arches, and in the eastern bay of the
vault, still with the large masonry, the large, flat, unmoulded
surfaces, and amid the fantastic carvings of the Romanesque building
about it, the Pointed style, determined yet discreet, makes itself
felt–makes itself felt by appearing, if not for the first time, yet
for the first time in the organic or systematic development of French
architecture.  Not in the unambitious facade of Saint-Denis, nor in
the austere aisles of Sens, but at Vezelay, in this grandiose fabric,
so worthy of the event, Viollet-le-Duc would [139] fain see the
birthplace of the Pointed style.  Here at last, with no sense of
contrast, but by way of veritable “transition,” and as if by its own
matured strength, the round arch breaks into the double curve, les
arcs brises, with a wonderful access of grace.  And the imaginative
effect is forthwith enlarged.  Beyond, far beyond, what is actually
presented to the eye in that peculiar curvature, its mysterious
grace, and by the stateliness, the elevation of the ogival method of
vaulting, the imagination is stirred to present one with what belongs
properly to it alone.  The masonry, though large, is nicely fitted; a
large light is admitted through the now fully pronounced Gothic
windows towards the west.  At Amiens we found the Gothic spirit,
reigning there exclusively, to be a restless one.  At Vezelay, where
it breathes for the first time amid the heavy masses of the old
imperial style, it breathes the very genius of monastic repose.  And
then, whereas at Amiens, and still more at Beauvais, at Saint-
Quentin, you wonder how these monuments of the past can have endured
so long, in strictly monastic Vezelay you have a sense of freshness,
such as, in spite of their ruin, we perceive in the buildings of
Greece.  We enjoy here not so much, as at Amiens, the sentiment of
antiquity, but that of eternal duration.
But let me place you once more where we stood for a while, on
entering by the doorway [140] in the midst of the long southern
aisle.  Cross the aisle, and gather now in one view the perspective
of the whole.  Away on the left hand the eye is drawn upward to the
tranquil light of the vaults of the fore-church, seeming doubtless
the more spacious because partly concealed from us by the wall of
partition below.  But on the right hand, towards the east, as if with
the set purpose of a striking architectural contrast, an instruction
as to the place of this or that manner in the architectural series,
the long, tunnel-like, military work of the Romanesque nave opens
wide into the exhilarating daylight of choir and transepts, in the
sort of Gothic Bernard would have welcomed, with a vault rising now
high above the roof-line of the body of the church, sicut lilium
excelsum.  The simple flowers, the flora, of the early Pointed style,
which could never have looked at home as an element in the half-
savage decoration of the nave, seem to be growing here upon the
sheaves of slender, reedy pillars, as if naturally in the carved
stone.  Even here indeed, Roman, or Romanesque, taste still lingers
proudly in the monolith columns of the chevet.  Externally, we may
note with what dexterity the Gothic choir has been inserted into its
place, below and within the great buttresses of the earlier
Romanesque one.
Visitors to the great church of Assisi have sometimes found a kind of
parable in the threefold [141] ascent from the dark crypt where the
body of Saint Francis lies, through the gloomy “lower” church, into
the height and breadth, the physical and symbolic “illumination,” of
the church above.  At Vezelay that kind of contrast suggests itself
in one view; the hopeful, but transitory, glory upon which one
enters; the long, darksome, central avenue; the “open vision” into
which it conducts us.  As a symbol of resurrection, its choir is a
fitting diadem to the church of the Magdalen, whose remains the monks
meant it to cover.
And yet, after all, notwithstanding this assertion of the superiority
(are we so to call it?) of the new Gothic way, perhaps by the very
force of contrast, the Madeleine of Vezelay is still pre-eminently a
Romanesque, and thereby the typically monastic, church.  In spite of
restoration even, as we linger here, the impression of the monastic
Middle Age, of a very exclusive monasticism, that has verily turned
its back upon common life, jealously closed inward upon itself, is a
singularly weighty one; the more so because, as the peasant said when
asked the way to an old sanctuary that had fallen to the occupation
of farm-labourers, and was now deserted even by them: Maintenant il
n’y a personne la.
126. *Published in the Nineteenth Century, June 1894, and now
reprinted by the kind permission of the proprietors.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of Essays” by Walter Horatio Pater.


Also by this author (on Amazon.com); The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of EssaysBy Walter Horatio PaterAt Amazon
