


CONSIDERED AS ONE OF THE FINE ARTS.
DOCTOR NORTH: You are a liberal man: liberal in the true classical sense,
not in the slang sense of modern politicians and education-mongers. Being
so, I am sure that you will sympathize with my case. I am an ill-used man,
Dr. North–particularly ill used; and, with your permission, I will briefly
explain how. A black scene of calumny will be laid open; but you, Doctor,
will make all things square again. One frown from you, directed to the
proper quarter, or a warning shake of the crutch, will set me right in
public opinion, which at present, I am sorry to say, is rather hostile to
me and mine–all owing to the wicked arts of slanderers. But you shall
hear.
A good many years ago you may remember that I came forward in the character
of a dilettante in murder. Perhaps dilettante may be too strong a word.
Connoisseur is better suited to the scruples and infirmity of public
taste. I suppose there is no harm in that at least. A man is not bound
to put his eyes, ears, and understanding into his breeches pocket when he
meets with a murder. If he is not in a downright comatose state, I suppose
he must see that one murder is better or worse than another in point of
good taste. Murders have their little differences and shades of merit as
well as statues, pictures, oratorios, cameos, intaglios, or what not. You
may be angry with the man for talking too much, or too publicly, (as to the
too much, that I deny–a man can never cultivate his taste too highly;) but
you must allow him to think, at any rate; and you, Doctor, you think, I am
sure, both deeply and correctly on the subject. Well, would you believe it?
all my neighbors came to hear of that little æsthetic essay which you had
published; and, unfortunately, hearing at the very same time of a club that
I as connected with, and a dinner at which I presided–both tending to the
same little object as the essay, viz., the diffusion of a just taste among
her majesty’s subjects, they got up the most barbarous calumnies against
me. In particular, they said that I, or that the club, which comes to the
same thing, had offered bounties on well conducted homicides–with a scale
of drawbacks, in case of any one defect or flaw, according to a table
issued to private friends. Now, Doctor, I’ll tell you the whole truth about
the dinner and the club, and you’ll see how malicious the world is. But
first let me tell you, confidentially, what my real principles are upon the
matters in question.
As to murder, I never committed one in my life. It’s a well known thing
amongst all my friends. I can get a paper to certify as much, signed by
lots of people. Indeed, if you come to that, I doubt whether many
people could produce as strong a certificate. Mine would be as big as a
table-cloth. There is indeed one member of the club, who pretends to say
that he caught me once making too free with his throat on a club night,
after every body else had retired. But, observe, he shuffles in his story
according to his state of civilation. When not far gone, he contents
himself with saying that he caught me ogling his throat; and that I was
melancholy for some weeks after, and that my voice sounded in a way
expressing, to the nice ear of a connoisseur, the sense of opportunities
lost–but the club all know that he’s a disappointed man himself, and that
he speaks querulously at times about the fatal neglect of a man’s coming
abroad without his tools. Besides, all this is an affair between two
amateurs, and every body makes allowances for little asperities
and sorenesses in such a case. “But,” say you, “If no murderer, my
correspondent may have encouraged, or even have bespoke a murder.” No, upon
my honor–nothing of the kind. And that was the very point I wished to
argue for your satisfaction. The truth is, I am a very particular man in
everything relating to murder; and perhaps I carry my delicacy too far. The
Stagyrite most justly, and possibly with a view to my case, placed virtue
in the [Greek: to meson] or middle point between two extremes. A golden
mean is certainly what every man should aim at. But it is easier talking
than doing; and, my infirmity being notoriously too much milkiness of
heart, I find it difficult to maintain that steady equatorial line between
the two poles of too much murder on the one hand, and too little on the
other. I am too soft–Doctor, too soft; and people get excused through
me–nay, go through life without an attempt made upon them, that ought not
to be excused. I believe if I had the management of things, there would
hardly be a murder from year’s end to year’s end. In fact I’m for virtue,
and goodness, and all that sort of thing. And two instances I’ll give you
to what an extremity I carry my virtue. The first may seem a trifle; but
not if you knew my nephew, who was certainly born to be hanged, and would
have been so long ago, but for my restraining voice. He is horribly
ambitious, and thinks himself a man of cultivated taste in most branches of
murder, whereas, in fact, he has not one idea on the subject, but such
as he has stolen from me. This is so well known, that the club has twice
blackballed him, though every indulgence was shown to him as my relative.
People came to me and said–"Now really, President, we would do much to
serve a relative of yours. But still, what can be said? You know yourself
that he’ll disgrace us. If we were to elect him, why, the next thing we
should hear of would be some vile butcherly murder, by way of justifying
our choice. And what sort of a concern would it be? You know, as well as we
do, that it would be a disgraceful affair, more worthy of the shambles than
of an artist’s attelier. He would fall upon some great big man, some huge
farmer returning drunk from a fair. There would be plenty of blood, and
that he would expect us to take in lieu of taste, finish, scenical
grouping. Then, again, how would he tool? Why, most probably with a cleaver
and a couple of paving stones: so that the whole coup d’oeil would remind
you rather of some hideous ogre or cyclops, than of the delicate operator
of the nineteenth century.” The picture was drawn with the hand of truth;
that I could not but allow, and, as to personal feelings in the matter, I
dismissed them from the first. The next morning I spoke to my nephew–I was
delicately situated, as you see, but I determined that no consideration
should induce me to flinch from my duty. “John,” said I, “you seem to me to
have taken an erroneous view of life and its duties. Pushed on by ambition,
you are dreaming rather of what it might be glorious to attempt, than what
it would be possible for you to accomplish. Believe me, it is not necessary
to a man’s respectability that he should commit a murder. Many a man has
passed through life most respectably, without attempting any species of
homicide–good, bad, or indifferent. It is your first duty to ask yourself,
quid valeant humeri, quid ferre recusent? we cannot all be brilliant men
in this life. And it is for your interest to be contented rather with a
humble station well filled, than to shock every body with failures, the
more conspicuous by contrast with the ostentation of their promises.” John
made no answer, he looked very sulky at the moment, and I am in high
hopes that I have saved a near relation from making a fool of himself by
attempting what is as much beyond his capacity as an epic poem. Others,
however, tell me that he is meditating a revenge upon me and the whole
club. But let this be as it may, liberavi animam meam; and, as you see,
have run some risk with a wish to diminish the amount of homicide. But the
other case still more forcibly illustrates my virtue. A man came to me as
a candidate for the place of my servant, just then vacant. He had the
reputation of having dabbled a little in our art; some said not without
merit. What startled me, however, was, that he supposed this art to be
part of his regular duties in my service. Now that was a thing I would not
allow; so I said at once, “Richard (or James, as the case might be,) you
misunderstand my character. If a man will and must practise this difficult
(and allow me to add, dangerous) branch of art–if he has an overruling
genius for it, why, he might as well pursue his studies whilst living in my
service as in another’s. And also, I may observe, that it can do no harm
either to himself or to the subject on whom he operates, that he should
be guided by men of more taste than himself. Genius may do much, but long
study of the art must always entitle a man to offer advice. So far I will
go–general principles I will suggest. But as to any particular case, once
for all I will have nothing to do with it. Never tell me of any special
work of art you are meditating–I set my face against it in toto. For if
once a man indulges himself in murder, very soon he comes to think
little of robbing; and from robbing he comes next to drinking and
Sabbath-breaking, and from that to incivility and procrastination. Once
begin upon this downward path, you never know where you are to stop. Many
a man has dated his ruin from some murder or other that perhaps he thought
little of at the time. Principiis obsta–that’s my rule.” Such was my
speech, and I have always acted up to it; so if that is not being virtuous,
I should be glad to know what is. But now about the dinner and the club.
The club was not particularly of my creation; it arose pretty much as other
similar associations, for the propagation of truth and the communication of
new ideas, rather from the necessities of things than upon any one man’s
suggestion. As to the dinner, if any man more than another could be held
responsible for that, it was a member known amongst us by the name of
Toad-in-the-hole. He was so called from his gloomy misanthropical
disposition, which led him into constant disparagements of all modern
murders as vicious abortions, belonging to no authentic school of art. The
finest performances of our own age he snarled at cynically; and at length
this querulous humor grew upon him so much, and he became so notorious as a
laudator tentporis acti, that few people cared to seek his society. This
made him still more fierce and truculent. He went about muttering and
growling; wherever you met him he was soliloquizing and saying, “despicable
pretender–without grouping–without two ideas upon handling–without"–and
there you lost him. At length existence seemed to be painful to him;
he rarely spoke, he seemed conversing with phantoms in the air, his
housekeeper informed us that his reading was nearly confined to God’s
Revenge upon Murder, by Reynolds, and a more ancient book of the same
title, noticed by Sir Walter Scott in his Fortunes of Nigel. Sometimes,
perhaps, he might read in the Newgate Calendar down to the year 1788, but
he never looked into a book more recent. In fact, he had a theory with
regard to the French Revolution, as having been the great cause of
degeneration in murder. “Very soon, sir,” he used to say, “men will have
lost the art of killing poultry: the very rudiments of the art will
have perished!” In the year 1811 he retired from general society.
Toad-in-the-hole was no more seen in any public resort. We missed him from
his wonted haunts–nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he. By the side of
the main conduit his listless length at noontide he would stretch, and pore
upon the filth that muddled by. “Even dogs are not what they were, sir–not
what they should be. I remember in my grandfather’s time that some dogs had
an idea of murder. I have known a mastiff lie in ambush for a rival, sir,
and murder him with pleasing circumstances of good taste. Yes, sir, I knew
a tom-cat that was an assassin. But now"–and then, the subject growing too
painful, he dashed his hand to his forehead, and went off abruptly in a
homeward direction towards his favorite conduit, where he was seen by an
amateur in such a state that he thought it dangerous to address him. Soon
after he shut himself entirely up; it was understood that he had resigned
himself to melancholy; and at length the prevailing notion was, that
Toad-in-the-hole had hanged himself.
The world was wrong there, as it has been on some other questions.
Toad-in-the-hole might be sleeping, but dead he was not; and of that we
soon had ocular proof. One morning in 1812, an amateur surprised us with
the news that he had seen Toad-in-the-hole brushing with hasty steps the
dews away to meet the postman by the conduit side. Even that was something:
how much more, to hear that he had shaved his beard–had laid aside his
sad-colored clothes, and was adorned like a bridegroom of ancient days.
What could be the meaning of all this? Was Toad-in-the-hole mad? or how?
Soon after the secret was explained–in more than a figurative sense
“the murder was out.” For in came the London morning papers, by which
it appeared that but three days before a murder, the most superb of the
century by many degrees had occurred in the heart of London. I need hardly
say, that this was the great exterminating chef-d’oeuvre of Williams at
Mr. Marr’s, No. 29, Ratcliffe Highway. That was the début of the artist;
at least for anything the public knew. What occurred at Mr. Williamson’s
twelve nights afterwards–the second work turned out from the same
chisel–some people pronounced even superior. But Toad-in-the-hole always
“reclaimed"–he was even angry at comparisons. “This vulgar gout de
comparaison, as La Bruyère calls it,” he would often remark, “will be
our ruin; each work has its own separate characteristics–each in and for
itself is incomparable. One, perhaps, might suggest the Iliad–the other
the Odyssey: what do you get by such comparisons? Neither ever was, or
will be surpassed; and when you’ve talked for hours, you must still come
back to that.” Vain, however, as all criticism might be, he often said that
volumes might be written on each case for itself; and he even proposed to
publish in quarto on the subject.
Meantime, how had Toad-in-the-hole happened to hear of this great work
of art so early in the morning? He had received an account by express,
dispatched by a correspondent in London, who watched the progress of art On
Toady’s behalf, with a general commission to send off a special express,
at whatever cost, in the event of any estimable works appearing–how much
more upon occasion of a ne plus ultra in art! The express arrived in the
night-time; Toad-in-the-hole was then gone to bed; he had been muttering
and grumbling for hours, but of course he was called up. On reading the
account, he threw his arms round the express, called him his brother and
his preserver; settled a pension upon him for three lives, and expressed
his regret at not having it in his power to knight him. We, on our part–we
amateurs, I mean–having heard that he was abroad, and therefore had nothanged himself, made sure of soon seeing him amongst us. Accordingly he
soon arrived, knocked over the porter on his road to the reading-room; he
seized every man’s hand as he passed him–wrung it almost frantically, and
kept ejaculating, “Why, now here’s something like a murder!–this is the
real thing–this is genuine–this is what you can approve, can recommend to
a friend: this–says every man, on reflection–this is the thing that ought
to be!” Then, looking at particular friends, he said–"Why, Jack, how are
you? Why, Tom, how are you? Bless me, you look ten years younger than
when I last saw you.” “No, sir,” I replied, “It is you who look ten years
younger.” “Do I? well, I should’nt wonder if I did; such works are
enough to make us all young.” And in fact the general opinion is, that
Toad-in-the-hole would have died but for this regeneration of art, which
he called a second age of Leo the Tenth; and it was our duty, he said
solemnly, to commemorate it. At present, and en attendant–rather as an
occasion for a public participation in public sympathy, than as in itself
any commensurate testimony of our interest–he proposed that the club
should meet and dine together. A splendid public dinner, therefore, was
given by the club; to which all amateurs were invited from a distance of
one hundred miles.
Of this dinner there are ample short-hand notes amongst the archives of
the club. But they are not “extended,” to speak diplomatically; and the
reporter is missing–I believe, murdered. Meantime, in years long after
that day, and on an occasion perhaps equally interesting, viz., the turning
up of Thugs and Thuggism, another dinner was given. Of this I myself kept
notes, for fear of another accident to the short-hand reporter. And I here
subjoin them. Toad-in-the-hole, I must mention, was present at this dinner.
In fact, it was one of its sentimental incidents. Being as old as the
valleys at the dinner of 1812, naturally he was as old as the hills at the
Thug dinner of 1838. He had taken to wearing his beard again; why, or with
what view, it passes my persimmon to tell you. But so it was. And his
appearance was most benign and venerable. Nothing could equal the angelic
radiance of his smile as he inquired after the unfortunate reporter, (whom,
as a piece of private scandal, I should tell you that he was himself
supposed to have murdered, in a rapture of creative art:) the answer was,
with roars of laughter, from the under-sheriff of our county–"Non est
inventus.” Toad-in-the-hole laughed outrageously at this: in fact, we all
thought he was choking; and, at the earnest request of the company, a
musical composer furnished a most beautiful glee upon the occasion,
which was sung five times after dinner, with universal applause and
inextinguishable laughter, the words being these, (and the chorus
so contrived, as most beautifully to mimic the peculiar laughter of
Toad-in-the-hole:)–
  “Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the hole–Ubi est ille reporter?
  Et responsum est cum cachinno–Non est inventus.”
Chorus.
  “Deinde iteratum est ab omnibus, cum cachinnatione undulante–
  Non est inventus.”
Toad-in-the-hole, I ought to mention, about nine years before, when an
express from Edinburgh brought him the earliest intelligence of the
Burke-and-Hare revolution in the art, went mad upon the spot; and, instead
of a pension to the express for even one life, or a knighthood, endeavored
to burke him; in consequence of which he was put into a strait waistcoat.
And that was the reason we had no dinner then. But now all of us were alive
and kicking, strait-waistcoaters and others; in fact, not one absentee
was reported upon the entire roll. There were also many foreign amateurs
present.
Dinner being over, and the cloth drawn, there was a general call made for
the new glee of Non est inventus; but, as this would have interfered with
the requisite gravity of the company during the earlier toasts, I overruled
the call. After the national toasts had been given, the first official
toast of the day was, The Old Man of the Mountains–drunk in solemn
silence.
Toad-in-the-hole returned thanks in a neat speech. He likened himself to
the Old Man of the Mountains, in a few brief allusions, that made the
company absolutely yell with laughter; and he concluded with giving the
health of
Mr. Von Hammer, with many thanks to him for his learned History of the
Old Man and his subjects the assassins.
Upon this I rose and said, that doubtless most of the company were aware
of the distinguished place assigned by orientalists to the very learned
Turkish scholar Von Hammer the Austrian; that he had made the profoundest
researches into our art as connected with those early and eminent artists
the Syrian assassins in the period of the Crusaders; that his work had been
for several years deposited, as a rare treasure of art, in the library
of the club. Even the author’s name, gentlemen, pointed him out as the
historian of our art–Von Hammer–
“Yes, yes,” interrupted Toad-in-the-hole, who never can sit still–"Yes,
yes, Von Hammer–he’s the man for a malleus hæreticorum: think rightly
of our art, or he’s the man to tickle your catastrophes. You all know what
consideration Williams bestowed on the hammer, or the ship carpenter’s
mallet, which is the same thing. Gentlemen, I give you another great
hammer–Charles the Hammer, the Marteau, or, in old French, the Martel–he
hammered the Saracens till they were all as dead as door-nails–he did,
believe me.”
“Charles Martel, with all the honors.”
But the explosion of Toad-in-the-hole, together with the uproarious cheers
for the grandpapa of Charlemagne, had now made the company unmanageable.
The orchestra was again challenged with shouts the stormiest for the new
glee. I made again a powerful effort to overrule the challenge. I might
as well have talked to the winds. I foresaw a tempestuous evening; and I
ordered myself to be strengthened with three waiters on each side; the
vice-president with as many. Symptoms of unruly enthusiasm were beginning
to show out; and I own that I myself was considerably excited as the
orchestra opened with its storm of music, and the impassioned glee
began–"Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the-hole–Ubi est ille Reporter?"
And the frenzy of the passion became absolutely convulsing, as the full
chorus fell in–"Et iteratum est ab omnibus–Non est inventus”
By this time I saw how things were going: wine and music were making most
of the amateurs wild. Particularly Toad-in-the-hole, though considerably
above a hundred years old, was getting as vicious as a young leopard. It
was a fixed impression with the company that he had murdered the reporter
in the year 1812; since which time (viz. twenty-six years) “ille reporter"
had been constantly reported “Non est inventus.” Consequently, the glee
about himself, which of itself was most tumultuous and jubilant, carried
him off his feet. Like the famous choral songs amongst the citizens of
Abdera, nobody could hear it without a contagious desire for falling back
into the agitating music of “Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the-hole,” &c.
I enjoined vigilance upon my assessors, and the business of the evening
proceeded.
The next toast was–The Jewish Sicarii.
Upon which I made the following explanation to the company:–"Gentlemen,
I am sure it will interest you all to hear that the assassins, ancient as
they were, had a race of predecessors in the very same country. All over
Syria, but particularly in Palestine, during the early years of the Emperor
Nero, there was a band of murderers, who prosecuted their studies in a very
novel manner. They did not practise in the night-time, or in lonely places;
but justly considering that great crowds are in themselves a sort of
darkness by means of the dense pressure and the impossibility of finding
out who it was that gave the blow, they mingled with mobs everywhere;
particularly at the great paschal feast in Jerusalem; where they actually
had the audacity, as Josephus assures us, to press into the temple,–and
whom should they choose for operating upon but Jonathan himself, the
Pontifex Maximus? They murdered him, gentlemen, as beautifully as if they
had had him alone on a moonless night in a dark lane. And when it was
asked, who was the murderer, and where he was"–
“Why, then, it was answered,” interrupted Toad-in-the-hole, ’Non est
inventus.” And then, in spite of all I could do or say, the
orchestra opened, and the whole company began–"Et interrogatum est à
Toad-in-the-hole–Ubi est ille Sicarius? Et responsum est ab omnibus–Non
est inventus.”
When the tempestuous chorus had subsided, I began again:–"Gentlemen, you
will find a very circumstantial account of the Sicarii in at least three
different parts of Josephus; once in Book XX. sect. v. c. 8, of his
Antiquities; once in Book I. of his Wars: but in sect. 10 of the
chapter first cited you will find a particular description of their
tooling. This is what he says–’They tooled with small scymetars not much
different from the Persian acinacæ, but more curved, and for all the
world most like the Roman sickles or sicæ.’ It is perfectly magnificent,
gentlemen, to hear the sequel of their history. Perhaps the only case
on record where a regular army of murderers was assembled, a justus
exercitus, was in the case of these Sicarii. They mustered in such
strength in the wilderness, that Festus himself was obliged to march
against them with the Roman legionary force.”
Upon which Toad-in-the-hole, that cursed interrupter, broke out
a-singing–"Et interrogatum est à Toad-in-the-hole–Ubi est ille exercitus?
Et responsum est ab omnibus–Non est inventus.”
“No, no, Toad–you are wrong for once: that army was found, and was all
cut to pieces in the desert. Heavens, gentlemen, what a sublime picture!
The Roman legions–the wilderness–Jerusalem in the distance–an army of
murderers in the foreground!”
Mr. R., a member, now gave the next toast–"To the further improvement of
Tooling, and thanks to the Committee for their services.”
Mr. L., on behalf of the committee who had reported on that subject,
returned thanks. He made an interesting extract from the report, by which
it appeared how very much stress had been laid formerly on the mode of
tooling, by the fathers, both Greek and Latin. In confirmation of this
pleasing fact, he made a very striking statement in reference to the
earliest work of antediluvian art. Father Mersenne, that learned Roman
Catholic, in page one thousand four hundred and thirty-one[1] of his
operose Commentary on Genesis, mentions, on the authority of several
rabbis, that the quarrel of Cain with Abel was about a young woman; that,
by various accounts, Cain had tooled with his teeth, [Abelem fuisse
morsibus dilaceratum à Cain;] by many others, with the jaw-bone of an
ass; which is the tooling adopted by most painters. But it is pleasing to
the mind of sensibility to know that, as science expanded, sounder views
were adopted. One author contends for a pitchfork, St. Chrysostom for a
sword, Irenæus for a scythe, and Prudentius for a hedging-bill. This last
writer delivers his opinion thus:–
  “Frater, probatæ sanctitatis æmulus,
  Germana curvo colla frangit sarculo:”
i.e. his brother, jealous of his attested sanctity, fractures his
brotherly throat with a curved hedging-bill. “All which is respectfully
submitted by your committee, not so much as decisive of the question, (for
it is not,) but in order to impress upon the youthful mind the importance
which has ever been attached to the quality of the tooling by such men as
Chrysostom and Irenæus.”
[Footnote 1: “Page one thousand four hundred and thirty-one"–literally,
good reader, and no joke at all.]
“Dang Irenæus!” said Toad-in-the-hole, who now rose impatiently to give the
next toast:–"Our Irish friends; and a speedy revolution in their mode of
tooling, as well as everything else connected with the art!”
“Gentlemen, I’ll tell you the plain truth. Every day of the year we take
up a paper, we read the opening of a murder. We say, this is good, this
is charming, this is excellent! But, behold you! scarcely have we read a
little farther, before the word Tipperary or Ballina-something betrays the
Irish manufacture. Instantly we loath it; we call to the waiter; we say,
Waiter, take away this paper; send it out of the house; it is absolutely
offensive to all just taste.’ I appeal to every man whether, on finding a
murder (otherwise perhaps promising enough) to be Irish, he does not feel
himself as much insulted as when Madeira being ordered, he finds it to be
Cape; or when, taking up what he takes to be a mushroom, it turns out
what children call a toad-stool. Tithes, politics, or something wrong in
principle, vitiate every Irish murder. Gentlemen, this must be reformed, or
Ireland will not be a land to live in; at least, if we do live there, we
must import all our murders, that’s clear.” Toad-in-the-hole sat
down growling with suppressed wrath, and the universal “Hear, hear!"
sufficiently showed that he spoke the general feeling.
The next toast was–"The sublime epoch of Burkism and Harism!”
This was drunk with enthusiasm; and one of the members, who spoke to the
question, made a very curious communication to the company:–"Gentlemen,
we fancy Burkism to be a pure invention of our own times: and in fact no
Pancirollus has ever enumerated this branch of art when writing de rebus
deperditis. Still I have ascertained that the essential principle of the
art was known to the ancients, although like the art of painting upon
glass, of making the myrrhine cups, &c., it was lost in the dark ages for
want of encouragement. In the famous collection of Greek epigrams made
by Planudes is one upon a very charming little case of Burkism: it is a
perfect little gem of art. The epigram itself I cannot lay my hand upon at
this moment, but the following is an abstract of it by Salmasius, as I find
it in his notes on Vopiscus: ’Est et elegans epigramma Lucilii, (well
he might call it “elegans!”) ubi medicus et pollinctor de compacto sic
egerunt, ut medicus ægros omnes curæ suæ commissos occideret:’ this was
the basis of the contract, you see, that on the one part the doctor, for
himself and his assigns, doth undertake and contract duly and truly to
murder all the patients committed to his charge: but why? There lies the
beauty of the case–’Et ut pollinctori amico suo traderet pollingendos.’
The pollinctor, you are aware, was a person whose business it was to
dress and prepare dead bodies for burial. The original ground of the
transaction appears to have been sentimental: ’He was my friend,’ says the
murderous doctor; ’he was dear to me,’ in speaking of the pollinctor. But
the law, gentlemen, is stern and harsh: the law will not hear of these
tender motives: to sustain a contract of this nature in law, it is
essential that a ’consideration’ should be given. Now what was the
consideration? For thus far all is on the side of the pollinctor: he
will be well paid for his services; but, meantime, the generous, the
noble-minded doctor gets nothing. What was the little consideration
again, I ask, which the law would insist on the doctor’s taking? You shall
hear: ’Et ut pollinctor vicissim [Greek: telamonas] quos furabatur de
pollinctione mortuorum medico mitteret doni ad alliganda vulnera eorurn
quos curabat.’ Now, the case is clear: the whole went on a principle of
reciprocity which would have kept up the trade for ever. The doctor was
also a surgeon: he could not murder all his patients: some of the
surgical patients must be retained intact; re infectâ. For these he
wanted linen bandages. But, unhappily, the Romans wore woollen, on which
account they bathed so often. Meantime, there was linen to be had in
Rome; but it was monstrously dear; and the [Greek: telamones] or linen
swathing bandages, in which superstition obliged them to bind up corpses,
would answer capitally for the surgeon. The doctor, therefore, contracts to
furnish his friend with a constant succession of corpses, provided, and be
it understood always, that his said friend in return should supply him with
one half of the articles he would receive from the friends of the parties
murdered or to be murdered. The doctor invariably recommended his
invaluable friend the pollinctor, (whom let us call the undertaker;) the
undertaker, with equal regard to the sacred rights of friendship, uniformly
recommended the doctor. Like Pylades and Orestes, they were models of a
perfect friendship: in their lives they were lovely, and on the gallows, it
is to be hoped, they were not divided.
“Gentlemen, it makes me laugh horribly, when I think of those two friends
drawing and redrawing on each other: ’Pollinctor in account with Doctor,
debtor by sixteen corpses; creditor by forty-five bandages, two of which
damaged.’ Their names unfortunately are lost; but I conceive they must have
been Quintus Burkius and Publius Harius. By the way, gentlemen, has anybody
heard lately of Hare? I understand he is comfortably settled in Ireland,
considerably to the west, and does a little business now and then; but, as
he observes with a sigh, only as a retailer–nothing like the fine thriving
wholesale concern so carelessly blown up at Edinburgh. ’You see what comes
of neglecting business,’–is the chief moral, the [Greek: epimutheon],
as Æsop would say, which he draws from his past experience.”
At length came the toast of the day–Thugdom in all its branches.
The speeches attempted at this crisis of the dinner were past all
counting. But the applause was so furious, the music so stormy, and the
crashing of glasses so incessant, from the general resolution never again
to drink an inferior toast from the same glass, that my power is not equal
to the task of reporting. Besides which, Toad-in-the-hole now became quite
ungovernable. He kept firing pistols in every direction; sent his servant
for a blunderbuss, and talked of loading with ball-cartridge. We conceived
that his former madness had returned at the mention of Burke and Hare; or
that, being again weary of life, he had resolved to go off in a general
massacre. This we could not think of allowing: it became indispensable,
therefore, to kick him out, which we did with universal consent, the whole
company lending their toes uno pede, as I may say, though pitying his
gray hairs and his angelic smile. During the operation the orchestra poured
in their old chorus. The universal company sang, and (what surprised us
most of all) Toad-in-the-hole joined us furiously in singing–
  “Et interrogatum est ab omnibus–Ubi est ille Toad-in-the-hole
  Et responsum est ab omnibus–Non est inventus.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Miscellaneous Essays” by Thomas de Quincey belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous essays, by Thomas De Quincey.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
