




[38] By his immense productiveness, by the even perfection of what he
produced, its fitness to its own day, its hold on posterity, in the
suavity of his life, some would add in the “opportunity” of his early
death, Raphael may seem a signal instance of the luckiness, of the
good fortune, of genius.  Yet, if we follow the actual growth of his
powers, within their proper framework, the age of the Renaissance–an
age of which we may say, summarily, that it enjoyed itself, and found
perhaps its chief enjoyment in the attitude of the scholar, in the
enthusiastic acquisition of knowledge for its own sake:–if we thus
view Raphael and his works in their environment we shall find even
his seemingly mechanical good fortune hardly distinguishable from his
own patient disposal of the means at hand.  Facile master as he may
seem, as indeed he is, he is also one of the world’s typical
scholars, with [39] Plato, and Cicero, and Virgil, and Milton.  The
formula of his genius, if we must have one, is this: genius by
accumulation; the transformation of meek scholarship into genius–
triumphant power of genius.
Urbino, where this prince of the Renaissance was born in 1483, year
also of the birth of Luther, leader of the other great movement of
that age, the Reformation–Urbino, under its dukes of the house of
Montefeltro, had wherewithal just then to make a boy of native
artistic faculty from the first a willing learner.  The gloomy old
fortress of the feudal masters of the town had been replaced, in
those later years of the Quattro-cento, by a consummate monument of
Quattro-cento taste, a museum of ancient and modern art, the owners
of which lived there, gallantly at home, amid the choicer flowers of
living humanity.  The ducal palace was, in fact, become nothing less
than a school of ambitious youth in all the accomplishments alike of
war and peace.  Raphael’s connexion with it seems to have become
intimate, and from the first its influence must have overflowed so
small a place.  In the case of the lucky Raphael, for once, the
actual conditions of early life had been suitable, propitious,
accordant to what one’s imagination would have required for the
childhood of the man.  He was born amid the art he was, not to
transform, but to perfect, by a thousand reverential retouchings.  In
no palace, however, but [40] in a modest abode, still shown,
containing the workshop of his father, Giovanni Santi.  But here,
too, though in frugal form, art, the arts, were present.  A store of
artistic objects was, or had recently been, made there, and now
especially, for fitting patrons, religious pictures in the old
Umbrian manner.  In quiet nooks of the Apennines Giovanni’s works
remain; and there is one of them, worth study, in spite of what
critics say of its crudity, in the National Gallery.  Concede its
immaturity, at least, though an immaturity visibly susceptible of a
delicate grace, it wins you nevertheless to return again and again,
and ponder, by a sincere expression of sorrow, profound, yet
resigned, be the cause what it may, among all the many causes of
sorrow inherent in the ideal of maternity, human or divine.  But if
you keep in mind when looking at it the facts of Raphael’s childhood,
you will recognise in his father’s picture, not the anticipated
sorrow of the “Mater Dolorosa” over the dead son, but the grief of a
simple household over the mother herself taken early from it.  That
may have been the first picture the eyes of the world’s great painter
of Madonnas rested on; and if he stood diligently before it to copy,
and so copying, quite unconsciously, and with no disloyalty to his
original, refined, improved, substituted,–substituted himself, in
fact, his finer self–he had already struck the persistent note of
his career.  As with his age, it is [41] his vocation, ardent worker
as he is, to enjoy himself–to enjoy himself amiably, and to find his
chief enjoyment in the attitude of a scholar.  And one by one, one
after another, his masters, the very greatest of them, go to school
to him.
It was so especially with the artist of whom Raphael first became
certainly a learner–Perugino.  Giovanni Santi had died in Raphael’s
childhood, too early to have been in any direct sense his teacher.
The lad, however, from one and another, had learned much, when, with
his share of the patrimony in hand, enough to keep him, but not to
tempt him from scholarly ways, he came to Perugia, hoping still
further to improve himself.  He was in his eighteenth year, and how
he looked just then you may see in a drawing of his own in the
University Galleries, of somewhat stronger mould than less genuine
likenesses may lead you to expect.  There is something of a fighter
in the way in which the nose springs from the brow between the wide-
set, meditative eyes.  A strenuous lad! capable of plodding, if you
dare apply that word to labour so impassioned as his–to any labour
whatever done at Perugia, centre of the dreamiest Apennine scenery.
Its various elements (one hardly knows whether one is thinking of
Italian nature or of Raphael’s art in recounting them), the richly-
planted lowlands, the sensitive mountain lines in flight one beyond
the other into clear distance, the cool yet glowing atmosphere, [42]
the romantic morsels of architecture, which lend to the entire scene
I know not what expression of reposeful antiquity, arrange themselves
here as for set purpose of pictorial effect, and have gone with
little change into his painted backgrounds.  In the midst of it, on
titanic old Roman and Etruscan foundations, the later Gothic town had
piled itself along the lines of a gigantic land of rock, stretched
out from the last slope of the Apennines into the plain.  Between its
fingers steep dark lanes wind down into the olive gardens; on the
finger-tips military and monastic builders had perched their towns.
A place as fantastic in its attractiveness as the human life which
then surged up and down in it in contrast to the peaceful scene
around.  The Baglioni who ruled there had brought certain tendencies
of that age to a typical completeness of expression, veiling crime–
crime, it might seem, for its own sake, a whole octave of fantastic
crime–not merely under brilliant fashions and comely persons, but
under fashions and persons, an outward presentment of life and of
themselves, which had a kind of immaculate grace and discretion about
them, as if Raphael himself had already brought his unerring gift of
selection to bear upon it all for motives of art.  With life in those
streets of Perugia, as with nature, with the work of his masters,
with the mere exercises of his fellow-students, his hand rearranges,
refines, renews, as if by simple contact; [43] but it is met here
half-way in its renewing office by some special aptitude for such
grace in the subject itself.  Seemingly innocent, full of natural
gaiety, eternally youthful, those seven and more deadly sins,
embodied and attired in just the jaunty dress then worn, enter now
and afterwards as spectators, or assistants, into many a sacred
foreground and background among the friends and kinsmen of the Holy
Family, among the very angels, gazing, conversing, standing firmly
and unashamed.  During his apprenticeship at Perugia Raphael visited
and left his work in more modest places round about, along those
seductive mountain or lowland roads, and copied for one of them
Perugino’s “Marriage of the Virgin” significantly, did it by many
degrees better, with a very novel effect of motion everywhere, and
with that grace which natural motion evokes, introducing for a temple
in the background a lovely bit of his friend Bramante’s sort of
architecture, the true Renaissance or perfected Quattro-cento
architecture.  He goes on building a whole lordly new city of the
like as he paints to the end of his life.  The subject, we may note,
as we leave Perugia in Raphael’s company, had been suggested by the
famous mystic treasure of its cathedral church, the marriage ring of
the Blessed Virgin herself.
Raphael’s copy had been made for the little old Apennine town of
Citta di Castello; and another place he visits at this time is still
more [44] effective in the development of his genius.  About his
twentieth year he comes to Siena–that other rocky Titan’s hand, just
lifted out of the surface of the plain.  It is the most grandiose
place he has yet seen; it has not forgotten that it was once the
rival of Florence; and here the patient scholar passes under an
influence of somewhat larger scope than Perugino’s.  Perugino’s
pictures are for the most part religious contemplations, painted and
made visible, to accompany the action of divine service–a visible
pattern to priests, attendants, worshippers, of what the course of
their invisible thoughts should be at those holy functions.  Learning
in the workshop of Perugino to produce the like–such works as the
Ansidei Madonna–to produce them very much better than his master,
Raphael was already become a freeman of the most strictly religious
school of Italian art, the so devout Umbrian soul finding there its
purest expression, still untroubled by the naturalism, the
intellectualism, the antique paganism, then astir in the artistic
soul everywhere else in Italy.  The lovely work of Perugino, very
lovely at its best, of the early Raphael also, is in fact
“conservative,” and at various points slightly behind its day, though
not unpleasantly.  In Perugino’s allegoric frescoes of the Cambio,
the Hall of the Money-changers, for instance, under the mystic rule
of the Planets in person, pagan personages take their place indeed
side by side with the figures of the New [45] Testament, but are no
Romans or Greeks, neither are the Jews Jews, nor is any one of them,
warrior, sage, king, precisely of Perugino’s own time and place, but
still contemplations only, after the manner of the personages in his
church-work; or, say, dreams–monastic dreams–thin, do-nothing
creatures, conjured from sky and cloud.  Perugino clearly never broke
through the meditative circle of the Middle Age.
Now Raphael, on the other hand, in his final period at Rome, exhibits
a wonderful narrative power in painting; and the secret of that
power–the power of developing a story in a picture, or series of
pictures–may be traced back from him to Pinturicchio, as that
painter worked on those vast, well-lighted walls of the cathedral
library at Siena, at the great series of frescoes illustrative of the
life of Pope Pius the Second.  It had been a brilliant personal
history, in contact now and again with certain remarkable public
events–a career religious yet mundane, you scarcely know which, so
natural is the blending of lights, of interest in it.  How unlike the
Peruginesque conception of life in its almost perverse other-
worldliness, which Raphael now leaves behind him, but, like a true
scholar, will not forget.  Pinturicchio then had invited his
remarkable young friend hither, “to assist him by his counsels,” who,
however, pupil-wise, after his habit also learns much as he thus
assists.  He stands depicted there in person in the scene [46] of the
canonisation of Saint Catherine; and though his actual share in the
work is not to be defined, connoisseurs have felt his intellectual
presence, not at one place only, in touches at once finer and more
forcible than were usual in the steady-going, somewhat Teutonic,
Pinturicchio, Raphael’s elder by thirty years.  The meek scholar you
see again, with his tentative sketches and suggestions, had more than
learned his lesson; through all its changes that flexible
intelligence loses nothing; does but add continually to its store.
Henceforward Raphael will be able to tell a story in a picture,
better, with a truer economy, with surer judgment, more naturally and
easily than any one else.
And here at Siena, of all Italian towns perhaps most deeply impressed
with medieval character–an impress it still retains–grotesque,
parti-coloured–parti-coloured, so to speak, in its genius–Satanic,
yet devout of humour, as depicted in its old chronicles, and
beautiful withal, dignified; it is here that Raphael becomes for the
first time aware of that old pagan world, which had already come to
be so much for the art-schools of Italy.  There were points, as we
saw, at which the school of Perugia was behind its day.  Amid those
intensely Gothic surroundings in the cathedral library where
Pinturicchio worked, stood, as it remained till recently, unashamed
there, a marble group of the three Graces–an average Roman work in
[47] effect–the sort of thing we are used to.  That, perhaps, is the
only reason why for our part, except with an effort, we find it
conventional or even tame.  For the youthful Raphael, on the other
hand, at that moment, antiquity, as with “the dew of herbs,” seemed
therein “to awake and sing” out of the dust, in all its sincerity,
its cheerfulness and natural charm.  He has turned it into a picture;
has helped to make his original only too familiar, perhaps, placing
the three sisters against his own favourite, so unclassic, Umbrian
background indeed, but with no trace of the Peruginesque ascetic,
Gothic meagreness in themselves; emphasising rather, with a hearty
acceptance, the nude, the flesh; making the limbs, in fact, a little
heavy.  It was but one gleam he had caught just there in medieval
Siena of that large pagan world he was, not so long afterwards, more
completely than others to make his own.  And when somewhat later
he painted the exquisite, still Peruginesque, Apollo and Marsyas,
semi-medieval habits again asserted themselves with delightfully
blent effects.  It might almost pass for a parable–that little
picture in the Louvre–of the contention between classic art and the
romantic, superseded in the person of Marsyas, a homely, quaintly
poetical young monk, surely!  Only, Apollo himself also is clearly of
the same brotherhood; has a touch, in truth, of Heine’s fancied
Apollo “in exile,” who, Christianity now triumphing, has served as
[48] a hired shepherd, or hidden himself under the cowl in a
cloister; and Raphael, as if at work on choir-book or missal, still
applies symbolical gilding for natural sunlight.  It is as if he
wished to proclaim amid newer lights–this scholar who never forgot a
lesson–his loyal pupilage to Perugino, and retained still something
of medieval stiffness, of the monastic thoughts also, that were born
and lingered in places like Borgo San Sepolcro or Citta di Castello.
Chef-d’oeuvre! you might exclaim, of the peculiar, tremulous, half-
convinced, monkish treatment of that after all damnable pagan world.
And our own generation certainly, with kindred tastes, loving or
wishing to love pagan art as sincerely as did the people of the
Renaissance, and medieval art as well, would accept, of course, of
work conceived in that so seductively mixed manner, ten per cent of
even Raphael’s later, purely classical presentments.
That picture was suggested by a fine old intaglio in the Medicean
collection at Florence, was painted, therefore, after Raphael’s
coming thither, and therefore also a survival with him of a style
limited, immature, literally provincial; for in the phase on which he
had now entered he is under the influence of style in its most fully
determined sense, of what might be called the thorough-bass of the
pictorial art, of a fully realised intellectual system in regard to
its processes, well tested by experiment, upon a survey [49] of all
the conditions and various applications of it–of style as understood
by Da Vinci, then at work in Florence.  Raphael’s sojourn there
extends from his twenty-first to his twenty-fifth year.  He came with
flattering recommendations from the Court of Urbino; was admitted as
an equal by the masters of his craft, being already in demand for
work, then and ever since duly prized; was, in fact, already famous,
though he alone is unaware–is in his own opinion still but a
learner, and as a learner yields himself meekly, systematically to
influence; would learn from Francia, whom he visits at Bologna; from
the earlier naturalistic works of Masolino and Masaccio; from the
solemn prophetic work of the venerable dominican, Bartolommeo,
disciple of Savonarola.  And he has already habitually this strange
effect, not only on the whole body of his juniors, but on those whose
manner had been long since formed; they lose something of themselves
by contact with him, as if they went to school again.
Bartolommeo, Da Vinci, were masters certainly of what we call “the
ideal” in art.  Yet for Raphael, so loyal hitherto to the traditions
of Umbrian art, to its heavy weight of hieratic tradition, dealing
still somewhat conventionally with a limited, non-natural matter–for
Raphael to come from Siena, Perugia, Urbino, to sharp-witted,
practical, masterful Florence was in immediate effect a transition
from reverie to [50] realities–to a world of facts.  Those masters
of the ideal were for him, in the first instance, masters also of
realism, as we say.  Henceforth, to the end, he will be the analyst,
the faithful reporter, in his work, of what he sees.  He will realise
the function of style as exemplified in the practice of Da Vinci,
face to face with the world of nature and man as they are; selecting
from, asserting one’s self in a transcript of its veritable data;
like drawing to like there, in obedience to the master’s preference
for the embodiment of the creative form within him.  Portrait-art had
been nowhere in the school of Perugino, but it was the triumph of the
school of Florence.  And here a faithful analyst of what he sees, yet
lifting it withal, unconsciously, inevitably, recomposing,
glorifying, Raphael too becomes, of course, a painter of portraits.
We may foresee them already in masterly series, from Maddalena Doni,
a kind of younger, more virginal sister of La Gioconda, to cardinals
and popes–to that most sensitive of all portraits, the “Violin-
player,” if it be really his.  But then, on the other hand, the
influence of such portraiture will be felt also in his inventive
work, in a certain reality there, a certain convincing loyalty to
experience and observation.  In his most elevated religious work he
will still keep, for security at least, close to nature, and the
truth of nature.  His modelling of the visible surface is lovely
because he understands, can see the hidden causes [51] of momentary
action in the face, the hands–how men and animals are really made
and kept alive.  Set side by side, then, with that portrait of
Maddalena Doni, as forming together a measure of what he has learned
at Florence, the “Madonna del Gran Duca,” which still remains there.
Call it on revision, and without hesitation, the loveliest of his
Madonnas, perhaps of all Madonnas; and let it stand as representative
of as many as fifty or sixty types of that subject, onwards to the
Sixtine Madonna, in all the triumphancy of his later days at Rome.
Observe the veritable atmosphere about it, the grand composition of
the drapery, the magic relief, the sweetness and dignity of the human
hands and faces, the noble tenderness of Mary’s gesture, the unity of
the thing with itself, the faultless exclusion of all that does not
belong to its main purpose; it is like a single, simple axiomatic
thought.  Note withal the novelty of its effect on the mind, and you
will see that this master of style (that’s a consummate example of
what is meant by style) has been still a willing scholar in the hands
of Da Vinci.  But then, with what ease also, and simplicity, and a
sort of natural success not his!
It was in his twenty-fifth year that Raphael came to the city of the
popes, Michelangelo being already in high favour there.  For the
remaining years of his life he paces the same streets with that grim
artist, who was so great a [52] contrast with himself, and for the
first time his attitude towards a gift different from his own is not
that of a scholar, but that of a rival.  If he did not become the
scholar of Michelangelo, it would be difficult, on the other hand, to
trace anywhere in Michelangelo’s work the counter influence usual
with those who had influenced him.  It was as if he desired to add to
the strength of Michelangelo that sweetness which at first sight
seems to be wanting there.  Ex forti dulcedo: and in the study of
Michelangelo certainly it is enjoyable to detect, if we may, sweet
savours amid the wonderful strength, the strangeness and potency of
what he pours forth for us: with Raphael, conversely, something of a
relief to find in the suavity of that so softly moving, tuneful
existence, an assertion of strength.  There was the promise of it, as
you remember, in his very look as he saw himself at eighteen; and you
know that the lesson, the prophecy of those holy women and children
he has made his own, is that “the meek shall possess.”  So, when we
see him at Rome at last, in that atmosphere of greatness, of the
strong, he too is found putting forth strength, adding that element
in due proportion to the mere sweetness and charm of his genius; yet
a sort of strength, after all, still congruous with the line of
development that genius has hitherto taken, the special strength of
the scholar and his proper reward, a purely cerebral strength [53]
the strength, the power of an immense understanding.
Now the life of Raphael at Rome seems as we read of it hasty and
perplexed, full of undertakings, of vast works not always to be
completed, of almost impossible demands on his industry, in a world
of breathless competition, amid a great company of spectators, for
great rewards.  You seem to lose him, feel he may have lost himself,
in the multiplicity of his engagements; might fancy that, wealthy,
variously decorated, a courtier, cardinal in petto, he was “serving
tables.”  But, you know, he was forcing into this brief space of
years (he died at thirty-seven) more than the natural business of the
larger part of a long life; and one way of getting some kind of
clearness into it, is to distinguish the various divergent outlooks
or applications, and group the results of that immense intelligence,
that still untroubled, flawlessly operating, completely informed
understanding, that purely cerebral power, acting through his
executive, inventive or creative gifts, through the eye and the hand
with its command of visible colour and form.  In that way you may
follow him along many various roads till brain and eye and hand
suddenly fail in the very midst of his work–along many various
roads, but you can follow him along each of them distinctly.
At the end of one of them is the Galatea, and in quite a different
form of industry, the datum [54] for the beginnings of a great
literary work of pure erudition.  Coming to the capital of
Christendom, he comes also for the first time under the full
influence of the antique world, pagan art, pagan life, and is
henceforth an enthusiastic archaeologist.  On his first coming to
Rome a papal bull had authorised him to inspect all ancient marbles,
inscriptions, and the like, with a view to their adaptation in new
buildings then proposed.  A consequent close acquaintance with
antiquity, with the very touch of it, blossomed literally in his
brain, and, under his facile hand, in artistic creations, of which
the Galatea is indeed the consummation.  But the frescoes of the
Farnese palace, with a hundred minor designs, find their place along
that line of his artistic activity; they do not exhaust his knowledge
of antiquity, his interest in and control of it.  The mere fragments
of it that still cling to his memory would have composed, had he
lived longer, a monumental illustrated survey of the monuments of
ancient Rome.
To revive something of the proportionable spirit at least of antique
building in the architecture of the present, came naturally to
Raphael as the son of his age; and at the end of another of those
roads of diverse activity stands Saint Peter’s, though unfinished.
What a proof again of that immense intelligence, by which, as I said,
the element of strength supplemented the element of mere sweetness
and charm in his [55] work, that at the age of thirty, known hitherto
only as a painter, at the dying request of the venerable Bramante
himself, he should have been chosen to succeed him as the director of
that vast enterprise!  And if little in the great church, as we see
it, is directly due to him, yet we must not forget that his work in
the Vatican also was partly that of an architect.  In the Loggie, or
open galleries of the Vatican, the last and most delicate effects of
Quattro-cento taste come from his hand, in that peculiar arabesque
decoration which goes by his name.
Saint Peter’s, as you know, had an indirect connexion with the
Teutonic reformation.  When Leo X. pushed so far the sale of
indulgences to the overthrow of Luther’s Catholicism, it was done
after all for the not entirely selfish purpose of providing funds to
build the metropolitan church of Christendom with the assistance of
Raphael; and yet, upon another of those diverse outways of his so
versatile intelligence, at the close of which we behold his
unfinished picture of the Transfiguration, what has been called
Raphael’s Bible finds its place–that series of biblical scenes in
the Loggie of the Vatican.  And here, while he has shown that he
could do something of Michelangelo’s work a little more soothingly
than he, this graceful Roman Catholic rivals also what is perhaps
best in the work of the rude German reformer–of Luther, who came to
Rome about this very [56] time, to find nothing admirable there.
Place along with them the Cartoons, and observe that in this phase of
his artistic labour, as Luther printed his vernacular German version
of the Scriptures, so Raphael is popularising them for an even larger
world; he brings the simple, to their great delight, face to face
with the Bible as it is, in all its variety of incident, after they
had so long had to content themselves with but fragments of it, as
presented in the symbolism and in the brief lections of the Liturgy:-
-Biblia Pauperum, in a hundred forms of reproduction, though designed
for popes and princes.
But then, for the wise, at the end of yet another of those divergent
ways, glows his painted philosophy in the Parnassus and the School of
Athens, with their numerous accessories.  In the execution of those
works, of course, his antiquarian knowledge stood him in good stead;
and here, above all, is the pledge of his immense understanding, at
work on its own natural ground on a purely intellectual deposit, the
apprehension, the transmission to others of complex and difficult
ideas.  We have here, in fact, the sort of intelligence to be found
in Lessing, in Herder, in Hegel, in those who, by the instrumentality
of an organised philosophic system, have comprehended in one view or
vision what poetry has been, or what Greek philosophy, as great
complex dynamic facts in the world.  But then, with the artist of the
sixteenth century, [57] this synoptic intellectual power worked in
perfect identity with the pictorial imagination and a magic hand.  By
him large theoretic conceptions are addressed, so to speak, to the
intelligence of the eye.  There had been efforts at such abstract or
theoretic painting before, or say rather, leagues behind him.  Modern
efforts, again, we know, and not in Germany alone, to do the like for
that larger survey of such matters which belongs to the philosophy of
our own century; but for one or many reasons they have seemed only to
prove the incapacity of philosophy to be expressed in terms of art.
They have seemed, in short, so far, not fit to be seen literally–
those ideas of culture, religion, and the like.  Yet Plato, as you
know, supposed a kind of visible loveliness about ideas.  Well! in
Raphael, painted ideas, painted and visible philosophy, are for once
as beautiful as Plato thought they must be, if one truly apprehended
them.  For note, above all, that with all his wealth of antiquarian
knowledge in detail, and with a perfect technique, it is after all
the beauty, the grace of poetry, of pagan philosophy, of religious
faith that he thus records.
Of religious faith also.  The Disputa, in which, under the form of a
council representative of all ages, he embodies the idea of theology,
divinarum rerum notitia, as constantly resident in the Catholic
Church, ranks with the “Parnassus” and the “School of Athens,” if it
does not rather [58] close another of his long lines of intellectual
travail–a series of compositions, partly symbolic, partly
historical, in which the “Deliverance of St. Peter from Prison,” the
“Expulsion of the Huns,” and the “Coronation of Charlemagne,” find
their places; and by which, painting in the great official chambers
of the Vatican, Raphael asserts, interprets the power and charm of
the Catholic ideal as realised in history.  A scholar, a student of
the visible world, of the natural man, yet even more ardently of the
books, the art, the life of the old pagan world, the age of the
Renaissance, through all its varied activity, had, in spite of the
weakened hold of Catholicism on the critical intellect, been still
under its influence, the glow of it, as a religious ideal, and in the
presence of Raphael you cannot think it a mere after-glow.
Independently, that is, of less or more evidence for it, the whole
creed of the Middle Age, as a scheme of the world as it should be, as
we should be glad to find it, was still welcome to the heart, the
imagination.  Now, in Raphael, all the various conditions of that age
discover themselves as characteristics of a vivid personal genius,
which may be said therefore to be conterminous with the genius of the
Renaissance itself.  For him, then, in the breadth of his immense
cosmopolitan intelligence, for Raphael, who had done in part the work
of Luther also, the Catholic Church–through all its phases, as
reflected in its visible local centre, [59] the papacy–is alive
still as of old, one and continuous, and still true to itself.  Ah!
what is local and visible, as you know, counts for so much with the
artistic temper!
Old friends, or old foes with but new faces, events repeating
themselves, as his large, clear, synoptic vision can detect, the
invading King of France, Louis XII., appears as Attila: Leo X. as Leo
I.: and he thinks of, he sees, at one and the same moment, the
coronation of Charlemagne and the interview of Pope Leo with Francis
I., as a dutiful son of the Church: of the deliverance of Leo X. from
prison, and the deliverance of St. Peter.
I have abstained from anything like description of Raphael’s pictures
in speaking of him and his work, have aimed rather at preparing you
to look at his work for yourselves, by a sketch of his life, and
therein especially, as most appropriate to this place, of Raphael as
a scholar.  And now if, in closing, I commend one of his pictures in
particular to your imagination or memory,, your purpose to see it, or
see it again, it will not be the Transfiguration nor the Sixtine
Madonna, nor even the “Madonna del Gran Duca,” but the picture we
have in London–the Ansidei, or Blenheim, Madonna.  I find there, at
first sight, with something of the pleasure one has in a proposition
of Euclid, a sense of the power of the understanding, in the economy
with which he has reduced his material to the [60] simplest terms,
has disentangled and detached its various elements.  He is painting
in Florence, but for Perugia, and sends it a specimen of its own old
art–Mary and the babe enthroned, with St. Nicolas and the Baptist in
attendance on either side.  The kind of thing people there had
already seen so many times, but done better, in a sense not to be
measured by degrees, with a wholly original freedom and life and
grace, though he perhaps is unaware, done better as a whole, because
better in every minute particular, than ever before.  The scrupulous
scholar, aged twenty-three, is now indeed a master; but still goes
carefully.  Note, therefore, how much mere exclusion counts for in
the positive effect of his work.  There is a saying that the true
artist is known best by what he omits.  Yes, because the whole
question of good taste is involved precisely in such jealous
omission.  Note this, for instance, in the familiar Apennine
background, with its blue hills and brown towns, faultless, for once-
-for once only–and observe, in the Umbrian pictures around, how
often such background is marred by grotesque, natural, or
architectural detail, by incongruous or childish incident.  In this
cool, pearl-grey, quiet place, where colour tells for double–the
jewelled cope, the painted book in the hand of Mary, the chaplet of
red coral–one is reminded that among all classical writers Raphael’s
preference was for the faultless Virgil.  How orderly, how divinely
[61] clean and sweet the flesh, the vesture, the floor, the earth and
sky!  Ah, say rather the hand, the method of the painter!  There is
an unmistakeable pledge of strength, of movement and animation in the
cast of the Baptist’s countenance, but reserved, repressed.  Strange,
Raphael has given him a staff of transparent crystal.  Keep then to
that picture as the embodied formula of Raphael’s genius.  Amid all
he has here already achieved, full, we may think, of the quiet
assurance of what is to come, his attitude is still that of the
scholar; he seems still to be saying, before all things, from first
to last, “I am utterly purposed that I will not offend.”
38. *A lecture delivered to the University Extension Students,
Oxford, 2 August, 1892.  Published in the Fortnightly Review, Oct.
1892, and now reprinted by the kind permission of the proprietors.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of Essays” by Walter Horatio Pater.


Also by this author (on Amazon.com); The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of EssaysBy Walter Horatio PaterAt Amazon
