


Vilray was having its market day, and everyone was either going to or
coming from market, or buying and selling in the little square by the
Court House.  It was the time when the fruits were coming in, when
vegetables were in full yield, when fish from the Beau Cheval were to be
had in plenty–from mud-cats and suckers, pike and perch, to rock-bass,
sturgeon and even maskinonge.  Also it was the time of year when butter
and eggs, chickens and ducks were so cheap that it was a humiliation not
to buy.  There were other things on sale also, not for eating and
drinking, but for wear and household use–from pots and pans to rag-
carpets and table-linen, from woollen yarn to pictures of the Virgin and
little calvaries.
These were side by side with dried apples, bottled fruits, jars of maple
syrup, and cordials of so generous and penetrating a nature that the
currant and elderberry wine by which they were flanked were tipple for
babes beside them.  Indeed, when a man wanted to forget himself quickly
he drank one of these cordials, in preference to the white whisky so
commonly imbibed in the parishes.  But the cordials being expensive, they
were chiefly bought for festive occasions like a wedding, a funeral, a
confirmation, or the going away of some young man or young woman to the
monastery or the convent to forget the world.  Meanwhile, if these
spiritual argonauts drank it, they were likely to forget the world on the
way to their voluntary prisons.  It was very seldom that a man or woman
bought the cordials for ordinary consumption, and when that was done, it
would almost make a parish talk!  Yet cordials of nice brown, of delicate
green, of an enticing yellow colour, were here for sale at Vilray market
on the morning after the painful scene at the Manor Cartier between Zoe
and her father.
The market-place was full–fuller than it had been for many a day.  A
great many people were come in as much to “make fete” as to buy and sell.
It was a saint’s day, and the bell of St. Monica’s had been ringing away
cheerfully twice that morning.  To it the bell of the Court House had
made reply, for a big case was being tried in the court.  It was a river-
driving and lumber case for which many witnesses had been called; and
there were all kinds of stray people in the place–red-shirted river-
drivers, a black-coated Methodist minister from Chalfonte, clerks from
lumber-firms, and foremen of lumber-yards; and among these was one who
greatly loved such a day as this when he could be free from work, and
celebrate himself!
Other people might celebrate saints dead and gone, and drink to ’La
Patrie’, and cry “Vive Napoleon!” or “Vive la Republique!” or “Vive la
Reine!” though this last toast of the Empire was none too common–but he
could only drink with real sincerity to the health of Sebastian Dolores,
which was himself.  Sebastian Dolores was the pure anarchist, the most
complete of monomaniacs.
“Here comes the father of the Spanische,” remarked Mere Langlois, who
presided over a heap of household necessities, chiefly dried fruits,
preserves and pickles, as Sebastian Dolores appeared not far away.
“Good-for-nothing villain!  I pity the poor priest that confesses him.”
“Who is the Spanische?” asked a young woman from her own stall or stand
very near, as she involuntarily arranged her hair and adjusted her waist-
belt; for the rakish-looking reprobate, with the air of having been
somewhere, was making towards them; and she was young enough to care how
she looked when a man, who took notice, was near.  Her own husband had
been a horse-doctor, farmer, and sportsman of a kind, and she herself was
now a farmer of a kind; and she had only resided in the parish during the
three years since she had been married to, and buried, Palass Poucette.
Old Mere Langlois looked at her companion in merchanting irritably, then
she remembered that Virginie Poucette was a stranger, in a way, and was
therefore deserving of pity, and she said with compassionate patronage:
“Newcomer you–I’d forgotten.  Look you then, the Spanische was the wife
of my third cousin, M’sieu’ Jean Jacques, and–”
Virginie Poucette nodded, and the slight frown cleared from her low yet
shapely forehead.  “Yes, yes, of course I know.  I’ve heard enough.  What
a fool she was, and M’sieu’ Jean Jacques so rich and kind and good-
looking!  So this is her father–well, well, well!”
Palass Poucette’s widow leaned forward, and looked intently at Sebastian
Dolores, who had stopped near by, and facing a couple of barrels on which
were exposed some bottles of cordial and home-made wine.  He was
addressing himself with cheerful words to the dame that owned the
merchandise.
“I suppose you think it’s a pity Jean Jacques can’t get a divorce,"
said Mere Langlois, rather spitefully to Virginie, for she had her
sex’s aversion to widows who had had their share of mankind, and were
afterwards free to have someone else’s share as well.  But suddenly
repenting, for Virginie was a hard-working widow who had behaved very
well for an outsider–having come from Chalfonte beyond the Beau
Chevalshe added: “But if he was a Protestant and could get a divorce,
and you did marry him, you’d make him have more sense than he’s got; for
you’ve a quiet sensible way, and you’ve worked hard since Palass Poucette
died.”
“Where doesn’t he show sense, that M’sieu’ Jean Jacques?” the younger
woman asked.
“Where?  Why, with his girl–with Ma’m’selle.”  “Everybody I ever heard
speaks well of Ma’m’selle Zoe,” returned the other warmly, for she had a
very generous mind and a truthful, sentimental heart.  Mere Langlois
sniffed, and put her hands on her hips, for she had a daughter of her
own; also she was a relation of Jean Jacques, and therefore resented in
one way the difference in their social position, while yet she plumed
herself on being kin.
“Then you’ll learn something now you never knew before,” she said.
“She’s been carrying on–there’s no other word for it–with an actor
fellow–”
“Yes, yes, I did hear about him–a Protestant and an Englishman.”
“Well, then, why do you pretend you don’t know–only to hear me talk, is
it?  Take my word, I’d teach cousin Zoe a lesson with all her education
and her two years at the convent.  Wasn’t it enough that her mother
should spoil everything for Jean Jacques, and make the Manor Cartier a
place to point the finger at, without her bringing disgrace on the parish
too!  What happened last night–didn’t I hear this morning before I had
my breakfast!  Didn’t I–”
She then proceeded to describe the scene in which Jean Jacques had thrown
the wrecked guitar of his vanished spouse into the fire.  Before she had
finished, however, something occurred which swept them into another act
of the famous history of Jean Jacques Barbille and his house.
She had arrived at the point where Zoe had cried aloud in pain at her
father’s incendiary act, when there was a great stir at the Court House
door which opened on the market-place, and vagrant cheers arose.  These
were presently followed by a more disciplined fusillade; which presently,
in turn, was met by hisses and some raucous cries of resentment.  These
increased as a man appeared on the steps of the Court House, looked round
for a moment in a dazed kind of way, then seeing some friends below who
were swarming towards him, gave a ribald cry, and scrambled down the
steps towards them.
He was the prisoner whose release had suddenly been secured by a piece of
evidence which had come as a thunder-clap on judge and jury.  Immediately
after giving this remarkable evidence the witness–Sebastian Dolores–
had left the court-room.  He was now engaged in buying cordials in the
market-place–in buying and drinking them; for he had pulled the cork out
of a bottle filled with a rich yellow liquid, and had drained half the
bottle at a gulp.  Presently he offered the remainder to a passing
carter, who made a gesture of contempt and passed on, for, to him, white
whisky was the only drink worth while.  Besides, he disliked Sebastian
Dolores.  Then, with a flourish, the Spaniard tendered the bottle to
Madame Langlois and Palass Poucette’s widow, at whose corner of
merchandise he had now arrived.
Surely there never was a more benign villain and perjurer in the world
than Sebastian Dolores!  His evidence, given a half-hour before, with
every sign of truthfulness, was false.  The man–Rocque Valescure–for
whom he gave it was no friend of his; but he owned a tavern called “The
Red Eagle,” a few miles from the works where the Spaniard was employed;
also Rocque Valescure’s wife set a good table, and Sebastian Dolores was
a very liberal feeder; when he was not hungry he was always thirsty.  The
appeasement of hunger and thirst was now become a problem to him, for his
employers at Beauharnais had given him a month’s notice because of
certain irregularities which had come to their knowledge.  Like a wise
man Sebastian Dolores had said nothing about this abroad, but had
enlarged his credit in every direction, and had then planned this piece
of friendly perjury for Rocque Valescure, who was now descending the
steps of the Court House to the arms of his friends and amid the
execrations of his foes.  What the alleged crime was does not matter.
It has no vital significance in the history of Jean Jacques Barbille,
though it has its place as a swivel on which the future swung.
Sebastian Dolores had saved Rocque Valescure from at least three years in
jail, and possibly a very heavy fine as well; and this service must have
its due reward.  Something for nothing was not the motto of Sebastian
Dolores; and he confidently looked forward to having a home at “The Red
Eagle” and a banker in its landlord.  He was no longer certain that he
could rely on help from Jean Jacques, to whom he already owed so much.
That was why he wanted to make Rocque Valescure his debtor.  It was not
his way to perjure his soul for nothing.  He had done so in Spain–yet
not for nothing either.  He had saved his head, which was now doing
useful work for himself and for a needy fellow-creature.  No one could
doubt that he had helped a neighbour in great need, and had done it at
some expense to his own nerve and brain.  None but an expert could have
lied as he had done in the witness-box.  Also he had upheld his lies with
a striking narrative of circumstantiality.  He made things fit in “like
mortised blocks” as the Clerk of the Court said to Judge Carcasson, when
they discussed the infamy afterwards with clear conviction that it was
perjury of a shameless kind; for one who would perjure himself to save a
man from jail, would also swear a man into the gallows-rope.  But Judge
Carcasson had not been able to charge the jury in that sense, for there
was no effective evidence to rebut the untruthful attestation of the
Spaniard.  It had to be taken for what it was worth, since the
prosecuting attorney could not shake it; and yet to the Court itself it
was manifestly false witness.
Sebastian Dolores was too wise to throw himself into the arms of his
released tavern-keeper here immediately after the trial, or to allow
Rocque Valescure a like indiscretion and luxury; for there was a strong
law against perjury, and right well Sebastian Dolores knew that old Judge
Carcasson would have little mercy on him, in spite of the fact that he
was the grandfather of Zoe Barbille.  The Judge would probably think that
safe custody for his wayward character would be the kindest thing he
could do for Zoe.  Therefore it was that Sebastian Dolores paid no
attention to the progress of the released landlord of “The Red Eagle,"
though, by a glance out of the corner of his eyes, he made sure that the
footsteps of liberated guilt were marching at a tangent from where he
was–even to the nearest tavern.
It was enough for Dolores that he should watch the result of his good
deed from the isolated area where he now was, in the company of two
virtuous representatives of domesticity.  His time with liberated guilt
would come!  He chuckled to think how he had provided himself with a
refuge against his hour of trouble.  That very day he had left his
employment, meaning to return no more, securing his full wages through
having suddenly become resentful and troublesome, neglectful–and
imperative.  To avoid further unpleasantness the firm had paid him all
his wages; and he had straightway come to Vilray to earn his bed and
board by other means than through a pen, a ledger and a gift for figures.
It would not be a permanent security against the future, but it would
suffice for the moment.  It was a rest-place on the road.  If the worst
came to the worst, there was his grand-daughter and his dear son-in-law
whom he so seldom saw–blood was thicker than water, and he would see to
it that it was not thinned by neglect.
Meanwhile he ogled Palass Poucette’s widow with one eye, and talked
softly with his tongue to Mere Langlois, as he importuned Madame to “Sip
the good cordial in the name of charity to all and malice towards none.”
“You’re a bad man–you, and I want none of your cordials,” was Mere
Langlois’s response.  “Malice towards none, indeed!  If you and the devil
started business in the same street, you’d make him close up shop in a
year.  I’ve got your measure, for sure; I have you certain as an arm and
a pair of stirrups.”
“I go about doing good–only good,” returned the old sinner with a leer
at the young widow, whose fingers he managed to press unseen, as he swung
the little bottle of cordial before the eyes of Mere Langlois.  He was
not wholly surprised when Palass Poucette’s widow did not show abrupt
displeasure at his bold familiarity.
A wild thought flashed into his mind.  Might there not be another refuge
here–here in Palass Poucette’s widow!  He was sixty-three, it was true,
and she was only thirty-two; but for her to be an old man’s darling who
had no doubt been a young man’s slave, that would surely have its weight
with her.  Also she owned the farm where she lived; and she was pleasant
pasturage–that was the phrase he used in his own mind, even as his eye
swept from Mere Langlois to hers in swift, hungry inquiry.
He seemed in earnest when he spoke–but that was his way; it had done him
service often.  “I do good whenever it comes my way to do it,” he
continued.  “I left my work this morning"–he lied of course–"and hired
a buggy to bring me over here, all at my own cost, to save a fellow-man.
There in the Court House he was sure of prison, with a wife and three
small children weeping in ’The Red Eagle’; and there I come at great
expense and trouble to tell the truth–before all to tell the truth–and
save him and set him free.  Yonder he is in the tavern, the work of my
hands, a gift to the world from an honest man with a good heart and a
sense of justice.  But for me there would be a wife and three children in
the bondage of shame, sorrow, poverty and misery"–his eyes again
ravished the brown eyes of Palass Poucette’s widow–"and here again
I drink to my own health and to that of all good people–with charity
to all and malice towards none!”
The little bottle of golden cordial was raised towards Mere Langlois.
The fingers of one hand, however, were again seeking those of the comely
young widow who was half behind him, when he felt them caught
spasmodically away.  Before he had time to turn round he heard a voice,
saying: “I should have thought that ’With malice to all and charity
towards none,’ was your motto, Dolores.”
He knew that voice well enough.  He had always had a lurking fear that
he would hear it say something devastating to him, from the great chair
where its owner sat and dispensed what justice a jury would permit him to
do.  That devastating something would be agony to one who loved liberty
and freedom–had not that ever been his watchword, liberty and freedom to
do what he pleased in the world and with the world?  Yes, he well knew
Judge Carcasson’s voice.  He would have recognized it in the dark–or
under the black cap.  “M’sieu’ le juge !” he said, even before he turned
round and saw the faces of the tiny Judge and his Clerk of the Court.
There was a kind of quivering about his mouth, and a startled look in his
eyes as he faced the two.  But there was the widow of Palass Poucette,
and, if he was to pursue and frequent her, something must be done to keep
him decently figured in her eye and mind.
“It cost me three dollars to come here and save a man from jail to-day,
m’sieu’ le juge,” he added firmly.  The Judge pressed the point of his
cane against the stomach of the hypocrite and perjurer.  “If the Devil
and you meet, he will take off his hat to you, my escaped anarchist"–
Dolores started almost violently now–"for you can teach him much, and
Ananias was the merest aboriginal to you.  But we’ll get you–we’ll get
you, Dolores.  You saved that guilty fellow by a careful and remarkable
perjury to-day.  In a long experience I have never seen a better
performance–have you, monsieur?” he added to M. Fille.
“But once,” was the pointed and deliberate reply.  “Ah, when was that?"
asked Judge Carcasson, interested.
“The year monsieur le juge was ill, and Judge Blaquiere took your place.
It was in Vilray at the Court House here.”
“Ah–ah, and who was the phenomenon–the perfect liar?” asked the Judge
with the eagerness of the expert.
“His name was Sebastian Dolores,” meditatively replied M. Fille.  “It was
even a finer performance than that of to-day.”
The Judge gave a little grunt of surprise.  “Twice, eh?” he asked.
“Yet this was good enough to break any record,” he added.  He fastened
the young widow’s eyes.  “Madame, you are young, and you have an eye of
intelligence.  Be sure of this: you can protect yourself against almost
anyone except a liar–eh, madame?” he added to Mere Langlois.  “I am
sure your experience of life and your good sense–”
“My good sense would make me think purgatory was hell if I saw him"–
she nodded savagely at Dolores as she said it, for she had seen that last
effort of his to take the fingers of Palass Poucette’s widow–"if I saw
him there, m’sieu’ le juge.”
“We’ll have you yet–we’ll have you yet, Dolores,” said the Judge, as the
Spaniard prepared to move on.  But, as Dolores went, he again caught the
eyes of the young widow.
This made him suddenly bold.  “’Thou shalt not bear false witness against
thy neighbour,’–that is the commandment, is it not, m’sieu’ le juge?
You are doing against me what I didn’t do in Court to-day.  I saved a man
from your malice.”
The crook of the Judge’s cane caught the Spaniard’s arm, and held him
gently.
“You’re possessed of a devil, Dolores,” he said, “and I hope I’ll never
have to administer justice in your case.  I might be more man than judge.
But you will come to no good end.  You will certainly–”
He got no further, for the attention of all was suddenly arrested by a
wagon driving furiously round the corner of the Court House.  It was a
red wagon.  In it was Jean Jacques Barbille.
His face was white and set; his head was thrust forward, as though
looking at something far ahead of him; the pony stallions he was driving
were white with sweat, and he had an air of tragic helplessness and
panic.
Suddenly a child ran across the roadway in front of the ponies, and the
wild cry of the mother roused Jean Jacques out of his agonized trance.
He sprang to his feet, wrenching the horses backward and aside with
deftness and presence of mind.  The margin of safety was not more than a
foot, but the child was saved.
The philosopher of the Manor Cartier seemed to come out of a dream as men
and women applauded, and cries arose of “Bravo, M’sieu’ Jean Jacques!”
At any other time this would have made Jean Jacques nod and smile, or
wave a hand, or exclaim in good fellowship.  Now, however, his eyes were
full of trouble, and the glassiness of the semi-trance leaving them, they
shifted restlessly here and there.  Suddenly they fastened on the little
group of which Judge Carcasson was the centre.  He had stopped his horses
almost beside them.
“Ah!” he said, “ah!” as his eyes rested on the Judge.  “Ah!” he again
exclaimed, as the glance ran from the Judge to Sebastian Dolores.  “Ah,
mercy of God!” he added, in a voice which had both a low note and a high
note-deep misery and shrill protest in one.  Then he seemed to choke, and
words would not come, but he kept looking, looking at Sebastian Dolores,
as though fascinated and tortured by the sight of him.
“What is it, Jean Jacques?” asked the little Clerk of the Court gently,
coming forward and laying a hand on the steaming flank of a spent and
trembling pony.
As though he could not withdraw his gaze from Sebastian Dolores, Jean
Jacques did not look at M. Fil1e; but he thrust out the long whip he
carried towards the father of his vanished Carmen and his Zoe’s
grandfather, and with the deliberation of one to whom speaking was like
the laceration of a nerve he said: “Zoe’s run away–gone–gone!”
At that moment Louis Charron, his cousin, at whose house Gerard Fynes had
lodged, came down the street galloping his horse.  Seeing the red wagon,
he made for it, and drew rein.
“It’s no good, Jean Jacques,” he called.  “They’re married and gone to
Montreal–married right under our noses by the Protestant minister at
Terrebasse Junction.  I’ve got the telegram here from the stationmaster
at Terrebasse.  .  .  .  Ah, the villain to steal away like that–only a
child–from her own father!  Here it is–the telegram.  But believe me,
an actor, a Protestant and a foreigner–what a devil’s mess!”
He waved the telegram towards Jean Jacques.
“Did he owe you anything, Louis?” asked old Mere Langlois, whose
practical mind was alert to find the material status of things.
“Not a sou.  Well, but he was honest, I’ll say that for the rogue and
seducer.”
“Seducer–ah, God choke you with your own tongue!” cried Jean Jacques,
turning on Louis Charron with a savage jerk of the whip he held.  “She is
as pure–”
“It is no marriage, of course!” squeaked a voice from the crowd.
“It’ll be all right among the English, won’t it, monsieur le juge?"
asked the gentle widow of Palass Poucette, whom the scene seemed to rouse
out of her natural shyness.
“Most sure, madame, most sure,” answered the Judge.  “It will be all
right among the English, and it is all right among the French so far as
the law is concerned.  As for the Church, that is another matter.  But–
but see,” he added addressing Louis Charron, “does the station-master say
what place they took tickets for?”
“Montreal and Winnipeg,” was the reply.  “Here it is in the telegram.
Winnipeg–that’s as English as London.”
“Winnipeg–a thousand miles!” moaned Jean Jacques.
With the finality which the tickets for Winnipeg signified, the shrill
panic emotion seemed to pass from him.  In its mumbling, deadening force
it was like a sentence on a prisoner.
As many eyes were on Sebastian Dolores as on Jean Jacques.  “It’s the bad
blood that was in her,” said a farmer with a significant gesture towards
Sebastian Dolores.
“A little bad blood let out would be a good thing,” remarked a truculent
river-driver, who had given evidence directly contrary to that given by
Sebastian Dolores in the trial just concluded.  There was a savage look
in his eye.
Sebastian Dolores heard, and he was not the man to invite trouble.  He
could do no good where he was, and he turned to leave the market-place;
but in doing so he sought the eye of Virginie Poucette, who, however,
kept her face at an angle from him, as she saw Mere Langlois sharply
watching her.
“Grandfather, mother and daughter, all of a piece!” said a spiteful
woman, as Sebastian Dolores passed her.  The look he gave her was not the
same as that he had given to Palass Poucette’s widow.  If it had been
given by a Spanish inquisitor to a heretic, little hope would have
remained in the heretic’s heart.  Yet there was a sad patient look on his
face, as though he was a martyr.  He had no wish to be a martyr; but he
had a feeling that for want of other means of expressing their sympathy
with Jean Jacques, these rough people might tar and feather him at least;
though it was only his misfortune that those sprung from his loins had
such adventurous spirits!
Sebastian Dolores was not without a real instinct regarding things.  What
was in his mind was also passing through that of the river-driver and a
few of his friends, and they carefully watched the route he was taking.
Jean Jacques prepared to depart.  He had ever loved to be the centre of a
picture, but here was a time when to be in the centre was torture.  Eyes
of morbid curiosity were looking at the open wounds of his heart-ragged
wounds made by the shrapnel of tragedy and treachery, not the clean
wounds got in a fair fight, easily healed.  For the moment at least the
little egoist was a mere suffering soul–an epitome of shame, misery and
disappointment.  He must straightway flee the place where he was tied to
the stake of public curiosity and scorn.  He drew the reins tighter, and
the horses straightened to depart.  Then it was that old Judge Carcasson
laid a hand on his knee.
“Come, come,” he said to the dejected and broken little man, “where is
your philosophy?”
Jean Jacques looked at the Judge, as though with a new-born suspicion
that henceforth the world would laugh at him, and that Judge Carcasson
was setting the fashion; but seeing a pitying moisture in the other’s
eyes, he drew himself up, set his jaw, and calling on all the forces at
his command, he said:
“Moi je suis philosophe!”
His voice frayed a little on the last word, but his head was up now.
The Clerk of the Court would have asked to accompany him to the Manor
Cartier, but he was not sure that Jean Jacques would like it.  He had a
feeling that Jean Jacques would wish to have his dark hour alone.  So he
remained silent, and Jean Jacques touched his horses with the whip.
After starting, however, and having been followed for a hundred yards or
so by the pitying murmurs and a few I-told-you-so’s and revilings for
having married as he did, Jean Jacques stopped the ponies.  Standing up
in the red wagon he looked round for someone whom, for a moment, he did
not see in the slowly shifting crowd.
Philosophy was all very well, and he had courageously given his
allegiance to it, or a formula of it, a moment before; but there was
something deeper and rarer still in the little man’s soul.  His heart
hungered for the two women who had been the joy and pride of his life,
even when he had been lost in the business of the material world.  They
were more to him than he had ever known; they were parts of himself which
had slowly developed, as the features and characteristics of ancestors
gradually emerge and are emphasized in a descendant as his years
increase.  Carmen and Zoe were more a part of himself now than they had
ever been.
They were gone, the living spirits of his home.  Anything that reminded
him of them, despite the pain of the reminder, was dear to him.  Love was
greater than the vengeful desire of injured human nature.  His eyes
wandered over the people, over the market.  At last he saw what he was
looking for.  He called.  A man turned.  Jean Jacques beckoned to him.
He came eagerly, he hurried to the red wagon.
“Come home with me,” said Jean Jacques.
The words were addressed to Sebastian Dolores, who said to himself that
this was a refuge surer than “The Red Eagle,” or the home of the widow
Poucette.  He climbed in beside Jean Jacques with a sigh of content.
“Ah, but that–but that is the end of our philosopher,” said Judge
Carcasson sadly to the Clerk of the Court, as with amazement he saw this
catastrophe.
“Alas!  if I had only asked to go with him, as I wished to do!"
responded M. Fille.  “There, but a minute ago, it was in my mind,” he
added with a look of pain.
“You missed your chance, falterer,” said the Judge severely.  “If you
have a good thought, act on it–that is the golden rule.  You missed your
chance.  It will never come again.  He has taken the wrong turning, our
unhappy Jean Jacques.”
“Monsieur–oh, monsieur, do not shut the door in the face of God like
that!” said the shocked little master of the law.  “Those two together
–it may be only for a moment.”
“Ah, no, my little owl, Jean Jacques will wind the boa-constrictor round
his neck like a collar, all for love of those he has lost,” answered the
Judge with emotion; and he caught M. Fille’s arm in the companionship of
sorrow.
In silence these two watched the red wagon till it was out of sight.
He hated irony in anyone else
I said I was not falling in love–I am in love
If you have a good thought, act on it
Philosophers are often stupid in human affairs
The beginning of the end of things was come for him
Continue...

This eBook of “The Money Master” (Complete) by Gilbert Parker belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The money master;: Being the curious history of Jean Jacques Barbille, his labours, his loves, and his ladies,By Gilbert ParkerAt Amazon
