


This book is in a place by itself among the novels I have written.  Many
critics said that it was a welcome return to Canada, where I had made my
first success in the field of fiction.  This statement was only meagrely
accurate, because since ’The Right of Way’ was published in 1901 I had
written, and given to the public, ’Northern Lights’, a book of short
stories, ’You Never Know Your Luck’, a short novel, and ’The World for
Sale’, though all of these dealt with life in Western Canada, and not
with the life of the French Canadians, in which field I had made my first
firm impression upon the public.  In any case, The Money Master was
favourably received by the press and public both in England and America,
and my friends were justified in thinking, and in saying, that I was at
home in French Canada and gave the impression of mastery of my material.
If mastery of material means a knowledge of the life, and a sympathy with
it, then my friends are justified; for I have always had an intense
sympathy with, and admiration for, French Canadian life.  I think the
French Canadian one of the most individual, original, and distinctive
beings of the modern world.  He has kept his place, with his own customs,
his own Gallic views of life, and his religious habits, with an assiduity
and firmness none too common.  He is essentially a man of the home, of
the soil, and of the stream; he has by nature instinctive philosophy and
temperamental logic.  As a lover of the soil of Canada he is not
surpassed by any of the other citizens of the country, English or
otherwise.
It would almost seem as though the pageantry of past French Canadian
history, and the beauty and vigour of the topographical surroundings of
French Canadian life, had produced an hereditary pride and exaltation–
perhaps an excessive pride and a strenuous exaltation, but, in any case,
there it was, and is.  The French Canadian lives a more secluded life on
the whole than any other citizen of Canada, though the native,
adventurous spirit has sent him to the Eastern States of the American
Union for work in the mills and factories, or up to the farthest reaches
of the St. Lawrence, Ottawa, and their tributaries in the wood and timber
trade.
Domestically he is perhaps the most productive son of the North American
continent.  Families of twenty, or even twenty-five, are not unknown,
and, when a man has had more than one wife, it has even exceeded that.
Life itself is full of camaraderie and good spirit, marked by religious
traits and sacerdotal influence.
The French Canadian is on the whole sober and industrious; but when he
breaks away from sobriety and industry he becomes a vicious element in
the general organism.  Yet his vices are of the surface, and do not
destroy the foundations of his social and domestic scheme.  A French
Canadian pony used to be considered the most virile and lasting stock on
the continent, and it is fair to say that the French Canadians themselves
are genuinely hardy, long-lived, virile, and enduring.
It was among such people that the hero of The Money Master, Jean Jacques
Barbille, lived.  He was the symbol or pattern of their virtues and of
their weaknesses.  By nature a poet, a philosopher, a farmer and an
adventurer, his life was a sacrifice to prepossession and race instinct;
to temperament more powerful than logic or common sense, though he was
almost professionally the exponent of both.
There is no man so simply sincere, or so extraordinarily prejudiced as
the French Canadian.  He is at once modest and vain; he is even lyrical
in his enthusiasms; he is a child in the intrigues and inventions of
life; but he has imagination, he has a heart, he has a love of tradition,
and is the slave of legend.  To him domestic life is the summum bonum of
being.  His four walls are the best thing which the world has to offer,
except the cheerful and sacred communion of the Mass, and his dismissal
from life itself under the blessing of his priest and with the promise of
a good immortality.
Jean Jacques Barbille had the French Canadian life of pageant, pomp, and
place extraordinarily developed.  His love of history and tradition was
abnormal.  A genius, he was, within an inch, a tragedy to the last
button.  Probably the adventurous spirit of his forefathers played a
greater part in his development and in the story of his days than
anything else.  He was wide-eyed, and he had a big soul.  He trained
himself to believe in himself and to follow his own judgment; therefore,
he invited loss upon loss, he made mistake upon mistake, he heaped
financial adventure upon financial adventure, he ran great risks; and it
is possible that his vast belief in himself kept him going when other men
would have dropped by the wayside.  He loved his wife and daughter, and
he lost them both.  He loved his farms, his mills and his manor, and they
disappeared from his control.
It must be remembered that the story of The Money Master really runs for
a generation, and it says something for Jean Jacques Barbille that he
could travel through scenes, many of them depressing, for long years, and
still, in the end, provoke no disparagement, by marrying the woman who
had once out of the goodness of her heart offered him everything–
herself, her home, her honour; and it was to Jean Jacques’s credit
that he took neither until the death of his wife made him free; but the
tremendous gift offered him produced a powerful impression upon his mind
and heart.
One of the most distinguished men of the world to-day wrote me in praise
and protest concerning The Money Master.  He declared that the first half
of the book was as good as anything that had been done by anybody, and
then he bemoaned the fact, which he believed, that the author had
sacrificed his two heroines without real cause and because he was tired
of them.  There he was wrong.  In the author’s mind the story was planned
exactly as it worked out.  He was never tired; he was resolute.  He was
intent to produce, if possible, a figure which would breed and develop
its own disasters, which would suffer profoundly for its own mistakes;
but which, in the end, would triumph over the disasters of life and time.
It was all deliberate in the main intention and plan.  Any failures that
exist in the book are due to the faults of the author, and to nothing
else.
Some critics have been good enough to call ’The Money Master’ a beautiful
book, and there are many who said that it was real, true, and faithful.
Personally I think it is real and true, and as time goes on, and we get
older, that is what seems to matter to those who love life and wish to
see it well harvested.
I do not know what the future of the book may be; what the future of any
work of mine will be; but I can say this, that no one has had the
pleasure in reading my books which I have had in making them.  They have
been ground out of the raw material of the soul.  I have a hope that they
will outlast my brief day, but, in any case, it will not matter.  They
have given me a chance of showing to the world life as I have seen it,
and indirectly, and perhaps indistinctly, my own ideas of that life.
’The Money Master’ is a vivid and somewhat emotional part of it.
Continue...

This eBook of “The Money Master” (Complete) by Gilbert Parker belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The money master;: Being the curious history of Jean Jacques Barbille, his labours, his loves, and his ladies,By Gilbert ParkerAt Amazon
