


In the frozen lake of Cocytus in the ninth circle of the Inferno, where
were punished the traitors to kindred, country, friends, or benefactors,
the poets beheld Count Ugolino, a Guelph, who, because of his treachery,
was taken prisoner by the people with his sons and grandsons and thrust
into a tower, where they were left to starve. Ugolino was frozen in the
ice, where he forever gnawed the head of the Archbishop Ruggieri, his
enemy. At the request of Dante he stopped to tell his story.
                 “Thy will ’tis I renew
    A desperate sorrow that doth crush my heart
    Even before my lips its tale impart.
  But if my words may be a seed that, sowed,
    Shall fruit of infamy to this traitor bear,
    Then, though I weep, speech too shall be my care.
  “Who thou may’st be I know not, nor what mode
    Hath brought thee here below, but then I glean,
    From words of thine, thou art a Florentine.
  That I Count Ugolino was, know thou,
    And this the Archbishop Ruggieri. Why
    I will thee tell we are such neighbors nigh.
  Needs not to say that him I did allow
    A friend’s own trusts, but so his treachery wrought;
    That first my liberty, then my life, it sought.
  “But that which thou canst not have hitherto learned
    That is, how cruel was my death, I thee
    Will tell; judge thou if he offended me.
  Within the Mew, a tower which well hath earned
    From me its name of Famine, and where wrath
    Yet others waits, a narrow opening hath,
  Through which of several moons the broken light
    Had strayed, when unto me in sleep was sent
    A dream whereby the future’s veil was rent.
  “This ill dream me this man set forth in might:
    He wolf and whelps upon those mounts pursued
    Which Pisa ’twixt and Lucca’s domes obtrude.
  Hounds had he with him, lank and shrewd and keen,
    And in their front Gualandi’s sword had place,
    Sismondi’s lash and sour Lanfranchi’s mace.
  Father and sons’ undoing soon was seen;
    Methought the sharp fangs on them closed, and tore
    Their flanks, which now the hue of crimson wore.
  “Before the dawn I woke and heard my sons,
    The helpless children with me, in their sleep,
    Cry out for bread, cries pushed from sobbings deep.
  Right cruel art thou, if not e’en now runs
    To tears thy grief at what my heart forbode,
    If tears of thine at misery’s tale e’er flowed.
  And then they woke, and came the hour around
    Which had been wont our scanty meal to bring;
    But from our dreams dumb terrors seemed to spring;
  “When from below we heard the dreadful sound
    Of nails; the horrible tower was closed; all dumb
    I let my gaze into my sons’ eyes come.
  Weep I did not, like stone my feelings lay.
    They wept, and spoke my little Anselm: ’Pray
    Why lookest so? Father, what ails thee, say?’
  Shed I no tear, nor answered all that day
    Nor the next night, until another sun
    His journey through the wide world had begun.
  “Then came a small ray into our sad, sad den,
    And when in their four faces I beheld
    That carking grief which mine own visage held,
  Mine hands for grief I bit, and they, who then
    Deemed that I did it from desire to eat,
    Stood up each one at once upon his feet,
  And said: ’Father, ’twill give us much less pain
    If thou wilt eat of us: of thee was born
    This hapless flesh, and be it by thee torn.’
  “Myself I calmed that they might not so grieve;
    Mute that day and the next we were; O thou
    Most cruel earth, that didst not open now!
  When we the fourth day’s agony did receive
    Stretched at my feet himself my Gaddo threw,
    And said: ’My father, canst thou nothing do?’
  There died he, and, as now sees me thy sight,
    The three I saw fall one by one; first died
    One on the fifth; deaths two the sixth me tried.
  “Then blind, I groped o’er them to left and right,
    And for three days called on their spirits dead;
    Then grief before the power of fasting fled."
             Wilstach’s Translation, Inferno. Canto XXXIII.
BUONCONTE DI MONTEFELTRO.
On the second terrace of the Ante-Purgatory, on the Purgatorial Mount,
were the spirits of those whose lives were ended by violence. Among those
who here addressed Dante was Buonconte di Montefeltro, who was slain in
the battle of Campaldino, and whose body was never found.
  Another then: “Ah, be thy cherished aim
    Attained that to the lofty Mount thee draws,
    As thou with pity shalt advance my cause.
  Of Montefeltro I Buonconte am;
    Giovanna, and she only, for me cares;
    Hence among those am I whom waiting wears.”
  “What violence or what chance led thee so wide
    From Campaldino,” I of him inquired,
    “That’s still unknown thy burial-place retired?"
  “Oh, Casentino’s foot,” he thus replied,
    “Archiano’s stream o’erflows, which hath its rise
    Above the Hermitage under Apennine skies.
  There where its name is lost did I arrive,
    Pierced through and through the throat, in flight,
    Upon the plain made with my life-blood bright;
  “There sight I lost, and did for speech long strive;
    At last I uttered Mary’s name, and fell
    A lifeless form, mine empty flesh a shell.
  Truth will I speak, below do thou it hymn;
    Took me God’s Angel up, and he of Hell
    Cried out: ’O thou from Heaven, thou doest well
  To rob from me the eternal part of him
    For one poor tear, that me of him deprives;
    In other style I’ll deal with other lives!’
  “Well know’st thou how in air is gathered dim
    That humid vapor which to water turns
    Soon as the cold its rising progress learns.
  The fiend that ill-will joined (which aye seeks ill)
    To intellectual power, which mist and wind
    Moved by control which faculties such can find,
  And afterwards, when the day was spent, did fill
    The space from Protomagno to where tower
    The Mounts with fog; and high Heaven’s covering power
  “The pregnant atmosphere moist to water changed.
    Down fell the rain, and to the ditches fled,
    Whate’er of it the soil’s thirst had not sped;
  And, as it with the mingling torrents ranged
    Towards the royal river, so it flowed
    That over every obstacle wild it rode.
  The robust river found my stiffened frame
    Near to its outlet, and it gave a toss
    To Arno, loosening from my breast the cross
  “I made of me when agony me o’ercame;
    Along his banks and bottoms he me lapped,
    Then in his muddy spoils he me enwrapped."
           Wilstach’s Translation, Purgatorio, Canto V.
BEATRICE DESCENDING FROM HEAVEN.
Dante and Vergil mounted to the Terrestial Paradise, where, while they
talked with Matilda, the Car of the Church Triumphant appeared in the
greatest splendor. As it stopped before Dante it was enveloped in a shower
of roses from the hands of a hundred angels.
  I have beheld ere now, when dawn would pale,
    The eastern hemisphere’s tint of roseate sheen,
    And all the opposite heaven one gem serene,
  And the uprising sun, beneath such powers
    Of vapory influence tempered, that the eye
    For a long space its fiery shield could try:
  E’en so, embosomed in a cloud of flowers,
    Which from those hands angelical upward played,
    And roseate all the car triumphal made,
  And showered a snow-white veil with olive bound,
    Appeared a Lady, green her mantle, name
    Could not describe her robe unless ’t were flame.
  And mine own spirit, which the past had found
    Often within her presence, free from awe,
    And which could never from me trembling draw,
  And sight no knowledge giving me at this time,
    Through hidden virtue which from her came forth,
    Of ancient love felt now the potent worth.
  As soon as on my vision smote sublime
    The heavenly influence that, ere boyhood’s days
    Had fled, had thrilled me and awoke my praise,
  Unto the leftward turned I, with that trust
    Wherewith a little child his mother seeks,
    When fear his steps controls, and tear-stained cheeks,
  To say to Vergil: “All my blood such gust
    Of feeling moves as doth man’s bravery tame;
    I feel the traces of the ancient flame."
            Wilstach’s Translation, Paradiso, Canto XXX.
THE EXQUISITE BEAUTY OF BEATRICE.
While Dante and Beatrice rose from the Heaven of Primal Motion to the
Empyrean, the poet turned his dazzled eyes from the heavens, whose sight
he could no longer bear, to the contemplation of Beatrice.
    Wherefore my love, and loss of other view,
    Me back to Beatrice and her homage drew.
  If what of her hath been already said
    Were in one single eulogy grouped, ’t would ill
    Her meed of merit at this moment fill.
  The beauty which in her I now beheld
    B’yond mortals goes; her Maker, I believe,
    Hath power alone its fulness to receive.
  Myself I own by obstacles stronger spelled
    Than in his labored theme was ever bard
    Whose verses, light or grave, brought problems hard;
  For, as of eyes quelled by the sun’s bright burst,
    E’en so the exquisite memory of that smile
    Doth me of words and forming mind beguile.
  Not from that day when on this earth I first
    Her face beheld, up to this moment, song
    Have I e’er failed to strew her path along,
  But now I own my limping numbers lame;
    An artist sometimes finds his powers surpassed,
    And mine succumbs to beauty’s lance at last.
  And I must leave her to a greater fame
    Than any that my trumpet gives, which sounds,
    Now, hastening notes, which mark this labor’s bounds.
            Wilstach’s Translation, Paradiso, Canto XXX.
THE ORLANDO FURIOSO.
Ludovico Ariosto, author of the Orlando Furioso was born in Reggio, Italy,
Sept. 8, 1474. In 1503 he was taken into the service of the Cardinal
Hippolito d’Este, and soon after began the composition of the Orlando
Furioso, which occupied him for eleven years. It was published in 1516,
and brought him immediate fame. Ariosto was so unkindly treated by his
patron that he left him and entered the service of the cardinal’s brother,
Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara. By him he was appointed governor of a province,
in which position he repressed the banditti by whom it was infested, and
after a successful administration of three years, returned to Ferrara to
reside. The latter part of his life was spent in writing comedies and
satires, and in revising the Orlando Furioso. He died in Ferrara, June 6,
1533.
The Orlando Furioso is a sequel to Boiardo’s Orlando Innamorata, Ariosto
taking up the story at the end of that poem. Its historical basis is the
wars of Charlemagne with the Moors, which were probably confused with
those of Charles Martel. As the Orlando of the poem is the same Roland
whose fall at Roncesvalles in 778 is celebrated in the Song of Roland, its
events must have occurred before that time.
Although the poem is called Orlando Furioso, Orlando’s madness occupies a
very small part of it, the principal threads of the story being Orlando’s
love for Angelica and his consequent madness, the wars of Charlemagne, and
the loves of Bradamant and Rogero. From this Rogero the family of Este
claimed to be derived, and for this reason Ariosto made Rogero the real
hero of the poem, and took occasion to lavish the most extravagant praises
upon his patron and his family.
With these principal threads are interwoven innumerable episodes which are
not out of place in the epic, and lend variety to a story which would
otherwise have become tiresome. The lightness of treatment, sometimes
approaching ridicule, the rapidity of movement, the grace of style, and
the clearness of language, the atmosphere created by the poet which so
successfully harmonizes all his tales of magic and his occasional
inconsistencies, and the excellent descriptions, have all contributed to
the popularity of the poem, which is said to be the most widely read of
the epics. These descriptions outweigh its faults,–the taking up the
story of Boiardo without an explanation of the situation, the lack of
unity, and the failure to depict character; for with the exception of
Bradamant and Rogero, Ariosto’s heroes and heroines are very much alike,
and their conversation is exceedingly tiresome.
The Furioso is written in the octave stanza, and originally consisted of
forty cantos, afterwards increased to forty-six.
The poem is the work of a practical poet, one who could govern a province.
It is marred by an over-profusion of ornament, and contains no such lofty
flights of fancy as are to be found in the Jerusalem Delivered. To this,
no doubt, it owes, in part at least, its great popularity, for the poet’s
poem is never the people’s poem.
Dublin University Magazine, 1845, xxvi., 187-201, 581-601, xxvii., 90-104;
Retrospective Review, 1823, viii., 145-170, ix., 263-291;
William T. Dobson’s Classic Poets, 1879, pp. 186-238;
Leigh Hunt’s Stories from the Italian Poets, n. d. vol. ii., pp. 134-151;
William Hickling Prescott’s Italian Narrative Poetry. (See his
Biographical and Critical Miscellanies, 1873, pp. 441-454);
M. W. Shelley’s Lives of the most eminent Literary and Scientific Men of
Italy, Spain, and Portugal, 1835, pp. 239-255. (In Lardner’s Cabinet
Cyclopedia, vol. i.);
John Addington Symonds’s Italian Literature, 1888, vol. i., pp. 493-522,
vol. ii. pp. 1-50.
Orlando Furioso, Tr. from the Italian by Sir James Harrington, 1724;
Orlando Furioso, Tr. by John Hoole, 1819;
Orlando Furioso, Tr. into English verse by W. S. Rose, 2 vols., 1864-5.
THE STORY OF THE ORLANDO FURIOSO.
The Emperor Charlemagne was at war with the Moors and had camped near the
Pyrenees with his host, determined to conquer their leaders, Marsilius of
Spain and Agramant of Africa. To his camp came Orlando, the great paladin,
with the beautiful Angelica, princess of Cathay, in search of whom he had
roamed the world over. Orlando’s cousin, Rinaldo, another of the great
lords of Charlemagne, also loved Angelica, for he had seen her immediately
after drinking of the Fountain of Love in the forest of Arden, and
Charlemagne, fearing trouble between the cousins on her account, took
Angelica from Orlando’s tent and placed her in the care of Duke Namus of
Bavaria.
Angelica did not like Orlando and she loathed Rinaldo, for he had been the
first to meet her after she had tasted the waters of the Fountain of Hate.
So when the Christian forces were one day routed in battle and the tents
forsaken, she leaped on her palfrey and fled into the forest. Here the
first person she met was the hated Rinaldo; and fleeing from him she
encountered the fierce Moor Ferrau, who, being also in love with her, drew
his sword and attacked the pursuing paladin. But when the two discovered
that Angelica had taken advantage of their duel to flee, they made peace
and went in search of her.
As she fled, Angelica met Sacripant, an eastern lover who had followed her
to France, and put herself under his protection. But when Sacripant was
first defeated by Bradamant and then engaged in battle with the pursuing
Rinaldo, she deemed herself safer without him and fled; and presently a
page appeared, a shade conjured there by a hermit magician whom Angelica
had met, and announced to the warriors that Orlando had appeared and
carried the maid to Paris.
Rinaldo immediately hastened to Paris, to find Orlando absent and
Charlemagne, defeated by the Moors, entrenching himself in the city and
preparing to send to England for aid. Rinaldo must be his ambassador, and
that without a day’s delay.
Frantic with jealousy, Rinaldo leaped into a ship in the midst of a storm,
and hastened on his errand. Driven upon the coast of Scotland, he won the
king’s gratitude by saving his daughter Ginevra from shame and death, and
secured from him a promise of all the horsemen and arms that could be
spared. He was equally successful in England, and was soon reviewing the
troops preparatory to their embarkation.
The warrior maid, Bradamant, sister of Rinaldo, after overthrowing
Sacripant, pursued her way through the forest in search of Rogero the
pagan. They had met once in battle and had loved, and since then she had
ever roamed through the land in search of him. In the forest she found
Pinabel, lamenting because his beloved lady had been snatched from him by
a wizard on a winged steed, and carried to an impregnable castle. Thither
he had seen many warriors conveyed, among them Rogero and Gradasso,
conquered first by the lance and then thrown into profound slumber by the
glare of a magic shield carried by the wizard.
Bradamant, anxious to save Rogero, offered to rescue Pinabel’s lady if he
would guide her to the castle. But when the treacherous knight learned
that she was Bradamant, between whose house and his there was a deadly
feud, he planned to slay her, and soon, by his treachery, managed to hurl
her down a precipice.
Bradamant was only stunned by the fall, however, and soon awoke, to find
herself at the entrance of a cave, which was the tomb of Merlin. Melissa,
the prophetess maid, welcomed her, assured her that Rogero should be her
spouse, and showed her their phantom descendants, brave princes and
beautiful princesses of the house of Este. She then told her that
Brunello, a knight of King Agramant, was hastening to the castle to
release the prisoners by means of a magic ring, formerly the property of
Angelica, which when put in the mouth would render one invisible, and,
worn on the finger, made one proof against magic spells. Bradamant must
overcome Brunello, wrest the ring from him, and herself free Rogero.
Following Melissa’s advice, Bradamant overtook Brunello, seized the ring,
and hastening to the castle, challenged Atlantes to battle. When he
displayed the shield she pretended to become unconscious; but when he ran
up to bind her she sprang up and seized him. He declared that he had
imprisoned Rogero, his nephew, only to save him from the fate foretold by
the stars, death by treachery at the hands of the Christians, and had
brought the other knights and ladies there for his entertainment. Then
Atlantes broke the spell and disappeared, together with the castle, and
the prisoners trooped forth, Rogero among them.
Bradamant was happy, but alas! only for a moment; for as she and Rogero
went down the mountain together he thoughtlessly leaped on the hippogrif,
which alighted near him, and the winged steed, refusing his control, rose
in the air, leaving the tearful Bradamant behind. The hippogrif flew
rapidly over land and sea until it was directly above a small island, upon
which it descended. Rogero sprang from its back, tied it to a myrtle tree,
and, weary from his three thousand mile ride in heavy armor, prepared to
drink from a rippling spring. The groves were of cedar, laurel, palm, and
myrtle; roses and lilies filled the air with their perfume, and the wild
stag and timid hare ran fearlessly through the groves. As he stooped to
drink he heard a voice issuing from the myrtle to which he had tied the
hippogrif. It was that of Astolpho, the English knight, who told him that
the greater part of the island was under the control of Alcina the
enchantress, who had left only a small portion to her sister Logistilla,
to whom it all rightfully belonged. He himself had been enticed thither by
Alcina, who had loved him for a few weeks, and then, serving him as she
did all her lovers, had transformed him to a tree.
Rogero determined to profit by this advice; but when he was driven from
the narrow path to Logistilla’s domain and met Alcina he fell under the
power of her beauty, and thought Astolpho a traducer. The days passed so
gayly in her beautiful home that Rogero forgot the pagan cause, forgot his
duty, forgot Bradamant, and was roused from his lethargy only by Melissa,
to whom Bradamant had given the magic ring to enable her to find and
rescue her lover. Melissa found the young knight when apart from Alcina,
and gave him the ring that he might with it be enabled to see the
enchantress in her true form. She then instructed him how to escape and
seek the kingdom of Logistilla. Rogero was disgusted when the beautiful
enchantress appeared as a hideous, wrinkled old woman, but concealing his
change of feeling, waited until the opportunity presented itself to get
his armor, take a steed, and pass by the warders of the gate. With great
difficulty he reached a stream which separated Alcina’s lands from those
of Logistilla, and while ferrying across was overtaken by the boats of
Alcina. With the help of Atlantes’ shield, they were overcome, and Alcina
was forced to depart, weeping, with only one boat, while Rogero entered
the castle of the fairy Logistilla, from whom he learned many noble
lessons.
Here came the other knights freed from Alcina’s enchantment by Melissa,
and Melissa herself with Astolpho, on the hippogrif, which she had learned
to control. Astolpho was in his own armor and bore his wondrous spear,
which had the power of overthrowing every one whom it so much as touched.
After a short rest among the pleasant gardens of Logistilla, Rogero
departed on the hippogrif, and although anxious to see his Bradamant
again, took the opportunity to pass over all the known world by this novel
method of travel. He saw the troops in England gathering to go to the aid
of Charlemagne, and rescued the beautiful Angelica, who had been taken by
pirates and sold to the people of Ebuda, who chained her upon a rock as a
victim for the orc. Rogero put the orc to sleep with his magic shield,
giving Angelica the ring that the sight of the shield might not affect her
as well. But when, charmed by the maid, he became too lover-like in his
attentions, she put the ring in her mouth and disappeared. The angry
Rogero turned, only to find that his hippogrif had broken its rein and was
gone. Hastening through the forest, vexed with himself and the maiden, he
fancied he saw ’Bradamant carried off by a giant, and following her,
entered a magic castle of Atlantes, where he spent his days vainly trying
to overtake his beloved and her captor.
Orlando could think only of his lost Angelica; and forgetful of the fact
that his uncle Charlemagne was sorely pressed by the heathen, he stole
from the camp one night in disguise, and went in search of her. Passing
the isle of Ebuda he slew the ore, rescued Olympia, who was exposed as its
victim, avenged her wrongs, and continued on his way until he reached the
castle of Atlantes, and, fancying he saw Angelica, entered, and began the
mad round of pursuit with many other Christian and pagan knights who were
rendered unconscious of one another’s presence by the magic of the wizard.
Hither came Angelica, invisible by means of the ring, to find a knight to
protect her on her way to Cathay. Unfortunately as she showed herself to
Sacripant, she was seen by Ferrau and Orlando, and all three pursued her
from the castle. When they were sufficiently removed from it Angelica
slipped the ring in her mouth and disappeared, and Ferrau and Orlando
began to quarrel about Orlando’s helmet, which the Moor was determined to
win and wear. As Ferrau wore no helm until he could win Orlando’s, that
paladin hung his on a tree while they fought. Unseen by them, Angelica
took it down, intending to restore it to Orlando later, and slipped away.
When the knights discovered her absence they went in search of her, and
Ferrau, coming upon her, took the helmet as she disappeared in fright.
Orlando, assuming another crest, which he did not need, as his body was
charmed and could not be hurt by any weapon, went forward, still in search
of his love, and on the way encountered and almost totally destroyed two
squadrons of Moors, and rescued from a robber’s cave the beautiful Isabel,
betrothed of Zerbino.
Melissa returned to Bradamant with the news that while Rogero was freed
from the enchantment of Aleina, he was imprisoned in Atlantes’ castle,
from which she herself could rescue him by slaying the wizard, who would
appear to her in the form of her lover. Bradamant resolved to do so; but
when she saw the seeming Rogero set upon by two giants, she forgot her
resolution, believed Melissa to be false, and spurring after him, became a
prisoner in that wondrous castle, through which day and night she pursued
her ever-fleeing lover.
When the Moors discovered the destruction of the two squadrons,
Mandricardo, the Tartar king, determined to seek and do battle with the
knight (unknown to him by name) who had wrought such destruction. The
Tartar wore the arms of Hector save the sword, which was the property of
Orlando, and until he gained it, he bore no weapon save the lance. With
this, however, he stormed through the battlefield, striking terror to the
hearts of all. With it alone, he destroyed a band of men conveying to
Rodomont, the Saracen chief, his betrothed bride, Doralice, and won the
maid for himself.
Outside Paris raged the infidel, chief among them the giant King Rodomont.
Smiting those of his troops who hesitated to mount the scaling ladders, he
waded through the wet moat, scaled the first wall, leaped the dry ditch,
mounted the second wall, and ran alone through the city, spreading terror,
death, and fire, while Charlemagne, ignorant of his presence, was busied
in the defence of one of the gates against Agramant.
Now Rinaldo’s army approached, unsuspected by the heathen, because of the
aid of Silence, summoned by Saint Michael. Through these, welcomed by
Charlemagne, Rodomont cut his way, hewing down fifteen or twenty foes at
once, and, casting himself into the Seine, escaped, angry that he had not
succeeded in destroying the city.
Discord, also summoned by Michael to the aid of the Christians, informed
Rodomont on his return to the camp of the capture of Doralice, and the
chief set forth raging, in search of Mandricardo, thoughtlessly abandoning
King Agramant, struggling against the English re-inforcements. As night
fell on a furious battle, the Moors were driven back, and Charlemagne
pitched his tents without the city, opposite those of the Moors.
In the Moorish camp were two youths who loved one another with a love
passing wonderful, Medoro and Cloridan. Both served Dardinello, and had
crossed the sea with him. As they stood on guard that night they talked of
their lord’s death on the field that day, and Medoro suggested that they
go in search of his body and bury it. Cloridan agreed, and they crept
through the sleeping lines of the Christians, slaughtering many, found the
body, and were hurrying into the forest when they heard the troops of
Zerbino. Cloridan fled, fancying that Medoro would do the same, but on
finding himself unaccompanied, retraced his footsteps, only to see his
friend surrounded by a troop of horsemen. From his ambush he shot his
arrows at the foe, until Zerbino in wrath seized Medoro by the throat,
exclaiming, “Thou shall die for this!” But when Medoro prayed to be
allowed first to bury his lord, pity touched Zerbino, and he freed the
youth, who fell, however, wounded by a thrust from a churlish horseman, in
pursuit of whom Zerbino at once fled. Cloridan sprang in among the
horsemen and fell dead by their thrusts at the side of the unconscious
Medoro.
The bleeding youth was found by Angelica, who passed by, clad in rustic
raiment; and the maid, struck with his beauty, recalled her knowledge of
chirturgery and revived him. After Dardinello was buried, she and a
shepherd assisted Medoro to a neighboring cottage, where she attended him
until his wound was healed. But as he grew well, Angelica, who had scorned
the suit of the proudest knights, fell sick of love for the humble youth,
and resolved to take him with her to Cathay.
When Astolpho left the castle of Logistilla he carried with him as her
gift a book from which he could learn to overcome all magic cheats, and a
horn whose sound would put the boldest man to flight. Following her
directions, he sailed past Scythia and India into the Persian Gulf, and
there disembarking, passed through Arabia and along the Red Sea. There he
overcame the giant Caligorantes, slew Orillo, who guarded the outlet of
the Nile, and met there the brother knights Gryphon and Aquilant. Gryphon,
led astray by an unworthy love, stole away from his brother, but was found
again after many adventures, and the three, together with Sansonet and
Marphisa, a warlike virgin, embarked for France. A great storm arose, and
the vessel was forced to land in Syria. This was the land of the Amazons,
and the troop escaped only by the warning and assistance of Guido, the
savage, who was a bondsman in the land.
Astolpho became separated from the rest of the party and reached Europe
alone. One day, while he was stooping to drink at a spring in the forest,
a rustic sprang from a thicket, and leaping upon Rabican, rode him away.
Astolpho, hastening after him, entered the enchanted castle of Atlantes,
and soon recognized it as a house of magic. He broke the spell by the aid
of his book, freed the captive knights, and finding the hippogrif, which
he had learned to guide from Melissa, mounted it and rode away.
When the castle was destroyed, Rogero recognized Bradamant and clasped her
in his arms, rejoicing to find her again. The maid, anxious to avoid
further separation, promised to wed him if he would become a Christian,
and demand her of her father, Duke Aymon. Rogero gladly promised to do so.
and the two were hastening to Vallombrosa that he might be baptized when
they encountered a maid, who prayed them to hasten to the relief of a
youth doomed to death by fire. They hurried on, but paused to free Guido
the savage, Gryphon. Aquilant, and Sansonet, who had been imprisoned by
Pinabel, and Bradamant, pursuing Pinabel into the forest, slew him. But
there, unfortunately, she lost her way, and while she was wandering about,
Rogero, ignorant of her whereabouts, pushed on and freed the youth, who
proved to be Bradamant’s brother.
As Bradamant wandered through the forest she found Astolpho, who had just
made a bridle for the hippogrif, and recognizing him, took his horse and
spear in charge. A long time she wandered forlorn. She did not know the
way to Vallombrosa; she did not know the whereabouts of Rogero. Her home
was in sight, but if her mother saw her she would not again be suffered to
depart. As she stood debating with herself, she was recognized by one of
her brothers, and was forced to accompany him home. Thence she secretly
sent her maid Hippalca to Vallombrosa with Rogero’s horse Frontino, and a
message explaining her absence.
After the capture of Doralice, Mandricardo hastened on, and overtook
Orlando just as he had freed Zerbino and united him to Isabel. Recognizing
Orlando by his crest as the chief who had destroyed the squadrons, the
Tartar challenged him to combat. In courtesy to his foe, who would bear no
sword until he could have Durindana, Orlando hung the blade on a tree, and
the two knights spurred their steeds and broke their lances together. Then
grappling, each endeavored to unhorse the other. The breaking of Orlando’s
saddle girth caused his fall just as he had slipped the bridle from the
head of his enemy’s horse, and the frightened steed, freed from its rein,
ran madly through the wood, followed by Doralice.
Orlando told Zerbino to inform Mandricardo if he overtook him that he
would wait in that spot three days for him to return and renew the combat,
and bade the lovers farewell. As he wandered through the region while
waiting, he found a peaceful little spot where a limpid rill rippled
through a meadow dotted here and there with trees. Here the weary warrior
sought repose; but as he looked about him he espied the name of Angelica
carved on the trees, entwined with that of Medoro. Persuading himself that
this was a fanciful name by which the maid intended to signify himself, he
entered a little ivy-covered grotto, arching over a fountain, and there
discovered on the rocky wall some verses in which Medoro celebrated his
union with Angelica. For a moment he stood as if turned to stone. Unable
to weep, he again mounted his horse and sought a peasant’s house to pass
the night. There he heard the story of Angelica’s infatuation, and saw the
bracelet she had left them in return for their hospitality. The unhappy
Orlando passed a sleepless night, weeping and groaning, and the next
morning hastened to the forest that he might give way to his grief
unobserved. There madness came upon him, and he uprooted the hateful
trees, cut the solid stone of the grotto with his sword, making a
desolation of the beautiful spot, and, casting off his armor, ran naked
through the country, pillaging, burning, and slaying.
Zerbino and Isabel sought the spot in a few days to learn if Mandricardo
had returned, found the scattered armor, and heard of Orlando’s madness
from a shepherd. Lamenting over their protector’s misfortune, they
gathered up the armor, hung it on a sapling, and wrote thereon Orlando’s
name. But while they were thus engaged, Mandricardo arrived, took the long
coveted sword, and gave Zerbino, who attempted to prevent the theft, a
mortal wound. The unhappy Isabel, intent on self-destruction, was
comforted by a hermit, who promised to take her to a monastery near
Marseilles.
Mandricardo had had but a few moments for repose after this combat with
Zerbino, when the furious Rodomont overtook him and a terrible combat
between the two began, the beautiful cause of it looking on with interest.
But so strong were the champions that the struggle might have been
prolonged indefinitely had not a messenger announced to the knights that
they must postpone their private quarrels for a moment and hasten to the
relief of King Agramant.
After Rogero had freed Richardetto, Bradamant’s brother, and had attempted
in vain to find Bradamant, he was troubled by the thought of King
Agramant. He was determined to wed the warrior maid and become a
Christian, but first came his vow to the pagan king. He therefore wrote
her a note, saying that honor required his presence with Agramant for at
least fifteen or twenty days, but after that time he would find means to
justify himself with Agramant and would meet her at Vallombrosa to be
baptized.
He, with Richardetto, Aldigier, and Marphisa, whom they met on her way to
the pagan camp, rode on together, and freed Vivian and Malagigi from the
Moors and Manganese. While they rested at a little fountain, Hippalca rode
up, and told them that she had just met Rodomont, who took Frontino from
her. She also managed secretly to give Rogero Bradamant’s message and
receive his letter in return.
While the party still remained at the fountain, Rodomont came up with
Mandricardo and Doralice, and all engaged in a fierce battle, which was at
last interrupted by Malagigi, who, versed in wizard arts, conjured a demon
into Doralice’s horse so that it ran away; and Rodomont and Mandricardo,
frightened by her screams, started in pursuit.
With the assistance of Rogero, Marphisa, Rodomont, and Mandricardo,
Agramant was enabled to drive Charlemagne back into Paris, where he was
saved only by the interposition of Discord, who stirred up the old
quarrels between Rodomont, Mandricardo, Rogero, and Gradasso over weapons,
bearings, and horses, until Agramant announced that they should settle
their difficulties by single combat, drawing lots to see who should first
engage in battle. But when they were ready for the lists, fresh quarrels
broke out, until the king despaired of ever having peace in his ranks.
Finally, at his command, Doralice publicly declared Mandricardo her
choice, and the furious Rodomont fled from the camp. On his way to Africa
he found a little abandoned church between France and Spain, and decided
to remain there instead of returning home. From this spot he saw Isabel on
her way to Marseilles, and falling in love with her, he slew the hermit,
dragged her to his retreat, and tried to win her. But she, loathing him
and faithful to Zerbino, caused him to slay her, pretending that she was
rendered invulnerable by an ointment which she had prepared, and the
secret of which she would impart to him. The unhappy Rodomont walled up
the church to form her tomb, and threw a narrow bridge across the stream.
On this bridge he met every knight who came thither, and having overthrown
him, took his arms to deck the tomb, on which he determined to hang a
thousand such trophies. If the vanquished knight was a Moor he was set
free without his arms; if a Christian he was imprisoned. Thither came the
mad Orlando, and wrestled with Rodomont on the bridge until both fell into
the stream. The madman then passed on through the country and met Medoro
and Angelica on their way to India. They escaped with difficulty, Medoro’s
horse falling a victim to the madman, who continued to lay waste the land
until he reached Zizera on the bay of Gibraltar, and, plunging into the
sea, swam to Africa.
After Doralice had decided the quarrel between Mandricardo and Rodomont,
Rogero and the Tartar met in the lists to decide their quarrel over their
bearings. The battle was fearful, and when both fell to the ground it was
supposed that Mandricardo was the victor. But when the crowd rushed to the
lists they found the Tartar dead and Rogero only wounded. But the cheers
of the crowd gave little pleasure to the hero, who grieved that he must
lie on a sick-bed instead of seeking Bradamant, according to his promise.
Bradamant too, who had looked forward so eagerly to the day he had set,
wept when it came without her lover. Soon she heard that Rogero’s coming
was prevented by his wounds; but when she also heard that he was attended
by the warrior maid Marphisa, and that their names were frequently coupled
in the pagan camp, she at once felt the pangs of jealousy. Unable to
endure it longer, she armed herself, changing her usual vest for one whose
colors denoted her desperation and desire to die, and set forth to meet
and slay Marphisa, taking with her the spear left her by Astolpho, whose
magic properties she did not know. With this she overthrew Rodomont and
caused him to depart from his tomb and free his captives, and then,
proceeding to Aries, challenged Rogero, who was sadly puzzled, not
recognizing his challenger on account of her changed vest. Several knights
attacked her before Rogero came forth, only to be overthrown by the spear,
and then Marphisa, who had rushed forth before Rogero could arm, met her,
and the two women fought like tigers. When Rogero at last went forth he
recognized Bradamant’s voice, and suspecting the cause of her hostility,
implored her to withdraw with him to a wood near by to hear his
explanation. Marphisa followed them and attacked Bradamant so fiercely
that Rogero was forced to her rescue, and lifting his sword would have
struck the maid had he not been stopped by a voice from a tomb near by. It
was that of Atlatites, who announced to Rogero and Marphisa that they were
brother and sister, children of Rogero of Pisa and Galiciella; that Rogero
had been treacherously slain and his town betrayed to Almontes, who cast
Galiciella adrift on the sea. Atlantes rescued her, and took her children
when she died; but Marphisa was stolen from him by a band of Arabs.
From this speech it was plainly the duty of Rogero and Marphisa to espouse
the cause of Charlemagne and take arms against Agramant, who was their
enemy. Bradamant and Marphisa then embraced, bade Rogero farewell, and
proceeded to Charlemagne’s camp, where Marphisa was received with honor
and baptized, while Rogero promised to follow them as soon as he could
find an excuse to leave Agramant.
When Astolpho left Bradamant in the forest, he quickly rose in the air and
passed rapidly over the kingdoms of the world, Aragon, Navarre, Cadiz,
Egypt, Morocco, Fez, over the sandy desert until he reached the kingdom of
Nubia, whose king he rescued from the harpies by the sound of his magic
horn. Then, mounted on his hippogrif again, he rose to the terrestrial
Paradise, where he was welcomed by John, who informed him that he was sent
thither by the grace of God that he might get instruction how to furnish
aid to Charles and the Church, who were sorely in need of it. With John he
rose in a chariot to the Heaven of the Moon, where, after seeing many
strange things, he was given the wits of Orlando enclosed in a vial. They
had been taken from him as a punishment for his loving a pagan, but were
now to be restored to him that he might aid Charlemagne in conquering the
Moors. Astolpho then descended to Nubia, restored sight to its king, and
asking for his forces, went with them into Africa and attacked Biserta,
the city of Agramant.
When these tidings were borne to Agramant he was greatly troubled, and
desiring to end the war in Europe and hasten to his own country, he
proposed to Charlemagne that the war be decided by single combat between
two champions. Great was the agony of Rogero, the pagan champion, when he
recognized in his opponent Rinaldo, the brother of Bradamant. He would
never dare to slay him, so he parried the blows rained upon him, and
struck back so feebly that the spectators, not understanding his motives,
deemed him unable to cope with Rinaldo. But Melissa, determined that
Merlin’s prophecy should come true, appeared to Agramant in the guise of
Rodomont, and urged him to break the compact and fall upon the Christians.
Delighted to have the mighty king with him again, Agramant did not scruple
to break his word, and rushed upon the Christian forces, breaking up the
combat. After a sharp conflict, the Saracens were put to flight and
Agramant hastened into Africa.
His people in Biserta, their strength drained by the long war, were unable
to withstand the Christian foe, soon re-enforced by a powerful enemy. One
day, as Astolpho and his friends were standing on the beach, a madman came
raging towards them, whom Astolpho recognized as Orlando. The warriors
attempted in vain to hold him until Astolpho ordered the ship’s hawsers to
be brought, and knotting them flung them at the count’s limbs, and so
threw him down and tied him. Then, after having had his body cleansed from
mud and filth, he stopped his mouth with herbs so that he could breathe
only through his nostrils, and holding the vial there, the lost senses
were quickly inhaled, and Orlando was himself again, astonished and
delighted to find himself with his friends.
With Orlando’s help, Biserta was soon taken, and Agramant, who had met the
Christian fleet under the leadership of Dudon and had barely escaped with
his life, saw from afar the flames devouring his beloved city.
Landing with Sobrino upon a little isle, he found there King Sericane, who
advised him to challenge the Christians to single combat in order to
decide the outcome of the war, he, Gradasso, and Sobrino to stand in the
lists against three Christian champions. Orlando agreed to do so, and
selected for his companions in the fight Brandimart and Olivier. But the
pagans were no match for Orlando, whom no weapon could injure, and
Agramant and Gradasso soon fell, while Sobrino was wounded. But the joy
over the Christian victory was not unalloyed by sorrow, for Olivier was
severely wounded and the beloved Brandimart was slain.
The champions were now joined by Rinaldo, who after the breaking of the
pact by Agramant, had set off for India in search of Angelica, whom he
still madly loved. But Disdain guided his steps to the Fountain of Hate,
one draught of which changed his love to loathing, so that he abandoned
his undertaking and hastened to join the Christian forces in Africa.
Olivier’s wound proved slow to heal, and when at last the warriors heard
of a hermit on a lonely isle who could help him, they hastened to take
their wounded comrade thither. There they found Rogero, who had been
shipwrecked while sailing to Africa, and had been baptized by the hermit,
who was warned in a dream of his coming. The Christian warriors gladly
welcomed Rogero to their ranks, for they knew of his valor; and Rinaldo,
who had learned how the young hero had saved the life of Richardetto and
had preserved Vivian and Malagigi, embraced him, and at the suggestion of
the hermit, plighted him to his sister. Before they left the isle, Sobrino
was converted by the pious hermit, and Olivier’s wound was healed.
The knights were received with the greatest honor by Charlemagne,
especially Rogero, the new convert. But what unhappiness awaited him! In
his absence Bradamant’s father had promised the maid to Leo, the son of
the Greek emperor, Constantine, in spite of her prayers and entreaties.
Although Bradamant declared that she would die sooner than wed another,
the heart-broken Rogero hastily departed for Constantinople to slay his
rival. In his absence, Bradamant besought Charlemagne not to compel her to
marry Leo unless he could defeat her in single combat; and her angry
parents, on learning of this, took her from the court and shut her up in
the tower of Rocca Forte. Rogero, in the mean time, reached Leo’s realms
just as the Greeks engaged in battle with the Bulgarians. Because of his
hatred for Leo, he fought with the Bulgarians, and when their king fell he
rallied their scattered troops and put the Greeks to flight. Rogero then
followed the fleeing Greeks unaccompanied, and being recognized, was taken
captive that night as he slept in a hostelry. At the entreaty of a
kinswoman whose son Rogero had slain that day, the emperor surrendered his
captive to her, and he was thrust into a gloomy dungeon, where he suffered
agonies from hunger and cold. But Leo, who had admired his valor in battle
and had longed to know him, rescued him, recovered his horse and armor,
and by his generosity compelled Rogero to admire him as much as he had
before hated him. The news of Charlemagne’s decree now reached Leo, and
he, fearing to fight Bradamant, asked the unknown knight of the unicorn to
take his place. Rogero’s heart sank within him, but he dared not refuse.
His life was Leo’s, and he must sacrifice himself for him, must either
slay Bradamant, or be slain by her for his deliverer’s sake. He
accompanied Leo to France, and feigning a cheerfulness he did not feel,
changed armor and steed that he might not be known, and, while Leo
remained in his tent outside the city, entered the lists and encountered
Bradamant, who was determined to slay her hated suitor. Rogero was equally
determined not to slay her nor to allow himself to be conquered. When
twilight fell and king and court saw that while the young knight had not
overcome the maid, he had not allowed himself to be overcome, they
declared that the couple were well matched and that they should wed.
The hopeless Rogero hastened back to Leo’s camp, changed armor and steed,
and during the night stole away from the hateful place to the greenwood
that he might die there, since he could never possess his beloved. At the
same time, Bradamant gave way to her grief in such a manner that Marphisa,
already indignant at the treatment of her brother, appeared before the
king in his behalf. She declared that Rogero and Bradamant had already
exchanged all the vows of those who marry and therefore she was not free
to wed another. She then suggested that since the matter had gone so far,
Leo and Rogero should meet in the lists to decide to whom the lady
belonged.
Leo at once set out in search of his knight of the unicorn, who he
believed would defend him from all peril, and found him in the forest,
almost fainting from fasting and sleeplessness. The Greek embraced Rogero
tenderly and implored him to betray the cause of his grief, and so tender
were his words and so gracious his manner that Rogero could not but
unbosom himself. And when Leo learned that his unknown champion was no
other than Rogero himself he declared that he would gladly forego
Bradamant for him, and would rather have forfeited his life than caused
such grief to such a faithful friend.
Joy filled the court when the story of Rogero’s fidelity was made known,
and the joy was increased when ambassadors came from Bulgaria, seeking the
unknown knight of the unicorn that they might offer their throne to him.
Duke Aymon and his wife were reconciled when they found that Rogero was to
be a king, and the wedding was celebrated with the greatest splendor,
Charlemagne providing for Bradamant as though she were his daughter.
In the midst of the celebrations Rodomont appeared to defy Rogero, and
that knight, nothing loath, met him in the lists. The Moor fell under
Rogero’s blows, and all the Christian court rejoiced to see the last of
the pagan knights fall by the hand of their champion.
Continue...

This full text of “National Epics” by Kate Milner Rabb belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
