


Kaiumers was the first King of Persia, and against him Ahriman, the evil,
through jealousy of his greatness, sent forth a mighty Deev to conquer
him. By this Deev, Saiamuk, the son of Kaiumers, was slain, and the king
himself died of grief at the loss of his son.
Husheng, his grandson, who succeeded Kaiumers, was a great and wise king,
who gave fire to his people, taught them irrigation, instructed them how
to till and sow, and gave names to the beasts. His son and successor,
Tahumers, taught his people the arts of spinning, weaving, and writing,
and when he died left his throne to his son Jemschid.
Jemschid was a mighty monarch, who divided men into classes, and the years
into periods, and builded mighty walls and cities; but his heart grew
proud at the thought of his power, and he was driven away from his land by
his people, who called Zohak to the throne of Iran.
Zohak, who came from the deserts of Arabia, was a good and wise young man
who had fallen into the power of a Deev. This Deev, in the guise of a
skillful servant, asked permission one day to kiss his monarch between the
shoulders, as a reward for an unusually fine bit of cookery. From the spot
he kissed sprang two black serpents, whose only nourishment was the brains
of the king’s subjects.
The serpent king, as Zohak was now called, was much feared by his
subjects, who saw their numbers daily lessen by the demands of the
serpents. But when the children of the blacksmith Kawah were demanded as
food for the serpents, the blacksmith defied Zohak, and raising his
leathern apron as a standard,–a banner ever since honored in Persia,–he
called the people to him, and set off in search of Feridoun, an heir of
Jemschid. Under the young leader the oppressed people defeated the tyrant,
and placed Feridoun on the throne.
Feridoun had three sons, Irij, Tur, and Silim. Having tested their
bravery, he divided the kingdom among them, giving to Irij the kingdom of
Iran. Although the other brothers had received equal shares of the
kingdom, they were enraged because Iran was not their portion, and when
their complaints to their father were not heeded, they slew their brother.
Irij left a son, a babe named Minuchihr, who was reared carefully by
Feridoun. In time he avenged his father, by defeating the armies of his
uncles and slaying them both. Soon after this, Feridoun died, intrusting
his grandson to Saum, his favorite pehliva, or vassal, who ruled over
Seistan.
Saum was a childless monarch, and when at last a son was born to him he
was very happy until he learned that while the child was perfect in every
other way, it had the silver hair of an old man. Fearing the talk of his
enemies, Saum exposed the child on a mountain top to die. There it was
found by the Simurgh, a remarkable animal, part bird, part human, that,
touched by the cries of the helpless infant, carried him to her great nest
of aloes and sandal-wood, and reared him with her little ones.
Saum, who had lived to regret his foolish and wicked act, was told in a
dream that his son still lived, and was being cared for by the Simurgh. He
accordingly sought the nest, and carried his son away with great
thanksgiving. The Simurgh parted tenderly with the little Zal, and
presented him with a feather from her wing, telling him that whenever he
was in danger, he had only to throw it on the fire and she would instantly
come to his aid.
Saum first presented his son at the court of Minuchihr, and then took him
home to Zaboulistan, where he was carefully instructed in every art and
science.
At one time, while his father was invading a neighboring province, Zal
travelled over the kingdom and stopped at the court of Mihrab, a tributary
of Saum, who ruled at Kabul. Though a descendant of the serpent king,
Mihrab was good, just, and wise, and he received the young warrior with
hospitality. Zal had not been long in Kabul before he heard of the
beauties of Rudabeh, the daughter of Mihrab, and she, in turn, of the
great exploits of Zal. By an artifice of the princess they met and vowed
to love one another forever, though they knew their love would meet with
opposition. Saum and Zal both pleaded Zal’s cause before Minuchihr, who
relented when he heard from the astrologers that a good and mighty warrior
would come of the union. Rudabeh’s mother won the consent of Mihrab, so
that the young people were soon married with great pomp. To them a son was
born named Rustem, who, when one day old, was as large as a year-old
child. When three years old he could ride a horse, and at eight years was
as powerful as any hero of the time.
Nauder succeeded the good Minuchihr, and under him Persia was defeated by
the Turanians, and Afrasiyab occupied the Persian throne. But Zal, whose
father, Saum, had died, overthrew him and placed Zew upon the throne.
Zew’s reign was short, and Garshasp, his son, succeeded him. When he was
threatened by the Turanians, his people went for aid to Zal, who, because
he was growing old, referred them to Rustem, yet of tender age. Rustem
responded gladly, and his father commanded that all the horses from
Zaboulistan to Kabul be brought forth that his son might select a steed
therefrom. Every horse bent beneath his grasp until he came to the colt
Rakush, which responded to Rustem’s voice, and suffered him to mount it.
From that day to his death, this steed was his faithful companion and
preserver.
Garshasp was too weak to rule over the kingdom, and Zal despatched Rustem
to Mt. Alberz, where he had been told in a dream a youth dwelt called
Kai-Kobad, descended from Feridoun. Kai-Kobad welcomed Rustem, and the
two, with the noblest of the kingdom, defeated the power of Turan.
After a reign of a hundred years, the wise Kai-Kobad died, and was
succeeded by his son, the foolish Kai-Kaus, who, not satisfied with the
wealth and extent of his kingdom, determined to conquer the kingdom of
Mazinderan, ruled by the Deevs. Zal’s remonstrances were of no avail: the
headstrong Kai-Kaus marched into Mazinderan, and, together with his whole
army, was conquered, imprisoned, and blinded by the power of the White
Deev.
When the news of the monarch’s misfortune came to Iran, Rustem immediately
saddled Rakush, and, choosing the shortest and most peril-beset route, set
forth, unaccompanied, for Mazinderan. If he survived the dangers that
lurked by the way, he would reach Mazinderan in seven days.
While sleeping in a forest, after his first day’s journey, he was saved
from a fierce lion by Rakush, who stood at his head.
On the second day, just as he believed himself perishing of thirst, he was
saved by a sheep that he followed to a fountain of water; on the third
night, Rakush, whom he had angrily forbidden to attack any animal without
waking him, twice warned him of the approach of a dragon. The first time
the dragon disappeared when Rustem awoke, and he spoke severely to his
faithful horse. The second time he slew the dragon, and morning having
dawned, proceeded through a desert, where he was offered food and wine by
a sorceress. Not recognizing her, and grateful for the food, he offered
her a cup of wine in the name of God, and she was immediately converted
into a black fiend, whom he slew.
He was next opposed by Aulad, whom he defeated, and promised to make ruler
of Mazinderan if he would guide him to the caves of the White Deev. A
stony desert and a wide stream lay between him and the demon; but the
undaunted Rustem passed over them, and choosing the middle of the day, at
which time Aulad told him the Deevs slept, he slew the guards, entered the
cavern, and after a terrible struggle, overcame and slew the great Deev.
He then released Kai-Kaus and his army, and restored their sight by
touching their eyes with the blood from the Deev’s heart.
Kai-Kaus, not satisfied with this adventure, committed many other follies,
from which it taxed his warrior sorely to rescue him.
Once he was imprisoned by the King of Hamaveran after he had espoused his
daughter; again he followed the advice of a wicked Deev, and tried to
search the heavens in a flying-machine, that descended and left him in a
desert waste. It was only after this last humiliation that he humbled
himself, lay in the dust many days, and at last became worthy of the
throne of his fathers.
At one time Rustem was hunting near the borders of Turan, and, falling
asleep, left Rakush to graze in the forest, where he was espied by the men
of Turan and at once captured. When Rustem awoke he followed his steed by
the traces of its hoofs, until he came to the city of Samengan. The king
received him kindly, and promised to restore the horse if it could be
found. While his messengers went in search of it, he feasted his guest,
and led him for the night to a perfumed couch.
In the middle of the night Rustem awoke, to see a beautiful young woman
enter the room, accompanied by a maid. She proved to be the princess, who
had fallen in love with Rustem. She pleaded with him to return her love,
promising, if he did so, to restore his cherished horse. Rustem longed for
his steed; moreover, the maiden was irresistibly beautiful. He accordingly
yielded to her proposals, and the two were wedded the next day, the king
having given his consent.
After tarrying some time in Samengan, Rustem was forced to return to Iran.
Bidding his bride an affectionate farewell, he presented her with a
bracelet.
“If thou art given a daughter, place this amulet in her hair to guard her
from harm. If a son, bind it on his arm, that he may possess the valor of
Nariman.”
In the course of time, the princess bore a boy, who was like his father in
beauty and boldness, whom she christened Sohrab. But for fear that she
would be deprived of him, she wrote to Rustem that a daughter had been
born to her. To her son she declared the secret of his birth, and urged
him to be like his father in all things; but she warned him not to
disclose the secret, for she feared that if it came to the ears of
Afrasiyab, he would destroy him because of his hatred of Rustem.
Sohrab, who had already cherished dreams of conquest, was elated at the
knowledge of his parentage. “Mother,” exclaimed he, “I shall gather an
army of Turks, conquer Iran, dethrone Kai-Kaus, and place my father on the
throne; then both of us will conquer Afrasiyab, and I will mount the
throne of Turan.”
The mother, pleased with her son’s valor, gave him for a horse a foal
sprung from Rakush, and fondly watched his preparations for war.
The wicked Afrasiyab well knew that Sohrab was the son of Rustem. He was
also aware that it was very dangerous to have two such mighty warriors
alive, since if they became known to each other, they would form an
alliance. He planned, therefore, to aid Sohrab in the war, keeping him in
ignorance of his father, and to manage in some way to have the two meet in
battle, that one or both might be slain.
The armies met and the great battle began. Sohrab asked to have Rustem
pointed out to him, but the soldiers on his side were all instructed to
keep him in ignorance. By some strange mischance the two men whom his
mother had sent to enlighten him, were both slain. Rustem was moved at the
sight of the brave young warrior, but remembering that Tahmineh’s
offspring was a daughter, thought nothing more of the thrill he felt at
sight of him. At last Sohrab and Rustem met in single combat. Sohrab was
moved with tenderness for his unknown opponent, and besought him to tell
him if he was Rustem, but Rustem declared that he was only a servant of
that chief. For three days they fought bitterly, and on the fourth day
Rustem overthrew his son. When Sohrab felt that the end had come he
threatened his unknown opponent. “Whoever thou art, know that I came not
out for empty glory but to find my father, and that though I have found
him not, when he hears that thou hast slain his son he will search thee
out and avenge me, no matter where thou hidest thyself. For my father is
the great Rustem.”
Rustem fell down in agony when he heard his son’s words, and realized that
his guile had prevented him from being made known the day before. He
examined the onyx bracelet on Sohrab’s arm; it was the same he had given
Tahmineh. Bethinking himself of a magic ointment possessed by Kai-Kaus, he
sent for it that he might heal his dying son; but the foolish king,
jealous of his prowess, refused to send it, and Sohrab expired in the arms
of his father.
Rustem’s heart was broken. He heaped up his armor, his tent, his
trappings, his treasures, and flung them into a great fire. The house of
Zal was filled with mourning, and when the news was conveyed to Samengan,
he tore his garments, and his daughter grieved herself to death before a
year had passed away.
To Kai-Kaus and a wife of the race of Feridoun was born a son called
Saiawush, who was beautiful, noble, and virtuous. But his foolish father
allowed himself to be prejudiced against the youth by slanderous tongues,
so that Saiawush fled from the court and sought shelter with Afrasiyab in
Turan. There he speedily became popular, and took unto himself for a wife
the daughter of Afrasiyab. But when he and Ferandis his wife built a
beautiful city, the hatred and jealousy of Gersiwaz was aroused, so that
he lied to Afrasiyab and said that Saiawush was puffed up with pride, and
at last induced Afrasiyab to slay his son-in-law.
Saiawush had a son, Kai-Khosrau, who was saved by Piran, a kind-hearted
nobleman, and given into the care of a goatherd. When Afrasiyab learned of
his existence he summoned him to his presence, but the youth, instructed
by Piran, assumed the manners of an imbecile, and was accordingly freed by
Afrasiyab, who feared no harm from him.
When the news of the death of Saiawush was conveyed to Iran there was
great mourning, and war was immediately declared against Turan. For seven
years the contest was carried on, always without success, and at the end
of that time Gudarz dreamed that a son of Saiawush was living called
Kai-Khosrau, and that until he was sought out and placed at the head of
the army, deliverance could not come to Iran. Kai-Khosrau was discovered,
and led the armies on to victory; and when Kai-Kaus found that his
grandson was not only a great warrior, skilled in magic, but also
possessed wisdom beyond his years, he resigned the throne and made
Kai-Khosrau ruler over Iran.
Kai-Khosrau ruled many long years, in which time he brought peace and
happiness to his kingdom, avenged the murder of his father, and compassed
the death of the wicked Afrasiyab. Then, fearing that he might become
puffed up with pride like Jemschid, he longed to depart from this world,
and prayed Ormuzd to take him to his bosom.
The king; after many prayers to Ormuzd, dreamed that his wish would be
granted if he set the affairs of his kingdom in order and appointed his
successor. Rejoiced, he called his nobles together, divided his treasure
among them, and appointed his successor, Lohurasp, whom he commanded to be
the woof and warp of justice. Accompanied by a few of his faithful
friends, he set out on the long journey to the crest of the mountains. At
his entreaties, some of his friends turned back; those who stayed over
night, in spite of his warnings, found on waking that they were covered by
a heavy fall of snow, and were soon frozen. Afterwards their bodies were
found and received a royal burial.
Lohurasp had a son Gushtasp who greatly desired to rule, and was a just
monarch, when he succeeded to the throne. Gushtasp, however, was jealous
of his son, Isfendiyar, who was a great warrior. When Gushtasp was about
to be overcome by the forces of Turan, he promised Isfendiyar the throne,
if he would destroy the enemy; but when the hosts were scattered, and
Isfendiyar reminded his father of his promise, he was cast into a dungeon,
there to remain until his services were again needed. When he had again
gained a victory, he was told that the throne should be his when he had
rescued his sisters from the brazen fortress of Arjasp, where they had
been carried and imprisoned.
On his way to this tower Isfendiyar met with as many terrible foes as
Rustem had encountered on his way to the White Deev, and as successfully
overcame them. Wolves, lions, enchantresses, and dragons barred the way to
the impregnable fortress, which rose three farsangs high and forty wide,
and was constructed entirely of brass and iron. But Isfendiyar, assuming
the guise of a merchant and concealing his warriors in chests, won his way
into the castle, gained the favor of its inmates, and made them drunk with
wine. This done, he freed his sisters, slew the guards, and struck down
Arjasp.
Instead of keeping his promise, Gushtasp hastened to set his son another
task. Rustem was his Pehliva, but it pleased him to send forth Isfendiyar
against him, commanding him to bring home the mighty warrior in chains.
Isfendiyar pleaded in vain with his father. Then he explained the
situation to Rustem, and begged that he would accompany him home in peace
to gratify his father. Rustem refused to go in chains, so the two heroes
reluctantly began the hardest battle of their lives.
At the end of the first day, Rustem and Rakush were severely wounded, and
on his return home Rustem happened to think of the Simurgh. Called by the
burning of the feather, the kind bird healed the wounds of the hero and of
Rakush, and instructed Rustem how to slay his foe. “Seek thou the tamarisk
tree, and make thereof an arrow. Aim at his eye, and there thou canst
blind and slay him.”
Rustem followed the directions, and laid low the gallant youth. Isfendiyar
died exclaiming, “My father has slain me, not thou, Rustem. I die, the
victim of my father’s hate; do thou keep for me and rear my son!”
Rustem, who had lived so long and accomplished such great deeds, died at
last by the hand of his half-brother. This brother, Shugdad, stirred up
the king of Kabul, in whose court he was reared, to slay Rustem because he
exacted tribute from Kabul.
Rustem was called into Kabul by Shugdad, who claimed that the king
mistreated him. When he arrived, the matter was settled amicably, and the
brothers set out for a hunt with the king. The hunters were led to a spot
where the false king had caused pits to be dug lined with sharp weapons.
Rustem, pleased with his kind reception and suspecting no harm, beat
Rakush severely when he paused and would go no further. Stung by the
blows, the gallant horse sprang forward, and fell into the pit. As he rose
from this, he fell into another, until, clambering from the seventh pit,
he and Rustem fell swooning with pain.
“False brother!” cried Rustem; “what hast thou done? Was it for thee to
slay thy father’s son? Exult now; but thou wilt yet suffer for this
crime!” Then altering his tone, he said gently: “But give me, I pray thee,
my bow and arrows, that I may have it by my side to slay any wild beast
that may try to devour me.”
Shugdad gave him the bow; and when he saw the gleam in Rustem’s eyes,
concealed himself behind a tree. But the angry Rustem, grasping the bow
with something of his former strength, sent the arrow through tree and
man, transfixing both. Then thanking his Creator that he had been given
the opportunity to slay his murderer, he breathed his last.
Continue...

This full text of “National Epics” by Kate Milner Rabb belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
