
George Herbert Palmer, (1842-1933)
Professor of Natural Religion, Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity
Harvard University
Portrait: 1926, 40 x 30 inches, Oil




In the preceding chapters I have examined only those features of
goodness which are common alike to persons and to things. Goodness was
there seen to be the expression of function in the construction of an
organism. That is, when we ask if any being, object, or quality is
good, we are really inquiring how organic it is, how much it
contributes of riches or solidity to some whole or other. There must,
then, be as many varieties of goodness as there are modes of
constructing organisms. A special set of functions will produce one
kind of organism, a different set another; and each of these will
express a peculiar variety of goodness. If, then, into the
construction of a person conditions enter which are not found in the
making of things, these conditions will render personal goodness to
some extent unlike the goodness of everything else.
Now I suppose that in the contacts of life we all feel a marked
difference between persons and things. We know a person when we see
him, and are quite sure he is not a thing. Yet if we were called on to
say precisely what it is we know, and how we know it, we should find
ourselves in some difficulty. No doubt we usually recognize a human
being by his form and motions, but we assume that certain inner traits
regularly attend these outward matters, and that in these traits the
real ground of difference between person and thing is to be found. How
many such distinguishing differences exist? Obviously a multitude; but
these are, I believe, merely various manifestations of a few
fundamental characteristics. Probably all can be reduced to four,–
they are self-consciousness, self-direction, self-development, and
self-sacrifice. Wherever these four traits are found, we feel at once
that the being who has them is a person. Whatever creature lacks them
is but a thing, and requires no personal attention. I might say more.
These four are so likely to go together that the appearance of one
gives confidence of the rest. If, for example, we discover a being
sacrificing itself for another, even though we have not previously
thought of it as a person, it will so stir sympathy that we shall see
in it a likeness to our own kind. Or, finding a creature capable of
steering itself, of deciding what its ends shall be, and adjusting its
many powers to reach them, we cannot help feeling that there is much
in such a being like ourselves, and we are consequently indisposed to
refer its movements to mechanic adjustment.
If, then, these are the four conditions of personality, the
distinctive functions by which it becomes organically good, they will
evidently need to be examined somewhat minutely before we can rightly
comprehend the nature of personal goodness, and detect its separation
from goodness in general. Such an examination will occupy this and the
three succeeding chapters. But I shall devote myself exclusively to
such features of the four functions as connect them with ethics. Many
interesting metaphysical and psychological questions connected with
them I pass by.
There is no need of elaborating the assertion that a person is a
conscious being. To this all will at once agree. More important is it
to inspect the stages through which we rise to consciousness, for
these are often overlooked. People imagine that they are self-
conscious through and through, and that they always have been. They
assume that the entire life of a person is the expression of
consciousness alone. But this is erroneous. To a large degree we are
allied with things. While self-consciousness is our distinctive
prerogative, it is far from being our only possession. Rather we might
say that all which belongs to the under world is ours too, while self-
consciousness appears in us as a kind of surplusage. No doubt it is by
the distinctive traits, those which are not shared with other
creatures, that we define our special character; but these are not our
sole endowment. Our life is grounded in unconsciousness, and with
this, as students of personal goodness, we must first make
acquaintance.
Yet how can we become acquainted with it? How grow conscious of the
unconscious? We can but mark it in a negative way and call it the
absence of consciousness. That is all. We cannot be directly aware of
ourselves as unconscious. Indeed, we cannot be quite sure that the
physical things about us, even organic objects, are unconscious. If
somebody should declare that the covers of this book are conscious,
and respond to everything wise or foolish which the writer puts
between them, there would be no way of confuting him. All I could say
would be, “I see no signs of it.” My readers occasionally give a
response and show that they do or do not agree with what I say. But
the volume itself lies in stolid passivity, offering no resistance to
whatever I record in it. Since, then, there is no evidence in behalf
of consciousness, I do not unwarrantably assume its presence. I save
my belief for objects where it is indicated, and indicate its absence
elsewhere by calling such objects unconscious.
But if in human beings consciousness appears, what are its marks, and
how is it known? Ought we not to define it at starting? I believe it
cannot be defined. Definition is taking an idea to pieces. But there
are no pieces in the idea of consciousness. It is elementary,
something in which all other pieces begin. That is, in attempting to
define consciousness, I must in every definition employed really
assume that my hearer is acquainted with it already. I cannot then
define it without covert reference to experience. I might vary the
term and call it awaredness, internal observation, psychic response. I
might say it is that which accompanies all experience and makes it to
be experience. But these are not definitions. A simple way to fix
attention on it is to say that it is what we feel less and less as we
sink into a swoon. What this is, I cannot more precisely state. But in
swoon or sleep we are all familiar with its diminution or increase,
and we recognize in it the very color of our being. After my friend’s
remark I am in a different state from that in which I was before.
Something has affected me which may abide. This is not the case with a
stone post, or at least there are no signs of it there. The post,
then, is unconscious. We call ourselves conscious.
In unconsciousness our lives began, and from it they have not
altogether emerged. Yet unconsciousness is a matter of degree. We may
be very much aware, aware but slightly, vanishingly, not at all. Even
though we never existed unconsciously, we may fairly assume such a
blank terminus in order the better to figure the present condition of
our minds. They show sinking degrees moving off in that direction;
when we think out the series, we come logically to a point where there
is no consciousness at all.
Such a point analogy also inclines us to concede. In our body we come
upon unconscious sections. This body seems to have some connection
with myself; yet of its large results only, and not of its minuter
operations, can I be distinctly aware. In like manner it is held that
within the mind processes cumulate and rise to a certain height before
they cross the threshold of consciousness. Below that threshold,
though actual processes, they are unknown to us. The teaching of
modern psychology is that all mental action is at the start
unconscious, requiring a certain bulk of stimulus in order to emerge
into conditions where we become aware of it. The cumulated result we
know; the minute factors which must be gathered together to form that
result, we do not know. I do not pronounce judgment on this
psychological question. I state the belief merely in order to show how
probable it is that our conscious life is superposed upon unconscious
conditions.
In conduct itself I believe every one will acknowledge that his
moments of consciousness are like vivid peaks, while the great mass of
his acts–even those with which he is most familiar–occur
unconsciously. When we read a word on the printed page, how much of it
do we consciously observe? Modern teachers of reading often declare
that detailed consciousness is here unnecessary or even injurious.
Better, they say, take the word, not the letter, as the unit of
consciousness. But taking merely the letter, how minutely are we
conscious of its curvatures? Somewhere consciousness must stop,
resting on the support of unconscious experiences. Matthew Arnold has
declared conduct to be three fourths of life. If we mean by conduct
consciously directed action, it is not one fourth. Yet however
fragmentary, it is that which renders all the rest significant.
Just above our unconscious mental modifications appear the reflex
actions, or instincts. Here experience is translated into action
before it reaches consciousness; that is, though the actions
accomplish intelligent ends, there is no previous knowledge of the
ends to be accomplished. A flash of light falls on my eye, and the lid
closes. It seems a wise act. The brilliant light is too fierce. It
might damage the delicate organ. Prudently, therefore, I draw the
small curtain until the light has gone, then raise it and resume
communication with the outer world. My action seems planned for
protection. In reality there was no plan. Probably enough I did not
perceive the flash; the lid, at any rate, would close equally well if
I did not. In falling from a height I do not decide to sacrifice my
arms rather than my body, and accordingly stretch them out. They
stretch themselves, without intention on my part. How anything so
blind yet so sagacious can occur will become clearer if we take an
illustration from a widely different field.
To-day we are all a good deal dependent on the telephone; though, not
being a patient man, I can seldom bring myself to use it. It has one
irritating feature, the central office, or perhaps I might more
accurately say, the central office girl. Whenever I try to communicate
with my friend, I must first call up the central office, as it is
briefly called and longly executed. Not until attention there has been
with difficulty obtained can I come into connection with my friend;
for through a human consciousness at that mediating point every
message must pass. In that central office are accordingly three
necessary things; viz., an incoming wire, a consciousness, and an
outgoing wire; and I am helpless till all these three have been
brought into cooperation. Really I have often thought life too short
for the performance of such tasks. And apparently our Creator thought
so at the beginning, when in contriving machinery for us he dispensed
with the hindering factor of a central office operator. For applied to
our previous example of a flash of light, the incoming message
corresponds to the sensuous report of the flash, the outgoing message
to the closure of the eye, and the unfortunate central office girl has
disappeared. The afferent nerve reports directly to the efferent,
without passing the message through consciousness. A fortune awaits
him who will contrive a similar improvement for the telephone. A
special sound sent into the switch-box must automatically, and without
human intervention, oblige an indicated wire to take up the uttered
words. The continuous arc thus established, without employment of the
at present necessary girl, will exactly represent the exquisite
machinery of reflex action which each of us bears about in his own
brain. Here, as in our improved telephone, the announcement itself
establishes the connections needful for farther transmission, without
employing the judgment of any operating official.
By such means power is economized and action becomes extremely swift
and sure. Promptness, too, being of the utmost importance for
protective purposes, creatures which are rich in such instincts have a
large practical advantage over those who lack them. It is often
assumed that brutes alone are instinctive, and that man must
deliberate over each occasion. But this is far from the fact. Probably
at birth man has as many instincts as any other animal. And though as
consciousness awakes and takes control, some of these become
unnecessary and fall away, new ones–as will hereafter be shown–are
continually established, and by them the heavy work of life is for the
most part performed. Personal goodness cannot be rightly understood
till we perceive how it is superposed on a broad reflex mechanism.
But higher in the personal life than unconsciousness, higher than the
reflex instincts, are the conscious experiences. By these, we for the
first time became aware of what is going on within us and without.
Messages sent from the outer world are stopped at a central office
established in consciousness, looked over, and deciphered. We judge
whether they require to be sent in one direction or another, or
whether we may not rest in their simple cognizance. Every moment we
receive a multitude of such messages. They are not always called for,
but they come of themselves. My hand carelessly falling on the table
reports in terms of touch. A person near me laughs, and I must hear. I
see the flowers on the table; smell reports them too; while taste
declares their leaves to be bitter and pungent. All this time the
inner organs, with the processes of breathing, blood circulation, and
nervous action, are announcing their acute or massive experiences.
Continually, and not by our own choice, our minds are affected by the
transactions around. Sensations occur–
    “The eye, it cannot choose but see;
     We cannot bid the ear be still;
     Our bodies feel, where’er they be,
     Against or with our will.”
These itemized experiences thus pouring in upon our passive selves are
found to vary endlessly also in degree, time, and locality. Through
such variations indeed they become itemized. “Therefore is space and
therefore time,” says Emerson, “that men may know that things are not
huddled and lumped, but sundered and divisible.”
Have we not, then, here reached the highest point of personal life,
self-consciousness? No, that is a peak higher still, for this is but
consciousness. Undoubtedly from consciousness self-consciousness
grows, often appearing by degrees and being extremely difficult to
discriminate. Yet the two are not the same. Possibly in marking the
contrast between them I may be able to gain the collateral advantage
of ridding myself of those disturbers of ethical discussion, the
brutes. Whenever I am nearing an explanation of some moral intricacy
one of my students is sure to come forward with a dog and to ask
whether what I have said shows that dog to be a moral and responsible
being. So I like to watch afar and banish the brutes betimes. Perhaps
if I bestow a little attention on them at present, I may keep the
creatures out of my pages for the future.
Many writers maintain that brutes differ from us precisely in this
particular, that while they possess consciousness they have not self-
consciousness. A brute, they say, has just such experiences as I have
been describing: he tastes, smells, hears, sees, touches. All this he
may do with greater intensity and precision than we. But he is
entirely wrapped up in these separate sensations. The single
experience holds his attention. He knows no other self than that; or,
strictly speaking, he knows no self at all. It is the experience he
knows, and not himself the experiencer. We say, “The cat feels herself
warm;” but is it quite so? Does she feel herself, or does she feel
warm? Which? If we may trust the writers to whom I have referred, we
ought rather to say, “The cat feels warm” than that “she feels herself
warm;” for this latter statement implies a distinction of which she is
in no way aware. She does not set off her passing moods in contrast to
a self who might be warm or cold, active or idle, hungry or satiated.
The experience of the instant occupies her so entirely that in reality
the cat ceases to be a cat and becomes for the moment just warm. So it
is in all her seeming activities. When she chases a mouse we rightly
say, “She is chasing a mouse,” for then she is nothing else. Such a
state of things is at least conceivable. We can imagine momentary
experiences to be so engrossing that the animal is exclusively
occupied with them, unable to note connections with past and future,
or even with herself, their perceiver. Through very fullness of
Consciousness brutes may be lacking in self-consciousness.
Whether this is the case with the brutes or not, something quite
different occurs in us. No particular experience can satisfy us; we
accordingly say, not “I am an experience,” but “I have an experience."
To be able to throw off the bondage of the moment is the distinctive
characteristic of a person. When Shelley watches the skylark, he
envies him his power of whole-heartedly seizing a momentary joy. Then
turning to himself, and feeling that his own condition, if broader, is
on that very account more liable to sorrow, he cries,–
    “We look before and after,
     And pine for what is not.”
That is the mark of man. He looks before and after. The outlook of the
brute, if the questionable account which I have given of him is
correct, is different. He looks to the present exclusively. The
momentary experience takes all his attention. If it does not, he too
in his little degree is a person. Could we determine this simple point
in the brute’s psychology, he would at once become available for
ethical material. At present we cannot use him for such purposes, nor
say whether he is selfish or self-sacrificing, possessed of moral
standards and accountable, or driven by subtle yet automatic reflexes.
The obvious facts of him may be interpreted plausibly in either way,
and he cannot speak. Till he can give us a clearer account of this
central fact of his being, we shall not know whether he is a poor
relation of ours or is rather akin to rocks, and clouds, and trees. I
incline to the former guess, and am ready to believe that between him
and us there is only a difference of degree. But since in any case he
stands at an extreme distance from ourselves, we may for purposes of
explanation assume that distance to be absolute, and talk of him as
having no share in the prerogative announced by Shelley. So regarded,
we shall say of him that he does not compare or adjust. He does not
organize experiences and know a single self running through them all.
Whenever an experience takes him, it swallows his self–a self, it is
true, which he never had.
It is sometimes assumed that Shelley was the first to announce this
weighty distinction. Philosophers of course were familiar with it long
ago, but the poets too had noticed it before the skylark told Shelley.
Burns says to the mouse:–
    “Still thou art blest, compared wi’ me!
     The present only toucheth thee:
     But, ooh! I backward cast my e’e
         On prospects drear!
     An’ forward tho’ I canna see,
         I guess an’ fear.”
This looking backward and forward which is the ground of man’s
grandeur, is also, Burns thinks, the ground of his misery; for in it
is rooted his self-consciousness, something widely unlike the itemized
consciousness of the brute. Shakespeare, too, found in us the same
distinctive trait. Hamlet reflects how God has made us “with such
discourse, looking before and after.” We possess discourse, can move
about intellectually, and are not shut up to the moment. But ages
before Shakespeare the fact had been observed. Homer knew all about
it, and in the last book of the Odyssey extols Halitherses, the son of
Mastor, as one “able to look before and after.” [Greek text omitted.]
This is the mark of the wise man, not merely marking off person from
brute, but person from person according to the degree of personality
attained. It is characteristic of the child to show little foresight,
little hindsight. He takes the present as it comes, and lives in it.
We who are more mature and rational contemplate him with the same envy
we feel for the skylark and the mouse, and often say, “Would I too
could so suck the joys of the present, without reflecting that
something else is coming and something else is gone.”
Yet after becoming possessed of self-consciousness, we do not steadily
retain it. States of mind occur where the self slips out, though vivid
consciousness remains. As I sit in my chair and fix my eye on the
distance, a daydream or reverie comes over me. I see a picture,
another, another. Somebody speaks and I am recalled. “Why, here I am!
This is I.” I find myself once more. I had lost myself–paradoxical
yet accurate expression. We have many such to indicate the
disappearance of self-consciousness at moments of elation. “I was
absorbed in thought,” we say; the I was sucked out by strenuous
attention elsewhere. “I was swept away with grief,” i.e., I vanished,
while grief held sway. “I was transported with delight,” “I was
overwhelmed with shame,” and–perhaps most beautiful of all these
fragments of poetic psychology,–"I was beside myself with terror,” I
felt myself, to be near, but was still parted; through the fear I
could merely catch glimpses of the one who was terrified.
These and similar phrases suggest the instability of self-
consciousness. It is not fixed, once and forever, but varies
continually and within a wide range of degree. We like to think that
man possesses full self-consciousness, while other creatures have
none. Our minds are disposed to part off things with sharpness, but
nature cares less about sharp divisions and seems on the whole to
prefer subtle gradations and unstable varieties. So the self has all
degrees of vividness. Of it we never have an experience barely. It is
always in some condition, colored by what it is mixed with. I know
myself speaking or angry or hearing; I know myself, that is, in some
special mood. But never am I able to sunder this self from the special
mass of consciousness in which it is immersed and to gaze upon it pure
and simple. At times that mass of consciousness is so engrossing that
hardly a trace of the self remains. At times the sense of being shut
up to one’s self is positively oppressive. Between the two extremes
there is endless variation. When we call self-consciousness the
prerogative of man we do not mean that he fully possesses it, but only
that he may possess it, may possess it more and more; and that in it,
rather than in the merely conscious life, the significance of his
being is found.
Probably we are born without it. We know how gradually the infant
acquires a mastery of its sensuous experience; and it is likely that
for a long time after it has obtained command of its single
experiences it remains unaware of its selfhood. In a classic passage
of “In Memoriam” Tennyson has stated the case with that blending of
witchery and scientific precision of which he alone among the poets
seems capable:–
    “The baby, new to earth and sky,
       What time his tender palm is prest
       Against the circle of the breast,
     Has never thought that ’this is I.’

    “But as he grows he gathers much,
       And learns the use of ’I’ and ’me,’
       And finds ’I am not what I see,
     And other than the things I touch.’

    “So rounds he to a separate mind,
       From whence clear memory may begin,
       As thro’ the frame that binds him in
     His isolation grows defined.”
Until he has separated his mind from the objects around, and even from
his own conscious states, he cannot perceive himself and obtain clear
memory. No child recalls his first year, for the simple reason that
during that year he was not there. Of course there was experience
during that year, there was consciousness; but the child could not
discriminate himself from the crowding experiences and so reach self-
consciousness. At what precise time this momentous possibility occurs
cannot be told. Probably the time varies widely in different children.
In any single child it announces itself by degrees, and usually so
subtly that its early manifestations are hardly perceptible.
Occasionally, especially when long deferred, it breaks with the
suddenness of an epoch, and the child is aware of a new existence. A
little girl of my acquaintance turned from play to her mother with the
cry, “Why, mamma, little girls don’t know that they are.” She had just
discovered it. In a famous passage of his autobiography, Jean Paul
Richter has recorded the great change in himself: “Never shall I
forget the inward experience of the birth of self-consciousness. I
well remember the time and place. I stood one afternoon, a very young
child, at the house-door, and looked at the logs of wood piled on the
left. Suddenly an inward consciousness, ’I am a Me,’ came like a flash
of lightning from heaven, and has remained ever since. At that moment
my existence became conscious of itself, and forever.”
The knowledge that I am an I cannot be conveyed to me by another human
being, nor can I perceive anything similar in him. Each must ascertain
it for himself. Accordingly there is only one word in every language
which is absolutely unique, bearing a different meaning for every one
who employs it. That is the word I. For me to use it in the sense that
you do would prove that I had lost my wits. Whatever enters into my
usage is out of it in yours. Obviously, then, the meaning of this word
cannot be taught. Everything else may be. What the table is, what is a
triangle, what virtue, heaven, or a spherodactyl, you can teach me.
What I am, you cannot; for no one has ever had an experience
corresponding to this except myself. People in speaking to me call me
John, Baby, or Ned, an externally descriptive name which has
substantially a common meaning for all who see me. When I begin to
talk I repeat this name imitatively, and thinking of myself as others
do. I speak of myself in the third person. Yet how early that
reference to a third person begins to be saturated with self-
consciousness, who can say? Before the word “I” is employed, “Johnny"
or “Baby” may have been diverted into an egoistic significance. All we
can say is that “I” cannot be rightly employed until consciousness has
risen to self-consciousness.
And when it has so risen, its unity and coherence are by no means
secure. I have already pointed out how often it is lost in moments
when the conscious element becomes particularly intense. But in morbid
conditions too it sometimes undergoes a disruption still more
peculiar. Just as disintegration may attack any other organic unit, so
may it appear in the personal life. The records of hypnotism and other
related phenomena show cases where self-consciousness appears to be
distributed among several selves. These curious experiences have
received more attention in recent years than ever before. They do not,
however, belong to my field, and to consider them at any length would
only divert attention from my proper topic. But they deserve mention
in passing in order to make plain how wayward is self-consciousness,–
how far from an assured possession of its unity.
This unity seems temporarily suspended on occasion of swoon or nervous
shock. An interesting case of its loss occurred in my own experience.
Many years ago I was fond of horseback riding; and having a horse that
was unusually easy in the saddle, I persisted in riding him long after
my groom had warned me of danger. He had grown weak in the knees and
was inclined to stumble. Riding one evening, I came to a little
bridge. I remember watching the rays of the sunset as I approached it.
Something too of my college work was in my mind, associated with the
evening colors. And then–well, there was no “then.” The next I knew a
voice was calling, “Is that you?” And I was surprised to find that it
was. I was entering my own gateway, leading my horse. I answered
blindly, “Something has happened. I must have been riding. Perhaps I
have fallen.” I put my hand to my face and found it bloody. I led my
horse to his post, entered the house, and relapsed again into
unconsciousness. When I came to myself, and was questioned about my
last remembrance, I recalled the little bridge. We went to it the next
day. There lay my riding whip. There in the sand were the marks of a
body which had been dragged. Plainly it was there that the accident
had occurred, yet it was three quarters of a mile from my house. When
thrown, I had struck on my forehead, making an ugly hole in it. Two or
three gashes were on other parts of the head. But I had apparently
still held the rein, had risen with the horse, had walked by his side
till I came to four corners in the road, had there taken the proper
turn, passed three houses, and entering my own gate then for the first
time became aware of what was happening.
What had been happening? About twenty minutes would be required to
perform this elaborate series of actions, and they had been performed
exactly as if I had been guiding them, while in reality I knew nothing
about them. Shall we call my conduct unconscious cerebration? Yes, if
we like large words which cover ignorance. I do not see how we can
certainly say what was going on. Perhaps during all this time I had
neither consciousness nor self-consciousness. I may have been a mere
automaton, under the control of a series of reflex actions. The
feeling of the reins in my hands may have set me erect. The feeling of
the ground beneath my feet may have projected these along their way;
and all this with no more consciousness than the falling man has in
stretching out his hands. Or, on the contrary, I may have been
separately conscious in each little instant; but in the shaken
condition of the brain may not have had power to spare for gluing
together these instants and knitting them into a whole. It may be it
was only memory which failed. I cite the case to show the precarious
character of self-consciousness. It appears and disappears. Our life
is glorified by its presence, and from it obtains its whole
significance. Whatever we are convinced possesses it we certainly
declare to be a person. Yet it is a gradual acquisition, and must be
counted rather a goal than a possession. Under it, as the height of
our being, are ranged the three other stages,–consciousness, reflex
action, and unconsciousness.
James’s Psychology, ch. x.
Royce’s Studies of Good and Evil, ch. vi.-ix.
Ferrier’s Philosophy of Consciousness, in his Philosophical Remains.
Calkins’s Introduction to Psychology, bk. ii.
Wundt’s Human and Animal Psychology, lect. xxvii.
Continue...

This electronic text of The Nature of Goodness by George Herbert Palmer (Alford Professor of Philosophy in Harvard University, 1903, A. F. P.) is in the public domain.
Conversion to this hypertext by Philipp Lenssen.


Magazine: Philosophy Today (Amazon).


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Nature of GoodnessBy George Herbert PalmerAt Amazon
