
George Herbert Palmer, (1842-1933)
Professor of Natural Religion, Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity
Harvard University
Portrait: 1926, 40 x 30 inches, Oil




In the last chapter I began to discuss the nature of goodness
distinctively personal. This has its origin in the differing
constitutions of persons and things. Into the making of a person four
characteristics enter which are not needed in the formation of a
thing. The most fundamental of these I examined. Persons and things
are unlike in this, that each force which stirs within a self-
conscious person is correlated with all his other forces. So great and
central is this correlation that a person can say, “I have an
experience,” not–as, possibly, the brutes–"I am an experience.” Yet
although a person tends thus to be an organic whole, he did not begin
his existence in conscious unity. Probably the early stages of our
life are to be sought rather in the regions of unconsciousness. Rising
out of unconscious conditions into reflex actions–those ingenious
provisions for our security at times when we have no directing powers
of our own–we gradually pass into conditions of consciousness, where
we are able to seize the single experience and to be absorbed in it.
Out of this emerges by degrees an apprehension of ourselves contrasted
with our experiences. Even, however, when this self-consciousness is
once established, it may on vivacious or morbid occasions be
overthrown. It by no means attends all the events of our lives. Yet it
marks all conduct that can be called good. Goodness which is
distinctively personal must in some way express the formation and
maintenance of a self-conscious life.
But more is needed. A person fashioned in the way described would be
aware of himself, aware of his mental changes, perhaps aware of an
objective order of things producing these changes, and still might
have no real share himself in what was going on. We can at least
imagine a being merely contemplative. He sits as a spectator at his
own drama. Trains of associated ideas pass before his interested gaze;
a multitude of transactions occur in his contemplated surroundings;
but he is powerless to intervene. He passively beholds, and does
nothing. If such a state of things can be imagined, and if something
like it occasionally occurs in our experience, it does not represent
our normal condition. Our life is no mere affair of vision. Self-
consciousness counts as a factor. Through it changes arise both
without and within. I accordingly entitle this fourth chapter Self-
direction. In it I propose to consider how our life goes forth in
action; for in fact wherever self-consciousness appears, there is
developed also a centre of activity, and an activity of an altogether
peculiar kind.
It is well known that in interpreting these facts of action the
judgment of ethical writers is divided. Libertarians and determinists
are here at issue. Into their controversy I do not desire to enter. I
mean to attempt a brief summary of those facts relating to human
action which are tolerably well agreed upon by writers of both
schools. In these there are intricacies enough. To raise the hand, to
wave it in the air, to lay it on the table again, would ordinarily be
reckoned simple matters. Yet operations so simple as these I shall
show pass through half a dozen steps, though they are ordinarily
performed so swiftly that we do not notice their several parts. In
life much is knitted together which cannot be understood without
dissection. In such dissection I must now engage. As a good pedagogue
I must discuss operations separately which in reality get all their
meaning through being found together. Against the necessary
distortions of such a method the reader must be on his guard.
In the total process of self-direction there are evidently two main
divisions,–a mental purpose must be formed, and then this purpose
must be sent forth into the outer world. It is there accepted by those
agencies of a physical sort which wait to do our bidding. The
formation of the mental purpose I will, for the sake of brevity, call
the intention, and to the sending of it forth I will give the name
volition. That these terms are not always confined within these limits
is plain. But I shall not force their meaning unduly by employing them
so, and I need a pair of terms to mark the great contrasted sides of
self-direction. The intention (A) shall designate the subjective side.
But those objective adjustments which fit it to emerge and seek in an
outer world its full expression I shall call the volition (B).
For the present, then, regarding entirely the former, let us see how
an intention arises,–how self-consciousness sets to work in stirring
up activity. To gain clearness I shall distinguish three subordinate
stages, designating them by special names and numerals.
At the start we are guided by an end or ideal of what we would bring
about. To a being destitute of self-consciousness only a single sort
of action is at any moment possible. When a certain force falls upon
it, it meets with a fixed response. Or, if the causative forces are
many, what happens is but the well-established resultant of these
forces operating upon a being as definite in nature as they. Such a
being contemplates no future to be reached through motions set up
within it. Its motions do not occur for the sake of realizing in
coming time powers as yet but half-existent. It is not guided by
ideals. Its actions set forth merely what it steadily is, not what it
might be. Something like the opposite of all this shapes personal
acts. A person has imagination. He contemplates future events as
possible before they occur, and this contemplation is one of the very
factors which bring them about. For example: while writing here, I can
emancipate my thought from this present act and set myself to
imagining my situation an hour hence. At that time I perceive I may be
still at my writing-desk, I may be walking the streets, I may be at
the theatre, or calling on my friend. A dozen, a hundred, future
possibilities are depicted as open to me. On one or another of these I
fix my attention, thereby giving it a causal force over other present
ideas, and rendering its future realization likely.
So enormously important is imagination. By it we effect our
emancipation from the present. Without this power to summon pictures
of situations which at present are not, we should be exactly like the
things or brutes already described. For in the thing a determined
sequence follows every impulse. There is no ambiguous future
disclosed, no variety of possibilities, no alternatives. Present
things under definite causes have but a single issue; and if the
account given of the brute is correct, his condition is unlike that of
things only in this respect, that in him curious automatic springs are
provided which set him in appropriate motion whenever he is exposed to
harm, so enabling him suitably to face a future of which, however, he
forms no image. In both brutes and things there is entire limitation
to the present. This is not the case with a person. He takes the
future into his reckoning, and over him it is at least as influential
as the past. A person, through imagination laying hold of future
possibilities, has innumerable auxiliary forces at his command. Choice
appears. A depicted future thus held by attention for causal purposes
is no longer a mere idea; it becomes an ideal.
But in order to transform the depicted future from an idea to an
ideal, I must conceive it as rooted in my nature, and in some degree
dependent on my power. Attracted by the brilliancy of the crescent
moon, I think what sport it would be to hang on one of its horns and
kick my heels in the air. But no, that remains a mere picture. It will
not become an ideal, for it has no relation to my structure and
powers. But there are other imaginable futures,–going to Europe,
becoming a physician, writing a book, buying a house, which, though
not fully compatible with one another, still represent, each one of
them, some capacity of mine. Attention to one or the other of these
will make it a reality in my life. They are competing ideals, and
because of such competition my future is uncertain. The ambiguous
future is accordingly a central characteristic of a person. He can
imagine all sorts of states of himself which as yet have no existence,
and one of these selected as an ideal may become efficient. This first
stage, then, in the formation of the purpose, where various depicted
future possibilities are summoned for assessment, may be called our
fashioning of an ideal.
But a second stage succeeds, the stage of desire. Indeed, though I
call it a second, it is really but a special aspect of the first; for
the ideal which I form always represents some improvement in myself.
An ideal which did not promise to better me in some way would be no
ideal at all. It would be quite inoperative. I never rise from my
chair except with the hope of being better off. Without this, I should
sit forever. But I feel uneasiness in my present position, and
conceive the possibility of not being constrained; or I think of some
needful work which remains unexecuted as long as I sit here, and that
work undone I perceive will leave my life less satisfactory than it
might be. And this imagined betterment must always be in some sense my
own. If it is a picture of the gains of some one else quite
unconnected with myself, it will not start my action.
But it will be objected that we do often act unselfishly and in behalf
of other persons. Indeed we do. Perhaps our impulses are more largely
derived from others than from ourselves, yet from desire our own share
is never quite eliminated. I give to the poor. But it is because I
hate poverty; or because I am attracted by the face, the story, or the
supposed character of him who receives; or because I am unable to
separate my interests from those of humanity everywhere. In some
subtle form the I-element enters. Leave it out, and the action would
lose its value and become mechanical. What I did would be no
expression of self-conscious me. And such undoubtedly is the case with
much of our conduct. The reflex actions, described in the last
chapter, and many of our habits too, contain no precise reference to
our self. Intelligent, purposeful, moral conduct, however, is
everywhere shaped by the hope of improving the condition of him who
acts. We do not act till we find something within or about us
unsatisfactory. If contemplating myself in my actual conditions I
could pronounce them all good, creation would for me be at an end. To
start it, some sense of need is required. Accordingly I have named
desire as the second state in the formation of a purpose, for desire
is precisely this sense of disparity between our actual self and that
possible bettered self depicted in the ideal.
Popular speech, however, does not here state the matter quite fully.
We often talk as if our desires were for other things than ourselves.
We say, for example, “I want a glass of water.” In reality it is not
the water I want. That is but a fragment of my desire. It is water
plus self. Only so is the desire fully uttered. Beholding my present
self, my thirsty and defective self, I perceive a side of myself
requiring to be bettered. Accordingly, among imagined pictures of
possible futures I identify myself with that one which represents me
supplied with water. But it is not water that is the object of my
desire, it is myself as bettered by water. Since, however, this
betterment of self is a constant factor of all desire, we do not
ordinarily name it. We say, “I desire wealth, I desire the success of
my friend, or the freedom of my country,” omitting the important and
never absent portion of the desire, the betterment of self.
Of course a stage in the formation of the purpose so important as
desire receives a multitude of names. Perhaps the simplest is
appetite. In appetite I do not know what I want. I am blindly impelled
in a certain direction. I do not perceive that I have a suffering
self, nor know that this particular suffering would be bettered by
that particular supply. Appetite is a mere instinct. In the mechanic
structure of my being it is planned that without comprehension of the
want I shall be impelled to the source of supply. But when appetite is
permeated with a consciousness of what is lacking, I apprehend it as a
need. Through needs we become persons. The capacity for
dissatisfaction is the sublime thing in man. We can know our poor
estate. We can say, That which I am I would not be. Passing the blind
point of appetite, we come into the region of want or need; if we then
can discern what is requisite to supply this need, we may be said to
have a desire. That desire, if specific and urgent, we call a wish.
All these varieties of desire include the same two factors: on the one
hand a recognition of present defect in ourselves, on the other
imagination of possible bettered conditions. Diminish either, and
personal power is narrowed. The richer a man’s imagination, and the
more abundant his pictures of possible futures, the more resourceful
he becomes. Pondering on desire as rooted in the sense of defect, we
may feel less regret that our age is one not easily satisfied. Never
were there so many discontents, because there were never so many
aspirations. It is true there may be a devilish discontent or a divine
one. There is a discontent without definite aims, one which merely
rejects what is now possessed; and there is one which seeks what is
wisely attainable. Yet after all, it is a small price to pay for
aspiration that it is often attended by vagueness and unwisdom.
But before the formation of the purpose is complete it must pass
through a third stage, the stage of decision. Ideals and desires are
not enough, or rather they are too many; for there may be a multitude
of them. Certain ideals are desired for supplying certain of my wants,
others for supplying others. But on examination these many desirable
ideals will often prove conflicting; all cannot be attained, or at
least not all at once. Among them I must pick and choose, reducing and
ordering their number. This process is decision. Starting with my
ambiguous future, imagination brings multifold possibilities of good
before me. But before these can be allowed to issue miscellaneously
into action, comparison and selection reduce them to a single best. I
accordingly assess the many desirable but competing ideals and see
which of them will on the whole most harmoniously supplement my
imperfections. On that I fasten, and the intention is complete.
All this is obvious. But one part of the process, and perhaps the most
important part, is apt to receive less attention than it deserves. In
decision we easily become engrossed with the single selected ideal,
and do not so fully perceive that our choice implies a rejection of
all else. Yet this it is–this cutting off–which rightly gives a name
to the whole operation. The best is arrived at only by a process of
exclusion in which we successively cut off such ideals as do not tend
to the largest supply of our contemplated defects. Walking by the
candy-shop, and seeing the tempting chocolates, I feel a strong desire
for them. My mouth waters. I hurry into the shop and deposit my five-
cent piece. In the evening I find that by spending five cents for the
chocolates I am cut off from obtaining my newspaper, a loss
unconsidered at the time. But to decide for anything is to decide
against a multitude of other things. Taking is still more largely
leaving. The full extent of this negative decision often escapes our
notice, and through the very fact of choosing a good we blindly
neglect a best.
Here, then, are the three steps in the formation of the purpose,–the
ideal, the desire, and the decision,–each earlier one preparing the
way for that which is to follow. But an intention is altogether
useless if it pauses here. It was formed to be sent forth, to he
entrusted to forces stretching beyond the intending mind. The laws of
nature are to take it in charge. The Germans have a good proverb: “A
stone once thrown belongs to the devil.” When once it parts from our
hands, it is no longer ours. It is taken up, for evil or for good, by
agencies other than our own. If we mistake the agency to which we
intrust it, enormous mischief may ensue, and we shall he helpless.
These agencies, accordingly, need careful scrutiny before being called
on to work their will. The business of scrutinizing them and of
turning over the purpose to their keeping, forms the second half (B)
of self-direction. In contrast with (A), the formation of the purpose
or the intention, this may be called the realization of the purpose,
or volition. Volition, it is true, is often employed more
comprehensively, but we shall do the term no violence if we confine
its meaning to the discharge of our subjective purpose into the
objective world. Volition then will also, under our scheme, have three
subordinate stages.
The first of them I will call deliberation, in order to approximate it
as closely as possible to the preceding decision. Having now my
purpose decisively formed, I have to ask myself what physical means
will best carry it out. I summon before my mind as complete a list as
possible of nature’s conveyances, and judge which of them will with
the greatest efficiency and economy execute my intention. Here I am at
a friend’s house, but I have decided to go to my own. I must compare,
then, the different modes of getting there, so as to pick out just
that one which involves the least expenditure and the most certain
result. One way occurs to me which I have never tried before, a swift
and interesting way. I might go by balloon. In that balloon I could
sail at my ease over the tops of the houses and across the beautiful
river. When the tower of Memorial Hall comes in sight, I could pull a
cord and drop gently down at my own door, having meanwhile had the
seclusion and exaltation of an unusual ride. What a delightful
experience! But there is one disadvantage. Balloons are not always at
hand. I might be obliged to wait here for hours, for days, before
getting one. I dismiss the thought of a balloon. It does not
altogether suit my purpose.
Or, I might call a carriage. So I should secure solitude and a certain
speed, but should pay for these with noise, jolting, and more money
than I can well spare. There would be waiting, too, before the
carriage comes. Perhaps I had better ask my friend to lend me his arm
and to escort me home. In this there would be dignity and a saving of
my strength. We could talk by the way, and I always find him
interesting. But should I be willing to be so much beholden to him,
and would not the wind to-day make our walk and talk difficult? Better
postpone till summer weather. And after all there is Boston’s most
common mode of locomotion right at hand, the electric car. Strange it
was not thought of before! The five-cent piece saved from the
chocolates will carry me, swiftly, safely, and with independence.
It is in this way that we go through the process of deliberation. All
the possible means of effecting our purpose are summoned for judgment.
The feasibility of each is examined, and the cost involved in its
employment. Comparison is made between the advantages offered by
different agencies; and oftentimes at the close we are in a sad
puzzle, finding these advantages and disadvantages so nearly balanced.
One, however, is finally judged superior in fitness. To this we tie
ourselves, making it the channel for our out-go. The whole process,
then, in its detailed comparison and final fixation, is identical with
that to which I have given the name of decision, except that the
comparisons of decision refer to inner facts, those of deliberation to
outer.
We now reach the climax of the whole process, effort, the actual
sending forth through the deliberately chosen channel of the ideal
desired and decided on. To it all the rest is merely preliminary, and
in it the final move is made which commits us to the deed. About it,
therefore, we may well desire the completest information. To tell the
truth, I have none to give, and nobody else has. The nature of the
operation is substantially unknown. Though something which we have
been performing all day long, we and all our ancestors, no one of us
has succeeded in getting a good sight of what actually takes place.
Our purposes are prepared as I have described, and then those
purposes–something altogether mental–change on a sudden to material
motions. How is the transmutation accomplished? How do we pass from a
mental picture to a set of motions in the physical world? What is the
bridge connecting the two? The bridge is always down when we direct
our gaze upon it, though firm when any act would cross.
Nor can we trace our passage any more easily in the opposite
direction. When my eyes are turned on my watch, for example, the
vibrations of light striking its face are reflected on the pupil of my
eye. There the little motions, previously existing only in the
surrounding ether, are communicated to my optic nerve. This vibrates
too, and by its motion excites the matter of my brain, and then–well,
I have a sensation of the white face of my watch. But what was
contained in that then is precisely what we do not understand.
Incoming motions may be transmuted into thought; or, as in effort,
outgoing thought may be transmuted into motion. But alike in both
cases, on the nature of that transmutation, the very thing we most
desire to know, we get no light. In regard to this crucial point no
one, materialist or idealist, can offer a suggestion. We may of
course, in fault of explanation, restate the facts in clumsy
circumlocution. Calling thought a kind of motion, we may say that in
action it propagates itself from the mind through the brain into the
outer world; while in the apprehension of an idea motions of the outer
world pass into the brain, and there set up those motions which we
know as thought. But after such explanations the mystery remains
exactly where it was before. How does a “mental motion” come out of a
bodily motion, or a bodily from a mental? It is wiser to acknowledge a
mystery and to mark the spot where it occurs.
This marking of the spot may, however, illuminate the surrounding
territory. If we cannot explain the nature of the crucial act, it may
still be well to study its range. How widely is effort exercised? We
should naturally answer, as widely as the habitable globe. I can sit
in my office in Boston and carry on business in China. When I touch a
button, great ships are loaded on the opposite side of the earth and
cross the intervening oceans to work the bidding of a person they have
never seen. Perhaps some day we may send our volition beyond the globe
and enter into communication with the inhabitants of Mars. It would
seem idle, then, to talk about the limitations of volition and a
restricted range of will. But in fact that will is restricted, and its
range is much narrower than the globe. For when we consider the
matter, with precision, it is not exactly I who have operated in
China. I operate only where I am. In touching the button my direct
agency ceases. It is true that connected with that button are wires
conducting to a wide variety of consequences. But about the details of
that conduction I need know nothing. The wire will work equally well
whether I understand or do not understand electricity. Its working is
not mine, but its own. The pressure of my finger ends my act, which is
then taken up and carried forward by automatic and mechanical
adjustments requiring neither supervision nor consciousness on my
part. We might then more accurately say that my direct volition is
circumscribed by my own body. My finger tips, my lips, my nodding head
are the points where I part with full control, though indefinitely
beyond these I can forecast changes which the automatic agencies, once
set astir, will induce.
Am I niggardly in thus confining the action of each of us within his
own body? Is the range of volition thus marked out too narrow? On the
contrary, it is probably still too wide. We are as powerless to direct
our bodies as we are to manage affairs in China. This, at least, is
the modern psychological doctrine of effort. It is now believed that
volition is entirely a mental affair, and is confined to the single
act of attention. It is alleged that when I attend to an ideal, fixing
my mind fully upon it, the results are altogether similar to what
occurred on my touching the button. Every idea tends to pass
automatically into action through agencies about which I know as
little as I do about ocean telegraphs. This physical frame of mine is
a curious organic mechanism, in which reflex actions and instincts do
their blind work at a hint from me. I am said to raise my arm. But
never having been a student of anatomy and physiology, I have not the
least idea how the rise was effected; and if I am told that nerves
excite muscles, and these in turn contract like cords and pull the arm
this way or that, the rise will not be accomplished a bit better for
the information. For, as in electric transmission, it is not I who do
the work. My part is attention. The rest is adapted automatism. When I
have driven everything else out of my mind except the picture of the
rising arm, it rises of itself, the after-effects on nerves and
muscles being apprehended by me as the sense of effort.
We cannot, then, exercise our will with a wandering mind. So long as
several ideas are conflictingly attended to, they hinder each other.
This we verify in regrettable experiences every day. On waking this
morning, for example, I saw it was time to get up. But the bed was
comfortable, and there were interesting matters to think of. I meant
to get up, for breakfast was waiting, and there was that new book to
be examined, and that letter to be written. How long would this
require, and how should the letter be planned? But I must get up.
Possibly those callers may come. And shall I want to see them? It is
really time to get up. What a curious figure the pattern of the paper
makes, viewed in this light! The breakfast bell! Out of my head go all
vagrant reflections, and suddenly, before I can notice the process, I
find myself in the middle of the floor. That is the way. From wavering
thoughts nothing comes. But suddenly some sound, some sight, some
significant interest, raises the depicted act into exclusive vividness
of attention, and our part is done. The spring has been touched, and
the physical machinery, of which we may know little or nothing, does
its work. There it stands ready, the automatic machinery of this
exquisite frame of ours, waiting for the unconfused signal,–our only
part in the performance,–then automatically it springs to action and
pushes our purpose into the outer world. Such at least is the
fashionable teaching of psychologists to-day. Volition is full
attention. It has no wider scope. With bodily adjustments it does not
meddle. These move by their own mechanic law. Of real connection
between body and mind we know nothing. We can only say that such
parallelism exists that physical action occurs on occasion of complete
mental vision.
No doubt this theory leaves much to be desired in the way of
clearness. What is meant by fixing the attention exclusively? Is
unrelated singleness possible among our mental pictures? Or how
narrowly must the field of attention be occupied before these strange
springs are set in motion? At the end of the explanation do not most
of the puzzling problems of scope, freedom, and selection remain,
existing now as problems about the nature and working of attention
instead of, as formerly, problems about the emergence of the intention
into outward nature? No doubt these classical problems puzzle us
still. But a genuine advance toward clarity is made when we confine
them within a small area by identifying volition with mental
attention. Nor will it be anything to the point to say, “But I know
myself as a physical creature to be involved in effort. The strain of
volition is felt in my head, in my arm, throughout my entire body."
Nobody denies it. After we have attended, and the machinery is set in
motion, we feel its results. The physical changes involved in action
are as apprehensible in our experience as are any other natural facts,
and are remembered and anticipated in each new act.
IX
Only one stage more remains, and that is an invariable one, the stage
of satisfaction. It is fortunately provided that pleasure shall attend
every act. Pleasure probably is nothing else but the sense that some
one of our functions has been appropriately exercised. Every time,
then, that an intention has been taken, up in the way just described,
carried forth into the complex world, and there conducted to its mark,
a gratified feeling arises. “Yes, I have accomplished it. That is
good. I felt a defect, I desired to remove it, and betterment is
here.” We cannot speak a word, or raise a hand, perhaps even draw a
breath, without something of this glad sense of life. It may be
intense, it may be slight or middling; but in some degree it is always
there. For through action we realize our powers. This seemingly fixed
world is found to be plastic in our hands. We modify it. We direct
something, mean something. No longer idle drifters on the tide,
through our desires we bring that tide our way. And in the sense of
self-directed power we find a satisfaction, great or small according
to the magnitude of our undertaking.
In such a catalogue of the elements of action as has just been given
there is something uncanny. Can we not pick up a pin without going
through all six stages? Should we ever do anything, if to do even the
simplest we were obliged to do six things? Have I not made matters
needlessly elaborate? No, I have not unduly elaborated. We are made
just so complex. Yet as a good teacher I have falsified. For the sake
of clearness I have been treating separately matters which go
together. There are not six operations, there is but one. In this one
there are six stages; that is, there are six points of view from which
the single operation may advantageously be surveyed. But these do not
exist apart. They are all intimately blended, each affecting all the
rest. Because of our dull faculties we cannot understand, though we
can work, them en bloc. He who would render them comprehensible
must commit the violence of plucking them asunder, holding them up
detachedly, and saying, “Of such diverse stuff is our active life
composed.” But in reality each gets its meaning through connection
with all the others. Life need not terrify because for purposes of
verification it must be represented as so intricate an affair. It is I
who have broken up its simplicity, and it belongs to my reader to put
it together again.
REFERENCE ON SELF-DIRECTION
James’s Psychology, ch. xxvi.
Sigwart’s Der Begriff des Wollen’s, in his Kleine Schriften.
A. Alexander’s Theories of the Will.
Munsterberg’s Die Willenshandlung.
Hoffding’s Psychology, ch. vii.
Continue...

This electronic text of The Nature of Goodness by George Herbert Palmer (Alford Professor of Philosophy in Harvard University, 1903, A. F. P.) is in the public domain.
Conversion to this hypertext by Philipp Lenssen.


Magazine: Philosophy Today (Amazon).


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Nature of GoodnessBy George Herbert PalmerAt Amazon
