
George Herbert Palmer, (1842-1933)
Professor of Natural Religion, Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity
Harvard University
Portrait: 1926, 40 x 30 inches, Oil




The view of human goodness presented in the preceding chapter is one
which is at present finding remarkably wide acceptance. Philosophers
are often reproached with an indisposition to agree, and naturally
where inquiry is active diversity will obtain. But to-day there
appears a strange unanimity as regards the ultimate formula of ethics.
The empirical schools state this as the highest form of the struggle
for existence; the idealistic, as self-realization. The two are the
same so far as they both regard morality as having to do with the
development of life in persons. These curious beings, both also
acknowledge, can never rest till they attain a completeness now
incalculable.
Of course there is abundant diversity in the application of such
formulae. In interpreting them we come upon problems no less urgent
and tangled than those which vexed our fathers. Who and what is a
person? How far is he detachable from nature? How far from his fellow
men? Is his individuality an illusion, and each of us only an
imperfect phase of a single universal being, so that in strictness we
must own that there is none good but one, that is God? These and
kindred questions naturally oppress the thought of our time. Yet all
are but so many attempts to push the formula of self-realization into
entire clearness. The considerable agreement in ethical formulae
everywhere noticeable shows that at least so much advance has been
made: morality has ceased to be primarily repressive, and is now
regarded as the amplest exhibit of human nature, free from every
external precept, however sacred. Man is the measure of the moral
universe, and the development of himself his single duty.
But when we thus accept self-realization as our supreme aim, we bring
ourselves into seeming conflict with one of our profoundest moral
instincts. It is self-sacrifice that calls forth from all mankind, as
nothing else does, the distinctively moral response of reverence.
Intelligence, skill, beauty, learning–we admire them all; but when we
see an act of self-sacrifice, however small, an awe falls on us; we
bow our heads, fearful that we might not have been capable of anything
so glorious. We thus acknowledge self-sacrifice to be the very
culmination of the moral life. He who understand it has comprehended
all righteousness, human and divine. But how does self-sacrifice
accord with self-development? Will he who is busy cultivating himself
sacrifice himself? Is there not a kind of conflict between the two?
Yet can we abandon either? And if not, must not the formula of self-
realization accept modification?
This, then, is the problem to which I must now turn: the possible
adjustment of these two imperative claims,–the claim to realize one’s
self and the claim to sacrifice one’s self. And I shall most easily
set my theme before my readers if I state at once the four historic
objections to the reality of self-sacrifice. I call them historic, for
they have appeared and reappeared in the history of ethics, and have
been worked out there on a great scale. While not altogether
consistent with one another, no one of them is unimportant. Together
they compactly present those conflicting considerations which must be
borne in mind when we attempt to comprehend the subtleties of self-
sacrifice. I will endeavor to state them briefly and sympathetically.
First, self-sacrifice is psychologically impossible. No man ever
performs a strictly disinterested act, as has been shown in my chapter
on self-direction. Before desire will start, his own interest must be
engaged. In action we seek to accomplish something, and between that
something and ourselves some sort of valued connection must be felt.
Every wish indicates that the wisher experiences a need which he
thinks might be supplied by the object wished for. It is true that
wishes and wills are often directed upon external objects, but only
because we believe that our own well-being is involved in their union
with us. I devote myself to my friend as my friend, counting his
happiness and my own inseparable. Were he so entirely a foreigner
that I had no interest in him, my sacrifices for him–even if
conceivable–would be meaningless. They acquire meaning only through
my sense of a tie between him and me. My service of him may be
regarded as my escape from petty selfishness into broad selfishness,
from immediate gain to remote gain. But the prospect of gain in some
form, proximate or ultimate, gain often of an impalpable and spiritual
sort, always attends my wish and will. The aim at self-realization,
however hidden, is everywhere the root of action. No belittlement of
ourselves can appear desirable except as a step toward ultimate
enlargement. Self-sacrifice in any true and thorough-going sense never
occurs.
So cogent is this objection, and so frequently does it appear, not
only in ethical discussion but in the minds of the struggling
multitude, that he who has not faced it, and taken its truth well to
heart, can have little comprehension of self-sacrifice. But it is a
blessed fact that thousands who comprehend self-sacrifice little
practise it largely.
A second objection strips off the glory of self-sacrifice and regards
it as a sad necessity. While there is nothing in it to attract or be
approved, the lamentable fact is that we are so crowded together and
disposed to trample on one another that, partially to escape, we must
each agree to abate something of our own in behalf of a neighbor’s
gain. We cannot each be all we would. It is a sign of our mean estate
that again and again we need to cut off sections of what we count
valuable in order to save any portion. Only by such compromises are we
able to get along with one another. He who refuses them finds himself
exposed to still greater loss. The hard conditions under which we live
appear in the fact that such restraint is inevitable. I call self-
sacrifice, therefore, a sad necessity.
This theory of sacrifice is urged by Hobbes and by the later moralists
who follow his daring lead. It should be counted among the objections
because, while it admits the fact of self-sacrifice, it denies its
dignity.
A third objection declares sacrifice to be needless. Its very
appearance rests on a misconception. We mistakenly suppose that in
abating our own for the sake of our neighbor’s good, we lose. In
reality this is our true mode of enlargement. The interests of the
individual and society are not hostile or alien, but supplemental.
Society is nothing but the larger individual; so that he alone
realizes himself who enters most fully into social relations, making
the well-being of society his own. This is plain enough when we study
the working of a small and comprehensible portion of society. The
child does not lose through identification with family life. That is
his great means of realizing himself. To assume contrast and
antagonism between family interest and the interest of the child is
palpably unwarranted and untrue. Equally unwarranted is a similar
assumption in the broader ranges of society. When we talk of
sacrifice, we refer merely to the first stage and outer aspect of the
act. Underneath, self-interest is guarded, the individual giving up
his individuality only through obtaining a larger individuality still.
Such identity of interest between society and the individual the
moralists of the eighteenth century are never tired of pointing out.
If they are right, and the identity is complete, then sacrifice is
abolished or is only a generous illusion. But these men never quite
succeeded in persuading the English people of their doctrine, at least
they never carried their thought fully over into the common mind.
That common mind has always thought of sacrifice in a widely different
way, but in one which renders it still more incomprehensible. Self-
sacrifice it regards as a glorious madness. Though the only act which
ever forces us to bow in reverent awe, it is insolubly mysterious,
irrational, crazy perhaps, but superb. For in it we do not deliberate.
We hear a call, we shut our ears to prudence, and with courageous
blindness as regards damage of our own, we hasten headlong to meet the
needs of others. To reckon heroism, to count, up opposing gains and
losses, balancing them one against another in order clear-sightedly to
act, is to render heroism impossible. Into it there enters an element
of insanity. The sacrificer must feel that he cares nothing for what
is rational, but only for what is holy, for his duty. The rational and
the holy,–in the mind of him who has not been disturbed by theoretic
controversy these two stand in harsh antithesis, and the antithesis
has been approved by important ethical writers of our time. The
rational man is, of course, needed in the humdrum work of life. His
assertive and sagacious spirit clears many a tangled pathway. But he
gets no reverence, the characteristic response of self-sacrifice. This
is reserved for him who says, “No prudence for me! I will he admirably
crazy. Let me fling myself away, so only there come salvation to
others.”
Such, then, are the four massive objections: self-sacrifice is unreal
psychologically, aesthetically, morally, or rationally: But negative
considerations are not enough. No amount of demonstration of what a
thing is not will ever reveal what it is. Objections are merely of
value for clearing a field and marking the spots on which a structure
cannot be reared. The serious task of erecting that structure
somewhere still remains. To it I now address myself.
What we need to consider first is the reality and wide range of self-
sacrifice. The moment the term is mentioned there spring up before our
minds certain typical examples of it. We see the soldier advancing
toward the battlefield, to stake his life for a country in whose
prosperity he may never share. We see the infant falling into the
water, and the full-grown man flinging in after it his own assured and
valued life in hopes of rescuing that incipient and uncertain thing, a
little child. Yes, I myself came on a case of heroism hardly less
striking. I was riding my bicycle along the public street when there
dashed past me a runaway horse with a carriage at his heels, both
moving so madly that I thought all the city was in danger. I pursued
as rapidly as I could, and as I neared my home, saw horse and carriage
standing by the sidewalk. By the horse’s head stood a negro. I went up
to him and said, “Did you catch that horse?” “Yes, sir,” he answered.
“But,” I said, “he was going at a furious pace.” “Yes, sir.” “And he
might have run you down.” “Yes, sir, but I know horses, and I was
afraid he would hurt some of these children.” There he stood, the big
brown hero, unexalted, soothing the still restive horse and unaware of
having done anything out of the ordinary. I entered my house ashamed.
Had I possessed such skill, would I have ventured my life in such a
fashion?
Such are some of the shining examples of self-sacrifice which occur to
us at the first mention of the word. But we shall mislead ourselves if
we confine our thoughts to cases so climactic, triumphant, and
spectacular. Deeds like these dazzle and do not invite to full
analysis of their nature. Let us turn to affairs more usual.
I have happened to know intimately members of three professions–
ministers, nurses, teachers-and I find self-sacrifice a matter of
daily practice with them all. To it the minister is dedicated. He must
not look for gain. He has a salary, of course; but it is much in the
nature of a fee, a means of insuring him a certain kind of living. And
while it is common enough to find a minister studying how he may make
money in his parish, it is commoner far to find one bent on seeing how
he can make righteousness prevail there, though it overwhelm him. The
other professions do not so manifestly aim at self-sacrifice. They are
distinctly money-making. They exact a given sum for a given service.
Still, in them too how constantly do we see that that which is given
far outruns that which is paid for. I have watched pretty closely the
work of a dozen or more trained nurses, and I believe it Would be hard
to find any class in the community showing a higher average of
estimable character. How quiet they are under the most irritating
circumstances! How fully they pour themselves into the lives of their
patients! How prompt is the deft hand! How considerate the swift
intelligence! Their hearts are aglow over what can be given, not over
what can be got. A similar temper is widely observable among teachers,
especially among those of the lower grades. Paid though they are for a
certain task, how indisposed they are to limit themselves to that task
or to confine their care of their children to the schoolroom! The
hard-worked creatures acquire an intimate interest in the little lives
and, heedless of themselves, are continually ready to spend and be
spent for those who cannot know what they receive. Among such teachers
I find self-sacrifice as broad, as deep, as genuine, if not so
striking, as that of the soldier in the field.
Evidently, then, self-sacrifice may be wide-spread and may permeate
the institutions of ordinary life; being found even in occupations
primarily ordered by principles of give and take, where it expresses
itself in a kind of surplusage of giving above what is prescribed in
the contract. In this form it enters into trade. The high-minded
merchant is not concerned merely with getting his money back from an
article sold. He interests himself in the thoroughly excellent quality
of that article, in the accommodation of his customers, the soundness
of his business methods, and the honorable standing of his firm. And
when we turn to our public officials, how frequent it is–how frequent
in spite of what the newspapers say–to find men eager for the public
good, men ready to take labor on themselves if only the state may be
saved from cost and damage!
But I still underestimate the prevalence of the principle. Our
instances must be homelier yet. Each day come petty citations to self-
sacrifice which are accepted as a matter of course. As I walk to my
lecture-room somebody stops me and says, “What is the way to Berkeley
Street?” Do I reprovingly answer, “You must have made a mistake. I
have no interest in Berkeley Street. I think it is you who are going
there, and why are you putting me to inconvenience merely that you may
the more easily find your way?” Should I answer so, he would think and
possibly say, “There are strange people in Cambridge, remoter from
human kind than any known elsewhere.” Every one would feel
astonishment at the man who declined to bear his little portion of a
neighbor’s burden. Our commonest acceptance of society involves self-
sacrifice, and in all our trivial intercourse we expect to put
ourselves to unrewarded inconvenience for the sake of others.
What I have set myself to make plain in this series of graded examples
is simply this: self-sacrifice is not something exceptional, something
occurring at crises of our lives, something for which we need
perpetually to be preparing ourselves, so that when the great occasion
comes we may be ready to lay ourselves upon its altar. Such
romanticism distorts and obscures. Self-sacrifice is an everyday
affair. By it we live. It is the very air of our moral lungs. Without
it society could not go on for an hour. And that is precisely why we
reverence it so–not for its rarity, but for its importance. Nothing
else, I suppose, so instantly calls on the beholder for a bowing of
the head. Even a slight exhibit of it sends through the sensitive
observer a thrill of reverent abasement. Other acts we may admire;
others we may envy; this we adore.
Perhaps we are now prepared to sum up our descriptive account and
throw what we have observed into a sort of definition. I mean by self-
sacrifice any diminution of my own possessions, pleasures, or powers,
in order to increase those of others. Naturally what we first think of
is the parting with possessions. That is what the word charity most
readily suggests, the giving up of some physical object owned by us
which, even at the moment of giving, we ourselves desire. But the gift
may be other than a physical object. When I would gladly sit, I may
stand in the car for the sake of giving another ease. But the greatest
conceivable self-sacrifice is when I give myself: when, that is, I in
some way allow my own powers to be narrowed in order that those of
some one else may be enlarged. Parents are familiar with such
exquisite charity, parents who put themselves to daily hardship
because they want education for their boys. But they have no monopoly
in this kind. I who stand in the guardianship of youth have frequent
occasion to miss a favorite pupil, boy or girl, who throws up a
college training and goes home–often, in my judgment, mistakenly–to
support, or merely to cheer, the family there. Of course such gifts
are incomparable. No parting with one’s goods, no abandonment of one’s
pleasures, can be measured against them. Yet this is what is going on
all over the country where devoted mother, gallant son, loyal husband,
are limiting their own range of existence for the sake of broadening
that of certain whom they hold dear.
But when we have thus assembled our omnipresent facts and set them in
order for cool assessment, the enigma of self-sacrifice only appears
the more clearly. Why should a man sacrifice himself? Why
voluntarily accept loss? Each of us has but a single life. Each feels
the pressure of his own needs and desires. These point the way to
enlargement. How, then, can I disinterestedly prefer another’s gain?
Each of us is penned within the range of his solitary consciousness,
which may be broadened or narrowed but cannot be passed. It is
incumbent on us, therefore, to study our own enrichment. Anticipating
whatever might confirm or crumble our being, we should strenuously
seize the one and reject the other. Deliberately to turn toward loss
would seem to be crazy. What should a man accept in exchange for his
life?
Here is the difficulty, a difficulty of the profoundest and most
instructive sort. If we could see our way clearly through it, little
in ethics would remain obscure. The common mode of meeting it is to
leave it thus paradoxical. Self-sacrifice banishes rationality and is
a glorious madness. But such a conclusion is a repellent one. How can
it be? Reason is man’s distinctive characteristic. While brutes act
blindly, while the punctual physical universe minutely obeys laws of
which it knows nothing, usually it is open to man to judge the path he
will pursue. Shall we then say that, though reason is a convenience in
all the lower stretches of life, when we reach self-sacrifice, our
single awesome height, it ceases? I cannot think so. On the contrary,
I hold that in self-sacrifice we have a case not of glorious madness,
but of somewhat extreme rationality. How, then, is rational contrasted
with irrational guidance? As we here approach the central and most
difficult part of our discussion, clearness will oblige me to enter
into some detail.
When a child looks at a watch, he sees a single object. It is
something there, a something altogether detached from his
consciousness, from the table, from other objects around. It is a
brute fact, one single thing, complete in itself. Such is the child’s
perception. But a man of understanding looks at it differently. Its
detached singleness is not to him the most important truth in regard
to it. Its meaning must rather be found in the relations in which it
stands, relations which, seeming at first to lie outside it, really
enter into it and make it what it is. The rational man would
accordingly see it all alive with the qualities of gold, brass, steel,
the metals of which it is composed. He would find it incomprehensible
apart from the mind of its maker, and would not regard that mind and
watch as two things, but as matters essentially related. Indeed, these
relations would run wider still, and reason would not rest satisfied
until the watch was united to time itself, to the very framework of
the universe. Apart from this it would be meaningless. In short, if a
man comprehends the watch in a rational way he must comprehend it in
what may he called a conjunct way. The child might picture it as
abstract and single, but it could really be known only in connection
with all that exists. Of course we pause far short of such full
knowledge. Our reason cannot stretch to the infinity of things. But
just so far as relations can be traced between this object and all
other objects, so much the more rational does the knowledge of the
watch become. Rationality is the comprehending of anything in its
relations. The perceptive, isolated view is irrational.
But if this is true of so simple a matter as a watch, it is doubly
true of a complex human being. The child imagines he can comprehend a
person too in isolation, but rational proverb-makers long ago told us,
“One person, no person.” Each person must be conceived as tied in with
all his fellows. We have seen how in the case of the watch we were
almost obliged to abandon the thought of a single object and to speak
of it as a kind of centre of constitutive relations. A plexus of ties
runs in every direction, and where these cross there is the watch. So
it is among human beings. If we try for a moment to conceive a person
as single and detached, we shall find he would have no powers to
exercise. No emotions would be his, whether of love or hate, for they
imply objects to arouse them, no occupations of civilized life, for
these involve mutual dependency. From speech he would be cut off, if
there were nobody to speak to; nor would any such instrument as
language be ready for his use, if ancestors had not cooperated in its
construction. His very thoughts would become a meaningless series of
impressions if they indicated no reality beside themselves. So empty
would be that fiction, the single and isolated individual. The real
creature, rational and conjunct man, is he who stands in living
relationship with his fellows, they being a veritable part of him and
he of them. Man is essentially a social being, not a being who happens
to be living in society. Society enters into his inmost fibre, and
apart from society he is not. Yet this does not mean that society, any
more than the individual, has an independent existence, prior,
complete, and authoritative. What would society be, parted from the
individuals who compose it? No more than an individual who does not
embody social relationships. The two are mutual conceptions, different
aspects of the same thing. We may view a person abstractly, fixing
attention on his single centre of consciousness; or we may view him
conjunctly, attending to his multifarious ties.
Now what is distinctive of self-sacrifice is that it insists in a
somewhat extreme way on this second and rational mode of regard. It is
a frank confession of interlocking lives. It says, “I have nothing to
do with the abstract, isolated, and finite self. That is a matter of
no consequence. What I care about is the conjunct, social, and
infinite self–that self which is inseparable from others. Where that
calls, I serve.” The self-sacrificing person knows no interest of his
own separate from those of his father and mother, his wife and
children. He cannot ask what is good for himself and set it in
contrast with what is good for them. For his own broader existence is
presented in these dear members of his family. And such a man, so far
from being mad, is wise as few of us are. Glorious indeed is the self-
sacrificer, because he is so sane, because in him all pettiness and
detachment are swept away. He appears mad only to those who stand at
the opposite point of view, but in his eyes it is they who are
ridiculous. In fact, each must be counted crazy or wise according to
the view we take of what constitutes the real person.
I remember a story current in our newspapers during the Civil War.
Just before a battle, an officer of our army, knowing of what
consequence it was that his regiment should hold its ground, hastened
to the rear to see that none of his men were straggling. He met a
cowardly fellow trying to regain the camp. Turning upon him in a
passion of disgust, he said, “What! Do you count your miserable little
life worth more than that of this great army?” “Worth more to me,
sir,” the man replied. How sensible! How entirely just from his own
point of view, that of the isolated self! Taking only this into
account, he was but a moral child, incapable of comprehending anything
so difficult as a conjunct self. He imagined that could he but save
this eating, breathing, feeling self, no matter if the country were
lost, he would be a gainer. What folly! What would existence be worth
outside the total inter-relationship of human beings called his land?
But this fact he could not perceive. To risk his separate self in such
a cause seemed absurd. Turn for a moment and see how absurd the
separate self appears from the point of view of the conjunct. When our
Lord hung upon the cross, the jeering soldiers shouted, “He saved
others, himself he cannot save.” No, he could not; and his inability
seemed to them ridiculous, while it was in reality his glory. His true
self he was saving–himself and all mankind–the only self he valued.
IX
Now it is this strange complexity of our being, compelling us to view
ourselves in both a separate and a conjunct way, which creates all the
difficulty in the problem of self-sacrifice. But I dare say that when
I have thus shown the reality and worth of the conjunct self, it will
be felt that self-sacrifice is altogether illusory; for while it seems
to produce loss, it is in fact the avoidance of what entails
littleness. So says Emerson:–
    “Let love repine and reason chafe,
     There came a voice without reply:
     ’T is man’s perdition to be safe
     When for the truth he ought to die.”
Have we not, then, by explaining the rationality of self-sacrifice,
explained away the whole matter and practically identified it with
self-culture? There is plausibility in this view–and it has often
been maintained–but not complete truth. For evidently the emotions
excited by culture and sacrifice are directly antagonistic. Toward a
man pursuing the aim of culture we experience a feeling of approval,
not unmixed with suspicion, but we give him none of that reverent
adoration which is the proper response to sacrifice. And if the
feelings of the beholder are contrasted, so also are the psychological
processes of the performer. The man of culture starts with a sense of
defect which he seeks to supplement; the sacrificer, with a sense of
fullness which he seeks to empty. He who turns to self-culture says,
“I have progressed thus far. I have gained thus much of what I would
acquire. But still I am poor. I need more. Let me gather as abundantly
as possible on every side.” But the thought of him who turns to self-
sacrifice is, “I have been gaining, but I only gained to give. Here is
my opportunity. Let me pour out as largely as I may.” He contemplates
final impoverishment. Accordingly I was obliged to say in my
definition that the self-sacrificer seeks to heighten another’s
possessions, pleasures, or powers at the cost of his own. Undoubtedly
at the end of the process he often finds himself richer than at the
beginning. Perhaps this is the normal result; but it is not
contemplated. Psychologically the sacrificer is facing in a different
direction.
X
Yet, though the motive agencies of the two are thus contrasted, I
think we must acknowledge that sacrifice no less than culture is a
powerful form of self-assertion. To miss this is to miss its essential
character, and at the same time to miss the safeguards which should
protect it against waste. For to say, “I will sacrifice myself” is to
leave the important part of the business unexpressed. The weighty
matter is in the covert preposition for.–"I will sacrifice myself
for,” An approved object is aimed at. We are not primarily
interested in negating ourselves. Only our estimate of the importance
of the object justifies our intended loss. This object should
accordingly be scrutinized. Self-sacrifice is noble if its end is
noble, but become reprehensible when its object is petty or
undeserving. Omit or overlook that word for, and self-sacrifice
loses its exalted character. It sinks into asceticism, one often most
degrading of moral aberrations. In asceticism we prize self-sacrifice
for its own sake. We hunt out what we value most; we judge what would
most completely fulfill our needs; and then we abolish it. Abolish it
for what? For nothing but the mere sake of abolishing. This is to turn
morality upside down; and in place of the Christian ideal of abounding
life, to set up the pessimistic aim of impoverishment. There is
nothing of this kind in self-sacrifice. Here we assert ourselves, our
conjunct selves. We estimate what will be best for the community of
man and seek to further this at whatever cost to our isolated
individuality. By this dedication to a deserving object sacrifice is
purified, ennobled, and made strong. We speak of the glorious deed of
him who plunges into the water to save a child. But it is a foolish
and immoral thing to risk one’s life for a stone, a coin, or nothing
at all. “Is the object deserving?” we must ask, “or shall I reserve
myself for greater need?”
Too easily does our sympathetic and sentimental age, recklessly
eulogistic of altruism, hurry into self-sacrifice. Altruism in itself
is worthless. That an act is unselfish can never justify its
performance. He who would be a great giver must first be a great
person. Our men, and still more our women, need as urgently the gospel
of self-development as that of self-sacrifice; though the two are
naturally supplemental. Our only means of estimating the propriety and
dignity of sacrifice is to inquire how closely connected with
ourselves is its object. Until we can justify this connection, we have
no right to incur it, for genuine sacrifice is always an act of self-
assertion. In saving his regiment and contributing his share toward
saving his country, the soldier asserts his own interests. He is a
good soldier in proportion as he feels these interests to be his;
while the deserter is condemned, not for refusing to give his life to
an alien country and regiment, but because he was small enough to
imagine that these great constituents of himself were alien. I tell
the man on the street the way home because I cannot part his
bewilderment from my own. The problem always is, What may I suitably
regard as mine? And in solving it, we should study as carefully that
for which we propose to sacrifice ourselves as anything which we might
seek to obtain. Triviality or lack of permanent consequence is as
objectionable in the one case as in the other. The only safe rule is
that self-sacrifice is self-assertion, is a judgment as regards what
we would welcome to be a portion of our conjunct self.
Perhaps an extreme case will show this most clearly. Jesus prayed,
“Not my will, but thine, be done.” He did not then lose his will. He
asserted and obtained it. For his will was that the divine will should
be fulfilled, and fulfilled it was. He set aside one form of his will,
his private and isolated will, knowing it to be delusive. But his true
or conjunct will–and he knew it to be his true one–he abundantly
obtained. It is no wonder, then, that in explaining these things to
his disciples he says, “My meat it is to do the will of my Father."
That is always the language of genuine self-sacrifice. The act is not
complete until the sense of loss has disappeared.
XI
Yet while I hold that self-sacrifice is thus the very extreme of
rationality, grounding as it does all worth in the relational or
conjunct selfhood, I cannot disguise from myself that it contains an
element of tragedy too. This my readers will already have felt and
will have begun to rebel against my insistence that self-sacrifice is
the fulfillment of our being. For though it is true that when
opposition arises between the conjunct and separate selves our largest
safety is with the former, the very fact that such opposition is
possible involves tragedy. One part of the nature becomes arrayed
against another. We must die to live. Our lower goods are found
incompatible with our higher. Pleasure, comfort, property, friends,
possibly life itself, have become hostile to our more inclusive aims
and must be cast aside. It is true that when the tragic antithesis is
presented and we can reach our higher goods only by loss of the lower,
hesitation is ruin. It is true too that on account of that element of
self-assertion to which I have drawn, attention, the genuine
sacrificer is ordinarily unaware of any such tragedy. But none the
less tragedy is there. To suppose it absent would strip sacrifice of
what we regard as most characteristic.
Nor can we pause here. Those who would call self-sacrifice a glorious
madness have still further justification. A leap into the dark we must
at least admit it to be, For trace it rationally as far as we may,
there always remains uncertainty at the close. There is, for example,
uncertainty about ultimate results. The mother toiling for her child,
and neglecting for its sake most of what would render her own life
rich, can never know that this child will grow up to power. The day
may come when she will wish it had died in childhood. The glory of her
action is bound up with this darkness. Were the soldier, marching to
the field, sure that his side would be victorious, he would be only
half a hero. The consequences of self-sacrifice can never be certain,
foreseen, calculable. There must be risk. Omit it, and the sacrifice
disappears. Indeed nothing in life which calls forth high admiration
is free from this touch of faith and courage, this movement into the
unknown. It is at the very heart of self-sacrifice.
But besides the unknown character of the result there is usually
uncertainty as regards the cost. The sacrificer does not give
according to measure. I do not say I will attend to this sick person
up to such and such a point, but when that point is reached I shall
have done enough. This would hardly be self-sacrifice. I rather say,
“Here I am. Take me, use me to the full, spend of me whatever you
need. How much that will be, I do not know.” So there is an element of
darkness in ourselves.
And possibly I ought to mention a third variety of these
incalculabilities of sacrifice. We do not plan the case. A while ago,
meeting a literary man whose product is of much consequence to the
community and himself, I asked him how his book was coming on.
“Badly,” he answered. “Just now an aged relative has fallen ill. There
is no other place where she can be properly disposed, and so she has
been brought to my house. I must care for her, my home will be much
broken up, and my work must be set aside.” I said, “Is that your duty?
Have you not a more important obligation to your book?” But he
answered, “One cannot choose a duty.” I did not fully agree. I think
we should carefully weigh duties, even if we do not choose them.
Morality would otherwise become the sport of accident. But I perceive
that in the last analysis no duty is made by ourselves. It is given us
by something more authoritative than we, something which we cannot
alter, fully estimate, or without damage evade. Necessity is laid upon
us, sometimes an invading necessity. We are walking our well-ordered
path, pursuing some dear aims, when harsh before us stands a waiting
duty, bidding us lay aside that in which we are engaged and take it. I
have said I believe a degree of scrutiny is needful here. We should
ask, what for? We should correlate the new duty with those already
pledged. And probably an interrupting duty is less often the one it is
well to follow than one which has had something of our time and care.
Few fresh calls can have the weighty claim of loyalty to obligation
already incurred. But, after all, that on which we finally decide has
not sprung from our own wishes. It subjects those wishes to itself.
Standing over against us, it summons us to do its bidding, and allows
us no more to be our own self-directed masters.
XII
Summing up, then, the jarring characteristics of self-sacrifice,–its
frequency, rationality, assertiveness, nearness to self–culture; yes,
and its darker traits of risk, immeasurability, and authoritativeness,
–does it not begin to appear that I have been calling it by a wrong
name? Self-sacrifice is a negative term. It lays stress on the thought
that I set myself aside, become in some way less than I was before. And
no doubt through all this intricate discussion certain belittlements
have been acknowledged, though these have also been shown to lie along
the path of largeness. There are, therefore, in self-sacrifice both
negative and positive elements. But why select its name from the
subordinate part? Why turn to the front its incidental negations? This
is topsy-turvy nomenclature. Better blot the word self-sacrifice from
our dictionaries. Devotion, service, love, dedication to a cause,
–these words mark its real nature and are the only descriptions of it
which its practicers will recognize. That damage to the abstract self
which chiefly impresses the outsider is something of which the
sacrificer is hardly aware. How exquisitely astonished are the men in
the parable when called to receive reward for their generous gifts!
“Lord, when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee, or thirsty and gave
thee drink? When saw we thee sick or in prison and came unto thee?"
They thought they had only been following their own desires.
Perhaps the most admirable case of self-sacrifice is that in which no
single person appears who is profited by our loss. The scholar, the
artist, the scientific man dedicate themselves to the interests of
undifferentiated humanity. They serve their undecipherable race, not
knowing who will obtain gains through their toils. In their sublime
benefactions they study the wants of no individual person, not even of
themselves. Yet, turn to a man of this type and try to call his
attention to the privations he endures, and what will be his answer?
“I have no coat? I have no dinner? I have little money? People do not
honor me as they honor others? Yes, I believe I lack these trifles.
But think what I possess! This great subject; or rather, it possesses
me. And it shall have of me whatever it requires.”
In such service of the absolute is found the highest expression of
self-sacrifice, of social service, of self-realization. The doctrine
that though union with a reason and righteousness not exclusively our
own each of us may hourly be renewed is the very heart of ethics.
XIII
I have attempted to cut out a clear path through an ethical jungle
overgrown with the exuberance of human life. I have not succeeded, and
it is probably impossible to succeed. In the subject itself there is
paradox. Conflicting elements enter into the very constitution of a
person. To trace them even imperfectly one must be patient of
refinements, accessible to qualifications, and ever ready to admit the
opposite of what has been laboriously established. We all desire
through study to win a swift simplicity. But nature abhors simplicity:
she complicates; she forces those who would know to take pains, to
proceed cautiously, and to feel their way along from point to point.
This I have tried to do; and I believe that the inquiry, though
intricate, primarily scientific, and only partially successful, need
not altogether lack practical consequence. Our age is bewildered
between heroism and greed. To each it is drawn more powerfully than
any age preceding. Neither of the two does it quite comprehend. If we
can render the nobler somewhat more intelligible, we may increase the
confidence of those who now, half-ashamed, follow its glorious but
blindly compulsive call.
Spencer’s Principles of Ethics, pt. i. ch. xi., xii.
Bradley’s Appearance and Reality, p. 414-429.
Paulsen’s Ethics, bk. ii. ch. 6.
Wundt’s Facts of the Moral Life, ch. iii., Section 4 (g).
Sidgwick’s Methods, concluding chapter.
Kidd’s Social Evolution, ch. 5.
S. Bryant in Journal of Ethics, Apr. 1893.
Bradley in Journal of Ethics, Oct. 1894.
Mackenzie, in Journal of Ethics, Apr. 1895.
Continue...

This electronic text of The Nature of Goodness by George Herbert Palmer (Alford Professor of Philosophy in Harvard University, 1903, A. F. P.) is in the public domain.
Conversion to this hypertext by Philipp Lenssen.


Magazine: Philosophy Today (Amazon).


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Nature of GoodnessBy George Herbert PalmerAt Amazon
