
George Herbert Palmer, (1842-1933)
Professor of Natural Religion, Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity
Harvard University
Portrait: 1926, 40 x 30 inches, Oil




At this culmination of our long discussion, a discussion much confused
by its necessary mass of details, it may be well to pause a moment, to
fix attention on the great lines along which we have been moving, and
to mark the points on which they appear to converge. We have regarded
goodness as divided into two very unequal parts. The first two
chapters treated of goodness in general, a species which being shared
alike by persons and things is in no sense distinctive of persons. The
last four chapters have been given to the more complex task of
exploring the goodness of persons.
In things we found that goodness consists in having their manifold
parts drawn into integral wholeness. And this is true also of persons.
But the modes of organization in the two cases were so unlike as to
require long elucidation. Our conclusion would seem to be that while
goodness is everywhere expressive of organization, personal conduct is
good only when consciously organized, guided, and aimed at the
development of a social self. We have seen how self-consciousness lies
at the foundation of personality, sharply discriminating persons from
things. We have seen too that wherever it is present, the person
curiously directs himself, passing through all the varieties of
purposive activity which were catalogued in the chapter on self-
direction. But such activity implies a being of variable, not of fixed
powers, a being accordingly capable of enlargement, and with
possibilities in him which every moment renders real. This progressive
realization of himself, this development, he–so far as he is good–
consciously conducts. And finally we found in the person the strange
fact that he conceives of his good self as essentially in conjunction
with his fellow man, and recognizes that parted off and in separate
abstractness he is no person at all. Accordingly personal
organization, direction, enlargement, conjunction. Under our analysis
two antithetic worlds emerge, a world of nature and of spirit, the
former guided by blind forces, the latter self-managed. Unlike
spiritual beings, natural objects are under alien control; have not
the power of development, and when brought into close conjunction with
others are liable to disruption.
Accepting this vital distinction, we see that the work of spiritual
man will consist in progressively subjugating whatever natural powers
he finds within him and without, rendering them all expressive of
self-conscious purpose. for we men are not altogether spiritual; in us
two elements meet. Our spirituality is superposed on a natural basis.
Like things, we have our natural aptitudes, blind tendencies,
established functions of body and mind. These are all serviceable and
organic; but to become spiritual all need to be redeemed, or drawn
over into the field of consciousness, where our special stamp may be
set upon them. When we speak of a good act, we mean an act which shows
the results of such redemption, one whose every part has been studied
in relation to every other part, and has thus been made to bear our
own image and superscription.
And this is essentially the Christian ideal, that spirit shall be lord
of nature. I ought to reject my natural life, accounting it not my
life at all. Until shaped by myself, it is merely my opportunity for
life, material furnished, out of which my true and conscious life may
be constructed. Widely is this contrasted with the pagan conceptions,
where man appears with powers as fixed as the things around him.
Indeed, in many forms of paganism there is no distinction between
persons and things. They are blended. And such blending usually
operates to the disparagement of the person; for things being more
numerous, and their laws more urgent, the powers of man become lost in
those of nature. Or if distinction is made, and men in some dim
fashion become aware that they are different from things, still it is
the tendency of paganism to subordinate person to nature. The child is
sacrificed to the sun. The sun is not thought of as existing for the
child. From the Christian point of view everything seems turned upside
down. Man is absorbed in natural forces, natural forces are reverenced
as divine, and self-consciousness–if noticed at all–is regarded as
an impertinent accident.
In the Christian ideal all this is reversed. Man is called to be
master of himself, and therefore of all else. The many beautiful
adjustments of the natural world are thought to possess dignity only
so far as they accept the conscious purposes put by us in their
keeping. And in man himself goodness is held to exist only in
proportion as his conduct expresses fullness of self-consciousness,
fullness of direction, and fullness of conscious conjunction with
other persons. I do not see how we can escape this conclusion. The
careful argumentation through which the previous chapters have brought
us obliges us to count conduct valuable in proportion as it bears the
impress of self-conscious mind.
Yet it must be owned that during the last few centuries doubts have
arisen about the justice of this Christian ideal. The simple
conception of a world of spirit and a world of nature arrayed against
each other, the one of them exactly what the other is not, the world
of spirit the superior, the world of nature to be frowned on, used
possibly, but always in subordination to spiritual purposes,–this
view, dominant as it was in the Middle Ages, and still largely
influential, has been steadily falling into disrepute. There is even a
tendency in present estimates to reverse the ancient valuation and
allow superiority to nature. Such a transformation is strikingly
evident in those sensitive recorders of human ideals, the Fine Arts.
Let us see what at different times they have judged best worthy of
record.
Early painting dealt with man alone, or rather with persons; for
personality in its transcendent forms–saints, angels, God himself–
was usually preferred above little man. Except the spiritual, nothing
was regarded as of consequence. The principle of early painting might
be summed in the proud saying, “On earth there is nothing great but
man; in man there is nothing great but mind.” It is true when man is
thus detached from nature he hardly appears to advantage or in his
appropriate setting. But the early painters would tolerate nothing
natural near their splendid persons. They covered their backgrounds
with gilding, so that a glory surrounded the entire figure, throwing
out the personality sharp and strong. Nothing broke its effect. But
after all, one comes to see that we inhabit a world; nature is
continually about us, and man really shows his eminence most fully
when standing dominant over nature. Early painting, accordingly, began
to set in a little landscape around the human figures, contrasting the
person with that which was not himself. But an independent interest
could not fail to spring up in these accessories. By degrees the
landscape is elaborated and the figure subordinated. The figure is
there by prescription, the landscape because people enjoy it. Nature
begins to assert her claims; and man, the eminent and worthy
representative of old ideals, retires from his ancient prominence.
When the Renaissance revolted against the teachings of the mediaeval
church, the disposition to return to nature was insolently strong.
Natural impulses were glorified, the physical world attracted
attention, and even began to be studied. Hitherto it had been thought
deserving of study only because in a few respects it was able to
minister to man. But in the Renaissance men studied it for its own
sake. Gradually the distinction between man and nature grew faint, so
that a kind of pantheism arose in which a general power, at once
natural and spiritual, appeared as the ruler of all. We individual men
emerge for a moment from this great central power, ultimately
relapsing into it. Nature had acquired coordinate, if not superior,
rights. Yet the full expression of this independent interest in nature
is more recent than is usually observed. Landscape painting goes back
but little beyond the year sixteen hundred. It is only two or three
centuries ago that painters discovered the physical world to be worthy
of representation for its own sake.
As the worth of nature thus became vindicated in painting, parallel
changes were wrought in the other arts. Arts less distinctly rational
began to assert themselves, and even to take the lead. The art most
characteristic of modern times, the one which most widely and
poignantly appeals to us, is music. But in music we are not distinctly
conscious of a meaning. Most of us in listening to music forget
ourselves under its lulling charms, abandon ourselves to its spell,
and by it are swept away, perhaps to the infinite, perhaps to an
obliteration of all clear thought. Is it not largely because we are so
hard pressed under the anxious conditions of modern life that music
becomes such an enormous solace and strength? I do not say that no
other factors have contributed to the vogue of music, but certainly it
is widely prized as an effective means of escape from ourselves. Music
too, though early known in calm and elementary forms, has within the
last two centuries been developed into almost a new art.
Of all the arts poetry is the most strikingly rational and articulate.
Its material is plain thought, plain words. We employ in it the
apparatus of conscious life. Poetry was therefore concerned in early
times entirely with things of the spirit. It dealt with persons, and
with them alone. It celebrated epic actions, recorded sagacious
judgments, or uttered in lyric song emotions primarily felt by an
individual, yet interpreting the common lot of man. But there has
occurred a great change in poetry too, a change notable during the
last century but initiated long before. Poetry has been growing
naturalistic, and is to-day disposed to reject all severance of body
and spirit. The great nature movement which we associate with the
names of Cowper, Burns, and Wordsworth, has withdrawn man’s attention
from conscious responsibility, and has taught him to adore blind and
vast forces which he cannot fully comprehend. We all know the
refreshment and the deepening of life which this mystic new poetry has
brought. But it is hard to say whether poetry is nowadays a spiritual
or a natural art. Many of us would incline to the latter view, and
would hold that even in dealing with persons it treats them as
embodiments of natural forces. Our instincts and unguided passions,
the features which most identify us with the physical world, are
coming more and more to be the subjects of modern poetry.
Nature, meanwhile, that part of the universe which is not consciously
guided, has become within a century our favorite field of scientific
study. The very word science is popularly appropriated to naturalistic
investigation. Of course this is a perversion. Originally it was
believed that the proper study of mankind was man. And probably we
should all still acknowledge that the study of personal structure is
as truly science as study of the structure of physical objects. Yet so
powerfully is the tide setting toward reverence for the unconscious
and the sub-conscious that science, our word for knowledge, has lost
its universality and has taken on an almost exclusively physical
character.
Perhaps there was only one farther step possible. Philosophy itself,
the study of mind, might be regarded as a study of the unconscious.
And this step has been taken. Books now bear the paradoxical title
“Philosophy of the Unconscious,” and investigation of the sub-
conscious processes is perhaps the most distinctive trait of
philosophy to-day. More and more it is believed that we cannot
adequately explore a person without probing beneath consciousness. The
blind processes can no longer be ruled out. Nature and spirit cannot
be parted as our fathers supposed they might. Probably Kant is the
last great scholar who will ever try to hold that distinction firm,
and he is hardly successful. In spite of his vigorous antitheses,
hints of covert connection between the opposed forces are not absent.
Indeed, if the two are so widely parted as his usual language asserts,
it is hard to see how his ethics can have mundane worth. Curiously
enough too, at the very time when Kant was reviving this ancient
distinction, and offering it as the solid basis of personal and social
life, the opposite belief received its most clamorous announcement,
resounding through the civilized world in the teachings of Rousseau.
Rousseau warns us that the conscious constructions of man are full of
artifice and deceit, and lead to corruption and pain. Conscious
guidance should, consequently, be banished, and man should return to
the peace, the ease, and the certainty of nature.
Now I do not think it is worth while to blame or praise a movement so
vast as this. If it is folly to draw an indictment against a nation,
it is greater folly to indict all modern civilization. We must not say
that philosophy and the fine arts took a wrong turn at the
Renaissance,–at least it is useless to call on them now to turn back.
The world seldom turns back. It absorbs, it re-creates, it brings new
significance into the older thought. All progress, Goethe tells us, is
spiral,–coming out at the place where it was before, but higher up.
No, we cannot wisely blame or praise, but we may patiently study and
understand. That is what I am attempting to do here. The movement
described is no negligible accident of our time. It is world-wide, and
shows progress steadily in a single direction.
In order, however, to prove that such a change in moral estimates has
occurred, it was hardly necessary to survey the course of history. The
evidence lies close around us, and is found in the standards of the
society in which we move. Who are the people most prized? Are they the
most self-conscious? That should be the case if our long argument is
sound. Our preceding chapters would urge us to fill life with
consciousness. In proportion as consciousness droops, human goodness
becomes meagre; as our acts are filled with it, they grow excellent.
These are our theoretic conclusions, but the experience of daily life
does not bear them out. If, for example, I find the person who is
talking to me watches each word he utters, pauses again and again for
correction, choosing the determined word and rejecting the one which
instinctively comes to his lips, I do not trust what he says, or even
listen to it; while he is shaping his exact sentences I attend to
something else. In general, if a man’s small actions impress us as
minutely planned, we turn from him. It is not the self-reflecting
persons, cautious of all they do, say, or think, who are popular. It
is rather those instinctively spontaneous creatures characterized by
abandon–men and women who let themselves go, and with all the wealth
of the world in them, allow it to come out of itself–that we take to
our hearts. We prize them for their want of deliberation. In short, we
give our unbiased endorsement not to the spiritual or consciously
guided person, but to him, on the contrary, who shows the closest
adjustment to nature.
Yet even so, we have gone too far afield for evidence. First we
surveyed the ages, then we surveyed one another. But there is one
proof-spot nearer still. Let us survey ourselves. I am much mistaken
if there are not among my readers persons who have all their lives
suffered from self-consciousness. They have longed to be rid of it, to
be free to think of the other person, of the matter in hand. Instead
of this, their thoughts are forever reverting to their own share in
any affair. Too contemptible to be avowed, and more distressing than
almost any other species of suffering, excessive self-consciousness
shames us with our selfishness, yet will not allow us to turn from it.
When I go into company where everybody is spontaneous and free, easily
uttering what the occasion calls for, I can utter only what I call for
and not at all what the occasion asks. Between the two demands there
is always an awkward jar. When tortured by such experiences it does
not soothe to have others carelessly remark, “Oh, just be natural!"
That is precisely what we should like to be, but how? That little
point is continually left unexplained. Yet obviously self-
consciousness involves something like a deadlock. For how can one
consciously exert himself to be unconscious and try not to try? We
cannot arrange our lives so as to have no arrangement in them, and
when shaking hands with a friend, for example, be on our guard against
noticing. Once locked up in this vicious circle, we seem destined to
be prisoners forever. That is what constitutes the anguish of the
situation. The most tyrannical of jailers–one’s self–is over us, and
from his bondage we are powerless to escape. The trouble is by no
means peculiar to our time, though probably commoner forty years ago
than at any other period of the world’s history. But it had already
attracted the attention of Shakespeare, who bases on it one of his
greatest plays. When Hamlet would act, self-consciousness stands in
his way. The hindering process is described in the famous soliloquy
with astonishing precision and vividness, if only we substitute our
modern term “self-consciousness” for that which was its ancient
equivalent:–
     “Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
      And thus the native hue of resolution
      Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought;
      And enterprises of great pith and moment
      With this regard their currents turn awry,
      And lose the name of action.”
And such is our experience. We, too, have purposed all manner of
important and serviceable acts; but just as we were setting them in
execution, consideration fell upon us. We asked whether it was the
proper moment, whether he to whom it was to be done was really needy,
or were we the fit doer, or should it be done in this way or that. We
hesitated, and the moment was gone. Self-consciousness had again
demonstrated its incompetence for superintending a task. Many of us,
far from regarding self-consciousness as a ground of goodness, are
disposed to look upon it as a curse.
Before, however, attempting to discover whether our theoretic
conclusions may he drawn into some sort of living accord with these
results of experience, let us probe a little more minutely into these
latter, and try to learn what reasons there may be for this very
general distrust of self-consciousness as a guide. Hitherto I have
exhibited that distrust as a fact. We always find it so; our neighbors
find it so, the ages have found it so. But why? I have not pointed out
precisely the reasons for the continual fact. Let me devote a page or
two to rational diagnosis.
To begin with, I suppose it will be conceded that we really cannot
guide ourselves through and through. There are certain large tracts of
life totally unamenable to consciousness.
Of our two most important acts, and those by which the remaining ones
are principally affected, birth and death, the one is necessarily
removed from conscious guidance, and the other is universally
condemned if so guided. We do not–as we have previously seen–happen
to be present at our birth, and so are quite cut off from controlling
that. Yet the conditions of birth very considerably shape everything
else in life. We cannot, then, be purely spiritual; it is impossible.
We must be natural beings at our beginning; and at the other end the
state of things is largely similar, for we are not allowed to fix the
time of our departure. The Stoics were. “If the house smokes,” they
said, “leave it.” When life is no longer worth while, depart. But
Christianity will not allow this. Death must be a natural affair, not
a spiritual. I am to wait till a wandering bacillus alights in my
lung. He will provide a suitable exit for me. But neither I nor my
neighbors must decide my departure. Let laws of nature reign.
And if these two tremendous events are altogether removed from
conscious guidance, many others are but slightly amenable to it. The
great organic processes both of mind and body are only indirectly, or
to a partial extent, under the control of consciousness. A few
persons, I believe, can voluntarily suspend the beating of their
hearts. They are hardly to be envied. The majority of us let our
hearts alone, and they work better than if we tried to work them.
Though it is true that we can control our breathing, and that we
occasionally do so, this also in general we wisely leave to natural
processes. A similar state of affairs we find when we turn to the mind
itself. The association of ideas, that curious process by which one
thought sticks to another and through being thus linked draws after it
material for use in all our intellectual constructions, goes on for
the most part unguided. It would be plainly useless, therefore, to
treat our great distinction as something hard and fast. Nature and
spirit may be contrasted; they cannot be sundered. Spirit removed from
nature would become impotent, while nature would then proceed on a
meaningless career.
Then too there are all sorts of degrees in consciousness. No man was
ever so conscious of himself and his acts that he could not be more
so. When introspection is causing us our sharpest distress, it may
still be rendered more minute. That is one cause of its peculiar
anguish. We are always uncertain whether our troubles have not arisen
from too little self-consciousness, and we whip ourselves into greater
nicety and elaborateness of personal observation. Varying through a
multitude of degrees, the fullness of consciousness is never reached.
A more thorough exercise of it is always possible. At the last, nature
must be admitted as a partner in the control of our lives, and her
share in that partnership the present age believes to be a large one.
For could we always consciously steer our conduct, we should be unwise
to do so. Consciousness hinders action. Acts are excellent in
proportion as they are sure, swift, and easy. When we undertake
anything, we seek to do exactly that thing, reach precisely that end,
and not merely to hit something in the neighborhood. Occasions, too,
run fast, and should be seized on the minute. Action is excellent only
when it meets the urgent and evasive demands of life. Faltering and
hesitation are fatal. Nor must action unduly weary. Good conduct
effects its results with the least necessary expenditure of effort.
When there are so many demands pressing upon us, we should not allow
ourselves to become exhausted by a single act, but should keep
ourselves fresh for further needs. Efficient action, then, is sure,
swift, and easy.
Now the peculiarity of self-consciousness is that it hinders all this
and makes action inaccurate, slow, and fatiguing. Inaccuracy is almost
certain. When we study how something is to be done, we are apt to lay
stress on certain features of the situation, and not to bring others
into due prominence. It is difficult separately to correlate the many
elements which go to make up a desired result. Sometimes we become
altogether puzzled and for the moment the action ceases. When I have
had occasion to drive a screw in some unusual and inconvenient place,
after setting the blade of the screw-driver into the slot I have asked
myself, “In which direction does this screw turn?” But the longer I
ask, the more uncertain I am. My only solution lies in trusting my
hand, which knows a great deal more about the matter than I. When we
once begin to meditate how a word is spelled, how helpless we are! It
is better to drop the question, and pick up the dictionary. In all
such cases consideration tends to confuse.
It tends to delay, too, as everybody knows. To survey all the
relations in which a given act may stand, to balance their relative
gains and losses, and with full sight to decide on the course which
offers the greatest profit, would require the years of Methuselah. But
at what point shall we cut the process short? To obtain full
knowledge, we should pass in review all that relates to the act we
propose; should inquire what its remoter consequences will be, and how
it will affect not merely myself, my cousin, my great-grandchild, but
the man in the next street, city, or state. There is no stopping. To
carry conscious verification over a moderate range is slow business.
If on the impulse of occasion we dash off an action unreflectingly,
life will be swift and simple. If we try to anticipate all
consequences of our task it will be slow and endless.
Nor need I dwell on the fatigue such conscious work involves. In
writing a letter, we usually sit down before our paper, our minds
occupied with what we would say. We allow our fingers to stroll of
themselves across the page, and we hardly notice whether they move or
not. If anybody should ask, “How did you write the letter s?” we
should be obliged to look on the paper to see. But suppose, instead
of writing in this way, I come to the task to-morrow determined to
superintend all the work consciously. How shall I hold my pen in the
best possible manner? How shape this letter so that each of its curves
gets its exact bulge? How give the correct slant to what is above or
below the line? I will not ask how long a time a letter prepared in
this fashion would require, or whether when written it would be fit to
read, for I wish to fix attention on the exhaustion of the writer. He
certainly could endure such fatigue for no more than a single epistle.
The schoolboy, when forced to it, seldom holds out for more than half
a page, though he employs every contortion of shoulder, tongue, and
leg to ease and diversify the struggle.
A dozen years ago some nonsense verses were running through the
papers,–verses pointing out with humorous precision the very
infelicities of conscious control to which I am now directing
attention. They put the case thus:–
     “The centipede was happy, quite,
         Until the toad for fun
      Said, ’Pray which leg comes after which?’
      This worked her mind to such a pitch
      She lay distracted in a ditch,
         Considering how to run.”
And no wonder! Problems so complex as this should be left to the
disposal of nature, and not be drawn over into the region of spiritual
guidance. But the complexities of the centipede are simple matters
when compared with the elaborate machinery of man. The human mind
offers more alternatives in a minute than does the centipede in a
lifetime. If spiritual guidance is inadequate to the latter, and is
found merely to hinder action, why is not the blind control of nature
necessary for the former also? Our age believes it is and, ever
disparaging the conscious world, attaches steadily greater consequence
to the unconscious. “It is the unintelligent me,” writes Dr. O. W.
Holmes, “stupid as an idiot, that has to try a thing a thousand times
before he can do it and then never knows how he does it, that at last
does it well. We have to educate ourselves through the pretentious
claims of intellect into the humble accuracy of instinct; and we end
at last by acquiring the dexterity, the perfection, the certainty
which those masters of arts, the bee and the spider, inherit from
nature.”
Green’s Prolegomena, Section 297.
Dewey’s Study of Ethics, Section xli.
Seth’s Study of Ethical Principles, pt. i. ch. 3, Section 6.
Alexander’s Moral Order and Progress, bk. i. ch. i. Section iii.
Earle’s English Prose, p. 490-500.
Palmer in The Forum, Jan. 1893.
Continue...

This electronic text of The Nature of Goodness by George Herbert Palmer (Alford Professor of Philosophy in Harvard University, 1903, A. F. P.) is in the public domain.
Conversion to this hypertext by Philipp Lenssen.


Magazine: Philosophy Today (Amazon).


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Nature of GoodnessBy George Herbert PalmerAt Amazon
