
George Herbert Palmer, (1842-1933)
Professor of Natural Religion, Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity
Harvard University
Portrait: 1926, 40 x 30 inches, Oil




Such is the mighty argument conducted through several centuries in
behalf of nature against spirit as a director of conduct. I have
stated it at length both because of its own importance and because it
is in seeming conflict with the results of my early chapters. But
those results stand fast. They were reached with care. To reject them
would be to obliterate all distinction between persons and things.
Self-consciousness is the indisputable prerogative of persons. Only so
far as we possess it and apply it in action do we rise above the
impersonal world around. And even if we admit the contention in behalf
of nature as substantially sound, we are not obliged to accept it as
complete. It may be that neither nature nor spirit can be dispensed
with in the supply of human needs. Each may have its characteristic
office; for though in the last chapter I have been setting forth the
superiorities of natural guidance, in spiritual guidance there are
advantages too, advantages of an even more fundamental kind. Let us
see what they are.
They may be summarily stated in a single sentence: consciousness alone
gives fresh initiative. Disturbing as the influence of consciousness
confessedly is, on its employment depends every possibility of
progress. Natural action is regular, constant, conformed to a pattern.
In the natural world event follows event in a fixed order, Under the
same conditions the same result appears an indefinite number of times.
The most objectionable form of this rigidity is found in mechanism. I
sometimes hear ladies talking about “real lace” and am on such
occasions inclined to speak of my real boots. They mean, I find, not
lace that is the reverse of ghostly, but simply that which bears the
impress of personality. It is lace which is made by hand and shows the
marks of hand work. Little irregularities are in it, contrasting it
with the machine sort, where every piece is identical with every other
piece. It might be more accurately called personal lace. The machine
kind is no less real–unfortunately–but mechanism is hopelessly dull,
says the same thing day after day, and never can say anything else.
Now though this coarse form of monotonous process nowhere appears in
what we call the world of nature, a restriction substantially similar
does; for natural objects vary slowly and within the narrowest limits.
Outside such orderly variations, they are subjected to external and
distorting agencies effecting changes in them regardless of their
gains. Branches of trees have their wayward and subtle curvatures, and
are anything but mechanical in outline. But none the less are they
helpless, unprogressive, and incapable of learning. The forces which
play upon them, being various, leave a truly varied record. But each
of these forces was an invariable one, and their several influences
cannot be sorted, judged, and selected by the tree with reference to
its future growth. Criticism and choice have no place here, and
accordingly anything like improvement from year to year is impossible.
The case of us human beings would be the same if we were altogether
managed by the sure, swift, and easy forces of nature. Progress would
cease. We should move on our humdrum round as fixedly constituted, as
submissive to external influence, and with as little exertion of
intelligence as the dumb objects we behold. Every power within us
would be actual, displayed in its full extent, and involving no
variety of future possibility. We should live altogether in the
present, and no changes would be imagined or sought. From this dull
routine we are saved by the admixture of consciousness. For a gain so
great we may well be ready to encounter those difficulties of
conscious guidance which my last chapter detailed. Let the process of
advance be inaccurate, slow, and severe, so only there be advance. For
progress no cost is too great. I am sometimes inclined to congratulate
those who are acute sufferers through self-consciousness, because to
them the door of the future is open. The instinctive, uncritical
person, who takes life about as it comes, and with ready acceptance
responds promptly to every suggestion that calls, may be as popular as
the sunshine, but he is as incapable of further advance. Except in
attractiveness, such a one is usually in later life about what he was
in youth; for progress is a product of forecasting intelligence. When
any new creation is to be introduced, only consciousness can prepare
its path.
Evidently, then, there are strong advantages in guidance through the
spirit. But natural guidance has advantages no less genuine. Human
life is a complex and demanding affair, requiring for its ever-
enlarging good whatever strength can be summoned from every side.
Probably we must abandon that magnificent conception of our ancestors,
that spirit is all in all and nature unimportant. But must we, in
deference to the temper of our time, eliminate conscious guidance
altogether? May not the disparagement of recent ages have arisen in
reaction against attempts to push conscious guidance into regions
where it is unsuitable? Conceivably the two agencies may be
supplementary. Possibly we may call on our fellow of the natural world
for aid in spiritual work. The complete ideal, at any rate, of good
conduct unites the swiftness, certainty, and ease of natural action
with the selective progressiveness of spiritual. Till such a
combination is found, either conduct will be insignificant or great
distress of self-consciousness will be incurred. Both of these evils
will be avoided if nature can be persuaded to do the work which we
clearly intend. That is what goodness calls on us to effect. To
showing the steps through which it may be reached the remainder of
this chapter will be given.
Let us, then, take a case of action where we are trying to create a
new power, to develop ourselves in some direction in which we have not
hitherto gone. For such an undertaking consciousness is needed, but
let us see how far we are able to hand over its work to
unconsciousness. Suppose, when entirely ignorant of music, I decide to
learn to play the piano. Evidently it will require the minutest
watchfulness. Approaching the strange instrument with some uneasiness,
I try to secure exactly that position on the stool which will allow my
arms their proper range along the keyboard. There is difficulty in
getting my sheet of music to stand as it should. When it is adjusted,
I examine it anxiously. What is that little mark? Probably the note C.
Among these curious keys there must also be a C. I look up and down.
There it is! But can I bring my finger down upon it at just the right
angle? That is accomplished, and gradually note after note is
captured, until I have conquered the entire score. If now during my
laborious performance a friend enters the room, he might well say, “I
do not like spiritual music. Give me the natural kind which is not
consciously directed.” But let him return three years later. He will
find me sitting at the piano quite at my ease, tossing off notes by
the unregarded handful. He approaches and enters into conversation
with me. I do not cease my playing; but as I talk, I still keep my
mind free enough to observe the swaying boughs outside the window and
to enjoy the fragrance of the flowers which my friend has brought. The
musical phrases which drop from my fingers appear to regulate
themselves and to call for little conscious regard.
Yet if my friend should try to show me how mistaken I had been in the
past, attempting to manage consciously what should have been left to
nature, if he should eulogize my natural action now and contrast it
with my former awkwardness, he would plainly be in error. My present
naturalness is the result of long spiritual endeavor, and cannot be
had on cheaper terms; and the unconsciousness which is now noticeable
in me is not the same thing as that which was with me when I began to
play. It is true the incidental hardships connected with my first
attack on the piano have ceased. I find myself in possession of a new
and seemingly unconscious power. An automatic train of movements has
been constructed which I now direct as a whole, its parts no longer
requiring special volitional prompting. But I still direct it, only
that a larger unit has been constituted for consciousness to act upon.
The naturalness which thus becomes possible is accordingly of an
altogether new sort; and since the result is a completer expression of
conscious intention, it may as truly be called spiritual as natural.
It has now become plain that our early reckoning of actions as either
natural or spiritual was too simple and incomplete. Conduct has three
stages, not two. Let us get them clearly in mind. At the beginning of
life we are at the beck and call of every impulse, not having yet
attained reflective command of ourselves. This first stage we may
rightly call that of nature or of unconsciousness, and manifestly most
of us continue in it to some extent and as regards certain tracts of
action throughout life. Then reflection is aroused; we become aware of
what we are doing. The many details of each act and the relations
which surround it come separately into conscious attention for
assessment, approval, or rejection. This is the stage of spirit, or
consciousness. But it is not the final stage. As we have seen in our
example, a stage is possible when action runs swiftly to its intended
end, but with little need of conscious supervision. This mechanized,
purposeful action presents conduct in its third stage, that of second
nature or negative consciousness. As this third is least understood,
is often confused with the first, and yet is in reality the complete
expression of the moral ideal and of that reconciliation of nature and
spirit of which we are in search, I will devote a few pages to its
explanation.
The phrase negative consciousness describes its character most
exactly, though the meaning is not at once apparent. Positive
consciousness marks the second stage. There we are obliged to think of
each point involved, in order to bring it into action. In piano-
playing, for example, I had to study my seat at the piano, the music
on the rack, the letters of the keyboard, the position of my fingers,
and the coordination of all these with one another. To each such
matter a separate and positive attention is given. But even at the
last, when I am playing at my ease, we cannot say that consciousness
is altogether absent. I am conscious of the harmony, and if I do not
direct, I still verify results. As an entire phrase of music rolls off
my rapid fingers, I judge it to be good. But if one of the notes
sticks, or I perceive that the phrase might be improved by a slightly
changed stress, I can check my spontaneous movements and correct the
error. There is therefore a watchful, if not a prompting,
consciousness at work. It is true that, the first note started, all
the others follow of themselves in natural sequence. Though I withdraw
attention from my fingers, they run their round as a part of the
associated train. But if they go awry, consciousness is ready with its
inhibition. I accordingly call this the stage of negative
consciousness. In it consciousness is not employed as a positive
guiding force, but the moment inhibition or check is required for
reaching the intended result, consciousness is ready and asserts
itself in the way of forbiddal. This third stage, therefore, differs
from the first through having its results embody a conscious purpose;
from the second, through having consciousness superintend the process
in a negative and hindering, rather than in a positive and prompting
way. It is the stage of habit. I call it second nature because it is
worked, not by original instincts, but by a new kind of associative
mechanism which must first be laboriously constructed.
Years ago when I began to teach at Harvard College, we used to regard
our students as roaring animals, likely to destroy whatever came in
their way. We instructors were warned to keep the doors of our lecture
rooms barred. As we came out, we must never fail to lock them. So
always in going to a lecture, as I passed through the stone entry and
approached the door my hand sought my pocket, the key came out, was
inserted in the keyhole, turned, was withdrawn, fell back into my
pocket, and I entered the room. This series of acts repeated day after
day had become so mechanized that if on entering the room I had been
asked whether on that particular day I had really unlocked the door, I
could not have told. The train took care of itself and I was not
concerned in it sufficiently for remembrance. Yet it remained my act.
On one or two occasions, after shoving in the key in my usual
unconscious fashion, I heard voices in the room and knew that it would
be inappropriate to enter. Instantly I stopped and checked the
remainder of the train. Habitual though the series of actions was, and
ordinarily executed without conscious guidance, it as a whole was
aimed at a definite end. If this were unattainable, the train stopped.
All are aware how large a part is played by such mechanization of
conduct. Without it, life could not go on. When a man walks to the
door, he does not decide where to set his foot, what shall be the
length of his step, how he shall maintain his balance on the foot that
is down while the other is raised. These matters were decided when he
was a child. In those infant years which seem to us intellectually so
stationary, a human being is probably making as large acquisitions as
at any period of his later life. He is testing alternatives and
organizing experience into ordered trains. But in the rest of us a
consolidation substantially similar should be going on in some section
of our experience as long as we live. For this is the way we develop:
not the total man at once, but this year one tract of conduct is
surveyed, judged, mechanized; and next year another goes through the
same maturing process. Not until such mechanization has been
accomplished is the conduct truly ours. When, for example, I am
winning the power of speech, I gradually cease to study exactly the
word I utter, the tone in which it is enunciated, how my tongue, lips,
and teeth shall be adjusted in reference to one another. While
occupied with these things, I am no speaker. I become such only when,
the moment I think of a word, the actions needed for its utterance set
themselves in motion. With them I have only a negative concern.
Indeed, as we grow maturer of speech, collocations of words stick
naturally together and offer themselves to our service. When we
require a certain range of words from which to draw our means of
communication, there they stand ready. We have no need to rummage the
dimness of the past for them. Mechanically they are prepared for our
service.
Of course this does not imply that at one period we foolishly believed
consciousness to be an important guide, but subsequently becoming
wiser, discarded its aid. On the contrary, the mechanization of second
nature is simply a mode of extending the influence of consciousness
more widely. The conclusions of our early lectures were sound. The
more fully expressive conduct can be of a self-conscious personality,
so much the more will it deserve to be called good. But in order that
it may in any wide extent receive this impress of personal life, we
must summon to our aid agencies other than spiritual. The more we
mechanize conduct the better. That is what maturing ourselves means.
When we say that a man has acquired character, we mean that he has
consciously surveyed certain large tracts of life, and has decided
what in those regions it is best to do. There, at least, he will no
longer need to deliberate about action. As soon as a case from this
region presents itself, some electric button in his moral organism is
touched, and the whole mechanism runs off in the surest, swiftest,
easiest possible way. Thus his consciousness is set free to busy
itself with other affairs. For in this third stage we do not so much
abandon consciousness as direct it upon larger units; and this not
because smaller units do not deserve attention, but because they have
been already attended to. Once having decided what is our best mode of
action in regard to them, we wisely turn them over to mechanical
control.
Such is the nature of moral habit. Before goodness can reach
excellence, it must be rendered habitual. Consideration, the mark of
the second stage, disappears in the third. We cannot count a person
honest so long as he has to decide on each occasion whether to take
advantage of his neighbor. Long ago he should have disciplined himself
into machine-like action as regards these matters, so that the
dishonest opportunity would be instinctively and instantly dismissed,
the honest deed appearing spontaneously. That man has not an amiable
character who is obliged to restrain his irritation, and through all
excitement and inner rage curbs himself courageously. Not until
conduct is spontaneous, rooted in a second nature, does it indicate
the character of him from whom it proceeds.
That unconsciousness is necessary for the highest goodness is a
cardinal principle in the teaching of Jesus. Other teachers of his
nation undertook clearly to survey the entirety of human life, to
classify its situations and coolly to decide the amount of good and
evil contained in each. Righteousness according to the Pharisees was
found in conscious conformity to these decisions. Theirs was the
method of casuistry, the method of minute, critical, and instructed
judgment. The fields of morality and the law were practically
identified, goodness becoming externalized and regarded as everywhere
substantially the same for one man as for another. Pharisaism, in
short, stuck in the second stage. Jesus emphasized the unconscious and
subjective factor. He denounced the considerate conduct of the
Pharisees as not righteousness at all. It was mere will-worship. Jesus
preached a religion of the heart, and taught that righteousness must
become an individual passion, similar to the passions of hunger and
thirst, if it would attain to any worth. So long as evil is easy and
natural for us, and good difficult, we are evil. We must be born
again. We must attain a new nature. Our right hand must not know what
our left hand does. We must become as little children, if we would
enter into the kingdom of heaven.
The chief difficulty in comprehending this doctrine of the three
stages lies in the easy confusion of the first and the third. Jesus
guards against this, not bidding us to be or to remain children, but
to become such. The unconsciousness and simplicity of childhood is the
goal, not the starting-point. The unconsciousness aimed at is not of
the same kind as that with which we set out. In early life we catch
the habits of our home or even derive our conduct from hereditary
bias. We begin, therefore, as purely natural creatures, not asking
whether the ways we use are the best. Those ways are already fixed in
the usages of speech, the etiquettes of society, the laws of our
country. These things make up the uncriticised warp and woof of our
lives, often admirably beautiful lives. When speaking in my last
chapter of the way in which our age has come to eulogize guidance by
natural conditions, I might have cited as a striking illustration the
prevalent worship of childhood. Only within the last century has the
child cut much of a figure in literature. He is an important enough
figure to-day, both in and out of books. In him nature is displayed
within the spiritual field, nature with the possibilities of spirit,
but those possibilities not yet realized. We accordingly reverence the
child and delight to watch him. How charming he is, graceful in
movement, swift of speech, picturesque in action! Enviable little
being! The more so because he is able to retain his perfection for so
brief a time.
But we all know the unhappy period from seven to fourteen when he who
formerly was all grace and spontaneity discovers that he has too many
arms and legs. How disagreeable the boy then becomes! Before, we liked
to see him playing about the room. Now we ask why he is allowed to
remain. For he is a ceaseless disturber; constantly noisy and
constantly aware of making a noise, his excuses are as bad as his
indiscretions. He cannot speak without making some awkward blunder. He
is forever asking questions without knowing what to do with the
answers. A confused and confusing creature! We say he has grown
backward. Where before he was all that is estimable, he has become all
that we do not wish him to be.
All that we do not wish him to be, but certainly much more what God
wishes him to be. For if we could get rid of our sense of annoyance,
we should see that he is here reaching a higher stage, coming into his
heritage and obtaining a life of his own. Formerly he lived merely the
life of those about him. He laid a self-conscious grasp on nothing of
his own. When now at length he does lay that grasp, we must permit him
to be awkward, and to us disagreeable. We should aid him through the
inaccurate, slow, and fatiguing period of his existence until, having
tested many tracts of life and learned in them how to mechanize
desirable conduct, he comes back on their farther side to a childhood
more beautiful than the original. Many a man and woman possesses this
disciplined childhood through life. Goodness seems the very atmosphere
they breathe, and everything they do to be exactly fitting. Their acts
are performed with full self-expression, yet without strut or
intrusion of consciousness. Whatever comes from them is happily
blended and organized into the entirety of life. Such should be our
aim. We should seek to be born again, and not to remain where we were
originally born.
In what has now been said there is a good deal of comfort for those
who suffer the pains of self-consciousness, previously described. They
need not seek a lower degree of self-consciousness, but only to
distribute more wisely what they now possess. In fullness of
consciousness they may well rejoice, recognizing its possession as a
power. But they should take a larger unit for its exercise. In meeting
a friend, for example, we are prone to think of ourselves, how we are
speaking or poising our body. But suppose we transfer our
consciousness to the subject of our talk, and allow ourselves a hearty
interest in that. Leaving the details of speech and posture to
mechanized past habits, we may turn all the force of our conscious
attention on the fresh issues of the discussion. With these we may
identify ourselves, and so experience the enlargement which new
materials bring. When we were studying the intricacies of self-
sacrifice, we found that the generous man is not so much the self-
denier or even the self-forgetter, but rather he who is mindful of his
larger self. He turns consciousness from his abstract and isolated
self and fixes it upon his related and conjunct self. But that is a
process which may go on everywhere. Our rule should be to withdraw
attention from isolated minutiae, for which a glance is sufficient.
Giving merely that glance, we may then leave them to themselves.
Encouraging them to become mechanized, we should use these mechanized
trains in the higher ranges of living. The cure for self-consciousness
is not suppression, but the turning of it upon something more
significant.
Every habit, however, requires perpetual adjustment, or it may rule us
instead of allowing us instead to rule through it. We do well to let
alone our mechanized trains while they do not lead us into evil. So
long as they run in the right direction, instincts are better than
intentions. But repeatedly we need to study results,–and see if we
are arriving at the goal where we would be. If not, then habit
requires readjustment. From such negative control a habit should never
be allowed to escape. This great world of ours does not stand still.
Every moment its conditions are altering. Whatever action fits it now
will be pretty sure to be a slight misfit next year. No one can be
thoroughly good who is not a flexible person, capable of drawing back
his trains, reexamining them, and bringing them into better adjustment
to his purposes.
It is meaningless, then, to ask whether we should be intuitive and
spontaneous, or considerate and deliberate. There is no such
alternative. We need both dispositions. We should seek to attain a
condition of swift spontaneity, of abounding freedom, of the absence
of all restraint, and should not rest satisfied with the conditions in
which we were born. But we must not suffer that even the new nature
should be allowed to become altogether natural. It should be but the
natural engine for spiritual ends, itself repeatedly scrutinized with
a view to their better fulfillment.
The doctrine of the three stages of conduct, elaborated in this
chapter, explains some curious anomalies in the bestowal of praise,
and at the same time receives from that doctrine farther elucidation.
When is conduct praiseworthy? When may we fairly claim honor from our
fellows and ourselves? There is a ready answer. Nothing is
praiseworthy which is not the result of effort. I do not praise a lady
for her beauty, I admire her. The athlete’s splendid body I envy,
wishing that mine were like it. But I do not praise him. Or does the
reader hesitate; and while acknowledging that admiration and envy may
be our leading feelings here, think that a certain measure of praise
is also due? It may be. Perhaps the lady has been kind enough by care
to heighten her beauty. Perhaps those powerful muscles are partly the
result of daily discipline. These persons, then, are not undeserving
of praise, at least to the extent that they have used effort. Seeing a
collection of china, I admire the china, but praise the collector. It
is hard to obtain such pieces. Large expense is required, long
training too, and constant watchfulness. Accordingly I am interested
in more than the collection. I give praise to the owner. A learned man
we admire, honor, envy, but also praise. His wisdom is the result of
effort.
Plainly, then, praise and blame are attributable exclusively to
spiritual beings. Nature is unfit for honor. We may admire her, may
wish that our ways were like hers, and envy her great law-abiding
calm. But it would be foolish to praise her, or even to blame when her
volcanoes overwhelm our friends. We praise spirit only, conscious
deeds. Where self-directed action forces its path to a worthy goal, we
rightly praise the director.
Now, if all this is true, there seems often-times a strange
unsuitableness in praise. We may well decline to receive it. To praise
some of our good qualities, pretty fundamental ones too, often strikes
us as insulting. You are asked a sudden question and put in a
difficult strait for an answer. “Yes,” I say, “but you actually did
tell the truth. I wish to congratulate you. You were successful and
deserve much praise.” But who would feel comfortable under such
eulogy? And why not? If telling the truth is a spiritual excellence
and the result of effort, why should it not be praised? But there lies
the trouble. I assumed that to be a truth-teller required strain on
your part. In reality it would have required greater strain for
falsehood. It might then seem that I should praise those who are not
easily excellent, since I am forbidden to praise those who are. And
something like this seems actually approved. If a boy on the street,
who has been trained hardly to distinguish truth from lies, some day
stumbles into a bit of truth, I may justly praise him. “Splendid
fellow! No word of falsehood there!” But when I see the father of his
country bearing his little hatchet, praise is unfit; for George
Washington cannot tell a lie.
Absurd as this conclusion appears, I believe it states our soundest
moral judgment; for praise never escapes an element of disparagement.
It implies that the unexpected has happened. If I praise a man for
learning, it is because I had supposed him ignorant; if for helping
the unfortunate, I hint that I did not anticipate that he would regard
any but himself. Wherever praise appears, we cannot evade the
suggestion that excellence is a matter of surprise. And as nobody
likes to be thought ill-adapted to excellence, praise may rightly be
resented.
It is true, there is a group of cases where praise seems differently
employed. We can praise those whom we recognize as high and lifted up.
“Sing praises unto the Lord, sing praises,” the Psalmist says. And our
hearts respond. We feel it altogether appropriate. We do not disparage
God by daily praise. No, but the element of disparagement is still
present, for we are really disparaging ourselves. That is the true
significance of praise offered to the confessedly great. For them, the
praise is inappropriate. But it is, nevertheless, appropriate that it
should be offered by us little people who stand below and look up.
Praising the wise man, I really declare my ignorance to be so great
that I have difficulty in conceiving myself in his place. For me, it
would require long years of forbidding work before I could attain to
his wisdom. And even in the extreme form of this praise of superiors,
substantially the same meaning holds. We praise God in order to abase
ourselves. Him we cannot really praise. That we understand at the
start. He is beyond commendation. Excellence covers him like a
garment, and is not attained, like ours, by struggle through
obstacles. Yet this difference between him and us we can only express
by trying to imagine ourselves like him, and saying how difficult such
excellence would then be. We have here, therefore, a sort of reversed
praise, where the disparagement which praise always carries falls
exclusively on the praiser. And such cases are by no means uncommon,
cases in which there is at least a pretense on the praiser’s part of
setting himself below the one praised. But praise usually proceeds
down from above, and then, implicitly, we disparage him whom we
profess to exalt.
Nor do I see how this is to be avoided; for praise belongs to goodness
gained by effort, while excellence is not reached till effort ceases
in second nature. To assert through praise that goodness is still a
struggle is to set the good man back from our third stage to our
second. In fact by the time he really reaches excellence praise has
lost its fitness, goodness now being easier than badness, and no
longer something difficult, unexpected, and demanding reward. For this
reason those persons are usually most greedy of praise who have a
rather low opinion of themselves. Being afraid that they are not
remarkable, they are peculiarly delighted when people assure them that
they are. Accordingly the greatest protection against vanity is pride.
The proud man, assured of his powers, hears the little praisers and is
amused. How much more he knows about it than they! Inner worth stops
the greedy ear. When we have something to be vain about, we are seldom
vain.
But if all this is true, why should praise be sweet? In candor most of
us will own that there is little else so desired. When almost every
other form of dependence is laid by, to our secret hearts the good
words of neighbors are dear. And well they may be! Our pleasure
testifies how closely we are knitted together. We cannot be satisfied
with a separated consciousness, but demand that the consciousness of
all shall respond to our own. A glorious infirmity then! And the
peculiar sweetness which praise brings is grounded in the
consciousness of our weakness. In certain regions of my life, it is
true, goodness has become fairly natural; and there of course praise
strikes me as ill-adjusted and distasteful. I do not like to have my
manners praised, my honesty, or my diligence. But there are other
tracts where I know I am still in the stage of conscious effort. In
this extensive region, aware of my feebleness and hearing an inward
call to greater heights, it will always be cheering to hear those
about me say, “Well done!” Of course in saying this they will
inevitably hint that I have not yet reached an end, and their praises
will displease unless I too am ready to acknowledge my incompleteness.
But when this is acknowledged, praise is welcome and invigorating. I
suspect we deal in it too little. If imagination were more active, and
we were more willing to enter sympathetically the inner life of our
struggling and imperfect comrades, we should bestow it more liberally.
Occasion is always at hand. None of us ever quite passes beyond the
deliberate, conscious, and praise-deserving line. In some parts of our
being we are farther advanced, and may there be experiencing the peace
and assurance of a considerable second nature. But there too perpetual
verification is necessary. And so many tracts remain unsubdued or
capable of higher cultivation that throughout our lives, perhaps on
into eternity, effort will still find room for work, and suitable
praises may attend it.
James’s Psychology, ch. iv.
Bain’s Emotions and the Will, ch. ix.
Wundt’s Facts of the Moral Life, ch. iii.
Stephen’s Science of Ethics, ch. vii. Section iii.
Martineau’s Types of Ethical Theory, pt. ii. bk. i. ch. iii.
 

This electronic text of The Nature of Goodness by George Herbert Palmer (Alford Professor of Philosophy in Harvard University, 1903, A. F. P.) is in the public domain.
Conversion to this hypertext by Philipp Lenssen.


Magazine: Philosophy Today (Amazon).


Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Nature of GoodnessBy George Herbert PalmerAt Amazon
