




Among the German epic poems of the Middle Ages the Nibelungenlied [4]
enjoyed an exceptional popularity, as is evident from the large number of
manuscripts–some thirty, either complete or fragmentary–that have been
preserved from the centuries immediately following its appearance. Three
are of prime importance as texts, namely, those preserved now in Munich,
St. Gall, and Donaueschingen, and cited as A, B, and C respectively.
Since the time when Lachmann, about a century ago, made the first
scientific study of the poem, a whole flood of writings has been poured
forth discussing the relative merits of these texts. Each in turn has had
its claims advocated with warmth and even acrimony. None of these three
principal manuscripts, however, offers the poem in its earliest form;
they all point to a still earlier version. It is now generally admitted
that the St. Gall manuscript (B), according to which the present
translation has been made, contains the best and most nearly original
text.
[4] The closing strophe of MS. C calls the poem der Nibelunge liet, or
    Nibelungenlied, i.e. the lay of the Nibelungen, and this is the title
    by which it is commonly known. MSS. A and B have in the corresponding
    strophe der Nibelunge not, i.e. the ’need’, ’distress’,
    ’downfall’ of the Nibelungen. In the title of the poem ’Nibelungen’
    is simply equivalent to ’Burgundians’: the poem relates the downfall
    of the Burgundian kings and their people. Originally the Nibelungen
    were, as their name, which is connected with nebel, ’mist’,
    ’gloom’, signifies, the powers of darkness to whom the light-hero
    Siegfried fell a prey. After Siegfried obtains possession of the
    treasure the name Nibelungen is still applied to Alberich and the
    dwarfs who guard it and who are now Siegfried’s vassals. Then after
    Siegfried’s death the name is given to the Burgundians. It is a
    mistake to suppose that the name was applied in each case to those
    who became possessors of the hoard, for Siegfried himself is never so
    designated.
Hand in hand with the discussion of the relative authenticity of the
manuscripts went the consideration of another more important literary
question,–the evolution of the poem itself. Even if we knew nothing of
the history of the Nibelungen saga as revealed in the Edda and through
other literary and historic sources, a reading of the poem would give us
unmistakable hints that it is not, in its present form, a perfect
literary unit. We detect inconsistencies in matter and inequalities of
style that prove it to be a remodelling of material already existing in
some earlier form. What, then, has been the history of its evolution? How
did this primeval Siegfried myth, this historical saga of the Burgundians
and Attila, first come to be part of the poetic stock of the German
people? What was its earliest poetic form, and what series of
transformations did it pass through during seven centuries of growth?
These and many kindred questions present themselves, and the search for
answers to them takes us through many winding labyrinths of the nation’s
contemporary history. Few products of German literature have so exercised
and tantalized critics as the Nibelungenlied.
In this connection we have to remind ourselves that comparatively little
of what must have been the large body of native poetry in Germany
previous to the eleventh century has come down to us. Barely enough has
been preserved to show the path of the nation’s literary progress. Some
of the important monuments have been saved by chance, while others of
equal or perhaps greater value have been irrecoverably lost. The interest
in the various incidents of the Nibelungen story was sufficient to keep
it alive among the people and hand it down orally through many
generations. If we could observe it as it passed from age to age we
should doubtless see it undergoing continuous change according to the
time and the class of the people that were the preservers of the native
literature in its many ups and downs. Lachmann in the year 1816 was the
first to bring scientific criticism to bear on the question of the
Nibelungenlied and its origin. Applying to it the same methods as had
recently been used by Wolf in his criticism of the Homeric poems, he
thought he was able to discover as the basis of the complete epic a cycle
of twenty separate lieder, ballads or shorter episodic poems, on the
strength of which belief he went so far as to publish an edition of the
poem in which he made the division into the twenty separate lays and
eliminated those strophes (more than one third of the whole number) that
he deemed not genuine. It is now generally admitted, however, that the
pioneer of Nibelungen investigation fell here into over-positive
refinements of literary criticism. Separate shorter poems there doubtless
existed narrating separate episodes of the story, but these are no longer
to be arrived at by a process of critical disintegration and pruning of
the epic as we have it. An examination of the twenty lieder according
to Lachmann’s division convinces us that they are not separate units in
the sense he conceived them to be. Though these twenty lieder may be
based upon a number of earlier episodic poems, yet the latter already
constituted a connected series. They were already like so many scenes of
a gradually developing drama. Events were foreshadowed in one that were
only fulfilled in another, and the incidents of later ones are often only
intelligible on the supposition of an acquaintance with motives that
originated in preceding ones. It is in this sense only, not according to
Lachmann’s overwrought theory, that we are justified in speaking of a
liedercyclus, or cycle of separate episodic poems, as the stage of the
epic antecedent to the complete form in which we now have it. But beyond
this cycle we cannot trace it back. How the mythical saga of Siegfried
and the Nibelungen, and the story of the Burgundians and Attila, were
first sung in alliterative lays in the Migration Period, how as heathen
song they were pushed aside or slowly influenced by the spirit of
Christianity, how with changing time they changed also their outward
poetical garb from alliteration to rhyme and altered verse-form, till at
last in the twelfth century they have become the cycle of poems from
which the great epic of the Nibelungenlied could be constructed–of all
this we may form a faint picture from the development of the literature
in general, but direct written record of it is almost completely wanting.
The twelfth and thirteenth centuries witnessed far-reaching changes in
the social and intellectual life of the German lands, the leading feature
of which is the high development of all that is included under the name
of chivalry. It is marked, too, by a revival of the native literature
such as had not been known before, a revival which is due almost entirely
to its cultivation by the nobility. From emperor down to the simple
knight they were patrons of poetry and, what is most striking, nearly all
the poets themselves belong to the knightly class. The drama has not yet
begun, but in the field of epic and lyric there appear about the year
1200 poets who are among the greatest that German literature even down to
the present time has to show. The epic poetry of that period, though
written almost entirely by the knights, is of two distinct kinds
according to its subject: on the one hand what is called the Court Epic,
on the other hand the National, or Popular, Epic. The Court Epic follows
for the most part French models and deals chiefly with the life of
chivalry, whose ideals were embodied in king Arthur and his circle of
knights; the National Epic drew its subjects from the national German
saga, its two great products being the Nibelungenlied and the poem of
Gudrun. Court Epic and National Epic are further distinct in form, the
Court Epic being written in the rhymed couplets popularized in modern
times in English by Sir Walter Scott, while the National Epic is composed
in four-lined strophes.
Though we know the name and more or less of the life of the authors of
the many court epics of the period, the name of the poet who gave the
Nibelungenlied its final form has not been recorded. As we have seen, the
poem is at bottom of a truly popular, national character, having its
beginnings in mythology and early national history. For centuries the
subject had been national property and connected with the name of no one
individual. We have it now in the form in which it was remodelled to suit
the taste of the court and the nobility, and like the court epic to be
read aloud in castle hall. That it is written in four-lined strophes[5]
and not in the usual rhymed couplets of the court epics is doubtless due
to the fact that the former verse-form had already been used in the
earlier ballads upon which it is based, and was simply taken over by the
final moulder of the poem. This latter was probably a member of the
nobility like the great majority of the epic poets of the time; he must
at least have been well acquainted with the manners, tastes, sentiments,
and general life of the nobility. Through him the poem was brought
outwardly more into line with the literary ideals of the court circles.
This shows itself chiefly in a negative way, namely, in the almost
complete avoidance of the coarse language and farcical situations so
common with the popular poet, the spielmann. Beyond this no violence is
done to the simple form of the original. The style is still inornate and
direct, facts still speak rather than words, and there is nothing
approaching the refined psychological dissection of characters and
motives such as we find in Wolfram von Eschenbach and the other court
writers.
[5] For description of the Nibelungen strophe see below, Chapter 7.
When we look to the inner substance we see that the ground ideals are
still those of the original Germanic heroic age. The chief characters are
still those of the first stages of the story–Siegfried, Brunhild,
Gunther, Kriemhild, Hagen. The fundamental theme is the ancient theme of
triuwe, unswerving personal loyalty and devotion, which manifests
itself above all in the characters of Kriemhild and Hagen. Kriemhild’s
husband Siegfried is treacherously slain: her sorrow and revenge are the
motives of the drama. Hagen’s mistress has, though with no evil intent on
Siegfried’s part, received an insult to her honor: to avenge that insult
is Hagen’s absorbing duty, which he fulfils with an utter disregard of
consequences. Over this their fundamental character the various persons
of the story have received a gloss of outward conduct in keeping with the
close of the twelfth century. The poet is at pains to picture them as
models of courtly bearing, excelling in hofscheit, zuht, tugent.
Great attention is paid to dress, and the preparation of fitting apparel
for court festivities is described and re-described with wearisome
prolixity. A cardinal virtue is milte, liberality in the bestowal of
gifts. Courtesy toward women is observed with the careful formality of
the age of the minnesingers. It was above all Siegfried, the light-hero
of the original myth, whose character lent itself to an idealization of
knighthood. Ruediger holds a like place in the latter part of the poem.
In the evident pleasure with which the minstrel-knight Volker of the
sword-fiddlebow is depicted, as well doubtless as in occasional gleams of
broader humor, the hand of the minstrels who wrought on the story in its
earlier ballad stages may be seen. And the whole poem, in keeping with
its form in an age strongly under church influence, has been tinged with
the ideals of Christianity. Not only does the ordinary conversation of
all the characters, including even the heathen Etzel, contain a great
number of formal imprecations of God, but Christian institutions and
Christian ethics come frequently into play. Mass is sung in the minster,
baptism, marriage, burial are celebrated in Christian fashion, the devil
is mentioned according to the Christian conception, we hear of priest,
chaplain, and bishop, Christians are contrasted with heathen, and
Kriemhild, in marrying Etzel, has a hope of turning him to Christianity.
In Hagen’s attempt to drown the chaplain whom the Burgundians have with
them as they set out for the land of the Huns we have perhaps an
expression of the conflict between the heathen and the Christian
elements, possibly also a reflection of the traditional animosity of the
spielmann to his clerical rival.
The Nibelungenlied and the Iliad of Homer have often been compared, but
after all to no great purpose. The two epics are alike in having their
roots deep in national origins, but beyond this we have contrasts rather
than resemblances. The Iliad is a more varied and complete picture of the
whole Greek world than the Nibelungenlied is of the German, its religious
atmosphere has not been disturbed in the same way as that of the saga of
early Germanic times projected several centuries into a later Christian
age, and it possesses in every way a greater unity of sentiment. In the
varied beauty of its language, its wealth of imagery, its depth of
feeling and copiousness of incident the Iliad is superior to the
Nibelungenlied with its language of simple directness, its few lyrical
passages, its expression of feeling by deeds rather than by words. Homer,
too, is in general buoyant, the Nibelungenlied is sombre and stern. And
in one last respect the two epics differ most of all: the Iliad is
essentially narrative and descriptive, a series of episodes; the
Nibelungenlied is essentially dramatic, scene following scene of dramatic
necessity and pointing steadily to a final and inevitable catastrophe.
In the Northern Edda and in the German Nibelungenlied the Nibelungen saga
found its fullest and most poetic expression. But these were not to be
the only literary records of it. Both in Scandinavian lands and in
Germany various other monuments, scattered over the intervening
centuries, bear witness to the fact that it lived on in more or less
divergent forms. The Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus of the latter part
of the twelfth century has a reference to the story of Kriemhild’s
treachery toward her brothers. About the year 1250 an extensive prose
narrative, known as the Thidrekssaga, was written by a Norwegian from
oral accounts given him by men from Bremen and Munster. This narrative is
interesting as showing the form the saga had taken by that date on Low
German territory, and holds an important place in the history of the
development of the saga. It has much more to say of the early history of
Siegfried than we find in the Nibelungenlied, and yet in the main
outlines of the story of Kriemhild’s revenge it corresponds with the
German epic and not with the Northern Edda. A chronicle of the island of
Hven in the Sound, dating in its original form from the sixteenth
century, as well as Danish ballads on the same island that have lived on
into modern times, tell of Sivard (Siegfried), Brynhild, and also of
Grimild’s (Kriemhild’s) revenge. In Norway and Sweden traces of the saga
have recently been discovered; while songs that are sung on the Faroe
Islands, as an accompaniment to the dance on festive occasions, have been
recorded, containing over six hundred strophes in which is related in
more or less distorted form the Nibelungen story.
In Germany the two poems known as the Klage and Hurnen Seyfrid are
the most noteworthy additional records of the Nibelungen saga, as
offering in part at least independent material. The Klage is a poem of
over four thousand lines in rhymed couplets, about half of it being an
account of the mourning of Etzel, Dietrich, and Hildebrand as they seek
out the slain and prepare them for burial, the other half telling of the
bringing of the news to Bechlaren, Passau, and Worms. The poem was
written evidently very soon after the Nibelungenlied, the substance of
which was familiar to the author, though he also draws in part from other
sources. Compared with the Nibelungenlied it possesses but little poetic
merit and is written with distinctly Christian sentiment which is out of
harmony with the ground-tone of the Germanic tragedy.
The Hurnen Seyfrid is a poem of 179 four-lined strophes which is
preserved only in a print of the sixteenth century, but at least a
portion of whose substance reaches back in its original form to a period
preceding the composition of the Nibelungenlied. It is evidently, as we
have it, formed by the union of two earlier separate poems, which are
indeed to a certain extent contradictory of each other. The first tells
of the boyhood of Seyfrid (Siegfried) and his apprenticeship to the
smith; how he slew many dragons, burned them, and smeared over his body
with the resulting fluid horny substance (hence his name hurnen), which
made him invulnerable; how he further found the hoard of the dwarf
Nybling, and by service to King Gybich won the latter’s daughter for his
wife. The second part tells how King Gybich reigned at Worms. He has
three sons, Gunther, Hagen, Gyrnot, and one daughter, Kriemhild. The
latter is borne off by a dragon, but finally rescued by Seyfrid, to whom
she is given in marriage. The three brothers are jealous of the might and
fame of Seyfrid, and after eight years Hagen slays him beside a cool
spring in the Ottenwald.
The poem Biterolf, written soon after the Nibelungenlied, and
Rosengarten of perhaps a half-century later, represent Dietrich in
conflict with Siegfried at Worms. The famous shoemaker-poet Hans Sachs of
Nuremberg in 1557 constructed a tragedy, Der hornen Sewfriedt, on the
story of Siegfried as he knew it from the Hurnen Seyfrid and the
Rosengarten. A prose version of the Hurnen Seyfrid, with free
additions and alterations, is preserved in the Volksbuch vom gehornten
Sigfrid, the oldest print of which dates from the year 1726. Of the vast
number of Fairy Tales, those most genuine creations of the poetic
imagination of the people, in which live on, often to be sure in scarcely
recognizable form, many of the myths and sagas of the nation’s infancy,
there are several that may with justice be taken as relics of the
Siegfried myth, for instance, The Two Brothers, The Young Giant, The
Earth-Manikin, The King of the Golden Mount, The Raven, The Skilled
Huntsman, and perhaps also the Golden Bird and The Water of Life;[6]
though it would seem from recent investigations that Thorn-Rose or the
Sleeping Beauty, is no longer to be looked upon as the counterpart of the
sleeping Brynhild. Finally, it is probable that several names in Germany
and in Northern countries preserve localized memories of the saga.
[6] These will be found in Grimm’s Marchen as numbers 60, 90-93, 111, 57,
    and 97.
Fundamentally different from the foregoing natural outgrowths of the
Nibelungen saga are the modern dramas and poems founded upon it since the
time of the romanticists at the beginning of the nineteenth century.[7]
Nearly all of these have already vanished as so much chaff from the
winnowing-mill of time: only two, perhaps, are now considered seriously,
namely, Hebbel’s Die Nibelungen and Richard Wagner’s Ring des
Nibelungen. Hebbel in his grandly conceived drama in three parts follows
closely the story as we have it in our epic poem the Nibelungenlied, and
the skill with which he makes use of its tragic elements shows his
dramatic genius at its best. But not even the genius of Hebbel could make
these forms of myth and saga live again for us upon a modern stage, and
the failure of this work with its wealth of poetic beauty and many scenes
of highest dramatic effectiveness to maintain its place as an acting
drama is sufficient evidence that the yawning gap that separates the
sentiment of the modern world from that of the early centuries in which
these sagas grew is not to be bridged over by the drama, however easy and
indeed delightful it may be for us to allow ourselves to be transported
thither to that romantic land upon the wings of epic story. Wagner in his
music-drama in three parts and prelude has followed in the main the saga
in its Northern form [8] up to the death of Siegfried and Brunhild, but
to the entire exclusion of the latter part of the story in which Atli
(Etzel) figures; his work has accordingly hardly any connection with the
Nibelungenlied here offered in translation. Only the pious loyalty of
national sentiment can assign a high place in dramatic literature to
Wagner’s work with its intended imitation of the alliterative form of
verse; while his philosophizing gods and goddesses are also but decadent
modern representatives of their rugged heathen originals.
[7] The curious will find a list of these in the introduction to Piper’s
    edition, cited below, Chapter 7.
[8] See above, Chapter 2.
The language of the Nibelungenlied presents about the same difficulty to
the German reader of to-day as that of our English Chaucer to us. Many
translations into modern German have accordingly been made to render it
accessible to the average reader without special study. In the year 1767
Bodmer in Zurich published a translation into hexameters of a portion of
it, and since the investigations of Lachmann raised it to the position of
a national epic of first magnitude many more have appeared, both in prose
and verse. The best in prose is that by Scherr, of the year 1860. Of the
metrical translations that by Simrock, which in its later editions
follows pretty closely the text of MS. C, is deservedly the most popular
and has passed through a great number of editions. Bartsch has also made
a translation based on his edition of MS. B. These modern versions by
Simrock and Bartsch reproduce best the metrical quality of the original
strophe. Easily obtainable recent translations are those by Junghans (in
Reclam’s Universalbibliothek) of text C, and by Hahn (Collection Spemann)
of text A.
[9] For a complete list of these, also of magazine articles, etc.,
    relating to the Nibelungenlied, see F. E. Sandbach, The
    Nibelungenlied and Gudrun in England and America, London,
    1903.
Early in last century interest in the Nibelungenlied began to manifest
itself in England. A synopsis of it, with metrical translation of several
strophes, appeared in the year 1814 in Weber, Jamieson and Scott’s
“Illustrations of Northern Antiquities” (London and Edinburgh), in which,
according to Lockhart, Sir Walter Scott’s hand may perhaps be seen.
Carlyle, laboring as a pioneer to spread a knowledge of German literature
in England, contributed to the Westminster Review in 1831 his well-known
essay on the Nibelungenlied which, though containing an additional mass
of rather ill-arranged matter and now antiquated in many particulars, is
still well worth reading for its enthusiastic account of the epic itself
in the genuine style of the author. Carlyle here reproduces in metrical
form a few strophes. He has said elsewhere that one of his ambitions was
to make a complete English version of the poem. Since then an endless
number of accounts of it, chiefly worthless, has appeared in magazines
and elsewhere. The first attempt at a complete metrical translation was
made in 1848 by Jonathan Birch, who however only reproduces Lachmann’s
twenty lieder, with some fifty-one strophes added on his own account.
His version of the first strophe runs thus:
Legends of by-gone times reveal wonders and prodigies,
  Of heroes worthy endless fame,–of matchless braveries,–
  Of jubilees and festal sports,–of tears and sorrows great,–
  And knights who daring combats fought:–the like I now relate.
In 1850 appeared William Nansom Lettsom’s translation of the whole poem
according to Braunfels’ edition, with the opening strophe turned as
follows:
In stories of our fathers high marvels we are told
  Of champions well approved in perils manifold.
  Of feasts and merry meetings, of weeping and of wail,
  And deeds of gallant daring I’ll tell you in my tale.
The next metrical rendering is that by A. G. Foster-Barham in the year
1887. His first strophe reads:
Many a wondrous story have the tales of old,
  Of feats of knightly glory, and of the Heroes bold,
  Of the delights of feasting, of weeping and of wail,
  Of noble deeds of daring; you may list strange things in my tale.
In the year 1898 follows still another, by Alice Horton (edited by E.
Bell). This latest translation is based on Bartsch’s text of MS. B, and
is prefaced by Carlyle’s essay. First strophe:
To us, in olden legends, / is many a marvel told
  Of praise-deserving heroes, / of labours manifold,
  Of weeping and of wailing, / of joy and festival;
  Of bold knights’ battling shall you / now hear a wondrous tale.
Apart from the many faults of interpretation all of the metrical
translations of the Nibelungenlied here enumerated are defective in one
all-important respect: they do not reproduce the poem in its metrical
form. Carlyle and other pioneers we may perhaps acquit of any intention
of following the original closely in this regard. None of the translators
of the complete poem, however, has retained in the English rendering what
is after all the very essence of a poem,–its exact metrical quality.
Birch has created an entirely different form of strophe in which all four
lines are alike, each containing seven principal accents, with the
caesura, following the fourth foot. Lettsom makes the first serious
attempt to reproduce the original strophe. It is evident from the
introduction to his translation (see p. xxvi) that he had made a careful
study of its form, and he does in fact reproduce the first three lines
exactly. Of the fourth line he says: “I have not thought it expedient to
make a rule of thus lengthening the fourth lines of the stanzas, though I
have lengthened them occasionally"(!). What moved him thus to deprive
the stanza of its most striking feature–and one, moreover, that is
easily preserved in English–he does not make clear. The versions of
Foster-Barham and of Horton and Bell show the same disfigurement, the
latter omitting the extra accent of the fourth line, as they say, “for
the sake of euphony"(!). It is just this lengthened close of each strophe
that gives the Nibelungenlied its peculiar metrical character and
contributes not a little to the avoidance of monotony in a poem of over
two thousand strophes. In theory the form of the fourth line as it stands
in the original is no more foreign to the genius of the English language
than to that of modern German, and few of the many Germans giving a
modernized version of the epic have been bold enough to lay sacrilegious
hands upon it to shorten it.
A brief account of the Nibelungen strophe may not be out of place here,
owing to the fact that its character has generally been misunderstood.
The origin and evolution of the strophe have been the subject of much
discussion, the results of which we need not pause to formulate here. As
it appears in actual practice in our poem of about the year 1200, it was
as follows: Each strophe consists of four long lines, the first line
rhyming with the second, and the third with the fourth. The rhymes are
masculine, that is, rhymes on the end syllable. Each line is divided by a
clearly marked caesura into two halves; each half of the first three
lines and the first half of the fourth line has three accented syllables,
the second half of the fourth line has four accented syllables. The first
half of each line ends in an unaccented syllabic–or, strictly speaking,
in a syllable bearing a secondary accent; that is, each line has what is
called a “ringing” caesura. The metrical character of the Nibelungen
strophe is thus due to its fixed number of accented syllables. Of
unaccented syllables the number may vary within certain limits.
Ordinarily each accented syllable is preceded by an unaccented one; that
is, the majority of feet are iambic. The unaccented syllable may,
however, at times be wanting, or there may, on the other hand, be two or
even three of them together. A characteristic of the second half of the
last line is that there is very frequently no unaccented syllable between
the second and the third accented ones. Among occasional variations of
the normal strophe as here described may be mentioned the following: The
end-rhyme is in a few instances feminine instead of masculine; while on
the other hand the ending of the first half-lines is occasionally
masculine instead of feminine, that is, the caesura is not “ringing.” In
a few scattered instances we find strophes that rhyme throughout in the
caesura as well as at the end of lines;[10] occasionally the first and
second lines, or still less frequently the third and fourth, alone have
caesural rhyme.[11] Rhyming of the caesura may be regarded as accidental
in most cases, but it is reproduced as exactly as possible in this
translation.
[10] Strophes 1, 17, 102, and possibly 841.
[11] Strophes 18, 69, 103, 115, 129, 148, 177, 190, 198, 222, 231,
     239, 293, 325, 345, 363, 485, 584, 703, 712, 859, 864, 894, 937,
     1022, 1032, 1114, 1225, 1432, 1436, 1460, 1530, 1555, 1597, 1855,
     1909, 1944, 1956, 2133, 2200, 2206, 2338.
In the original the opening strophe, which is altogether more regular
than the average and is, moreover, one of the few that have also complete
caesural rhyme, is as follows:
Uns ist in alten maeren / wunders vil geseit
  von heleden lobebaeren, / von grozer arebeit,
  von frouden, hochgeziten, / von weinen und von klagen,
  von kuener recken striten / muget ir nu wunder hoeren sagen.
Here the only place where the unaccented syllable is lacking before the
accented is before wunders at the beginning of the second half of the
first line. A strophe showing more typical irregularities is, for
instance, the twenty-second:
In sinen besten ziten, / bi sinen jungen tagen,
  man mohte michel wunder / von Sivride sagen,
  waz eren an im wuchse / und wie scoene was sin lip.
  sit heten in ze minne / diu vil waetlichen wip.
Here the rhyme of the first and second lines is still masculine, tagen
and sagen being pronounced tagn and sagn. The unaccented syllable
is lacking, e.g., before the second accent of the second half of line
two, also before the first and the third accent of the second half of
line four. There are two unaccented syllables at the beginning
(Auftakt) of the second half of line three. The absence of the
unaccented syllable between the second and the third accent of the last
half of the fourth line of a strophe, as here, is so frequent in the poem
as to amount almost to a rule; it shows an utter misconception, or
disregard, of its true character, nevertheless, to treat this last
half-line as having only three accented syllables, as all translators
hitherto have done.
MS. A. (Hohenems-Munich).
  Lachmann, Der Nibelunge Not und die Klage, 5th ed., Berlin, 1878.
    Several reprints of the text alone later.
MS. B. (St. Gall).
  Bartsch, Das Nibelungenlied, 6th ed., Leipzig, 1886. (Vol. 3 of the
    series Deutsche Classiker des Mittelalters.)
  Piper, Die Nibelungen. (Vol. 6 of Kurschner’s Deutsche
    National-Litteratur.)
MS. C. (Donaueschingen).
  Zarncke, Das Nibelungenlied, 6th ed., Leipzig, 1887.
Continue...

This full text of The Nibelungenlied by George Henry Needler, Translator
is in the public domain.


Also see: A Companion to the Nibelungenlied


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
