


TIME FIXED FOR THE UPRISING OR REVOLUTION–EXTENSIVE PREPARATIONS–DRILL
AND DISCIPLINE OF CLUBS–OPEN THREATS UPON OUR STREETS–MASS MEETINGS AND
TARGET PRACTICE OF TRAITORS–PREPARATIONS FOR THE NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC
CONVENTION IN CHICAGO–WHY THE UPRISING DID NOT TAKE PLACE–PRICE BEHIND
TIME–ANOTHER PERIOD FIXED–ALL READY AT THE CONVENTION–PROMPT AND
TIMELY PRECAUTION BY COLONEL SWEET.
The approach of the time fixed for the general uprising, witnessed
remarkable and very unusual activity among the members of the Sons of
Liberty, who now saw vividly the complete realization of their wishes, and
were all, rank and file, in obedience to orders, busy with preparations.
Little did the busy bustling city know of the plans and movements on foot.
The same activity in trade, the same hopeful spirit among Union persons,
the same gatherings at amusements, the same busy hum of industry as ever;
nothing gave evidence of the existence of the terrible plot so soon to
culminate, and to destroy by a single blow the hopes of our people,–to
inaugurate a reign of terror as fearful as any in the history of the war.
Citizens met and congratulated each other upon Union victories, and upon
the probable speedy close of the national strife, and at the firesides of
home discussed the terrible ravages of war, and as they knelt at the
family altar, thanked God that our own city, and our State, and our
section of the Union, had thus far been spared the immediate horrors and
desolation which ever mark the theatre of warfare. Who of all in our fair
city, besides the guilty wretches who were plotting the ruin and
slaughter, had even a foreboding of the trouble so nearly upon them. For
rebels in arms to commit cruelties and barbarities would have been
expected, but for the authors of our ruin to be our very friends and
neighbors, persons associated with us in business avocations, in social
relations, and in the enjoyment of the same general blessings with
ourselves, surpassed belief; yet such was the fact, and the faces that
beamed smiles upon us by day, and joined us in our congratulations for
national victories, by night were hideous with the dark designs and
murderous intent. The gunsmiths were busy, and trade in weapons of all
kinds was brisk; revolvers and knives particularly were articles of
demand. So brisk and yet so silently and secretly, was the arming of
individuals carried on, that weeks before the Convention assembled, but
few, if any, of the members of Copperhead organizations but were well
armed, and many had arms with which to supply other persons who might be
less fortunate than themselves. It was indeed a dark picture to look in
upon a group of the Sons of Liberty in their secure retreats, in the quiet
hours of night, cleaning, repairing and inspecting their muskets and
revolvers, moulding bullets, and making other preparations, and realizing
that the mission of these monsters was the murder of men who dared
proclaim and maintain their devotion to the Union. Upon the streets
treason became emboldened, as time rolled on, and not a few personal
collisions occurred from its utterance.
All this while that contemptible print, the Chicago Times, was
instilling treason into the minds of its readers, and doing all that it
could to embarrass the Government, discourage patriotism, and to give aid
and comfort to the rebels; our victories, with that sheet, were always
unimportant; our cause was unholy; our President a despot; our Union
soldiers were hirelings; our Union-loving citizens were abolition fanatics;
Jeff Davis was a master spirit of the age; his generals the heroes of the
Times; and rebel victories were events cheering and hope giving, as they
presaged the close of the war and peace; peace at the sacrifice of the
Union, of national honor, of national dignity and national interests. Such
was the Chicago Times at that period–the darkest era in our
history–and as well might we have looked for mercy from a hyena, or
reason from a ghoul, as in the event of open insurrection in our city, to
have looked to Wilbur F. Story, editor of the Times, to have endeavored
to suppress the flames his incendiary print had for years been fanning
into a blaze. And yet, citizens of Chicago and the West, this same Chicago
Times, now, after the occupation of Richmond by our forces, and the
surrender of Lee and all his forces, and the end of the rebellion is at
hand, this same Chicago Times pretends to rejoice in our success, and
some days turns a cold shoulder upon its old friend and patron, who has
contributed to its circulation and prosperity for years–Jeff Davis–and
really declares that his master’s cause is hopeless. Most noble Story,
most patriotic Story, most consistent Story! Rather weep with the fallen
fortunes of your masters. Flatter not yourself that the cloak of loyalty,
which you have found it so convenient to fling around you, as our Union
processions come marching along with thundering tread, that they will
believe your conversion sincere and lasting; the cloak is not long enough
to conceal your feet, and Union men will recognize the same Wilbur F.
Story, and none will be so obtuse as not to discover under any disguise
Bottom, the tailor. In the position of that Copperhead print, the state of
mind of the Times man reminds us of an instance of what may be called
poor consolation, A soldier of a division, after the command had run two
days from the scene of an engagement, had thrown away his gun and
accouterments, and alone in the woods sat down and commenced thinking–the
first opportunity he had for doing so. Rolling up his sleeves, and looking
at his legs and general physique, he thus gave utterance to his feelings:
“I am whipped–badly whipped–and somewhat demoralized, but no man, thank
God, can say I’m scattered!” And so, the Chicago Times, though kicked out
of respectable society long ago, continues to print its daily issues,
while from the scarcity of Copperheads all at once, since our recent
glorious victories, we infer that they have been “scattered;” and as
snakes cast their skins in the spring, so the Copperhead Times seems to
have cast its own this season; but though it may appear in more pleasing
garb with its present covering, let none forget that it is the same old
Copperhead still. And the time will come when some enterprising showman
will obtain and exhibit the last issue of that delectable sheet as the
acme of treason and corruption during the war, and as an illustration of
what villainy the mind of man may conceive, when he once turns against his
country.
About the period of which we write, say a month prior to the Convention,
informal meetings of the Sons of Liberty were frequent, and large numbers
of the members often went out of the city on excursions, nominally for
pleasure, but really for practice with fire arms. The most active
preparations were made by the Democrats, resident of Chicago, to be able
to accommodate their brethren from abroad, who would attend the
Convention, or who would pay them an earlier visit; for the time of the
uprising, it will be remembered, had been fixed for about the middle of
August. The time assigned arrived, but “all was quiet on the Potomac,” and
along the placid and fragrant Chicago. It was a complete fizzle, but not
from want of harmonious action on the part of the Copperheads of the
Northwest, but to the chagrin of the Rebel government, Gen. Price failed
to make his appearance in the vicinity of St. Louis, or Buckner about
Louisville. The disappointment and vexation of the Sons of Liberty was
great, and it found expression in the peculiar style of oratory and
diction, which Judge Morris had introduced into the Temple. The failure of
the rebels to concur, as had been arranged, was for a time quite
inexplicable and unsatisfactory to the most ultra secesh of the Temple. It
was not easy to communicate with Price and Buckner, and much mystery and
doubt hung over the failure. The leaders were in doubt as to the wisdom of
rising at the Convention, some being in favor and others adverse to it. It
was evident the leaders were not a little embarrassed, but they finally
agreed that a large force of “bone and muscle” should be on hand in
Chicago at the Convention, and if it was found that the War Democrats
should be in the ascendency, and the Peace wing could get nothing–either
platform or candidate–the uprising should occur at that time, but so
confident were the Peace men that they should be able to have the control
of the Convention, that Judge Morris and Brig.-Gen. Walsh, and other
leaders, announced to the members of the Illini their entire belief that
there would be no doubt of the success of the Peace wing, in that
Convention, and if so, no insurrectionary movement would be expedient; but
if the uprising did not occur then, it surely would at the time of the
Presidential election, and in the time which would elapse between the
Convention and the election, the most active and earnest efforts would be
made to strengthen the numbers of the Temples of the Sons of Liberty,
wherever they existed. Judge Morris had expressed the confident belief
that no difficulty would occur at the Convention, but declared if they
(the Copperheads) should meet with any interference, the most serious
results would follow.
The rank and file who had been edified by such men as J.L. Rock, Charles
W. Patten, James A. Wilkinson, L.C. Morrison, L.A. Doolittle, James Geary,
Mr. Duncan, Mr. Dooley, Mr. Frank Adams, City Attorney, and many others
were most impatient, and it was quite probable that a slight cause of
offence with Union men would result in an open riot, that could not be
suppressed till the grand aim of the Order was accomplished. About this
time L.A. Doolittle, who was never tired of expressing his devotion to the
distinguished exile Mr. Vallandigham, announced that Mr. V., who was
Supreme Commander of the whole Order, would honor the Chicago Temple with
a visit during the Convention, but that worthy could not find time to make
the visit. As the excitement of the coming Convention seized upon the
minds of those who were to participate in it, much speech making was done
inside the Temples. At these meetings the writer particularly noticed two
members, who seemed to have fallen into disfavor by the course which they
had seen fit to adopt. One of these men was Christopher C. Strawn, a young
lawyer of this city, of some education, a very fair order of talents, and
who had seemed hitherto taciturn and reserved. Upon conversation with him
we were astonished to find that he did not approve of the Jeff. Davis
principles, and had no fellowship with any overt act of treason. He had
been appointed a Brigadier-General, on the ground of his supposed ability,
but early took occasion to express himself, in such a manner that his
commission was speedily revoked. Mr. Strawn was, he declares, not in the
clique who favored a revolution. Mr. Strawn was subsequently arrested, but
he was soon released, and freely communicated truthful information to the
authorities.
During the summer an event truly unfortunate for the Sons of Liberty took
place, it being an exposé in the Chicago Tribune of the signs, grips,
passwords, &c. of the order. This was a cause of great distress of mind.
We remember that at a meeting about the 25th of August (Charles W. Patten
presiding), the expediency of changing the signs, grips, &c. was
considered, inasmuch as it would be unsafe to use them in public, but the
lateness of the day, and the time drawing so near when the entire forces
of the order would be called into requisition, it was not deemed expedient
to undertake any change or modification. At this meeting Judge Morris made
a speech in which he said that a demand had been made for arms seized in
Indiana (as Col. Walker had proposed to do), and if the demand failed, the
revolution would be begun in Indiana “as sure as there was a God in heaven
or an abolitionist in hell.”
At a meeting of the Chicago Temple Sons of Liberty, on the eve of the
Convention, we heard for the first time (and that from the mouth of L.A.
Doolittle), a definite plan for the attack of Camp Douglas. Doolittle told
how the camp was situated, and that it was accessible on two sides; that
guns were in position on only one side, and the west side was referred to
by him as being the weakest; he spoke of the common board fence which
formed the enclosure, and of the ease with which the camp could be taken,
and the vast importance of liberating the prisoners the first thing upon
an uprising. The speech of Doolittle was variously received; many of the
members were much interested; others who were in the higher degrees of the
order were vexed beyond measure that Doolittle should be so stupid as to
proclaim, in this public manner, a matter which really belonged to higher
degrees of the organization to decide. One of the number, James Geary, a
second-hand clothes dealer and broker on Wells street, who will receive
further mention by and by, became so much incensed that he ordered Mr.
Doolittle to his seat, declaring, with an oath, that Doolittle was telling
too much.
At a meeting about this time, several of the members spoke upon the
subject of releasing the prisoners at Camp Douglas. A map of Camp Douglas
was exhibited by an individual present, who seemed to be a soldier. The
map was a fine piece of work and had been made by a hand accustomed to
such labor. Upon this map the precise position of the various departments,
headquarters, cannon, &c., were laid down. There could be no shadow of
doubt in the mind of any man not stupefied with whiskey, and possessed of
common sense, that the details of the attack had been carefully considered
by those who were most interested in leading it on.
It had for some time been the policy of the Sons of Liberty to unite with
the Invincible Democratic Club and the various McClellan escorts in the
city and elsewhere, and seek to become its officers, that in case of an
outbreak it would be far better to be the controlling power, than to be
controlled. This plan worked admirably, and the Democratic Invincible Club
of Chicago became one of the most corrupt organizations outside the order
of Sons of Liberty. Its secretary at one time was Charles W. Patten, who
had been a Grand Seignior of the Chicago Temple, was also a member of the
Grand Council, and had taken a very active part in the prosperity of the
order, and was chairman of the committee to see that all the Sons of
Liberty were armed. One of the officers of the above named Club was Capt.
P.D. Parks, whose devotion to Jeff. Davis and good whiskey were noticeable
features in his character. This Capt. Parks was captain of the Invincible
Club and often made speeches in the Sons of Liberty Hall.
On Saturday the 26th August (two days prior to the National Democratic
Convention), immense numbers of persons came flocking to Chicago, indeed
at no former time in the history of the city was there such an influx of
strangers; they came in the cars and in wagon trains, and on horseback.
One county alone sent nearly a thousand men. It was a noticeable fact that
almost all persons who came into the city were well armed, and some of
them even brought muskets. Treason was now rampant, and it would not be
difficult, in looking around upon the most unprepossessing groups, and to
hear the language, to fancy one’s-self in Charleston, or some other nest
of treason. From all the men who came to the city we did not, in a single
instance, hear one good, hearty expression of Unionism, but our “Southern
brethren and their rights,” and this “wicked war,” &c., &c., were the
topics of conversation, and it was safe to set it down, that this was the
Peace wing of that most remarkable bird,–Democracy of 1864.
The writer was in close communication with Col. Sweet, commandant at Camp
Douglas, and by aid of our auxiliaries not an item of information
concerning the hostile intentions of the party transpired, that was not
known instantly by Col. Sweet,–special carriers or orderlies conveying
our dispatches. It must not be supposed that our observations were
confined to Chicago. Our channels of communication with the principal
points in the West were unobstructed; our “telegraphic cable” was in fine
working order, and if those wise heads for a moment fancied that Col. B.J.
Sweet might be caught napping, they were the worst self-deceived men we
have ever seen. Col. Sweet proceeded with all caution and celerity to make
his arrangements, and we beg the Colonel not to regard it as a breach of
confidence in us to say, that the guns were in such a position and so well
managed, that had there been any attempt to have assaulted the camp, there
would not have been able-bodied traitors enough left, to have carried the
killed and wounded to secure retreats. Almost any officer, perhaps, less
cool than Col. Sweet would have blustered about in such a manner as to
have rendered himself not only positively offensive to the citizens, but
would have placed the city under martial law, and doubtless precipitated
the very event it was wise for a time to avert. Col. Sweet was cool, and
managed the matter with the most perfect military ability and skill. He
compelled everybody, friend and foe, to respect him by his dignified,
gentlemanly bearing, and yet there was that about his appearance that told
plainer than words, that while he was courteous, polite, kind and willing
to do all in his power and consistent with his duty to preserve the peace,
yet had an outbreak been begun, of all men in Chicago, rebels and
sympathisers would prefer to get as far as possible from Col. Sweet, or
the reach of his influence. This gallant officer had his men under such
perfect discipline that a simple request, even when the men were not on
duty, was obeyed with the alacrity as if it had been a peremptory order.
The discovery that Col. Sweet was ready for them, which discovery was
early made and duly reported, had much to do with the good order which
prevailed in Chicago during the Convention.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Great North-Western Conspiracy In All Its Startling Details” by I. Windslow Ayer
is provided as free e-text and belongs to the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Great North-Western Conspiracy In All Its Startling DetailsBy I. Windslow AyerAt Amazon
