


MEETING OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL, F.O.S.L. AT THE RICHMOND HOUSE,
CHICAGO–TWO MILLION DOLLARS DISBURSED AS CONSIDERATION FOR THE GOOD OF
THE ORDER–TRAITORS TO BE KNOWN TO EACH OTHER BY BADGES, AND THEIR
PROPERTY SAVED BY DISPLAYING THE CONFEDERATE FLAG.
We have already shown that the three degrees in the Sons of Liberty had
each their specific province. The lower strata composed of the rough
material from which the Grand Council was made up by selections or choice
of the brighter and more shining lights,–persons whose political views
were up to the standard of treason, whose qualifications of intellect,
shrewdness, cunning, caution, promptness, and firmness of purpose fully
met the requirements of this degree of the order. The Supreme Council was
composed of the Supreme Commanders–the ruling spirits of the order. This
council was the body, therefore, from which all important measures must
emanate, and the secrecy of their movements, even from the order below
them, except such business as was regularly transmitted, was quite equal
to that of the lower order, from the rest of the world. Such being the
nature and character of this royal degree, and the fact that an uprising
had been determined upon, it will be seen how essential it was to the
Government of the United States, to be advised of their plans, and the
old adage that “where there is a will there is a way,” was not a fallacy
in the present case. On or about the 20th of July, 1863, agreeably to a
private notice which had been extended to the Supreme Council, a meeting
of that body was convened at the Richmond House, Chicago. During that day,
as well as on the day preceding, members of that organization arrived in
the city, and among the notables present on that occasion was Col.
Barrett, who was a Major-General of the Sons of Liberty, in command of the
District of Illinois, but who on the present occasion appeared in another
character of no less moment, that of representative of the Confederate
States Government, and charged with certain important instructions. Among
the members present were Captain Majors, from Canada; Brig.-Gen. Charles
Walsh, of Chicago; Judge Bullitt, of the Supreme Court of Kentucky, who
acted as Chairman; Dr. Bowles, Mr. Swan, Mr. Williams, Mr. Green, Mr.
Piper, Mr. Holloway, H.H. Dodd and James B. Wilson, Auditor of Washington
County, Indiana. The last named person and Mr. Green were present as
members of Dr. Bowles’ staff. After considerable discussion upon minor
matters, Major-General Barrett, (commonly called Colonel Barrett, who had
served the Rebel Government with some distinction, and was a first class
rebel), made a formal proposition to unite Illinois, Kentucky, Missouri,
Ohio and Indiana with the Confederate States, through the agency of the
Sons of Liberty, and as to the other States, their relations would be an
after consideration. The enterprise, he stated, would be attended with no
little expense, and would necessarily involve extreme caution, prudence
and firmness. He added, that the Southern Confederacy had placed in his
hands the snug little sum of two millions of dollars, which had been
captured from a Federal paymaster on the Red River, in Arkansas, to be
applied in furtherance of this proposition. Captain Majors was also, by
his own statement, a representative of the Rebel Government. It was
proposed to distribute the two millions of dollars through the Grand
Commanders of Indiana, Ohio, Kentucky, Missouri and Illinois, and that the
money was by them to be distributed through the Major-Generals to the
subordinate officers, according as might be deemed expedient. This money,
says Mr. Wilson, (and we have the best of reasons to credit his
statement,) was expended for arms. Well do we remember that an oral report
was submitted one evening at the Temple of the Illini, by the Grand
Seignor presiding, that the pro rata for Illinois had been so expended,
and that the weapons had been started for their destination, which was
Chicago. These arms consisted of muskets, carbines, pistols, pistol belts
and ammunition. At the Council meeting, of which we have spoken, the whole
subject of revolution was freely discussed, and received the unanimous
support of all present, and a time was named and agreed upon, but not
until after much debate, several dates being named by different parties,
and reasons given for fixing upon each. It was arranged that the Order in
Indiana were to rendezvous at Indianapolis, also at Evansville, New Albany
(opposite Louisville,) and Terra Haute, that they would seize the arsenal
at Indianapolis, and the arms and ammunition would be distributed among
the members. Wilson, before the military commission in Cincinnati, states
that he learned from Dr. Bowles, that it was the purpose of the Order to
free the rebel prisoners at Indianapolis, and that the same had been
agreed upon with respect to other rebel camps, in other States, on the
supposition that they would unite with the Sons of Liberty, in overturning
the Government, and if they were found willing to do this, arms were to be
placed in their hands. At that meeting it was a matter of discussion in
what manner it was feasible to communicate with Gens. Buckner and Price,
in order that they might co-operate, and have their forces near St. Louis
and Louisville. The approach of their troops to those cities was the
favored moment for beginning hostilities in the North. Mr. Wilson
testified that he received a thousand dollars of the two million fund, but
that instead of appropriating it according to the programme, he used it
for buying substitutes, but the rightful owner can have the same upon
call. Maj.-Gen. Barrett, the party having the fund in trust, has left the
country, doubtless for his health, and the thousand dollars is still
without an applicant.
At this memorable meeting, as it was the last meeting of this body ever
held in Chicago, it was agreed that at the time of the uprising, friends
(rebels and copperheads) should appear with red and white badges, and the
property of such persons would also be saved from destruction by
displaying from their buildings the Confederate flag. Thus were ample and
definite arrangements made, and as that meeting adjourned it was the
deliberate end and aim of all the persons there assembled (with a single
exception) to effect their objects at all hazards. All who were present,
as well as the rebels then in Richmond, conceded that of all points in the
several States embraced in the proposition with which Col. Barrett was
entrusted, Chicago was by far the most important post, and the one which,
of all others, should first fall. The facility and ease with which Camp
Douglas could be taken, was a matter of remark among the traitors in every
section, and it was understood that communication could readily be made
with the prisoners, as Mrs. Morris, wife of Judge Morris, and others who
were known to be in the interest of the Confederacy, had never been denied
access to the camp, and such prohibition was scarcely expected, as of
course the plans of the conspirators must be a dead secret from the
commander of the post. In the temples of the Sons of Liberty it was a
matter of congratulation that it was impossible for a detective to obtain
their secrets, yet all this time Col. B.J. Sweet was well acquainted with
every move that had the least importance, for the writer made it an
invariable custom to send dispatches regularly to Col. Sweet, who thus
came into full possession of the plans and designs of the Order, as soon
as they were announced, and hence was at all times in a position that he
could not have been surprised by any assault upon the Camp. The Colonel is
at all times perfectly cool and self-possessed, prudent in the highest
degree, and inflexible in purpose, when once resolved upon a line of
action. His arrangements were made with all celerity and completeness, and
though his little force was quite too small to offer great resistance in
case of surprise had not the facts been known to the commandant, yet the
interior arrangement of the camp, the disposition of his forces, and above
all, the perfect discipline which had ever been maintained by him, now
offered a silent barrier which caused the conspirators to entertain
direful apprehensions, as to the disaster to themselves when they should
make the undertaking, for the movements of the camp were noticed from the
observatories near by, and on one occasion Brig. Gen. Walsh, accompanied
by an attaché of the Chicago Times, made a personal visit to the camp,
and being received as gentlemen by the gallant Colonel, they were able to
make certain discoveries of a disagreeable nature. The greatest
precaution, of course, was observed in the transmission of dispatches by
the writer to Col. Sweet, for had it been supposed for a moment, that the
commander of the post was cognizant of their acts, it would most certainly
have precipitated the uprising, as the leaders of the conspiracy could not
hope for so favorable a time again. The camp was enclosed by only one
thickness of inch boards, not over twelve feet high, and a little force of
less than eight hundred men were to guard some eight or ten thousand
prisoners, many of them being the lowest class of raiders and ruffians.
During the latter part of July, at a meeting of the Sons of Liberty,
Colonel Walker, of Indiana, was present, and in a speech referred to the
recent seizure of arms in Indiana, and said a formal demand had been made
upon Governor Morton of that State for them, and if they were not
forthcoming they (the copperheads) would compel restitution by the bullet,
and said Morton would be assassinated if he refused. At this time a man
named James A. Wilkinson was Grand Seignior of the temple. The question of
supplying our quota to avoid the draft, agitating the community, it was
proposed to resist the draft, and all the members were required forthwith
to arm themselves with firearms, and Charles W. Patten and Wilkinson both
offered to supply all who could not afford to purchase firearms. Wilkinson
was a very efficient member of the order, and very zealous. Much of his
time he passed in the organization of temples in different sections of
country; and it was often stated as encouragement for the members that the
temples were rapidly multiplying, and being filled with the “best kind” of
men. It was earnestly requested of the members, as the time was
short–Judge Morris saying the purposes of the organization would be
fulfilled within the next sixty days–to bring in as many new members as
possible, and the injunction was duly heeded. The temple in Chicago
thrived remarkably, and arrangements were made by which individuals could
initiate members, and the initiated increased in numbers rapidly.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Great North-Western Conspiracy In All Its Startling Details” by I. Windslow Ayer
is provided as free e-text and belongs to the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Great North-Western Conspiracy In All Its Startling DetailsBy I. Windslow AyerAt Amazon
