


  The Mussulmaun religion.–Sectarians.–Their difference of
  faith.–History of the Soonies.–The Caliphas Omir, Osman, Aboubuker,
  &c.–Mahumud’s parting charge to Ali.–Omir’s jealousy of Ali.–The
  Khoraun.–How compiled.–The Calipha Omir held in detestation.–Creed
  of the Sheahs.–Funeral service.–Opinions of the Mussulmauns
  respecting the Millennium.–The foundation of their faith
  exhibited.–Sentiments of the most devout followers of
  Mahumud.–Bridge of Sirraat, the Scales, &c. explained.–Emaum
  Mhidhie.–Prophecy of his reappearance.–Its early fulfilment
  anticipated.–Discourse with the Meer Hadjee Shaah on this subject.
I do not presume to offer opinions on the nature, substance, or character,
of the Mussulmaun Faith; but confine myself to the mere relation of such
facts as I have received from the best possible authority, viz. the
religious men who are of that faith, and live in strict accordance with
the tenets they profess.
There are two sects of the Mussulmaun persuasion, as I have before
remarked, viz. the Sheahs and the Soonies. The leaders of the former are
called Emaums; and those of the latter Caliphas. The Sheahs acknowledge
Ali and his immediate descendants (eleven in number) ’the right and only
lawful Emaums’, in succession, after Mahumud. The Soonies declare the
Caliphas–as Omir, Aboubuker, &c.–to be their lawful leaders after
Mahumud.
I do not find that there is any great difference in the points of faith
between the two sects; they are equally guided by the same laws and
ordinances inculcated by Mahumud in the Khoraun;–the Sheahs pursuing the
pattern of observances traced out in the life and manners of Ali and his
descendants;–and the Soonies taking their examples from the manners of
the Caliphas. There is a distinguishing method in ablutions before prayers,
and also in the manner of bowing and prostrating in their devotional
exercises;[1] this difference, however, has nothing to do with their
faith,–the subject and form of their daily prayer is one; but both sects
have extra services for particular occasions, agreeable to the instruction
of their favourite leaders. The Namaaz (daily prayer) was taught by
Mahumud to his followers, every line of which is religiously reverenced by
Mussulmauns, and cannot be altered by sectarian principles.
The Mussulmaun faith is founded on three roots; from these spring, with
the Sheahs, six branches; with the Soonies, five. The roots are as
follows:–
First.–’There is but one God, self existing; ever was, and ever will be;
in Whom is all Power, Majesty, and Dominion; by Whom all things are, and
were created. With Whom is neither partner or substance:[2] and He alone
is to be worshipped.’
Second.–’The Prophets were all true; and all their writings to be relied
on, with a true faith.’
Third.–’The resurrection of the dead is certain.’
The Sheahs’ branches, or emanations, from the three roots of their faith,
are as follow:–
1st.–’Namaaz,’[3] (prayer five times daily); a necessary duty, never to
be omitted.
2nd.–’Rumzaun,’[4] (fasting) the whole thirty days of that month; a
service acceptable to God from His humble creatures.
3rd.–’The Hadje,’[5] (pilgrimage to Mecca); commanded by Mahumud, and
therefore to be obeyed.
4th.–’Zuckhaut;’[6] the fortieth portion of all worldly goods to be set
apart every year (an offering to God) for the service of the poor.
5th.–To fight in the road of God, or in His service, against the
idolaters.
6th.–To believe that the twelve Emaums were the true and lawful leaders,
after Mahumud; to follow in their path, or example, and to succour and
defend the Syaads, their descendants.
The Soonies omit the last branch in their profession of faith; with this
solitary exception, the creed of the two sects, from all I can understand,
is the same. The Sheahs are those who celebrate Mahurrum: in my
description of that event will be seen the zealous partizans of the sect;
and here may be introduced with propriety, some account of the opposite
party denominated Soonies.
The word Calipha[7] implies the master or head of any trade, profession,
or calling,–as the master of the tailors, the head master of a college or
school, &c. Omir was the first to usurp the title after Mahumud’s death,
and to him succeeded Aboubuker, and then Ausmaun (Osman).[8]
Aboubuker may have claimed some relationship to Mahumud;–he was converted
by his preaching from idolatry to the faith;–he gave his daughter in
marriage to Mahumud, by whom two sons were born to him, Ishmael and
Ibrahim.[9] ’An angel appeared to Mahumud, saying, Which of thy family
shall be taken from thee, Oh, Mahumud! such is the command of God; two of
thy youth must die, and I am sent to demand of thee whether it is thy wish
Ishmael and Ibrahim, thine own sons, shall be taken from this world, or
Hasan and Hosein, the sons of Fatima thy daughter?’ The historian
continues, after dwelling much on the virtues of the Prophet’s only
daughter, ’Such was the affection of Mahumud for his daughter Fatima and
her children, and so well he knew the purity of their hearts, that he
hesitated not a moment in replying, “If the Lord graciously permits His
servant to choose, I freely offer my two sons Ishmael and Ibrahim; that
Hasan and Hosein may live by His mercy “’.
Omir was also a convert to the faith Mahumud taught: he likewise gave a
daughter in marriage to Mahumud;[10] by whom, however, the same historian
remarks, his house was not peopled. His only daughter, Fatima, lived to
add numbers to his family: she was born to him by the pious female (a
widow) who was his first wife[11] and to whom he was united before he
commenced his work of conversion. Ali, to whom Fatima was married, was the
nephew of Mahumud, and from this union the Syaad race descend to the
present day. The Prophet observing real piety in Ali, designed him not
only to be the most suitable husband for his amiable daughter, but the
best qualified person to be chosen as his successor, when he should be
called by ’the hand of death’; and in the most public manner gave charge
of his flock to Ali, not long before that event occurred. Mahumud’s speech
to Ali on that occasion is much reverenced by the Sheah sect;–it has been
translated for me by my husband, and is as follows:–
’You, my son, will suffer many persecutions in the cause of religion; many
will be the obstructions to your preaching, for I see they are not all as
obedient and faithful as yourself. Usurpers of the authority, delegated to
you, will arise, whose views are not pure and holy as your own; but let my
admonitions dwell on your mind, remember my advice without swerving. The
religion I have laboured to teach, is, as yet, but as the buds shooting
forth from the tree; tender as they are, the rude blasts of dissension may
scatter them to the winds, and leave the parent tree without a leaf:–but
suffered to push forth its produce quietly, the hand of Time will ripen
and bring to perfection that which has been the business of my awakened
life to cultivate. Never, my son, suffer your sword to be unsheathed in
the justice of your cause; I exhort you to bear this injunction on your
mind faithfully; whatever may be the provocations you receive, or insults
offered to your person,–I know this trial is in store for my
son,–remember the cause you are engaged in; suffer patiently; never draw
your sword against the people who profess the true faith, even though they
are but by name Mussulmauns.
’Against the enemies of God, I have already given you directions; you may
fight for Him–the only true God,–but never against Him, or His faithful
servants.’
When Mahumud was numbered with the dead, Omir soon set himself forward as
the lawful successor; he was of good address, and insinuating manners, and
succeeded in drawing ’numbers to his threshold’. He preached the same
doctrine Mahumud had taught, but sensual indulgence and early developed
ambition were more strong in his heart than the faith he preached. Omir
grew jealous of Ali’s virtues and forbearance, under the various trials of
oppression and injustice he chose to visit him with; and resolved that, if
possible, he would destroy not only Ali, but his whole family. Omir caused
his house to be fired treacherously, but as the historians say, ’the mercy
of God watched over the sanctified family’; they escaped from the flames,
with no other loss than that of their small property.
The Khoraun was not the work of any particular period in the life of
Mahumud. It was not compiled into a book until after Mahumud’s death, who
was totally unacquainted with letters; each chapter having been conveyed
by the angel Gabriel[12] to Mahumud, his inspired memory enabled him to
repeat, verbatim, the holy messenger’s words to his disciples and converts
when assembled as was their daily custom. To as many as committed verse,
chapter, or portion to memory, by this oral communication, Mahumud
rewarded with the highest seats in his assembly (meaning nearest his
person); and to those who wished for employment, he gave the command of
detachments sent out against the infidels.
The whole Khoraun was thus conveyed to Mahumud by the angel Gabriel, at
many different periods of his mission; and by daily repetition, did he
instil into the memory of his followers that mental scripture. But when
Omir usurped the right to lead, he ambitiously planned for himself a large
share of popularity by causing the Khoraun to be committed to paper, and
he accordingly gave orders, that the best scribes should be employed to
convey its precepts to writing.
Ali had been engaged in the same employment for some time, perceiving the
future benefit to the faith which would accrue from such a labour, and on
the very day, when Omir was seated in form to receive the work of his
scribes, Ali also presented himself with his version of the Khoraun. It is
asserted that Omir treated him with some indignity, and gave the
preference to the volume his own scribes had prepared, desiring Ali,
nevertheless, to leave that he had transcribed with him, though he
candidly told him he never intended it should be ’the Book for the People’.
Ali found, on this trying occasion, the benefit of Mahumud’s advice, to
keep his temper subdued for the trial, and withdrew with his book clasped
to his heart, assuring Omir, that the volume should only be the property
of his descendants; and that when the twelfth Emaum, prophesied by Mahumud,
should disappear from the eye of man, the Khoraun he had written should
also disappear, until that Emaum returned, with whom the book he had
written should again be found.
The name of Omir is detestable to all lovers of literature, or admirers of
ancient history and valuable records. By his orders, the bath was heated
with the valuable collection of manuscripts, which it had been the work of
ages to complete.[13] Omir was told that the people valued the writings of
the ancients, and that they were displeased at this irreparable
destruction of valuable records; he asked if the people were not satisfied
with the Khoraun? and if satisfied, why should they seek for other
knowledge than that book contained? declaring it to be an useless
employment of time, to be engaged in any other readings. They say the
collection of books thus destroyed was so vast, that it served the purpose,
to which it was applied, for many successive days. I have thus far given
the accounts I have received of the origin of the two sects amongst the
Mussulmauns from good authority. My husband says, that in Hindoostaun the
two sects may be nearly equal in number;[14] in Persia the Sheahs
certainly prevail; in Turkey all are Soonies; and in Arabia the Sheahs are
supposed to preponderate. On the whole, perhaps, the two sects are about
equally divided.
The Mussulmauns’ Creed, of the Sheah sect, is as follows:–
’I believe in one God, supreme over all, and Him alone do I worship.
’I believe that Mahumud was the creature of God, the Creator; I believe
that Mahumud was the messenger of God, (the Lord of messengers); and that
he was the last of the prophets. I believe that Ali was the chief of the
faithful, the head of all the inheritors of the law, and the true leader
appointed of God; consequently to be obeyed by the faithful. Also I
believe that Hasan and Hosein, the sons of Ali, and Ali son of Hosein, and
Mahumud son of Ali, and Jaufur son of Mahumud, and Moosa son of Jaufur,
and Ali son of Moosa, and Mahumud son of Ali, and Ali son of Mahumud, and
Hasan son of Ali, and Mhidhie (the standing proof) son of Hasan; the mercy
of God be upon them! these were the true leaders of the faithful, and the
proof of God was conveyed by them to the people.’[15]
This creed is taught to the children of both sexes, in Mussulmaun families,
as soon as they are able to talk; and, from the daily repetition, is
perfectly familiar to them at an early age.
I propose describing the funeral service here, as the substance of their
particular faith is so intimately connected with the appointed service for
the dead.
The dead body of a Mussulmaun, in about six hours after life is extinct,
is placed in a kuffin[16] (coffin) and conveyed to the place of burial,
with parade suited to the rank he held in life.
A tent, or the kaanaut[17] (screen), is pitched in a convenient place,
where water is available near to the tomb, for the purpose of washing and
preparing the dead body for interment. They then take the corpse out of
the coffin and thoroughly bathe it; when dry, they rub pounded camphor on
the hands, feet, knees, and forehead, these parts having, in the method of
prostrating at prayer, daily touched the ground; the body is then wrapped
neatly in a winding-sheet of white calico, on which has been written
particular chapters from the Khoraun:[18] this done, it is taken up with
great gentleness and laid in the grave on the side, with the face towards
Mecca. The officiating Maulvee steps solemnly into the grave (which is
much deeper and wider than ours), and with a loud voice repeats the creed,
as before described; after which he says, ’These were thy good and holy
leaders, O son of Adam! (here he repeats the person’s names). Now when the
two angels come unto thee, who are the Maccurrub[19] (messengers) from thy
great and mighty God, they will ask of thee, “Who is thy Lord? Who is thy
Prophet? What is thy faith? Which is thy book? Where is thy Kiblaah?[20]
Who is thy Leader?”
’Then shalt thou answer the Maccurrub thus:–
  ’"God, greatest in glory, is my only Lord; Mahumud, my Prophet; Islaaim,
  my faith, (Islaaim means true faith); the Khoraun, my book; the Kaubah
  (Holy House at Mecca), my Kiblaah;
  ’"Emaum Ali, son of Aboutalib,
    “   Hasan and Hosein,
    “   Ali, surnamed Zynool Auberdene,
    “   Mahumud,  “   Baakur,
    “   Jaufur,   “   Saadick,
    “   Moosa,    “   Khazim,
    “   Ali,      “   Reezah,
    “   Mahumud,  “   Ul Jawaad,
    “   Ali,      “   Ul Hoodah,
    “   Hasan,    “   Ul Ushkeree,
    “   Mhidhie, the standing proof that we are waiting for.[21]
  ’"These are all my leaders, and they are my intercessors, with them is my
  love, with their enemies is my hatred, in the world of earth and in the
  world to come eternal."’
Then the Maulvee says:–
’Know ye for a truth, O man (repeating his name), that the God we worship
is One only, Great and Glorious, Most High and Mighty God, who is above
all lords, the only true God.
’Know ye also, That Mahumud is the best of the Lord’s messengers.
’That Ali and his successors (before enumerated, but always here repeated)
were the best of all leaders.
’That whatever came with Mahumud is true, (meaning the whole work of his
mission);–Death is true; the Interrogation by Moonkih and Nykee[22] (the
two angels) is true; the Resurrection is true; Destruction is true; the
Bridge of Sirraat[23] is true; the Scales are true; Looking into the Book
is true; Heaven and Earth are true; Hell is true; the Day of Judgment is
true.
’Of these things there is no doubt–all are true; and, further, that God,
the great and glorious God, will raise all the dead bodies from their
graves.’
Then the Maulvee reads the following prayer or benediction, which is
called Dooar[24] prayer:–
’May the Lord God, abundant in mercy, keep you with the true speech; may
He lead you to the perfect path; may He grant you knowledge of Him, and of
His prophets.
’May the mercy of God be fixed upon you for ever. Ameen.’
This concluded, the Maulvee quits the grave, and slowly moves forty
measured paces in a line with it; then turning round, he comes again to
the grave, with the same solemnity in his steps, and standing on the edge,
he prays,
’O great and glorious God, we beseech Thee with humility make the earth
comfortable to this Thy servant’s side, and raise his soul to Thee, and
with Thee may he find mercy and forgiveness.’
’Ameen, Ameen,’ is responded by all present.
This ends the funeral service: the earth is closed over by the servants,
&c. and, except with the very poor, the grave is never entirely forsaken
day or night, during the forty days of mourning; readers of the Khoraun
are paid for this service, and in the families of the nobility the grave
is attended for years by those hired, who are engaged to read from that
book perpetually, relieving each other at intervals day and night.
They believe that when the Maulvee quits the grave, the angels enter to
interrogate the dead body, and receive the confession of his particular
faith; this is the object of the Maulvee’s retiring forty paces, to give
the angels time to enter on their mission to the dead.
The Mussulmauns all believe that Mhidhie, the standing proof as he is
called, will visit the earth at a future period; they are said to possess
prophecies, that lead them to expect the twelve hundred and sixtieth year
of the Hegirah, as the time for his coming. The Soonies say, this Emaum
has yet to be born:–the Sheahs believe that Emaum Mhidhie is the person
to reappear. Some believe he is still on earth, dwelling, as they
conjecture, in the wilds and forests; and many go so far as to assert,
that Mhidhie visits (without being recognized) the Holy House of Mecca
annually, on the great day of sacrifice; but I cannot find any grounds
they have for this opinion.[25]
They also possess a prophecy, on which much dependance is placed, that
’When the four quarters of the globe contain Christian inhabitants, and
when the Christians approach the confines of Kaabah, then may men look for
that Emaum who is to come’. And it is the general belief amongst
Mussulmauns, founded on the authority of their most revered and valued
writers, that Emaum Mhidhie will appear with Jesus Christ at his second
coming; and with whom, they declare and firmly believe, he will act in
concert to purge the world of sin and wickedness. When, they add, ’all men
shall be of one mind and one faith’.
Of the three principal Roots of the Mussulmauns’ faith, little need be
further said in explanation. I have had various opportunities of learning
their undisguised thoughts, and wish only to impart what the people are,
who are so little known to the world in general. All persons having had
the opportunity of studying the peculiarities of their particular faith,
will, I think, give them due credit, that reverence for, and belief in God,
forms a prominent trait in their character and faith: ’The English
translation of the Khoraun by Sale, (imperfect as all works must be, where
the two languages are inadequate to speak each other’s meaning,) will tell
without a commentary, that the worship of God was the foundation on which
Mahumud built his code of laws; and that the prophets were all
acknowledged by him as messengers sent from God to His people, in every
age of the world; and, lastly, that Mahumud was the Prophet, who came when
the people of the earth, vicious and profane, had fallen into the most
dissolute habits, worshipping idols instead of God.’ This passage is the
sentiment expressed to me by a worthy man, and a true Mussulmaun; I have
traced it out for the sake of explaining what is in the hearts of the
Mussulmauns of the present day.
When I have conversed with some of them on the improbability of Mahumud’s
prophetic mission, I have been silenced by a few words, ’How many prophets
were sent to the Israelites?’–’Many.’–’You cannot enumerate them? then,
is it too much to be probable that God’s mercy should have been graciously
extended to the children of Ishmael? they also are Abraham’s seed. The
Israelites had many prophets, in all of whom we believe; the Ishmaelites
have one Prophet only, whose mission was to draw men from idolatry to the
true God. All men, they add will be judged according to their fidelity in
the faith they have professed. It is not the outward sign which makes a
man the true Mussulmaun; neither is it the mere profession of Christianity
which will clear the man at the last day. Religion and faith are of the
heart.’
In their collection of writings, I have had access to a voluminous work,
entitled ’Hyaatool Kaaloob’[26] (Enlightener of the Heart). My husband has
translated for me, occasionally, portions of this valuable work, which
bears a striking similarity to our Holy Scriptures, though collected after
a different manner; I have acquired, by this means, a more intimate
acquaintance with the general character of the Mussulmaun’s belief. This
book contains all the prophets’ lives, at every age of the world. It was
compiled by Mahumud Baakur, first in Arabic, and afterwards translated by
him into the Persian language, for the benefit of the public; and is of
great antiquity–I cannot now ascertain the exact date.
The Mussulmaun belief on the subject of the resurrection is, ’When the
fulness of time cometh, of which no man knoweth, then shall the earth be
destroyed by fire–and after this will be the resurrection of the dead’.
The branches emanating from the roots of the Mussulmaun faith will require
further explanation which shall follow in due course. I will in this
letter merely add what is meant by the Bridge of Sirraat,[27] the
Scales,[28] and Looking into the Book as noted in the burial service.
’The Bridge of Sirraat’, they understand, is to be passed over by every
person in their passage to eternity, and is represented sharp as the
keenest sword.[29] The righteous will be gifted with power to pass over
with the rapidity of lightning, neither harm nor inconvenience will attend
them on the passage. The wicked, on the contrary, will be without help,
and must be many times injured and cut down in the attempt. An idea has
crept into the minds of some, that whoever offers up to God, at different
periods of his life, such animals as are deemed clean and fitting for
sacrifice, the same number and kind, on their day of passing Sirraat,
shall be in readiness to assist them on the passage over.
On this supposition is grounded the object of princes and nobles in India
offering camels in sacrifice on the day of Buckrah Eade.[30] This event
answers our Scripture account of Abraham’s offering, but the Mussulmauns
say, the son of Abraham so offered was Ishmael, and not Isaac. I have
disputed the point with some of their learned men, and brought them to
search through their authorities; in some one or two there is a doubt as
to which was the son offered, but the general writers and most of the
Mussulmauns themselves believe Ishmael was the offering made by Abraham.
’The Scales are true;’ the Mussulmauns believe, that on the day of
judgment, the good and the bad deeds of every mortal will be submitted to
the scales prepared in Heaven for that purpose.
’Looking into the Book is true;’ the Mussulmauns believe that every human
being from their birth is attended by two angels,[31] one resting on the
right shoulder the other on the left, continually; their business is to
register every action of the individual they attend; when a good action is
to be recorded, they beseech the Almighty in His mercy to keep the person
in the good and perfect way; when evil ways are to be registered, they
mourn with intercessions to God that His mercy may be extended, by
granting them repentant hearts, and then, His forgiveness. Thus they
explain ’Looking into the Book is true’, that whatever is contained in
this book will be looked into on the day of judgment, and by their deeds
therein registered shall they be judged.
In the ’Hyaatool Kaaloob’ is to be found the lives of the Emaums, from
which is gleaned the following remarks:–
The Emaum Mhidhie was an orphan at nine years old. Alrouschid,[32] the
King of Bagdad, advised by his wicked minister, resolved on destroying
this boy (the last of the Emaums), fearing as he grew into favour with the
people, that the power of his sovereignty would decrease.
The King sent certain soldiers to seize Mhidhie, who was at prayers in an
inner room when they arrived. The soldiers demanded and were refused
admittance they then forced an entrance and proceeded to the room in which
the Emaum was supposed to be at prayers, they discovered him immersed to
the waist in a tank of water; the soldiers desired him to get out of the
water and surrender himself, he continued repeating his prayer, and
appeared to take no notice of the men nor their demand. After some
deliberations amongst the soldiers, they thought the water was too shallow
to endanger their lives, and one entered the tank intending to take the
Emaum prisoner, he sank instantly to rise no more, a second followed who
shared the same fate; and the rest, deterred by the example of their
brother soldiers, fled from the place, to report the failure of their plan
to the King at Bagdad.
This writer reports that Emaum Mhidhie was secretly conveyed away,
supposed by the interposition of Divine Providence, and was not again seen,
to be recognized, on earth; yet it is believed he still lives and will
remain for the fulfilment of that prophecy which sayeth:–’When Mecca is
filled with Christian people Emaum Mhidhie will appear, to draw men to the
true faith; and then also, Jesus Christ will descend from heaven to Mecca,
there will be great slaughter amongst men; after which there will be but
one faith–and then shall there be perfect peace and happiness over all
the world.’
The Mussulmauns of the present age discourse much on the subject of that
prophecy–particularly during the contest between the Greeks and Turks, of
which however they had no very correct information, yet they fancied the
time must be fast approaching, by these leading events, to the fuller
accomplishment; often, when in conversation with the most religious men of
the country, I have heard them declare it as their firm belief that the
time was fast approaching when there should be but one mind amongst all
men. ’There is but little more to finish;’ ’The time draws near;’ are
expressions of the Mussulmauns’ belief, when discoursing of the period
anticipated, as prophesied in their sacred writings;–so persuaded are
they of the nearness of that time. In relating the substance of my last
serious conversation with the devout Meer Hadjee Shaah, I shall disclose
the real sentiments of most, if not every religious reflecting, true
Mussulmaun of his sect in India.
Meer Hadjee Shaah delighted in religious conversations; it was his
happiest time when, in the quiet of night, the Meer, his son, translated,
as I read, the Holy Bible to him. We have often been thus engaged until
one or two, and even to a later hour in the morning; he remembered all he
heard, and drew comparisons, in his own mind, between the two authorities
of sacred writings–the Khoraun and Bible; the one he had studied through
his long life, the other, he was now equally satisfied, contained the word
of God; he received them both, and as the ’two witnesses’ of God. The last
serious conversation I had with him, was a very few days before his death;
he was then nearly in as good health as he had been for the last year; his
great age had weakened his frame, but he walked about the grounds with his
staff, as erect as when I first saw him, and evinced nothing in his
general manner that could excite a suspicion that his hours had so nearly
run their course.
We had been talking of the time when peace on earth should be universal;
’My time, dear baittie[33] (daughter), is drawing to a quick conclusion.
You may live to see the events foretold, I shall be in my grave; but
remember, I tell you now, though I am dead, yet when Jesus Christ returns
to earth, at His coming, I shall rise again from my grave; and I shall be
with Him, and with Emaum Mhidhie also.’
This was the substance of his last serious conversation with me, and
within one short week he was removed from those who loved to hear his
voice; but he still lives in the memory of many, and those who knew his
worth are reconciled by reflecting on the ’joy that awaits the righteous’.
’Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring,
and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd.’ Also, ’In My Father’s house are many mansions’. These were
particularly pleasing passages to him, and often referred to in our
scriptural conversations.
[1] The Shi’ahs only wipe or rub the feet, instead of washing them, as
    do the Sunnis. In the standing posture (qiyam) in prayer, the
    Sunnis place the right hand over the left below the navel; the
    Shi’ahs keep their hands hanging on both sides of the body.
[2] I have met with the creed of the modern Jews, some time in the course
    of my life, in Hurd’s History of all Religions; the belief of the
    Mussulmauns, as regards the unity of God, strictly coincides with that
    of the Jews, described in the first four articles of their creed.
    [Author.]
[3] Namaz, liturgical prayer, as contrasted with du’a, ordinary
    prayer.
[4] Ramzan, Ramazan.
[5] Hajj.
[6] Zakat.
[7] Khalifah, ’successor,’ ’lieutenant,’ ’viceregent.’
[8] ’Umar, Abu Bakr, ’Usman.
[9] No son named Ishmail is recorded. Ibrahim, his son from
    his slave girl, Mary the Copt, died A.D. 631, and was buried at Medina.
    The daughter of Abu Bakr was ’Ayishah.
[10] The Prophet married Hafsah, daughter of ’Umar, as his third wife.
[11] Khadijah.
[12] ’Whoso is the enemy of Gabriel–for he has by God’s leave caused to
    descend on thy heart the confirmation of previous
    revelations.’–Koran, ii. 91.
[13] ’The story of the destruction of the library at Alexandria is first
    told by Bar-hebraeus (Abulfaragius), a Christian writer who lived six
    centuries later: it is of very doubtful authority.’–Encyclopaedia
    Britannica, i. 570.
[14] This is incorrect, Sunnis very largely preponderating over
    Shi’ahs. According to the latest information there were in the
    United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, nearly 6-1/2 million Sunnis and
    183,000 Shi’ahs (Imperial Gazetteer (1908), xxiv. 172). This
    information was not collected in recent census reports. In the whole
    of India, in 1881, there were 46-3/4 million Sunnis, as compared
    with 809,561 Shi’ahs.
[15] The correct list of the Imams recognized by the Imamiya or
    orthodox Shi’ahs is as follows: ’Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet;
    Al-Hasan, son of ’Ali, Al-Husain, second son of ’Ali; ’Ali
    Zain-ul-’Abidin, son of Al-Husain; Muhammad Al-Baqir, son of
    Zain-ul-’Abidin; Ja’afar as-Sadiq, son of Muhammad Al-Baqir;
    Ar-Raza, son of Musa; Muhammad At-Taqi, son of Ar-Raza;
    ’Ali-an Naqi, son of Muhammad At-Taqi; Al-Hasan Al-Askari,
    son of ’Ali-an Naqi; Muhammad, son of Al-Hasan Al-Askari, or
    the Imam Al-Mahdi, who is believed to be still alive, and will
    appear in the last days as the Mahdi.
[16] Kafn, properly ’a winding-sheet’.
[17] Qanat.
[18] The religious man generally prepares his own winding-sheet, keeping
    it always ready, and occasionally taking out this monitor to add
    another verse or chapter, as the train of thought may have urged at
    the time. I have seen this done by the Meer Hadjee Shaah, who
    appropriated a piece of fine white cambric muslin, he had received
    from me, to this sacred purpose. I have often been a silent observer
    of my revered friend whilst he was engaged in writing passages from
    the book whose rules he lived by. The anticipated moment when he
    should require this his kuffin dress, was never clouded by dread, but
    always looked forward to with cheerfulness and fervent hope; for he
    trusted in the mercy of God whom he loved and worshipped. [Author.]
    [Many pilgrims buy at Mecca the shroud in which they desire to be
    buried, and wash it in the well Zamzam, supposing that the holy water
    will secure the repose of the soul after death.]
[19] Maccurrub means those angels who are at all times privileged to
    appear in the presence of God;–they are supposed to have eyes of
    great brilliance. In order that the Mussulmauns may have the reply
    ready for that awful moment, they have a custom of repeating the
    responses to the angel every evening, when the lamp is first lighted,
    as they say this sudden light resembles the angels’ eyes. I had
    noticed the custom for some time, and fancied the Mussulmaun people
    worshipped light, until I was made acquainted with the real motive for
    this general observance both with the men and women. [Author.]
    [Muqarrab, ’those allowed to come near’.]
[20] Kiblaah is the holy place to which men turn their face when offering
    up their prayer to God, as the Jews face Jerusalem. Literally,
    ’worshipping place’. [Author.] [Qiblah: the direction of prayer
    was changed by the Prophet from Jerusalem to Mecca (Koran, ii.
    138-9, with Sale’s note).]
[21] See p. 72.
[22] Munkir, or Munkar, and Nakir are the two recording angels.
[23] See p. 78.
[24] Du’a.
[25] Al-Mahdi, ’the directed one’, who will appear in the last day.
    According to the Shi’ahs, he has already appeared in the person of
    Muhammad Abu’l-Qasim, the 12th Imam. Later claimants are
    Sayyid Ahmad, who fought against the Sikhs in 1826; Muhammad Ahmad ibn
    Sayyid Abdulla, who fled after the fatal day of Omdurman, and was
    killed in battle in 1899.
[26] Hayat[u’]l-Qulub compiled by Muhammad Baqir, whose last
    work was published A.D. 1627. It has been partly translated into
    English by J.L. Morrick, Boston, 1850.
[27] Sirat, the bridge over which the soul must cross on its way to
    Paradise.
[28] Mizan, the Balance, with which the deeds of the dead man are
    weighed.–Koran, xxi. 47.
[29] May not this be a poetical symbol, similar to the scythe? [Author.]
[30] Baqarah ’Id, ’cow festival,’ held on the 10th of the month
    Zu’l-Hijjah, the month of pilgrimage, the attempted sacrifice of
    Ishmael having, it is said, occurred at Mount Mina, near Mecca.
[31] Kiramu’l-Katibin, one recording the good, the other the
    evil actions of the dead.
[32] Harun-al-Rashid, ’Aaron the Orthodox’, fifth Abbasid Caliph,
    of Baghdad (A.D. 763 or 776-809), best known from The Arabian Nights.
[33] Beti.
Continue...

This eBook of “Observations on the Mussulmauns of India” by Mrs. Meer Hassan Ali belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Observations on the Mussulmauns of India (Large Print Edition)By Mrs. Meer Hassan AliAt Amazon
