


There was once a king of Athens whose name was AEgeus. He had no son; but
he had fifty nephews, and they were waiting for him to die, so that one
of them might be king in his stead. They were wild, worthless fellows,
and the people of Athens looked forward with dread to the day when the
city should be in their power. Yet so long as AEgeus lived they could not
do much harm, but were content to spend their time in eating and
drinking at the king’s table and in quarreling among themselves.
It so happened one summer that AEgeus left his kingdom in the care of the
elders of the city and went on a voyage across the Saronic Sea to the
old and famous city of Troezen, which lay nestled at the foot of the
mountains on the opposite shore. Troezen was not fifty miles by water
from Athens, and the purple-peaked island of AEgina lay between them;
but to the people of that early time the distance seemed very great, and
it was not often that ships passed from one place to the other. And as
for going by land round the great bend of the sea, that was a thing so
fraught with danger that no man had ever dared try it.
King Pittheus of Troezen was right glad to see AEgeus, for they had been
boys together, and he welcomed him to his city and did all that he could
to make his visit a pleasant one. So, day after day, there was feasting
and merriment and music in the marble halls of old Troezen, and the two
kings spent many a happy hour in talking of the deeds of their youth and
of the mighty heroes whom both had known. And when the time came for the
ship to sail back to Athens, AEgeus was not ready to go. He said he would
stay yet a little longer in Troezen, for that the elders of the city
would manage things well at home; and so the ship returned without him.
But AEgeus tarried, not so much for the rest and enjoyment which he was
having in the home of his old friend, as for the sake of AEthra, his old
friend’s daughter. For AEthra was as fair as a summer morning, and she
was the joy and pride of Troezen; and AEgeus was never so happy as when
in her presence. So it happened that some time after the ship had
sailed, there was a wedding in the halls of King Pittheus; but it was
kept a secret, for AEgeus feared that his nephews, if they heard of it,
would be very angry and would send men to Troezen to do him harm.
Month after month passed by, and still AEgeus lingered with his bride and
trusted his elders to see to the affairs of Athens. Then one morning,
when the gardens of Troezen were full of roses and the heather was green
on the hills, a babe was born to AEthra–a boy with a fair face and
strong arms and eyes as sharp and as bright as the mountain eagle’s. And
now AEgeus was more loth to return home than he had been before, and he
went up on the mountain which overlooks Troezen, and prayed to Athena,
the queen of the air, to give him wisdom and show him what to do. Even
while he prayed there came a ship into the harbor, bringing a letter to
AEgeus and alarming news from Athens.
“Come home without delay"–these were words of the letter which the
elders had sent–"come home quickly, or Athens will be lost. A great
king from beyond the sea, Minos of Crete, is on the way with ships and a
host of fighting men; and he declares that he will carry sword and fire
within our walls, and will slay our young men and make our children his
slaves. Come and save us!”
“It is the call of duty,” said AEgeus; and with a heavy heart he made
ready to go at once across the sea to the help of his people. But he
could not take AEthra and her babe, for fear of his lawless nephews, who
would have slain them both.
“Best of wives,” he said, when the hour for parting had come, “listen to
me, for I shall never see your father’s halls, nor dear old Troezen, nor
perhaps your own fair face, again. Do you remember the old plane tree
which stands on the mountain side, and the great flat stone which lies a
little way beyond it, and which no man but myself has ever been able to
lift? Under that stone, I have hidden my sword and the sandals which I
brought from Athens. There they shall lie until our child is strong
enough to lift the stone and take them for his own. Care for him, AEthra,
until that time; and then, and not till then, you may tell him of his
father, and bid him seek me in Athens.”
Then AEgeus kissed his wife and the babe, and went on board the ship; the
sailors shouted; the oars were dipped into the waves; the white sail was
spread to the breeze; and AEthra from her palace window saw the vessel
speed away over the blue waters towards AEgina and the distant Attic
shore.
Year after year went by, and yet no word reached AEthra from her husband
on the other side of the sea. Often and often she would climb the
mountain above Troezen, and sit there all day, looking out over the blue
waters and the purple hills of AEgina to the dim, distant shore beyond.
Now and then she could see a white-winged ship sailing in the offing;
but men said that it was a Cretan vessel, and very likely was filled
with fierce Cretan warriors, bound upon some cruel errand of war. Then
it was rumored that King Minos had seized upon all the ships of Athens,
and had burned a part of the city, and had forced the people to pay him
a most grievous tribute. But further than this there was no news.
In the meanwhile AEthra’s babe had grown to be a tall, ruddy-cheeked lad,
strong as a mountain lion; and she had named him Theseus. On the day
that he was fifteen years old he went with her up to the top of the
mountain, and with her looked out over the sea.
“Ah, if only your father would come!” she sighed.
“My father?” said Theseus. “Who is my father, and why are you always
watching and waiting and wishing that he would come? Tell me about him.”
And she answered: “My child, do you see the great flat stone which lies
there, half buried in the ground, and covered with moss and trailing
ivy? Do you think you can lift it?”
“I will try, mother,” said Theseus. And he dug his fingers into the
ground beside it, and grasped its uneven edges, and tugged and lifted
and strained until his breath came hard and his arms ached and his body
was covered with sweat; but the stone was moved not at all. At last he
said, “The task is too hard for me until I have grown stronger. But why
do you wish me to lift it?”
“When you are strong enough to lift it,” answered AEthra, “I will tell
you about your father.”
After that the boy went out every day and practiced at running and
leaping and throwing and lifting; and every day he rolled some stone out
of its place. At first he could move only a little weight, and those who
saw him laughed as he pulled and puffed and grew red in the face, but
never gave up until he had lifted it. And little by little he grew
stronger, and his muscles became like iron bands, and his limbs were
like mighty levers for strength. Then on his next birthday he went up on
the mountain with his mother, and again tried to lift the great stone.
But it remained fast in its place and was not moved.
“I am not yet strong enough, mother,” he said.
“Have patience, my son,” said AEthra.
So he went on again with his running and leaping and throwing and
lifting; and he practiced wrestling, also, and tamed the wild horses of
the plain, and hunted the lions among the mountains; and his strength
and swiftness and skill were the wonder of all men, and old Troezen was
filled with tales of the deeds of the boy Theseus. Yet when he tried
again on his seventeenth birthday, he could not move the great flat
stone that lay near the plane tree on the mountain side.
“Have patience, my son,” again said AEthra; but this time the tears were
standing in her eyes.
So he went back again to his exercising; and he learned to wield the
sword and the battle ax and to throw tremendous weights and to carry
tremendous burdens. And men said that since the days of Hercules there
was never so great strength in one body. Then, when he was a year older,
he climbed the mountain yet another time with his mother, and he stooped
and took hold of the stone, and it yielded to his touch; and, lo, when
he had lifted it quite out of the ground, he found underneath it a sword
of bronze and sandals of gold, and these he gave to his mother.
“Tell me now about my father,” he said.
AEthra knew that the time had come for which she had waited so long, and
she buckled the sword to his belt and fastened the sandals upon his
feet. Then she told him who his father was, and why he had left them in
Troezen, ands how he had said that when the lad was strong enough to
lift the great stone, he must take the sword and sandals and go and seek
him in Athens.
Theseus was glad when he heard this, and his proud eyes flashed with
eagerness as he said: “I am ready, mother; and I will set out for Athens
this very day.”
Then they walked down the mountain together and told King Pittheus what
had happened, and showed him the sword and the sandals. But the old man
shook his head sadly and tried to dissuade Theseus from going.
“How can you go to Athens in these lawless times?” he said. “The sea is
full of pirates. In fact, no ship from Troezen has sailed across the
Saronic Sea since your kingly father went home to the help of his
people, eighteen years ago.”
Then, finding that this only made Theseus the more determined, he said:
“But if you must go, I will have a new ship built for you, stanch and
stout and fast sailing; and fifty of the bravest young men in Troezen
shall go with you; and mayhap with fair winds and fearless hearts you
shall escape the pirates and reach Athens in safety.”
“Which is the most perilous way?” asked Theseus–"to go by ship or to
make the journey on foot round the great bend of land?”
“The seaway is full enough of perils,” said his grandfather, “but the
landway is beset with dangers tenfold greater. Even if there were good
roads and no hindrances, the journey round the shore is a long one and
would require many days. But there are rugged mountains to climb, and
wide marshes to cross, and dark forests to go through. There is hardly a
footpath in all that wild region, nor any place to find rest or shelter;
and the woods are full of wild beasts, and dreadful dragons lurk in the
marshes, and many cruel robber giants dwell in the mountains.”
“Well,” said Theseus, “if there are more perils by land than by sea,
then I shall go by land, and I go at once.”
“But you will at least take fifty young men, your companions, with you?"
said King Pittheus.
“Not one shall go with me,” said Theseus; and he stood up and played
with his sword hilt, and laughed at the thought of fear.
Then when there was nothing more to say, he kissed his mother and bade
his grandfather good-by, and went out of Troezen towards the trackless
coastland which lay to the west and north. And with blessings and tears
the king and AEthra followed him to the city gates, and watched him until
his tall form was lost to sight among the trees which bordered the shore
of the sea.
With a brave heart Theseus walked on, keeping the sea always upon his
right. Soon the old city of Troezen was left far behind, and he came to
the great marshes, where the ground sank under him at every step, and
green pools of stagnant water lay on both sides of the narrow pathway.
But no fiery dragon came out of the reeds to meet him; and so he walked
on and on till he came to the rugged mountain land which bordered the
western shore of the sea. Then he climbed one slope after another, until
at last he stood on the summit of a gray peak from which he could see
the whole country spread out around him. Then downward and onward he
went again, but his way led him through dark mountain glens, and along
the edges of mighty precipices, and underneath many a frowning cliff,
until he came to a dreary wood where the trees grew tall and close
together and the light of the sun was seldom seen.
In that forest there dwelt a robber giant, called Club-carrier, who was
the terror of all the country. For oftentimes he would go down into the
valleys where the shepherds fed their flocks, and would carry off not
only sheep and lambs, but sometimes children and the men themselves. It
was his custom to hide in the thickets of underbrush, close to a
pathway, and, when a traveler passed that way, leap out upon him and
beat him to death. When he saw Theseus coming through the woods, he
thought that he would have a rich prize, for he knew from the youth’s
dress and manner that he must be a prince. He lay on the ground, where
leaves of ivy and tall grass screened him from view, and held his great
iron club ready to strike.
But Theseus had sharp eyes and quick ears, and neither beast nor robber
giant could have taken him by surprise. When Club-carrier leaped out of
his hiding place to strike him down, the young man dodged aside so
quickly that the heavy club struck the ground behind him; and then,
before the robber giant could raise it for a second stroke, Theseus
seized the fellow’s legs and tripped him up.
Club-carrier roared loudly, and tried to strike again; but Theseus
wrenched the club out of his hands, and then dealt him such a blow on
the head that he never again harmed travelers passing through the
forest. Then the youth went on his way, carrying the huge club on his
shoulder, and singing a song of victory, and looking sharply around him
for any other foes that might be lurking among the trees.
Just over the ridge of the next mountain he met an old man who warned
him not to go any farther. He said that close by a grove of pine trees,
which he would soon pass on his way down the slope, there dwelt a robber
named Sinis, who was very cruel to strangers.
“He is called Pine-bender,” said the old man; “for when he has caught a
traveler, he bends two tall, lithe pine trees to the ground and binds
his captive to them–a hand and a foot to the top of one, and a hand and
a foot to the top of the other. Then he lets the trees fly up, and he
roars with laughter when he sees the traveler’s body torn in sunder.”
“It seems to me,” said Theseus, “that it is full time to rid the world
of such a monster;” and he thanked the kind man who had warned him, and
hastened onward, whistling merrily as he went down towards the grove of
pines.
Soon he came in sight of the robber’s house, built near the foot of a
jutting cliff. Behind it was a rocky gorge and a roaring mountain
stream; and in front of it was a garden wherein grew all kinds of rare
plants and beautiful flowers. But the tops of the pine trees below it
were laden with the bones of unlucky travelers, which hung bleaching
white in the sun and wind.
On a stone by the roadside sat Sinis himself; and when he saw Theseus
coming, he ran to meet him, twirling a long rope in his hands and crying
out:
“Welcome, welcome, dear prince! Welcome to our inn–the true Traveler’s
Rest!”
“What kind of entertainment have you?” asked Theseus. “Have you a pine
tree bent down to the ground and ready for me?”
“Ay; two of them!” said the robber. “I knew that you were coming, and I
bent two of them for you.”
As he spoke he threw his rope towards Theseus and tried to entangle him
in its coils. But the young man leaped aside, and when the robber rushed
upon him, he dodged beneath his hands and seized his legs, as he had
seized Club-carrier’s, and threw him heavily to the ground. Then the two
wrestled together among the trees, but not long, for Sinis was no match
for his lithe young foe; and Theseus knelt upon the robber’s back as he
lay prone among the leaves, and tied him with his own cord to the two
pine trees which were already bent down. “As you would have done unto
me, so will I do unto you,” he said.
Then Pine-bender wept and prayed and made many a fair promise; but
Theseus would not hear him. He turned away, the trees sprang up, and the
robber’s body was left dangling from their branches.
Now this old Pine-bender had a daughter named Perigune, who was no more
like him than a fair and tender violet is like the gnarled old oak at
whose feet it nestles; and it was she who cared for the flowers and the
rare plants which grew in the garden by the robber’s house. When she saw
how Theseus had dealt with her father, she was afraid and ran to hide
herself from him.
“Oh, save me, dear plants!” she cried, for she often talked to the
flowers as though they could understand her. “Dear plants, save me; and
I will never pluck your leaves nor harm you in any way so long as I
live.”
There was one of the plants which up to that time had had no leaves, but
came up out of the ground looking like a mere club or stick. This plant
took pity on the maiden. It began at once to send out long feathery
branches with delicate green leaves, which grew so fast that Perigune
was soon hidden from sight beneath them. Theseus knew that she must be
somewhere in the garden, but he could not find her, so well did the
feathery branches conceal her. So he called to her:
“Perigune,” he said, “you need not fear me; for I know that you are
gentle and good, and it is only against things dark and cruel that I
lift up my hand.”
The maiden peeped from her hiding-place, and when she saw the fair face
of the youth and heard his kind voice, she came out, trembling, and
talked with him. And Theseus rested that evening in her house, and she
picked some of her choicest flowers for him and gave him food. But when
in the morning the dawn began to appear in the east, and the stars grew
dim above the mountain peaks, he bade her farewell and journeyed onward
over the hills. And Perigune tended her plants and watched her flowers
in the lone garden in the midst of the piny grove; but she never plucked
the stalks of asparagus nor used them for food, and when she afterwards
became the wife of a hero and had children and grandchildren and
great-grandchildren, she taught them all to spare the plant which had
taken pity upon her in her need.
The road which Theseus followed now led him closer to the shore, and by
and by he came to a place where the mountains seemed to rise sheer out
of the sea, and there was only a, narrow path high up along the side of
the cliff. Far down beneath his feet he could hear the waves dashing
evermore against the rocky wall, while above him the mountain eagles
circled and screamed, and gray crags and barren peaks glistened in the
sunlight.
But Theseus went on fearlessly and came at last to a place where a
spring of clear water bubbled out from a cleft in the rock; and there
the path was narrower still, and the low doorway of a cavern opened out
upon it. Close by the spring sat a red-faced giant, with a huge club
across his knees, guarding the road so that no one could pass; and in
the sea at the foot of the cliff basked a huge turtle, its leaden eyes
looking always upward for its food. Theseus knew–for Perigune had told
him–that this was the dwelling-place of a robber named Sciron, who was
the terror of all the coast, and whose custom it was to make strangers
wash his feet, so that while they were doing so, he might kick them over
the cliff to be eaten, by his pet turtle below.
When Theseus came up, the robber raised his club, and said fiercely: “No
man can pass here until he has washed my feet! Come, set to work!”
Then Theseus smiled, and said: “Is your turtle hungry to-day? and do you
want me to feed him?” The robber’s eyes flashed fire, and he said, “You
shall feed him, but you shall wash my feet first;” and with that he
brandished his club in the air and rushed forward to strike.
But Theseus was ready for him. With the iron club which he had taken
from Club-carrier in the forest he met the blow midway, and the robber’s
weapon was knocked out of his hands and sent spinning away over the edge
of the cliff. Then Sciron, black with rage, tried to grapple with him;
but Theseus was too quick for that. He dropped his club and seized
Sciron by the throat; he pushed him back against the ledge on which he
had been sitting; he threw him sprawling upon the sharp rocks, and held
him there, hanging half way over the cliff.
“Enough! enough!” cried the robber. “Let me up, and you may pass on your
way.”
“It is not enough,” said Theseus; and he drew his sword and sat down by
the side of the spring. “You must wash my feet now. Come, set to work!”
Then Sciron, white with fear, washed his feet.
“And now,” said Theseus, when the task was ended, “as you have done unto
others, so will I do unto you.”
There was a scream in mid air which the mountain eagles answered from
above; there was a great splashing in the water below, and the turtle
fled in terror from its lurking place. Then the sea cried out: “I will
have naught to do with so vile a wretch!” and a great wave cast the body
of Sciron out upon the shore. But it had no sooner touched the ground
than the land cried out: “I will have naught to do with so vile a
wretch!” and there was a sudden earthquake, and the body of Sciron was
thrown back into the sea. Then the sea waxed furious, a raging storm
arose, the waters were lashed into foam, and the waves with one mighty
effort threw the detested body high into the air; and there it would
have hung unto this day had not the air itself disdained to give it
lodging and changed it into a huge black rock. And this rock, which men
say is the body of Sciron, may still be seen, grim, ugly, and desolate;
and one third of it lies in the sea, one third is embedded in the sandy
shore, and one third is exposed to the air.
Keeping the sea always in view, Theseus went onward a long day’s journey
to the north and east; and he left the rugged mountains behind and came
down into the valleys and into a pleasant plain where there were sheep
and cattle pasturing and where there were many fields of ripening
grain. The fame of his deeds had gone before him, and men and women
came crowding to the roadside to see the hero who had slain Club-carrier
and Pine-bender and grim old Sciron of the cliff.
“Now we shall live in peace,” they cried; “for the robbers who devoured
our flocks and our children are no more.”
Then Theseus passed through the old town of Megara, and followed the
shore of the bay towards the sacred city of Eleusis.
“Do not go into Eleusis, but take the road which leads round it through
the hills,” whispered a poor man who was carrying a sheep to market.
“Why shall I do that?” asked Theseus.
“Listen, and I will tell you,” was the answer. “There is a king in
Eleusis whose name is Cercyon, and he is a great wrestler. He makes
every stranger who comes into the city wrestle with him; and such is the
strength of his arms that when he has overcome a man he crushes the life
out of his body. Many travelers come to Eleusis, but no one ever goes
away.”
“But I will both come and go away,” said Theseus; and with his club upon
his shoulder, he strode onward into the sacred city.
“Where is Cercyon, the wrestler?” he asked of the warden at the gate.
“The king is dining in his marble palace,” was the answer. “If you wish
to save yourself, turn now and flee before he has heard of your coming.”
“Why should I flee?” asked Theseus. “I am not afraid;” and he walked on
through the narrow street to old Cercyon’s palace.
The king was sitting at his table, eating and drinking; and he grinned
hideously as he thought of the many noble young men whose lives he had
destroyed. Theseus went up boldly to the door, and cried out:
“Cercyon, come out and wrestle with me!”
“Ah!” said the king, “here comes another young fool whose days are
numbered. Fetch him in and let him dine with me; and after that he shall
have his fill of wrestling.”
So Theseus was given a place at the table of the king, and the two sat
there and ate and stared at each other, but spoke not a word. And
Cercyon, as he looked at the young man’s sharp eyes and his fair face
and silken hair, had half a mind to bid him go in peace and seek not to
test his strength and skill. But when they had finished, Theseus arose
and laid aside his sword and his sandals and his iron club, and stripped
himself of his robes, and said:
“Come now, Cercyon, if you are not afraid; come, and wrestle with me.”
Then the two went out into the courtyard where many a young man had met
his fate, and there they wrestled until the sun went down, and neither
could gain aught of advantage over the other. But it was plain that the
trained skill of Theseus would, in the end, win against the brute
strength of Cercyon. Then the men of Eleusis who stood watching the
contest, saw the youth lift the giant king bodily into the air and hurl
him headlong over his shoulder to the hard pavement beyond.
“As you have done to others, so will I do unto you!” cried Theseus.
But grim old Cercyon neither moved nor spoke; and when the youth turned
his body over and looked into his cruel face, he saw that the life had
quite gone out of him.
Then the people of Eleusis came to Theseus and wanted to make him their
king. “You have slain the tyrant who was the bane of Eleusis,” they
said, “and we have heard how you have also rid the world of the giant
robbers who were the terror of the land. Come now and be our king; for
we know that you will rule over us wisely and well.”
“Some day,” said Theseus, “I will be your king, but not now; for there
are other deeds for me to do.” And with that he donned his sword and
his sandals and his princely cloak, and threw his great iron club upon
his shoulder, and went out of Eleusis; and all the people ran after him
for quite a little way, shouting, “May good fortune be with you, O king,
and may Athena bless and guide you!”
Athens was now not more than twenty miles away, but the road thither led
through the Parnes Mountains, and was only a narrow path winding among
the rocks and up and down many a lonely wooded glen. Theseus had seen
worse and far more dangerous roads than this, and so he strode bravely
onward, happy in the thought that he was so near the end of his long
journey. But it was very slow traveling among the mountains, and he was
not always sure that he was following the right path. The sun was almost
down when he came to a broad green valley where the trees had been
cleared away. A little river flowed through the middle of this valley,
and on either side were grassy meadows where cattle were grazing; and on
a hillside close by, half hidden among the trees, there was a great
stone house with vines running over its walls and roof.
While Theseus was wondering who it could be that lived in this pretty
but lonely place, a man came out of the house and hurried down to the
road to meet him. He was a well-dressed man, and his face was wreathed
with smiles; and he bowed low to Theseus and invited him kindly to come
up to the house and be his guest that night.
“This is a lonely place,” he said, “and it is not often that travelers
pass this way. But there is nothing that gives me so much joy as to find
strangers and feast them at my table and hear them tell of the things
they have seen and heard. Come up, and sup with me, and lodge under my
roof; and you shall sleep on a wonderful bed which I have–a bed which
fits every guest and cures him of every ill.”
Theseus was pleased with the man’s ways, and as he was both hungry and
tired, he went up with him and sat down under the vines by the door; and
the man said:
“Now I will go in and make the bed ready for you, and you can lie down
upon it and rest; and later, when you feel refreshed, you shall sit at
my table and sup with me, and I will listen to the pleasant tales which
I know you will tell.”
When he had gone into the house, Theseus looked around him to see what
sort of a place it was. He was filled with surprise at the richness of
it–at the gold and silver and beautiful things with which every room
seemed to be adorned–for it was indeed a place fit for a prince. While
he was looking and wondering, the vines before him were parted and the
fair face of a young girl peeped out.
“Noble stranger,” she whispered, “do not lie down on my master’s bed,
for those who do so never rise again. Fly down the glen and hide
yourself in the deep woods ere he returns, or else there will be no
escape for you.”
“Who is your master, fair maiden, that I should be afraid of him?” asked
Theseus.
“Men call him Procrustes, or the Stretcher,” said the girl–and she
talked low and fast. “He is a robber. He brings hither all the strangers
that he finds traveling through the mountains. He puts them on his iron
bed. He robs them of all they have. No one who comes into his house ever
goes out again.”
“Why do they call him the Stretcher? And what is that iron bed of his?"
asked Theseus, in no wise alarmed.
“Did he not tell you that it fits all guests?” said the girl; “and most
truly it does fit them. For if a traveler is too long, Procrustes hews
off his legs until he is of the right length; but if he is too short, as
is the case with most guests, then he stretches his limbs and body with
ropes until he is long enough. It is for this reason that men call him
the Stretcher.”
“Methinks that I have heard of this Stretcher before,” said Theseus; and
then he remembered that some one at Eleusis had warned him to beware of
the wily robber, Procrustes, who lurked in the glens of the Parnes peaks
and lured travelers into his den.
“Hark! hark!” whispered the girl. “I hear him coming!” And the vine
leaves closed over her hiding-place.
The very next moment Procrustes stood in the door, bowing and smiling as
though he had never done any harm to his fellow men.
“My dear young friend,” he said, “the bed is ready, and I will show you
the way. After you have taken a pleasant little nap, we will sit down at
table, and you may tell me of the wonderful things which you have seen
in the course of your travels.”
Theseus arose and followed his host; and when they had come into an
inner chamber, there, surely enough, was the bedstead, of iron, very
curiously wrought, and upon it a soft couch which seemed to invite him
to lie down and rest. But Theseus, peering about, saw the ax and the
ropes with cunning pulleys lying hidden behind the curtains; and he saw,
too, that the floor was covered with stains of blood.
“Now, my dear young friend,” said Procrustes, “I pray you to lie down
and take your ease; for I know that you have traveled far and are faint
from want of rest and sleep. Lie down, and while sweet slumber overtakes
you, I will have a care that no unseemly noise, nor buzzing fly, nor
vexing gnat disturbs your dreams.”
“Is this your wonderful bed?” asked Theseus.
“It is,” answered Procrustes, “and you need but to lie down upon it, and
it will fit you perfectly.”
“But you must lie upon it first,” said Theseus, “and let me see how it
will fit itself to your stature.”
“Ah, no,” said Procrustes, “for then the spell would be broken,” and as
he spoke his cheeks grew ashy pale.
“But I tell you, you must lie upon it,” said Theseus; and he seized the
trembling man around the waist and threw him by force upon the bed. And
no sooner was he prone upon the couch than curious iron arms reached out
and clasped his body in their embrace and held him down so that he could
not move hand or foot. The wretched man shrieked and cried for mercy;
but Theseus stood over him and looked him straight in the eye.
“Is this the kind of bed on which you have your guests lie down?” he
asked.
But Procrustes answered not a word. Then Theseus brought out the ax and
the ropes and the pulleys, and asked him what they were for, and why
they were hidden in the chamber. He was still silent, and could do
nothing now but tremble and weep.
“Is it true,” said Theseus, “that you have lured hundreds of travelers
into your den only to rob them? Is it true that it is your wont to
fasten them in this bed, and then chop off their legs or stretch them
out until they fit the iron frame? Tell me, is this true?”
“It is true! it is true!” sobbed Procrustes; “and now kindly touch the
spring above my head and let me go, and you shall have everything that I
possess.”
But Theseus turned away. “You are caught,” he said, “in the trap which
you set for others and for me. There is no mercy for the man who shows
no mercy;” and he went out of the room, and left the wretch to perish by
his own cruel device.
Theseus looked through the house and found there great wealth of gold
and silver and costly things which Procrustes had taken from the
strangers who had fallen into his hands. He went into the dining hall,
and there indeed was the table spread with a rich feast of meats and
drinks and delicacies such as no king would scorn; but there was a seat
and a plate for only the host, and none at all for guests.
Then the girl whose fair face Theseus had seen among the vines, came
running into the house; and she seized the young hero’s hands and
blessed and thanked him because he had rid the world of the cruel
Procrustes.
“Only a month ago,” she said, “my father, a rich merchant of Athens, was
traveling towards Eleusis, and I was with him, happy and care-free as
any bird in the green woods. This robber lured us into his den, for we
had much gold with us. My father, he stretched upon his iron bed; but
me, he made his slave.”
Then Theseus called together all the inmates of the house, poor wretches
whom Procrustes had forced to serve him; and he parted the robber’s
spoils among them and told them that they were free to go wheresoever
they wished. And on the next day he went on, through the narrow crooked
ways among the mountains and hills, and came at last to the plain of
Athens, and saw the noble city and, in its midst, the rocky height where
the great Temple of Athena stood; and, a little way from the temple, he
saw the white walls of the palace of the king.
When Theseus entered the city and went walking up the street everybody
wondered who the tall, fair youth could be. But the fame of his deeds
had gone before him, and soon it was whispered that this was the hero
who had slain the robbers in the mountains and had wrestled with Cercyon
at Eleusis and had caught Procrustes in his own cunning trap.
“Tell us no such thing!” said some butchers who were driving their
loaded carts to market. “The lad is better suited to sing sweet songs to
the ladies than to fight robbers and wrestle with giants.”
“See his silken black hair!” said one.
“And his girlish face!” said another.
“And his long coat dangling about his legs!” said a third.
“And his golden sandals!” said a fourth.
“Ha! ha!” laughed the first; “I wager that he never lifted a ten-pound
weight in his life. Think of such a fellow as he hurling old Sciron from
the cliffs! Nonsense!”
Theseus heard all this talk as he strode along, and it angered him not a
little; but he had not come to Athens to quarrel with butchers. Without
speaking a word he walked straight up to the foremost cart, and, before
its driver had time to think, took hold of the slaughtered ox that was
being hauled to market, and hurled it high over the tops of the houses
into the garden beyond. Then he did likewise with the oxen in the
second, the third, and the fourth wagons, and, turning about, went on
his way, and left the wonder-stricken butchers staring after him,
speechless, in the street.
He climbed the stairway which led to the top of the steep, rocky hill,
and his heart beat fast in his bosom as he stood on the threshold of his
father’s palace.
“Where is the king?” he asked of the guard.
“You cannot see the king,” was the answer; “but I will take you to his
nephews.”
The man led the way into the feast hall, and there Theseus saw his fifty
cousins sitting about the table, and eating and drinking and making
merry; and there was a great noise of revelry in the hall, the minstrels
singing and playing, and the slave girls dancing, and the half-drunken
princes shouting and cursing. As Theseus stood in the doorway, knitting
his eyebrows and clinching his teeth for the anger which he felt, one of
the feasters saw him, and cried out:
“See the tall fellow in the doorway! What does he want here?”
“Yes, girl-faced stranger,” said another, “what do you want here?”
“I am here,” said Theseus, “to ask that hospitality which men of our
race never refuse to give.”
“Nor do we refuse,” cried they. “Come in, and eat and drink and be our
guest.”
“I will come in,” said Theseus, “but I will be the guest of the king.
Where is he?”
“Never mind the king,” said one of his cousins. “He is taking his ease,
and we reign in his stead.”
But Theseus strode boldly through the feast hall and went about the
palace asking for the king. At last he found AEgeus, lonely and
sorrowful, sitting in an inner chamber. The heart of Theseus was very
sad as he saw the lines of care upon the old man’s face, and marked his
trembling, halting ways.
“Great king,” he said, “I am a stranger in Athens, and I have come to
you to ask food and shelter and friendship such as I know you never deny
to those of noble rank and of your own race.”
“And who are you, young man?” said the king.
“I am Theseus,” was the answer.
“What? the Theseus who has rid the world of the mountain robbers, and of
Cercyon the wrestler, and of Procrustes, the pitiless Stretcher?”
“I am he,” said Theseus; “and I come from old Troezen, on the other side
of the Saronic Sea.”
The king started and turned very pale.
“Troezen! Troezen!” he cried. Then checking himself, he said, “Yes! yes!
You are welcome, brave stranger, to such shelter and food and friendship
as the King of Athens can give.”
Now it so happened that there was with the king a fair but wicked witch
named Medea, who had so much power over him that he never dared to do
anything without asking her leave. So he turned to her, and said: “Am I
not right, Medea, in bidding this young hero welcome?”
“You are right, King AEgeus,” she said; “and let him be shown at once to
your guest chamber, that he may rest himself and afterwards dine with us
at your own table.”
Medea had learned by her magic arts who Theseus was, and she was not at
all pleased to have him in Athens; for she feared that when he should
make himself known to the king, her own power would be at an end. So,
while Theseus was resting himself in the guest chamber, she told AEgeus
that the young stranger was no hero at all, but a man whom his nephews
had hired to kill him, for they had grown tired of waiting for him to
die. The poor old king was filled with fear, for he believed her words;
and he asked her what he should do to save his life.
“Let me manage it,” she said. “The young man will soon come down to
dine with us. I will drop poison into a glass of wine, and at the end of
the meal I will give it to him. Nothing can be easier.”
So, when the hour came, Theseus sat down to dine with the king and
Medea; and while he ate he told of his deeds and of how he had overcome
the robber giants, and Cercyon the wrestler, and Procrustes the
pitiless; and as the king listened, his heart yearned strangely towards
the young man, and he longed to save him from Medea’s poisoned cup. Then
Theseus paused in his talk to help himself to a piece of the roasted
meat, and, as was the custom of the time, drew his sword to carve
it–for you must remember that all these things happened long ago,
before people had learned to use knives and forks at the table. As the
sword flashed from its scabbard, AEgeus saw the letters that were
engraved upon it–the initials of his own name. He knew at once that it
was the sword which he had hidden so many years before under the stone
on the mountain side above Troezen.
“My son! my son!” he cried; and he sprang up and dashed the cup of
poisoned wine from the table, and flung his arms around Theseus. It was
indeed a glad meeting for both father and son, and they had many things
to ask and to tell. As for the wicked Medea, she knew that her day of
rule was past. She ran out of the palace, and whistled a loud, shrill
call; and men say that a chariot drawn by dragons came rushing through
the air, and that she leaped into it and was carried away, and no one
ever saw her again.
The very next morning, AEgeus sent out his heralds, to make it known
through all the city that Theseus was his son, and that he would in time
be king in his stead. When the fifty nephews heard this, they were angry
and alarmed.
“Shall this upstart cheat us out of our heritage?” they cried; and they
made a plot to waylay and kill Theseus in a grove close by the city
gate.
Right cunningly did the wicked fellows lay their trap to catch the young
hero; and one morning, as he was passing that way alone, several of them
fell suddenly upon him, with swords and lances, and tried to slay him
outright. They were thirty to one, but he faced them boldly and held
them at bay, while he shouted for help. The men of Athens, who had borne
so many wrongs from the hands of the nephews, came running out from the
streets; and in the fight which followed, every one of the plotters, who
had lain in ambush was slain; and the other nephews, when they heard
about it, fled from the city in haste and never came back again.
Continue...

This eBook of “Old Greek Stories” by James Baldwin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Greek StoriesBy James BaldwinAt Amazon
