




The American clipper ship was the result of an evolution which
can be traced back to the swift privateers which were built
during the War of 1812. In this type of vessel the shipyards of
Chesapeake Bay excelled and their handiwork was known as the
“Baltimore clipper,” the name suggested by the old English verb
which Dryden uses to describe the flight of the falcon that
“clips it down the wind.” The essential difference between the
clipper ship and other kinds of merchant craft was that speed and
not capacity became the chief consideration. This was a radical
departure for large vessels, which in all maritime history had
been designed with an eye to the number of tons they were able to
carry. More finely molded lines had hitherto been found only in
the much smaller French lugger, the Mediterranean galley, the
American schooner.
To borrow the lines of these fleet and graceful models and apply
them to the design of a deepwater ship was a bold conception. It
was first attempted by Isaac McKim, a Baltimore merchant, who
ordered his builders in 1832 to reproduce as closely as possible
the superior sailing qualities of the renowned clipper brigs and
schooners of their own port. The result was the Ann McKim, of
nearly five hundred tons, the first Yankee clipper ship, and
distinguished as such by her long, easy water-lines, low
free-board, and raking stem. She was built and finished without
regard to cost, copper-sheathed, the decks gleaming with
brasswork and mahogany fittings. But though she was a very fast
and handsome ship and the pride of her owner, the Ann McKim could
stow so little cargo that shipping men regarded her as
unprofitable and swore by their full-bodied vessels a few years
longer.
That the Ann McKim, however, influenced the ideas of the most
progressive builders is very probable, for she was later owned by
the New York firm of Howland and Aspinwall, who placed an order
for the first extremely sharp clipper ship of the era. This
vessel, the Rainbow, was designed by John W. Griffeths, a marine
architect, who was a pioneer in that he studied shipbuilding as a
science instead of working by rule-of-thumb. The Rainbow, which
created a sensation while on the stocks because of her concave or
hollowed lines forward, which defied all tradition and practice,
was launched in 1845. She was a more radical innovation than the
Ann McKim but a successful one, for on her second voyage to China
the Rainbow went out against the northeast monsoon in ninety-two
days and came home in eighty-eight, a record which few ships were
able to better. Her commander, Captain John Land, declared her to
be the fastest ship in the world and there were none to dispute
him.
Even the Rainbow however, was eclipsed when not long afterward
Howland and Aspinwall, now converted to the clipper, ordered the
Sea Witch to be built for Captain Bob Waterman. Among all the
splendid skippers of the time he was the most dashing figure.
About his briny memory cluster a hundred yarns, some of them
true, others legendary. It has been argued that the speed of the
clippers was due more to the men who commanded them than to their
hulls and rigging, and to support the theory the career of
Captain Bob Waterman is quoted. He was first known to fame in the
old Natchez, which was not a clipper at all and was even rated as
slow while carrying cotton from New Orleans to New York. But
Captain Bob took this full-pooped old packet ship around the Horn
and employed her in the China tea trade. The voyages which he
made in her were all fast, and he crowned them with the amazing
run of seventy-eight days from Canton to New York, just one day
behind the swiftest clipper passage ever sailed and which he
himself performed in the Sea Witch. Incredulous mariners simply
could not explain this feat of the Natchez and suggested that Bob
Waterman must have brought the old hooker home by some new route
of his own discovery.
Captain Bob had won a reputation for discipline as the mate of a
Black Ball liner, a rough school, and he was not a mild man.
Ashore his personality was said to have been a most attractive
one, but there is no doubt that afloat he worked the very souls
out of his sailors. The rumors that he frightfully abused them
were not current, however, until he took the Sea Witch and showed
the world the fastest ship under canvas. Low in the water, with
black hull and gilded figurehead, she seemed too small to support
her prodigious cloud of sail. For her there were to be no
leisurely voyages with Captain Bob Waterman on the quarter-deck.
Home from Canton she sped in seventy-seven days and then in
seventy-nine--records which were never surpassed.
With what consummate skill and daring this master mariner drove
his ship and how the race of hardy sailors to which he belonged
compared with those of other nations may be descried in the log
of another of them, Captain Philip Dumaresq, homeward bound from
China in 1849 in the clipper Great Britain. Three weeks out from
Java Head she had overtaken and passed seven ships heading the
same way, and then she began to rush by them in one gale after
another. Her log records her exploits in such entries as these:
“Passed a ship under double reefs, we with our royals and
studdingsails set . . . . Passed a ship laying-to under a
close-reefed maintopsail . . . . Split all three topsails and had
to heave to . . . . Seven vessels in sight and we outsail all of
them . . . . Under double-reefed topsails passed several vessels
hove-to.” Much the same record might be read in the log of the
medium clipper Florence--and it is the same story of carrying
sail superbly on a ship which had been built to stand up under
it: “Passed two barks under reefed courses and close-reefed
topsails standing the same way, we with royals and topgallant
studding-sails,” or “Passed a ship under topsails, we with our
royals set.” For eleven weeks “the topsail halliards were started
only once, to take in a single reef for a few hours.” It is not
surprising, therefore, to learn that, seventeen days out from
Shanghai, the Florence exchanged signals with the English ship
John Hagerman, which had sailed thirteen days before her.
Two notable events in the history of the nineteenth century
occurred within the same year, 1849, to open new fields of trade
to the Yankee clipper. One of these was the repeal of the British
Navigation Laws which had given English ships a monopoly of the
trade between London and the British East Indies, and the other
was the discovery of gold in California. After centuries of pomp
and power, the great East India Company had been deprived of its
last exclusive rights afloat in 1833. Its ponderous,
frigate-built merchantmen ceased to dominate the British commerce
with China and India and were sold or broken up. All British
ships were now free to engage in this trade, but the spirit and
customs of the old regime still strongly survived. Flying the
house-flags of private owners, the East Indiamen and China tea
ships were still built and manned like frigates, slow,
comfortable, snugging down for the night under reduced sail.
There was no competition to arouse them until the last barrier of
the Navigation Laws was let down and they had to meet the Yankee
clipper with the tea trade as the huge stake.
Then at last it was farewell to the gallant old Indianian and her
ornate, dignified prestige. With a sigh the London Times
confessed: “We must run a race with our gigantic and unshackled
rival. We must set our long-practised skill, our steady industry,
and our dogged determination against his youth, ingenuity, and
ardor. Let our shipbuilders and employers take warning in time.
There will always be an abundant supply of vessels good enough
and fast enough for short voyages. But we want fast vessels for
the long voyages which otherwise will fall into American hands.”
Before English merchants could prepare themselves for these new
conditions, the American clipper Oriental was loading in 1850 at
Hong Kong with tea for the London market. Because of her
reputation for speed, she received freightage of six pounds
sterling per ton while British ships rode at anchor with empty
holds or were glad to sail at three pounds ten per ton. Captain
Theodore Palmer delivered his sixteen hundred tons of tea in the
West India Docks, London, after a crack passage of ninety-one
days which had never been equaled. His clipper earned $48,000, or
two-thirds of what it had cost to build her. Her arrival in
London created a profound impression. The port had seen nothing
like her for power and speed; her skysail yards soared far above
the other shipping; the cut of her snowy canvas was faultless;
all clumsy, needless tophamper had been done away with; and she
appeared to be the last word in design and construction, as lean
and fine and spirited as a race-horse in training.
This new competition dismayed British shipping until it could
rally and fight with similar weapons The technical journal, Naval
Science, acknowledged that the tea trade of the London markets
had passed almost out of the hands of the English ship-owner, and
that British vessels, well-manned and well-found, were known to
lie for weeks in the harbor of Foo-chow, waiting for a cargo and
seeing American clippers come in, load, and sail immediately with
full cargoes at a higher freight than they could command. Even
the Government viewed the loss of trade with concern and sent
admiralty draftsmen to copy the lines of the Oriental and
Challenge while they were in drydock.
British clippers were soon afloat, somewhat different in model
from the Yankee ships, but very fast and able, and racing them in
the tea trade until the Civil War. With them it was often nip and
tuck, as in the contest between the English Lord of the Isles and
the American clipper bark Maury in 1856. The prize was a premium
of one pound per ton for the first ship to reach London with tea
of the new crop. The Lord of the Isles finished loading and
sailed four days ahead of the Maury, and after thirteen thousand
miles of ocean they passed Gravesend within ten minutes of each
other. The British skipper, having the smartest tug and getting
his ship first into dock, won the honors. In a similar race
between the American Sea Serpent and the English Crest of the
Wave, both ships arrived off the Isle of Wight on the same day.
It was a notable fact that the Lord of the Isles was the first
tea clipper built of iron at a date when the use of this stubborn
material was not yet thought of by the men who constructed the
splendid wooden ships of America.
For the peculiar requirements of the tea trade, English maritime
talent was quick to perfect a clipper type which, smaller than
the great Yankee skysail-yarder, was nevertheless most admirable
for its beauty and performance. On both sides of the Atlantic
partizans hotly championed their respective fleets. In 1852 the
American Navigation Club, organized by Boston merchants and
owners, challenged the shipbuilders of Great Britain to race from
a port in England to a port in China and return, for a stake of
$50,000 a side, ships to be not under eight hundred nor over
twelve hundred tons American register. The challenge was aimed at
the Stornaway and the Chrysolite, the two clippers that were
known to be the fastest ships under the British flag. Though this
sporting defiance caused lively discussion, nothing came of it,
and it was with a spirit even keener that Sampson and Tappan of
Boston offered to match their Nightingale for the same amount
against any clipper afloat, British or American.
In spite of the fact that Yankee enterprise had set the pace in
the tea trade, within a few years after 1850 England had so
successfully mastered the art of building these smaller clippers
that the honors were fairly divided. The American owners were
diverting their energies to the more lucrative trade in larger
ships sailing around the Horn to San Francisco, a long road
which, as a coastwise voyage, was forbidden to foreign vessels
under the navigation laws. After the Civil War the fastest tea
clippers flew the British flag and into the seventies they
survived the competition of steam, racing among themselves for
the premiums awarded to the quickest dispatch. No more of these
beautiful vessels were launched after 1869, and one by one they
vanished into other trades, overtaken by the same fate which had
befallen the Atlantic packet and conquered by the cargo steamers
which filed through the Suez Canal.
Until 1848 San Francisco had been a drowsy little Mexican
trading-post, a huddle of adobe huts and sheds where American
ships collected hides--vividly described in Two Years Before the
Mast--or a whaler called for wood and water. During the year
preceding the frenzied migration of the modern Argonauts, only
two merchant ships, one bark and one brig, sailed in through the
Golden Gate. In the twelve months following, 775 vessels cleared
from Atlantic ports for San Francisco, besides the rush from
other countries, and nearly fifty thousand passengers scrambled
ashore to dig for gold. Crews deserted their ships, leaving them
unable to go to sea again for lack of men, and in consequence a
hundred of them were used as storehouses, hotels, and hospitals,
or else rotted at their moorings. Sailors by hundreds jumped from
the forecastle without waiting to stow the sails or receive their
wages. Though offered as much as two hundred dollars a month to
sign again, they jeered at the notion. Of this great fleet at San
Francisco in 1849, it was a lucky ship that ever left the harbor
again.
It seemed as if the whole world were bound to California and
almost overnight there was created the wildest, most extravagant
demand for transportation known to history. A clipper costing
$70,000 could pay for herself in one voyage, with freights at
sixty dollars a ton. This gold stampede might last but a little
while. To take instant advantage of it was the thing. The fastest
ships, and as many of them as could be built, would skim the
cream of it. This explains the brief and illustrious era of the
California clipper, one hundred and sixty of which were launched
from 1850 to 1854. The shipyards of New York and Boston were
crowded with them, and they graced the keel blocks of the
historic old ports of New England--Medford, Mystic, Newburyport,
Portsmouth, Portland, Rockland, and Bath--wherever the timber and
the shipwrights could be assembled.
Until that time there had been few ships afloat as large as a
thousand tons. These were of a new type, rapidly increased to
fifteen hundred, two thousand tons, and over. They presented new
and difficult problems in spars and rigging able to withstand the
strain of immense areas of canvas which climbed two hundred feet
to the skysail pole and which, with lower studdingsails set,
spread one hundred and sixty feet from boom-end to boom-end.
There had to be the strength to battle with the furious tempests
of Cape Horn and at the same time the driving power to sweep
before the sweet and steadfast tradewinds. Such a queenly clipper
was the Flying Cloud, the achievement of that master builder,
Donald McKay, which sailed from New York to San Francisco in
eighty-nine days, with Captain Josiah Creesy in command. This
record was never lowered and was equaled only twice--by the
Flying Cloud herself and by the Andrew Jackson nine years later.
It was during this memorable voyage that the Flying Cloud sailed
1256 miles in four days while steering to the northward under
topgallantsails after rounding Cape Horn. This was a rate of
speed which, if sustained, would have carried her from New York
to Queenstown in eight days and seventeen hours. This speedy
passage was made in 1851, and only two years earlier the record
for the same voyage of fifteen thousand miles had been one
hundred and twenty days, by the clipper Memnon.
Donald McKay now resolved to build a ship larger and faster than
the Flying Cloud, and his genius neared perfection in the
Sovereign of the Seas, of 2421 tons register, which exceeded in
size all merchant vessels afloat. This Titan of the clipper fleet
was commanded by Donald’s brother, Captain Lauchlan McKay, with a
crew of one hundred and five men and boys. During her only voyage
to San Francisco she was partly dismasted, but Lauchlan McKay
rigged her anew at sea in fourteen days and still made port in
one hundred and three days, a record for the season of the year.
It was while running home from Honolulu in 1853 that the
Sovereign of the Seas realized the hopes of her builder. In
eleven days she sailed 3562 miles, with four days logged for a
total of 1478 knots. Making allowance for the longitudes and
difference in time, this was an average daily run of 378 sea
miles or 435 land miles. Using the same comparison, the distance
from Sandy Hook to Queenstown would have been covered in seven
days and nine hours. Figures are arid reading, perhaps, but these
are wet by the spray and swept by the salt winds of romance.
During one of these four days the Sovereign of the Seas reeled
off 424 nautical miles, during which her average speed was
seventeen and two-thirds knots and at times reached nineteen and
twenty. The only sailing ship which ever exceeded this day’s work
was the Lightning, built later by the same Donald McKay, which
ran 436 knots in the Atlantic passage already referred to. The
Sovereign of the Seas could also boast of a sensational feat upon
the Western Ocean, for between New York and Liverpool she
outsailed the Cunard liner Canada by 325 miles in five days.
It is curiously interesting to notice that the California clipper
era is almost generally ignored by the foremost English writers
of maritime history. For one thing, it was a trade in which their
own ships were not directly concerned, and partizan bias is apt
to color the views of the best of us when national prestige is
involved. American historians themselves have dispensed with many
unpleasant facts when engaged with the War of 1812. With regard
to the speed of clipper ships, however, involving a rivalry far
more thrilling and important than all the races ever sailed for
the America’s cup, the evidence is available in concrete form.
Lindsay’s “History of Merchant Shipping” is the most elaborate
English work of the kind. Heavily ballasted with facts and rather
dull reading for the most part, it kindles with enthusiasm when
eulogizing the Thermopylae and the Sir Launcelot, composite
clippers of wood and iron, afloat in 1870, which it declares to
be “the fastest sailing ships that ever traversed the ocean."
This fairly presents the issue which a true-blooded Yankee has no
right to evade. The greatest distance sailed by the Sir Launcelot
in twenty-four hours between China and London was 354 knots,
compared with the 424 miles of the Sovereign of the Seas and the
436 miles of the Lightning. Her best sustained run was one of
seven days for an average of a trifle more than 300 miles a day.
Against this is to be recorded the performance of the Sovereign
of the Seas, 3562 miles in eleven days, at the rate of 324 miles
every twenty-four hours, and her wonderful four-day run of 1478
miles, an average of 378 miles.
The Thermopylae achieved her reputation in a passage of
sixty-three days from London to Melbourne--a record which was
never beaten. Her fastest day’s sailing was 330 miles, or not
quite sixteen knots an hour. In six days she traversed 1748
miles, an average of 291 miles a day. In this Australian trade
the American clippers made little effort to compete. Those
engaged in it were mostly built for English owners and sailed by
British skippers, who could not reasonably be expected to get the
most out of these loftily sparred Yankee ships, which were much
larger than their own vessels of the same type. The Lightning
showed what she could do from Melbourne to Liverpool by making
the passage in sixty-three’ days, with 3722 miles in ten
consecutive days and one day’s sprint of 412 miles.
In the China tea trade the Thermopylae drove home from Foo-chow
in ninety-one days, which was equaled by the Sir Launcelot. The
American Witch of the Wave had a ninety-day voyage to her credit,
and the Comet ran from Liverpool to Shanghai in eighty-four days.
Luck was a larger factor on this route than in the California or
Australian trade because of the fitful uncertainty of the
monsoons, and as a test of speed it was rather unsatisfactory. In
a very fair-minded and expert summary, Captain Arthur H. Clark,*
in his youth an officer on Yankee clippers, has discussed this
question of rival speed and power under sail--a question which
still absorbs those who love the sea. His conclusion is that in
ordinary weather at sea, when great power to carry sail was not
required, the British tea clippers were extremely fast vessels,
chiefly on account of their narrow beam. Under these conditions
they were perhaps as fast as the American clippers of the same
class, such as the Sea Witch, White Squall, Northern Light, and
Sword-Fish. But if speed is to be reckoned by the maximum
performance of a ship under the most favorable conditions, then
the British tea clippers were certainly no match for the larger
American ships such as the Flying Cloud, Sovereign of the Seas,
Hurricane, Trade Wind, Typhoon, Flying Fish, Challenge, and Red
Jacket. The greater breadth of the American ships in proportion
to their length meant power to carry canvas and increased
buoyancy which enabled them, with their sharper ends, to be
driven in strong gales and heavy seas at much greater speed than
the British clippers. The latter were seldom of more than one
thousand tons’ register and combined in a superlative degree the
good qualities of merchant ships.
* “The Clipper Ship Era.” N.Y., 1910.
It was the California trade, brief and crowded and fevered, which
saw the roaring days of the Yankee clipper and which was familiar
with racing surpassing in thrill and intensity that of the packet
ships of the Western Ocean. In 1851, for instance, the Raven, Sea
Witch, and Typhoon sailed for San Francisco within the same week.
They crossed the Equator a day apart and stood away to the
southward for three thousand miles of the southeast trades and
the piping westerly winds which prevailed farther south. At fifty
degrees south latitude the Raven and the Sea Witch were abeam of
each other with the Typhoon only two days astern.
Now they stripped for the tussle to windward around Cape Horn,
sending down studdingsail booms and skysail yards, making all
secure with extra lashings, plunging into the incessant head seas
of the desolate ocean, fighting it out tack for tack, reefing
topsails and shaking them out again, the vigilant commanders
going below only to change their clothes, the exhausted seamen
stubbornly, heroically handling with frozen, bleeding fingers the
icy sheets and canvas. A fortnight of this inferno and the Sea
Witch and the Raven gained the Pacific, still within sight of
each other, and the Typhoon only one day behind. Then they swept
northward, blown by the booming tradewinds, spreading
studdingsails, skysails, and above them, like mere handkerchiefs,
the water-sails and ring-tails. Again the three clippers crossed
the Equator. Close-hauled on the starboard tack, their bowsprits
were pointed for the last stage of the journey to the Golden
Gate. The Typhoon now overhauled her rivals and was the first to
signal her arrival, but the victory was earned by the Raven,
which had set her departure from Boston Light while the others
had sailed from New York. The Typhoon and the Raven were only a
day apart, with the Sea Witch five days behind the leader.
Clipper ship crews included men of many nations. In the average
forecastle there would be two or three Americans, a majority of
English and Norwegians, and perhaps a few Portuguese and
Italians. The hardiest seamen, and the most unmanageable, were
the Liverpool packet rats who were lured from their accustomed
haunts to join the clippers by the magical call of the
gold-diggings. There were not enough deep-water sailors to man
half the ships that were built in these few years, and the crimps
and boarding-house runners decoyed or flung aboard on sailing day
as many men as were demanded, and any drunken, broken landlubber
was good enough to be shipped as an able seaman. They were things
of rags and tatters--their only luggage a bottle of whiskey.
The mates were thankful if they could muster enough real sailors
to work the ship to sea and then began the stern process of
whipping the wastrels and incompetents into shape for the perils
and emergencies of the long voyage. That these great clippers
were brought safely to port is a shining tribute to the masterful
skill of their officers. While many of them were humane and just,
with all their severity, the stories of savage abuse which are
told of some are shocking in the extreme. The defense was that it
was either mutiny or club the men under. Better treatment might
have persuaded better men to sail. Certain it is that life in the
forecastle of a clipper was even more intolerable to the
self-respecting American youth than it had previously been aboard
the Atlantic packet.
When Captain Bob Waterman arrived at San Francisco in the
Challenge clipper in 1851, a mob tried very earnestly to find and
hang him and his officers because of the harrowing stories told
by his sailors. That he had shot several of them from the yards
with his pistol to make the others move faster was one count in
the indictment. For his part, Captain Waterman asserted that a
more desperate crew of ruffians had never sailed out of New York
and that only two of them were Americans. They were mutinous from
the start, half of them blacklegs of the vilest type who swore to
get the upper hand of him. His mates, boatswain, and carpenter
had broken open their chests and boxes and had removed a
collection of slung-shots, knuckle-dusters, bowie-knives, and
pistols. Off Rio Janeiro they had tried to kill the chief mate,
and Captain Waterman had been compelled to jump in and stretch
two of them dead with an iron belaying-pin. Off Cape Horn three
sailors fell from aloft and were lost. This accounted for the
casualties.
The truth of such episodes as these was difficult to fathom.
Captain Waterman demanded a legal investigation, but nothing came
of his request and he was commended by his owners for his skill
and courage in bringing the ship to port without losing a spar or
a sail. It was a skipper of this old school who blandly
maintained the doctrine that if you wanted the men to love you,
you must starve them and knock them down. The fact is proven by
scores of cases that the discipline of the American clipper was
both famously efficient and notoriously cruel. It was not until
long after American sailors had ceased to exist that adequate
legislation was enacted to provide that they should be treated as
human beings afloat and ashore. Other days and other customs! It
is perhaps unkind to judge these vanished master-mariners too
harshly, for we cannot comprehend the crises which continually
beset them in their command.
No more extreme clipper ships were built after 1854. The
California frenzy had subsided and speed in carrying merchandise
was no longer so essential; besides, the passenger traffic was
seeking the Isthmian route. What were called medium clippers
enjoyed a profitable trade for many years later, and one of them,
the Andrew Jackson, was never outsailed for the record from New
York to San Francisco. This splendid type of ship was to be found
on every sea, for the United States was still a commanding factor
in the maritime activities of South America, India, China,
Europe, and Australia. In 1851 its merchant tonnage rivaled that
of England and was everywhere competing with it.
The effects of the financial panic of 1857 and the aftermath of
business depression were particularly disastrous to American
ships. Freights were so low as to yield no profit, and the finest
clippers went begging for charters. The yards ceased to launch
new tonnage. British builders had made such rapid progress in
design and construction that the days of Yankee preference in the
China trade had passed. The Stars and Stripes floated over ships
waiting idle in Manila Bay, at Shanghai, Hong-Kong, and Calcutta.
The tide of commerce had slackened abroad as well as at home and
the surplus of deep-water tonnage was world-wide.
In earlier generations afloat, the American spirit had displayed
amazing recuperative powers. The havoc of the Revolution had been
unable to check it, and its vigor and aggressive enterprise had
never been more notable than after the blows dealt by the
Embargo, the French Spoliations, and the War of 1812. The
conditions of trade and the temper of the people were now so
changed that this mighty industry, aforetime so robust and
resilient, was unable to recover from such shocks as the panic of
1857 and the Civil War. Yet it had previously survived and
triumphed over calamities far more severe. The destruction
wrought by Confederate cruisers was trifling compared with the
work of the British and French privateers when the nation was
very small and weak.
The American spirit had ceased to concern itself with the sea as
the vital and dominant element. The footsteps of the young men no
longer turned toward the wharf and the waterside and the tiers of
tall ships outward bound. They were aspiring to conquer an inland
empire of prairie and mountain and desert, impelled by the same
pioneering and adventurous ardor which had burned in their
seafaring sires. Steam had vanquished sail--an epochal event in a
thousand years of maritime history--but the nation did not care
enough to accept this situation as a new challenge or to continue
the ancient struggle for supremacy upon the sea. England did
care, because it was life or death to the little, sea-girt
island, but as soon as the United States ceased to be a strip of
Atlantic seaboard and the panorama, of a continent was unrolled
to settlement, it was foreordained that the maritime habit of
thought and action should lose its virility in America. All great
seafaring races, English, Norwegian, Portuguese, and Dutch, have
taken to salt water because there was lack of space, food, or
work ashore, and their strong young men craved opportunities.
Like the Pilgrim Fathers and their fishing shallops they had
nowhere else to go.
When the Flying Cloud and the clippers of her kind--taut, serene,
immaculate--were sailing through the lonely spaces of the South
Atlantic and the Pacific, they sighted now and then the stumpy,
slatternly rig and greasy hull of a New Bedford whaler, perhaps
rolling to the weight of a huge carcass alongside. With a poor
opinion of the seamanship of these wandering barks, the clipper
crews rolled out, among their favorite chanteys:
    Oh, poor Reuben Ranzo,
    Ranzo, boys, O Ranzo,
    Oh, Ranzo was no sailor,
    So they shipped him aboard a whaler,
    Ranzo, boys, O Ranzo.
This was crass, intolerant prejudice. The whaling ship was
careless of appearances, it is true, and had the air of an ocean
vagabond; but there were other duties more important than
holystoning decks, scraping spars, and trimming the yards to a
hair. On a voyage of two or three years, moreover, there was
always plenty of time tomorrow. Brave and resourceful seamen were
these New England adventurers and deep-sea hunters who made
nautical history after their own fashion. They flourished coeval
with the merchant marine in its prime, and they passed from the
sea at about the same time and for similar reasons. Modernity
dispensed with their services, and young men found elsewhere more
profitable and easier employment.
The great days of Nantucket as a whaling port were passed before
the Revolution wiped out her ships and killed or scattered her
sailors. It was later discovered that larger ships were more
economical, and Nantucket harbor bar was too shoal to admit their
passage. For this reason New Bedford became the scene of the
foremost activity, and Nantucket thereafter played a minor part,
although her barks went cruising on to the end of the chapter and
her old whaling families were true to strain. As explorers the
whalemen rambled into every nook and corner of the Pacific before
merchant vessels had found their way thither. They discovered
uncharted islands and cheerfully fought savages or suffered
direful shipwreck. The chase led them into Arctic regions where
their stout barks were nipped like eggshells among the grinding
floes, or else far to the southward where they broiled in tropic
calms. The New Bedford lad was as keen to go a-whaling as was his
counterpart in Boston or New York to be the dandy mate of a
California clipper, and true was the song:
      I asked a maiden by my side,
    Who sighed and looked to me forlorn,
      “Where is your heart?” She quick replied,
    “Round Cape Horn.”
Yankee whaling reached its high tide in 1857 when the New Bedford
fleet alone numbered 329 sail and those owned in other ports of
Buzzard’s Bay swelled the total to 426 vessels, besides thirty
more hailing from New London and Sag Harbor. In this year the
value of the catch was more than ten million dollars. The old
custom of sailing on shares or “lays” instead of wages was never
changed. It was win or lose for all hands--now a handsome fortune
or again an empty hold and pockets likewise. There was Captain
W.T. Walker of New Bedford who, in 1847, bought for a song a ship
so old that she was about to be broken up for junk and no
insurance broker would look at her. In this rotten relic he
shipped a crew and went sailing in the Pacific. Miraculously
keeping afloat, this Envoy of his was filled to the hatches with
oil and bones, twice running, before she returned to her home
port; and she earned $138,450 on a total investment of eight
thousand dollars.
The ship Sarah of Nantucket, after a three years’ cruise, brought
back 3497 barrels of sperm oil which sold for $89,000, and the
William Hamilton of New Bedford set another high mark by stowing
4181 barrels of a value of $109,269. The Pioneer of New London,
Captain Ebenezer Morgan, was away only a year and stocked a cargo
of oil and whalebone which sold for $150,060. Most of the profits
of prosperous voyages were taken as the owners’ share, and the
incomes of the captain and crew were so niggardly as to make one
wonder why they persisted in a calling so perilous, arduous, and
poorly paid. During the best years of whaling, when the ships
were averaging $16,000 for a voyage, the master received an
eighteenth, or about nine hundred dollars a year. The highly
skilled hands, such as the boat-steerers and harpooners, had a
lay of only one seventy-fifth, or perhaps a little more than two
hundred dollars cash as the reward of a voyage which netted the
owner at least fifty per cent on his investment. Occasionally
they fared better than this and sometimes worse. The answer to
the riddle is that they liked the life and had always the
gambling spirit which hopes for a lucky turn of the cards.
The countless episodes of fragile boats smashed to kindling by
fighting whales, of the attack renewed with harpoon and lance, of
ships actually rammed and sunk, would fill a volume by themselves
and have been stirringly narrated in many a one. Zanzibar and
Kamchatka, Tasmania and the Seychelles knew the lean, sun-dried
Yankee whaleman and his motto of a “dead whale or a stove boat."
The Civil War did not drive him from the seas. The curious fact
is that his products commanded higher prices in 1907 than fifty
years before, but the number of his ships rapidly decreased.
Whales were becoming scarce, and New England capital preferred
other forms of investment. The leisurely old sailing craft was
succeeded by the steam whaler, and the explosive bomb slew,
instead of the harpoon and lance hurled by the sinewy right arm
of a New Bedford man or Cape Verde islander.
Roving whaler and armed East Indiaman, plunging packet ship and
stately clipper, they served their appointed days and passed on
their several courses to become mere memories, as shadowy and
unsubstantial as the gleam of their own topsails when seen at
twilight. The souls of their sailors have fled to Fiddler’s
Green, where all dead mariners go. They were of the old merchant
marine which contributed something fine and imperishable to the
story of the United States. Down the wind, vibrant and
deep-throated, comes their own refrain for a requiem:
    We’re outward bound this very day,
    Good-bye, fare you well,
    Good-bye, fare you well.
    We’re outward bound this very day,
      Hurrah, my boys, we’re outward bound.
Continue...

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
