


In a little town north of Delphi, and not very far from the sea, there
lived a young man named Admetus. He was the ruler of the town, and hence
was called its king; but his kingdom was so small that he could walk all
round it in half a day. He knew the name of every man and woman and
child in the town, and everybody loved him because he was so gentle and
kind and at the same time a king.
Late one day, when the rain was falling and the wind was blowing cold
from the mountains, a beggar came to his door. The man was ragged and
dirty and half starved, and Admetus knew that he must have come from
some strange land, for in his own country no one ever went hungry. So
the kind king took him into the house and fed him; and after the man had
bathed he gave him his own warm cloak, and bade the servants make a
place for him to sleep through the night.
In the morning Admetus asked the poor man his name, but he shook his
head and made no answer. Then Admetus asked him about his home and his
country; and all that the man would say was: “Make me your slave,
master! Make me your slave, and let me serve you for a year.”
The young king did not need another servant. But he saw that the poorest
slave in the land was better off than this man, and so he took pity on
him. “I will do as you ask,” he said. “I will give you a home and food
and clothing; and you shall serve me and be my slave for one year.”
There was but little that the stranger knew how to do, and so he was
sent to the hills to take care of the king’s sheep and goats. For a
whole year he tended the flocks, finding the greenest pastures and the
freshest water for them, and keeping the wolves away. Admetus was very
kind to him, as he was to all his servants, and the food and clothing
which he gave him were of the best in the land. But the stranger did not
tell his name nor say anything about his kindred or his home.
When a year and a day had passed, it so happened that Admetus was
walking out among the hills to see his sheep. All at once the sound of
music fell upon his ear. It was no such music as shepherds play, but
sweeter and richer than any he had ever heard before. He looked to see
where the sound came from. Ah! who was that sitting on the hilltop, with
the sheep around him listening to his music? Surely it was not his
shepherd?
It was a tall and handsome young man, clad in robes lighter and finer
than any king might wear. His face was as bright as sunbeams, and his
eyes gleamed like lightning. Upon his shoulder was a silver bow, from
his belt hung a quiver of sharp arrows, and in his hands was a golden
lyre. Admetus stood still and wondered. Then the stranger spoke:
“King Admetus,” he said, “I am the poor beggar whom you fed–your slave
to whom you were so kind. I have served you, as I agreed, for a whole
year, and now I am going home. Is there anything I can do for you?”
“Yes,” said Admetus; “tell me your name.”
“My name is Apollo,” was the answer. “Twelve months ago my father,
mighty Jupiter, drove me away from before his face and bade me go out
friendless and alone upon the earth; and he told me that I should not
turn again towards home until I had served a year as some man’s slave. I
came to you, ragged and half starved, and you fed and clothed me; and I
became your slave, and you were as kind to me as though I were your son.
What shall I give you to reward you?”
“Lord of the Silver Bow,” said the king, “I have all that any man can
want. I am happy in the thought that I have been of some help to you. I
can ask for nothing more.”
“Very well,” said Apollo; “but if the time should ever come when you
need my help, let me know.”
Then the bright prince walked swiftly away, playing sweet music as he
went; and Admetus with glad heart returned to his home.
From the place where Admetus lived it was only a few miles to Iolcus, a
rich city by the sea. The king of Iolcus was a cruel tyrant named
Pelias, who cared for nobody in all the world but himself. This Pelias
had a daughter named Alcestis, who was as fair as any rose in June and
so gentle and good that everybody praised her. Many a prince from over
the sea had come to woo Alcestis for his wife; and the noblest young men
in Greece had tried to win her favor. But there was only one to whom she
would listen, and that was her young neighbor, King Admetus.
So Admetus went before gruff King Pelias to ask him whether he might wed
Alcestis.
“No one shall have my daughter,” said the old king, “until he proves
that he is worthy to be my son-in-law. If you want her, you must come
for her in a chariot drawn by a lion and a wild boar. If you come in any
other way, she shall not be your wife.” And Pelias laughed, and drove
the young man out of his palace.
Admetus went away feeling very sad; for who had ever heard of harnessing
a lion and a wild boar together in a chariot? The bravest man in the
world could not do such a thing as that.
As he walked along and saw the sheep and goats feeding on the hilltops
near his own town, he chanced to think of Apollo and of the last words
that he had heard him say: “When you need my help, let me know.”
“I will let him know,” said Admetus.
Early the next morning he built an altar of stones in the open field;
and when he had killed the fattest goat of the flock, he built a fire on
the altar and laid the thighs of the goat in the flames. Then when the
smell of the burning flesh went up into the air, he lifted his hands
towards the mountain tops and called to Apollo.
“Lord of the Silver Bow,” he cried, “if ever I have shown kindness to
the poor and the distressed, come now and help me. For I am in sore
need, and I remember your promise.”
Hardly was he done speaking when bright Apollo, bearing his bow and his
quiver of arrows, came down and stood before him.
“Kindest of kings,” he said, “tell me how I can help you.”
Then Admetus told him all about the fair Alcestis, and how her father
would give her only to the man who should come for her in a chariot
drawn by a lion and a wild boar.
“Come with me,” said Apollo, “and I will help you.”
Then the two went together into the forest, the Lord of the Silver Bow
leading the way. Soon they started a lion from its lair and gave chase
to it. The fleet-footed Apollo seized the beast by its mane, and
although it howled and snapped with its fierce jaws it did not touch
him. Then Admetus started a wild boar from a thicket. Apollo gave chase
to it, too, making the lion run beside him like a dog. When he had
caught the boar, he went on through the forest, leading the two beasts,
one with his right hand, the other with his left; and Admetus followed
behind.
It was not yet noon when they came to the edge of the woods and saw
the sea and the city of Iolcus only a little way off. A golden chariot
stood by the roadside as if waiting for them, and the lion and the boar
were soon harnessed to it. It was a strange team, and the two beasts
tried hard to fight each other; but Apollo lashed them with a whip and
tamed them until they lost their fierceness and were ready to mind the
rein. Then Admetus climbed into the chariot; and Apollo stood by his
side and held the reins and the whip, and drove into Iolcus.
Old King Pelias was astonished when he saw the wonderful chariot and the
glorious charioteer; and when Admetus again asked him for the fair
Alcestis, he could not refuse. A day was set for the wedding, and Apollo
drove his team back to the forest and set the lion and the wild boar
free.
And so Admetus and Alcestis were married, and everybody in the two
towns, except gruff old King Pelias, was glad. Apollo himself was one of
the guests at the wedding feast, and he brought a present for the young
bridegroom; it was a promise from the Mighty Folk upon the mountain top
that if Admetus should ever be sick and in danger of death, he might
become well again if some one who loved him would die for him.
Admetus and Alcestis lived together happily for a long time, and all the
people in their little kingdom loved and blessed them. But at last
Admetus fell sick, and, as he grew worse and worse every day, all hope
that he would ever get well was lost. Then those who loved him
remembered the wedding gift which Apollo had given him, and they began
to ask who would be willing to die in his stead.
His father and mother were very old and could hope to live but a short
time at best, and so it was thought that one of them would be glad to
give up life for the sake of their son. But when some one asked them
about it, they shook their heads and said that though life was short
they would cling to it as long as they could.
Then his brothers and sisters were asked if they would die for Admetus,
but they loved themselves better than their brother, and turned away and
left him. There were men in the town whom he had befriended and who owed
their lives to him; they would have done everything else for him, but
this thing they would not do.
Now while all were shaking their heads and saying “Not I,” the beautiful
Alcestis went into her own room and called to Apollo and asked that she
might give up her life to save her husband. Then without a thought of
fear she lay down upon her bed and closed her eyes; and a little while
afterward, when her maidens came into the room they found her dead.
At the very same time Admetus felt his sickness leave him, and he sprang
up as well and strong as he had ever been. Wondering how it was that he
had been so quickly cured, he made haste to find Alcestis and tell her
the good news. But when he went into her room, he saw her lying lifeless
on her couch, and he knew at once that she had died for him. His grief
was so great that he could not speak, and he wished that death had taken
him and spared the one whom he loved.
In all the land every eye was wet with weeping for Alcestis, and the
cries of the mourners were heard in every house. Admetus sat by the
couch where his young queen lay, and held her cold hand in his own. The
day passed, and night came, but he would not leave her. All through the
dark hours he sat there alone. The morning dawned, but he did not want
to see the light.
At last the sun began to rise in the east, and then Admetus was
surprised to feel the hand which he held growing warm. He saw a red
tinge coming into the pale cheeks of Alcestis.
A moment later the fair lady opened her eyes and sat up, alive and well
and glad.
How was it that Alcestis had been given back to life?
When she died and left her body, the Shadow Leader, who knows no pity,
led her, as he led all others, to the cheerless halls of Proserpine, the
queen of the Lower World.
“Who is this who comes so willingly?” asked the pale-faced queen.
And when she was told how Alcestis, so young and beautiful, had given
her life to save that of her husband, she was moved with pity; and she
bade the Shadow Leader take her back again to the joy and sunlight of
the Upper World.
So it was that Alcestis came to life; and for many years she and Admetus
lived in their little kingdom not far from the sea; and the Mighty Ones
on the mountain top blessed them; and, at last, when they had become
very old, the Shadow Leader led them both away together.
Continue...

This eBook of “Old Greek Stories” by James Baldwin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Greek StoriesBy James BaldwinAt Amazon
