




American privateering in 1812 was even bolder and more successful
than during the Revolution. It was the work of a race of merchant
seamen who had found themselves, who were in the forefront of the
world’s trade and commerce, and who were equipped to challenge
the enemy’s pretensions to supremacy afloat. Once more there was
a mere shadow of a navy to protect them, but they had learned to
trust their own resources. They would send to sea fewer of the
small craft, slow and poorly armed, and likely to meet disaster.
They were capable of manning what was, in fact, a private navy
comprised of fast and formidable cruisers. The intervening
generation had advanced the art of building and handling ships
beyond all rivalry, and England grudgingly acknowledged their
ability. The year of 1812 was indeed but a little distance from
the resplendent modern era of the Atlantic packet and the Cape
Horn clipper.
Already these Yankee deep-water ships could be recognized afar by
their lofty spars and snowy clouds of cotton duck beneath which
the slender hull was a thin black line. Far up to the gleaming
royals they carried sail in winds so strong that the lumbering
English East Indiamen were hove to or snugged down to reefed
topsails. It was not recklessness but better seamanship. The
deeds of the Yankee privateers of 1812 prove this assertion to
the hilt. Their total booty amounted to thirteen hundred prizes
taken over all the Seven Seas, with a loss to England of forty
million dollars in ships and cargoes. There were, all told, more
than five hundred of them in commission, but New England no
longer monopolized this dashing trade. Instead of Salem it was
Baltimore that furnished the largest fleet--fifty-eight vessels,
many of them the fast ships and schooners which were to make the
port famous as the home of the Baltimore clipper model. All down
the coast, out of Norfolk, Wilmington, Charleston, Savannah, and
New Orleans, sallied the privateers to show that theirs was, in
truth, a seafaring nation ardently united in a common cause.
Again and more vehemently the people of England raised their
voices in protest and lament, for these saucy sea-raiders fairly
romped to and fro in the Channel, careless of pursuit, conducting
a blockade of their own until London was paying the famine price
of fifty-eight dollars a barrel for flour, and it was publicly
declared mortifying and distressing that “a horde of American
cruisers should be allowed, unresisted and unmolested, to take,
burn, or sink our own vessels in our own inlets and almost in
sight of our own harbors.” It was Captain Thomas Boyle in the
Chasseur of Baltimore who impudently sent ashore his proclamation
of a blockade of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
which he requested should be posted in Lloyd’s Coffee House.
A wonderfully fine figure of a fighting seaman was this Captain
Boyle, with an Irish sense of humor which led him to haunt the
enemy’s coast and to make sport of the frigates which tried to
catch him. His Chasseur was considered one of the ablest
privateers of the war and the most beautiful vessel ever seen in
Baltimore. A fleet and graceful schooner with a magical turn for
speed, she mounted sixteen long twelve-pounders and carried a
hundred officers, seamen, and marines, and was never outsailed in
fair winds or foul. “Out of sheer wantonness,” said an admirer,
“she sometimes affected to chase the enemy’s men-of-war of far
superior force.” Once when surrounded by two frigates and two
naval brigs, she slipped through and was gone like a phantom.
During his first cruise in the Chasseur, Captain Boyle captured
eighteen valuable merchantmen. It was such defiant rovers as he
that provoked the “Morning Chronicle” of London to splutter “that
the whole coast of Ireland from Wexford round by Cape Clear
to Carrickfergus, should have been for above a month under the
unresisted domination of a few petty fly-by-nights from the
blockaded ports of the United States is a grievance equally
intolerable and disgraceful.”
This was when the schooner Syren had captured His Majesty’s
cutter Landrail while crossing the Irish Sea with dispatches;
when the Governor Tompkins burned fourteen English vessels in the
English Channel in quick succession; when the Harpy of Baltimore
cruised for three months off the Irish and English coasts and in
the Bay of Biscay, and returned to Boston filled with spoils,
including a half million dollars of money; when the Prince de
Neuchatel hovered at her leisure in the Irish Channel and made
coasting trade impossible; and when the Young Wasp of
Philadelphia cruised for six months in those same waters.
Two of the privateers mentioned were first-class fighting ships
whose engagements were as notable, in their way, as those of the
American frigates which made the war as illustrious by sea as it
was ignominious by land. While off Havana in 1815, Captain Boyle
met the schooner St. Lawrence of the British Navy, a fair match
in men and guns. The Chasseur could easily have run away but
stood up to it and shot the enemy to pieces in fifteen minutes.
Brave and courteous were these two commanders, and Lieutenant
Gordon of the St. Lawrence gave his captor a letter which read,
in part: “In the event of Captain Boyle’s becoming a prisoner of
war to any British cruiser I consider it a tribute justly due to
his humane and generous treatment of myself, the surviving
officers, and crew of His Majesty’s late schooner St. Lawrence,
to state that his obliging attention and watchful solicitude to
preserve our effects and render us comfortable during the short
time we were in his possession were such as justly entitle him to
the indulgence and respect of every British subject.”
The Prince de Neuchatel had the honor of beating off the attack
of a forty-gun British frigate--an exploit second only to that of
the General Armstrong in the harbor of Fayal. This privateer with
a foreign name hailed from New York and was so fortunate as to
capture for her owners three million dollars’ worth of British
merchandise. With Captain J. Ordronaux on the quarterdeck, she
was near Nantucket Shoals at noon on October 11, 1814, when a
strange sail was discovered. As this vessel promptly gave chase,
Captain Ordronaux guessed-and as events proved correctly--that
she must be a British frigate. She turned out to be the Endymion.
The privateer had in tow a prize which she was anxious to get
into port, but she was forced to cast off the hawser late in the
afternoon and make every effort to escape.
The breeze died with the sun and the vessels were close inshore.
Becalmed, the privateer and the frigate anchored a quarter of a
mile apart. Captain Ordronaux might have put his crew on the
beach in boats and abandoned his ship. This was the reasonable
course, for, as he had sent in several prize crews, he was
short-handed and could muster no more than thirty-seven men and
boys. The Endymion, on the other hand, had a complement of three
hundred and fifty sailors and marines, and in size and fighting
power she was in the class of the American frigates President and
Constitution. Quite unreasonably, however, the master of the
privateer decided to await events.
The unexpected occurred shortly after dusk when several boats
loaded to the gunwales with a boarding party crept away from the
frigate. Five of them, with one hundred and twenty men, made a
concerted attack at different points, alongside and under the bow
and stern. Captain Ordronaux had told his crew that he would blow
up the ship with all hands before striking his colors, and they
believed him implicitly. This was the hero who was described as
“a Jew by persuasion, a Frenchman by birth, an American for
convenience, and so diminutive in stature as to make him appear
ridiculous, in the eyes of others, even for him to enforce
authority among a hardy, weatherbeaten crew should they do aught
against his will.” He was big enough, nevertheless, for this
night’s bloody work, and there was no doubt about his authority.
While the British tried to climb over the bulwarks, his
thirty-seven men and boys fought like raging devils, with knives,
pistols, cutlases, with their bare fists and their teeth. A few
of the enemy gained the deck, but the privateersmen turned and
killed them. Others leaped aboard and were gradually driving the
Americans back, when the skipper ran to the hatch above the
powder magazine, waving a lighted match and swearing to drop it
in if his crew retreated one step further. Either way the issue
seemed desperate. But again they took their skipper’s word for it
and rallied for a bloody struggle which soon swept the decks.
No more than twenty minutes had passed and the battle was won.
The enemy was begging for quarter. One boat had been sunk, three
had drifted away filled with dead and wounded, and the fifth was
captured with thirty-six men in it of whom only eight were
unhurt. The American loss was seven killed and twenty-four
wounded, or thirty-one of her crew of thirty-seven. Yet they had
not given up the ship. The frigate Endymion concluded that once
was enough, and next morning the Prince de Neuchatel bore away
for Boston with a freshening breeze.
Those were merchant seamen also who held the General Armstrong
against a British squadron through that moonlit night in Fayal
Roads, inflicting heavier losses than were suffered in any naval
action of the war. It is a story Homeric, almost incredible in
its details and so often repeated that it can be only touched
upon in this brief chronicle. The leader was a kindly featured
man who wore a tall hat, side-whiskers, and a tail coat. His
portrait might easily have served for that of a New England
deacon of the old school. No trace of the swashbuckler in this
Captain Samuel Reid, who had been a thrifty, respected merchant
skipper until offered the command of a privateer.
Touching at the Azores for water and provisions in September,
1814, he was trapped in port by the great seventy-four-gun ship
of the line Plantagenet, the thirty-eight-gun frigate Rota, and
the warbrig Carnation. Though he was in neutral water, they paid
no heed to this but determined to destroy a Yankee schooner which
had played havoc with their shipping. Four hundred men in twelve
boats, with a howitzer in the bow of each boat, were sent against
the General Armstrong in one flotilla. But not a man of the four
hundred gained her deck. Said an eyewitness: “The Americans
fought with great firmness but more like bloodthirsty savages
than anything else. They rushed into the boats sword in hand and
put every soul to death as far as came within their power. Some
of the boats were left without a single man to row them, others
with three or four. The most that any one returned with was about
ten. Several boats floated ashore full of dead bodies . . . . For
three days after the battle we were employed in burying the dead
that washed on shore in the surf.”
This tragedy cost the British squadron one hundred and twenty men
in killed and one hundred and thirty in wounded, while Captain
Reid lost only two dead and had seven wounded. He was compelled
to retreat ashore next day when the ships stood in to sink his
schooner with their big guns, but the honors of war belonged to
him and well-earned were the popular tributes when he saw home
again, nor was there a word too much in the florid toast:
“Captain Reid--his valor has shed a blaze of renown upon the
character of our seamen, and won for himself a laurel of eternal
bloom.”
It is not to glorify war nor to rekindle an ancient feud that
such episodes as these are recalled to mind. These men, and
others like them, did their duty as it came to them, and they
were sailors of whom the whole Anglo-Saxon race might be proud.
In the crisis they were Americans, not privateersmen in quest of
plunder, and they would gladly die sooner than haul down the
Stars and Stripes. The England against which they fought was not
the England of today. Their honest grievances, inflicted by a
Government too intent upon crushing Napoleon to be fair to
neutrals, have long ago been obliterated. This War of 1812
cleared the vision of the Mother Country and forever taught her
Government that the people of the Republic were, in truth, free
and independent.
This lesson was driven home not only by the guns of the
Constitution and the United States, but also by the hundreds of
privateers and the forty thousand able seamen who were eager to
sail in them. They found no great place in naval history, but
England knew their prowess and respected it. Every schoolboy is
familiar with the duels of the Wasp and the Frolic, of the
Enterprise and the Boxer; but how many people know what happened
when the privateer Decatur met and whipped the Dominica of the
British Navy to the southward of Bermuda?
Captain Diron was the man who did it as he was cruising out of
Charleston, South Carolina, in the summer of 1813. Sighting an
armed schooner slightly heavier than his own vessel, he made for
her and was unperturbed when the royal ensign streamed from her
gaff. Clearing for action, he closed the hatches so that none of
his men could hide below. The two schooners fought in the veiling
smoke until the American could ram her bowsprit over the other’s
stern and pour her whole crew aboard. In the confined space of
the deck, almost two hundred men and lads were slashing and
stabbing and shooting amid yells and huzzas. Lieutenant Barrette,
the English commander, only twenty-five years old, was mortally
hurt and every other officer, excepting the surgeon and one
midshipman, was killed or wounded. Two-thirds of the crew were
down but still they refused to surrender, and Captain Diron had
to pull down the colors with his own hands. Better discipline and
marksmanship had won the day for him and his losses were
comparatively small.
Men of his description were apt to think first of glory and let
the profits go hang, for there was no cargo to be looted in a
King’s ship. Other privateersmen, however, were not so valiant or
quarrelsome, and there was many a one tied up in London River or
the Mersey which had been captured without very savage
resistance. Yet on the whole it is fair to say that the private
armed ships outfought and outsailed the enemy as impressively as
did the few frigates of the American Navy.
There was a class of them which exemplified the rapid development
of the merchant marine in a conspicuous manner--large commerce
destroyers too swift to be caught, too powerful to fear the
smaller cruisers. They were extremely profitable business
ventures, entrusted to the command of the most audacious and
skillful masters that could be engaged. Of this type was the ship
America of Salem, owned by the Crowninshields, which made
twenty-six prizes and brought safely into port property which
realized more than a million dollars. Of this the owners and
shareholders received six hundred thousand dollars as dividends.
She was a stately vessel, built for the East India trade, and was
generally conceded to be the fastest privateer afloat. For this
service the upper deck was removed and the sides were filled in
with stout oak timber as an armored protection, and longer yards
and royal masts gave her a huge area of sail. Her crew of one
hundred and fifty men had the exacting organization of a
man-of-war, including, it is interesting to note, three
lieutenants, three mates, a sailingmaster, surgeon, purser,
captain of marines, gunners, seven prize masters, armorer,
drummer, and a fifer. Discipline was severe, and flogging was the
penalty for breaking the regulations.
During her four cruises, the America swooped among the plodding
merchantmen like a falcon on a dovecote, the sight of her
frightening most of her prey into submission, with a brush now
and then to exercise the crews of the twenty-two guns, and
perhaps a man or two hit. Long after the war, Captain James
Chever, again a peaceful merchant mariner, met at Valparaiso, Sir
James Thompson, commander of the British frigate Dublin, which
had been fitted out in 1813 for the special purpose of chasing
the America. In the course of a cordial chat between the two
captains the Briton remarked:
“I was once almost within gun-shot of that infernal Yankee
skimming-dish, just as night came on. By daylight she had
outsailed the Dublin so devilish fast that she was no more than a
speck on the horizon. By the way, I wonder if you happen to know
the name of the beggar that was master of her.”
“I’m the beggar,” chuckled Captain Chever, and they drank each
other’s health on the strength of it.
Although the Treaty of Ghent omitted mention of the impressment
of sailors, which had been the burning issue of the war, there
were no more offenses of this kind. American seafarers were safe
against kidnapping on their own decks, and they had won this
security by virtue of their own double-shotted guns. At the same
time England lifted the curse of the press-gang from her own
people, who refused longer to endure it.
There seemed no reason why the two nations, having finally fought
their differences to a finish, should not share the high seas in
peaceful rivalry; but the irritating problems of protection and
reciprocity survived to plague and hamper commerce. It was
difficult for England to overcome the habit of guarding her trade
against foreign invasion. Agreeing with the United States to
waive all discriminating duties between the ports of the two
countries--this was as much as she was at that time willing to
yield. She still insisted upon regulating the trade of her West
Indies and Canada. American East Indiamen were to be limited to
direct voyages and could not bring cargoes to Europe. Though this
discrimination angered Congress, to which it appeared as lopsided
reciprocity, the old duties were nevertheless repealed; and then,
presto! the British colonial policy of exclusion was enforced and
eighty thousand tons of American shipping became idle because the
West India market was closed.
There followed several years of unhappy wrangling, a revival of
the old smuggling spirit, the risk of seizure and confiscations,
and shipping merchants with long faces talking ruin. The theory
of free trade versus protection was as debatable and opinions
were as conflicting then as now. Some were for retaliation,
others for conciliation; and meanwhile American shipmasters went
about their business, with no room for theories in their honest
heads, and secured more and more of the world’s trade. Curiously
enough, the cries of calamity in the United States were echoed
across the water, where the “London Times” lugubriously
exclaimed: “The shipping interest, the cradle of our navy, is
half ruined. Our commercial monopoly exists no longer; and
thousands of our manufacturers are starving or seeking redemption
in distant lands. We have closed the Western Indies against
America from feelings of commercial rivalry. Its active seamen
have already engrossed an important branch of our carrying trade
to the Eastern Indies. Her starred flag is now conspicuous on
every sea and will soon defy our thunder.”
It was not until 1849 that Great Britain threw overboard her long
catalogue of protective navigation laws which had been piling up
since the time of Cromwell, and declared for free trade afloat.
Meanwhile the United States had drifted in the same direction,
barring foreign flags from its coastwise shipping but offering
full exemption from all discriminating duties and tonnage duties
to every maritime nation which should respond in like manner.
This latter legislation was enacted in 1828 and definitely
abandoned the doctrine of protection in so far as it applied to
American ships and sailors. For a generation thereafter, during
which ocean rivalry was a battle royal of industry, enterprise,
and skill, the United States was paramount and her merchant
marine attained its greatest successes.
There is one school of modern economists who hold that the seeds
of decay and downfall were planted by this adoption of free trade
in 1828, while another faction of gentlemen quite as estimable
and authoritative will quote facts and figures by the ream to
prove that governmental policies had nothing whatever to do with
the case. These adversaries have written and are still writing
many volumes in which they almost invariably lose their tempers.
Partisan politics befog the tariff issue afloat as well as
ashore, and one’s course is not easy to chart. It is
indisputable, however, that so long as Yankee ships were better,
faster, and more economically managed, they won a commanding
share of the world’s trade. When they ceased to enjoy these
qualities of superiority, they lost the trade and suffered for
lack of protection to overcome the handicap.
The War of 1812 was the dividing line between two eras of salt
water history. On the farther side lay the turbulent centuries of
hazard and bloodshed and piracy, of little ships and indomitable
seamen who pursued their voyages in the reek of gunpowder and of
legalized pillage by the stronger, and of merchant adventurers
who explored new markets wherever there was water enough to float
their keels. They belonged to the rude and lusty youth of a world
which lived by the sword and which gloried in action. Even into
the early years of the nineteenth century these mariners still
sailed--Elizabethan in deed and spirit.
On the hither side of 1812 were seas unvexed by the privateer and
the freebooter. The lateen-rigged corsairs had been banished from
their lairs in the harbors of Algiers, and ships needed to show
no broadsides of cannon in the Atlantic trade. For a time they
carried the old armament among the lawless islands of the Orient
and off Spanish-American coasts where the vocation of piracy made
its last stand, but the great trade routes of the globe were
peaceful highways for the white-winged fleets of all nations. The
American seamen who had fought for the right to use the open sea
were now to display their prowess in another way and in a romance
of achievement that was no less large and thrilling.
Continue...

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
