




As a rule, American historians like McMaster, Adams, and Rhodes
give too little space to the maritime achievements of the nation.
The gap has been partially filled by the following special works:
Winthrop L. Marvin, “The American Merchant Marine: Its History
and Romance from 1620 to 1902” (1902). This is the most nearly
complete volume of its kind by an author who knows the subject
and handles it with accuracy.
John R. Spears, “The Story of the American Merchant Marine"
(1910), “The American Slave Trade” (1901), “The Story of the New
England Whalers” (1908). Mr. Spears has sought original sources
for much of his material and his books are worth reading,
particularly his history of the slave-trade.
Ralph D. Paine, “The Ships and Sailors of Old Salem: The Record
of a Brilliant Era of American Achievement” (1912). A history of
the most famous seaport of the Atlantic coast, drawn from
log-books and other manuscript collections. “The Book of Buried
Treasure: Being a True History of the Gold, Jewels, and Plate of
Pirates, Galleons, etc.” (1911). Several chapters have to do with
certain picturesque pirates and seamen of the colonies.
Edgar S. Maclay, “A History of American Privateers” (1899). The
only book of its kind, and indispensable to those who wish to
learn the story of Yankee ships and sailors.
J. R. Hutchinson, “The Press Gang Afloat and Ashore” (1914). This
recent volume, written from an English point of view, illuminates
the system of conscription which caused the War of 1812.
Nothing can take the place, however, of the narratives of those
master mariners who made the old merchant marine famous:
Richard Henry Dana, Jr., “Two Years Before the Mast” (1840). The
latest edition, handsomely illustrated, (1915). The classic
narrative of American forecastle life in the sailing-ship era.
Captain Richard Cleveland, “Narrative of Voyages and Commercial
Enterprises” (1842). This is one of the fascinating
autobiographies of the old school of shipmasters who had the gift
of writing.
Captain Amasa Delano, “Narrative of Voyages and Travels” (1817).
Another of the rare human documents of blue water. It describes
the most adventurous period of activity, a century ago.
Captain Arthur H. Clark, “The Clipper Ship Era” (1910). A
thrilling, spray-swept, true story. Far and away the best account
of the clipper, by a man who was an officer of one in his youth.
Robert Bennet Forbes, “Notes on Ships of the Past” (1888). Random
facts and memories of a famous Boston ship-owner. It is valuable
for its records of noteworthy passages.
Captain John D. Whidden, “Ocean Life in the Old Sailing Ship
Days” (1908). The entertaining reminiscences of a veteran
shipmaster.
Captain A. W. Nelson, “Yankee Swanson: Chapters from a Life at
Sea” (1913). Another of the true romances, recommended for a
lively sense of humor and a faithful portrayal of life aboard a
windjammer.
There are many other personal narratives, some of them privately
printed and very old, which may be found in the libraries.
Typical of them is “A Journal of the Travels and Sufferings of
Daniel Saunders” (1794), in which a young sailor relates his
adventures after shipwreck on the coast of Arabia.
Among general works the following are valuable:
J. Grey Jewell, “Among Our Sailors” (1874). A plea for more
humane treatment of American seamen, with many instances on
shocking brutalities as reported to the author, who was a United
States Consul.
E. Keble Chatterton, “Sailing Ships: The Story of their
Development” (1909). An elaborate history of the development of
the sailing vessel from the earliest times to the modern steel
clipper.
W. S. Lindsay, “History of Merchant Shipping and Ancient
Commerce,” 4 vols. (1874-76). An English work, notably fair to
the American marine, and considered authoritative.
Douglas Owen, “Ocean Trade and Shipping” (1914). An English
economist explains the machinery of maritime trade and commerce.
William Wood, “All Afloat.” In “The Chronicles of Canada Series."
Glasgow, Brook and Co., Toronto, 1914.
J. B. McMaster, “The Life and Times of Stephen Girard, Mariner
and Merchant,” 2 vols. (1918).
The relation of governmental policy to the merchant marine is
discussed by various writers:
David A. Wells, “Our Merchant Marine: How It Rose, Increased,
Became Great, Declined, and Decayed” (1882). A political treatise
in defense of a protective policy.
William A. Bates, “American Marine: The Shipping Question in
History and Politics” (1892); “American Navigation: The Political
History of Its Rise and Ruin” (1902). These works are statistical
and highly technical, partly compiled from governmental reports,
and are also frankly controversial.
Henry Hall, “American Navigation, With Some Account of the Causes
of Its Former Prosperity and Present Decline” (1878).
Charles S. Hill, “History of American Shipping: Its Prestige,
Decline, and Prospect” (1883).
J. D. J. Kelley, “The Question of Ships: The Navy and the
Merchant Marine” (1884).
Arthur J. Maginnis, “The Atlantic Ferry: Its Ships, Men, and
Working” (1900).
A vast amount of information is to be found in the Congressional
Report of the Merchant Marine Commission, published in three
volumes (1905).
 

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
