




One thinks of the old merchant marine in terms of the clipper
ship and distant ports. The coasting trade has been overlooked in
song and story; yet, since the year 1859, its fleets have always
been larger and more important than the American deep-water
commerce nor have decay and misfortune overtaken them. It is a
traffic which flourished from the beginning, ingeniously adapting
itself to new conditions, unchecked by war, and surviving with
splendid vigor, under steam and sail, in this modern era.
The seafaring pioneers won their way from port to port of the
tempestuous Atlantic coast in tiny ketches, sloops, and shallops
when the voyage of five hundred miles from New England to
Virginia was a prolonged and hazardous adventure. Fog and shoals
and lee shores beset these coastwise sailors, and shipwrecks were
pitifully frequent. In no Hall of Fame will you find the name of
Captain Andrew Robinson of Gloucester, but he was nevertheless an
illustrious benefactor and deserves a place among the most useful
Americans. His invention was the Yankee schooner of fore-and-aft
rig, and he gave to this type of vessel its name.* Seaworthy,
fast, and easily handled, adapted for use in the early eighteenth
century when inland transportation was almost impossible, the
schooner carried on trade between the colonies and was an
important factor in the growth of the fisheries.
* It is said that as the odd two-master slid gracefully into the
water, a spectator exclaimed: “See how she scoons!” “Aye,"
answered Captain Robinson, “a SCHOONER let her be!” This
launching took place in 1718 or 1714.
Before the Revolution the first New England schooners were
beating up to the Grand Bank of Newfoundland after cod and
halibut. They were of no more than fifty tons’ burden, too small
for their task but manned by fishermen of surpassing hardihood.
Marblehead was then the foremost fishing port with two hundred
brigs and schooners on the offshore banks. But to Gloucester
belongs the glory of sending the first schooner to the Grand
Bank.* From these two rock-bound harbors went thousands of
trained seamen to man the privateers and the ships of the
Continental navy, slinging their hammocks on the gun-decks beside
the whalemen of Nantucket. These fishermen and coastwise sailors
fought on the land as well and followed the drums of Washington’s
armies until the final scene at Yorktown. Gloucester and
Marblehead were filled with widows and orphans, and half their
men-folk were dead or missing.
* Marvin’s “American Merchant Marine,” p. 287.
The fishing-trade soon prospered again, and the men of the old
ports tenaciously clung to the sea even when the great migration
flowed westward to people the wilderness and found a new American
empire. They were fishermen from father to son, bound together in
an intimate community of interests, a race of pure native or
English stock, deserving this tribute which was paid to them in
Congress: “Every person on board our fishing vessels has an
interest in common with his associates; their reward depends upon
their industry and enterprise. Much caution is observed in the
selection of the crews of our fishing vessels; it often happens
that every individual is connected by blood and the strongest
ties of friendship; our fishermen are remarkable for their
sobriety and good conduct, and they rank with the most skillful
navigators.”
Fishing and the coastwise merchant trade were closely linked.
Schooners loaded dried cod as well as lumber for southern ports
and carried back naval stores and other southern products.
Well-to-do fishermen owned trading vessels and sent out
their ventures, the sailors shifting from one forecastle to the
other. With a taste for an easier life than the stormy, freezing
Banks, the young Gloucesterman would sign on for a voyage to
Pernambuco or Havana and so be fired with ambition to become a
mate or master and take to deep water after a while. In this way
was maintained a school of seamanship which furnished the most
intelligent and efficient officers of the merchant marine. For
generations they were mostly recruited from the old fishing and
shipping ports of New England until the term “Yankee shipmaster"
had a meaning peculiarly its own.
Seafaring has undergone so many revolutionary changes and old
days and ways are so nearly obliterated that it is singular to
find the sailing vessel still employed in great numbers, even
though the gasolene motor is being installed to kick her along in
spells of calm weather. The Gloucester fishing schooner, perfect
of her type, stanch, fleet, and powerful, still drives homeward
from the Banks under a tall press of canvas, and her crew still
divide the earnings, share and share, as did their forefathers a
hundred and fifty years ago. But the old New England strain of
blood no longer predominates, and Portuguese, Scandinavians, and
Nova Scotia “Bluenoses” bunk with the lads of Gloucester stock.
Yet they are alike for courage, hardihood, and mastery of the
sea, and the traditions of the calling are undimmed.
There was a time before the Civil War when Congress jealously
protected the fisheries by means of a bounty system and
legislation aimed against our Canadian neighbors. The fishing
fleets were regarded as a source of national wealth and the
nursery of prime seamen for the navy and merchant marine. In 1858
the bounty system was abandoned, however, and the fishermen were
left to shift for themselves, earning small profits at peril of
their lives and preferring to follow the sea because they knew no
other profession. In spite of this loss of assistance from the
Government, the tonnage engaged in deep-sea fisheries was never
so great as in the second year of the Civil War. Four years later
the industry had shrunk one-half; and it has never recovered its
early importance*
* In 1882, the tonnage amounted to 193,459; in 1866, to 89,336.
The coastwise merchant trade, on the other hand, has been
jealously guarded against competition and otherwise fostered ever
since 1789, when the first discriminatory tonnage tax was
enforced. The Embargo Act of 1808 prohibited domestic commerce to
foreign flags, and this edict was renewed in the American
Navigation Act of 1817. It remained a firmly established doctrine
of maritime policy until the Great War compelled its suspension
as an emergency measure. The theories of protection and free
trade have been bitterly debated for generations, but in this
instance the practice was eminently successful and the results
were vastly impressive. Deepwater shipping dwindled and died, but
the increase in coastwise sailing was consistent. It rose to five
million tons early in this century and makes the United States
still one of the foremost maritime powers in respect to saltwater
activity.
To speak of this deep-water shipping as trade coastwise is
misleading, in a way. The words convey an impression of dodging
from port to port for short distances, whereas many of the
voyages are longer than those of the foreign routes in European
waters. It is farther by sea from Boston to Philadelphia than
from Plymouth, England, to Bordeaux. A schooner making the run
from Portland to Savannah lays more knots over her stern than a
tramp bound out from England to Lisbon. It is a shorter voyage
from Cardiff to Algiers than an American skipper pricks off on
his chart when he takes his steamer from New York to New Orleans
or Galveston. This coastwise trade may lack the romance of the
old school of the square-rigged ship in the Roaring Forties, but
it has always been the more perilous and exacting. Its seamen
suffer hardships unknown elsewhere, for they have to endure
winters of intense cold and heavy gales and they are always in
risk of stranding or being driven ashore.
The story of these hardy men is interwoven, for the most part,
with the development of the schooner in size and power. This
graceful craft, so peculiar to its own coast and people, was
built for utility and possessed a simple beauty of its own when
under full sail. The schooners were at first very small because
it was believed that large fore-and-aft sails could not be
handled with safety. They were difficult to reef or lower in a
blow until it was discovered that three masts instead of two made
the task much easier. For many years the three-masted schooner
was the most popular kind of American merchant vessel. They
clustered in every Atlantic port and were built in the yards of
New England, New York, New Jersey, and Virginia,--built by the
mile, as the saying was, and sawed off in lengths to suit the
owners’ pleasure. They carried the coal, ice, lumber of the whole
seaboard and were so economical of man-power that they earned
dividends where steamers or square-rigged ships would not have
paid for themselves.
As soon as a small steam-engine was employed to hoist the sails,
it became possible to launch much larger schooners and to operate
them at a marvelously low cost. Rapidly the four-master gained
favor, and then came the five- and six-masted vessels, gigantic
ships of their kind. Instead of the hundred-ton schooner of a
century ago, Hampton Roads and Boston Harbor saw these great
cargo carriers which could stow under hatches four and five
thousand tons of coal, and whose masts soared a hundred and fifty
feet above the deck. Square-rigged ships of the same capacity
would have required crews of a hundred men, but these schooners
were comfortably handled by a company of fifteen all told, only
ten of whom were in the forecastle. There was no need of sweating
and hauling at braces and halliards. The steam-winch undertook all
this toil. The tremendous sails, stretching a hundred feet from
boom to gaff could not have been managed otherwise. Even for
trimming sheets or setting topsails, it was necessary merely to
take a turn or two around the drum of the winch engine and turn
the steam valve. The big schooner was the last word in cheap,
efficient transportation by water. In her own sphere of activity
she was as notable an achievement as the Western Ocean packet or
the Cape Horn clipper.
The masters who sailed these extraordinary vessels also changed
and had to learn a new kind of seamanship. They must be very
competent men, for the tests of their skill and readiness were
really greater than those demanded of the deepwater skipper. They
drove these great schooners alongshore winter and summer; across
Nantucket Shoals and around Cape Cod, and their salvation
depended on shortening sail ahead of the gale. Let the wind once
blow and the sea get up, and it was almost impossible to strip
the canvas off an unwieldy six-master. The captain’s chief fear
was of being blown offshore, of having his vessel run away with
him! Unlike the deep-water man, he preferred running in toward
the beach and letting go his anchors. There he would ride out the
storm and hoist sail when the weather moderated.
These were American shipmasters of the old breed, raised in
schooners as a rule, and adapting themselves to modern
conditions. They sailed for nominal wages and primage, or five
per cent of the gross freight paid the vessel. Before the Great
War in Europe, freights were low and the schooner skippers earned
scanty incomes. Then came a world shortage of tonnage and
immediately coastwise freights soared skyward. The big schooners
of the Palmer fleet began to reap fabulous dividends and their
masters shared in the unexpected opulence. Besides their primage
they owned shares in their vessels, a thirty-second or so, and
presently their settlement at the end of a voyage coastwise
amounted to an income of a thousand dollars a month. They earned
this money, and the managing owners cheerfully paid them, for
there had been lean years and uncomplaining service and the
sailor had proved himself worthy of his hire. So tempting was the
foreign war trade, that a fleet of them was sent across the
Atlantic until the American Government barred them from the war
zone as too easy a prey for submarine attack. They therefore
returned to the old coastwise route or loaded for South American
ports--singularly interesting ships because they were the last
bold venture of the old American maritime spirit, a challenge to
the Age of Steam.
No more of these huge, towering schooners have been built in the
last dozen years. Steam colliers and barges have won the fight
because time is now more valuable than cheapness of
transportation. The schooner might bowl down to Norfolk from
Boston or Portland in four days and be threshing about for two
weeks in head winds on the return voyage.
The small schooner appeared to be doomed somewhat earlier. She
had ceased to be profitable in competition with the larger, more
modern fore-and-after, but these battered, veteran craft died
hard. They harked back to a simpler age, to the era of the
stage-coach and the spinning-wheel, to the little shipyards that
were to be found on every bay and inlet of New England. They were
still owned and sailed by men who ashore were friends and
neighbors. Even now you may find during your summer wanderings
some stumpy, weatherworn two-master running on for shelter
overnight, which has plied up and down the coast for fifty or
sixty years, now leaking like a basket and too frail for winter
voyages. It was in a craft very much like this that your rude
ancestors went privateering against the British. Indeed, the
little schooner Polly, which fought briskly in the War of 1812,
is still afloat and loading cargoes in New England ports.
These little coasters, surviving long after the stately merchant
marine had vanished from blue water, have enjoyed a slant of
favoring fortune in recent years. They, too, have been in demand,
and once again there is money to spare for paint and cordage and
calking. They have been granted a new lease of life and may be
found moored at the wharfs, beached on the marine railways, or
anchored in the stream, eagerly awaiting their turn to refit. It
is a matter of vital concern that the freight on spruce boards
from Bangor to New York has increased to five dollars a thousand
feet. Many of these craft belong to grandfatherly skippers who
dared not venture past Cape Cod in December, lest the venerable
Matilda Emerson or the valetudinarian Joshua R. Coggswell should
open up and founder in a blow. During the winter storms these
skippers used to hug the kitchen stove in bleak farmhouses until
spring came and they could put to sea again. The rigor of
circumstances, however, forced others to seek for trade the whole
year through. In a recent winter fifty-seven schooners were lost
on the New England coast, most of which were unfit for anything
but summer breezes. As by a miracle, others have been able to
renew their youth, to replace spongy planking and rotten stems,
and to deck themselves out in white canvas and fresh paint!
The captains of these craft foregather in the ship-chandler’s
shops, where the floor is strewn with sawdust, the armchairs are
capacious, and the environment harmonizes with the tales that are
told. It is an informal club of coastwise skippers and the old
energy begins to show itself once more. They move with a brisker
gait than when times were so hard and they went begging for
charters at any terms. A sinewy patriarch stumps to a window,
flourishes his arm at an ancient two-master, and booms out:
“That vessel of mine is as sound as a nut, I tell ye. She ain’t
as big as some, but I’d like nothin’ better than to fill her full
of suthin’ for the west coast of Africy, same as the Horace M.
Bickford that cleared t’other day, stocked for SIXTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS.”
“Huh, you’d get lost out o’ sight of land, John,” is the cruel
retort, “and that old shoe-box of yours ’ud be scared to death
without a harbor to run into every time the sun clouded over.
Expect to navigate to Africy with an alarm-clock and a
soundin’-lead, I presume.”
“Mebbe I’d better let well enough alone,” replies the old man.
“Africy don’t seem as neighborly as Phippsburg and Machiasport.
I’ll chance it as far as Philadelphy next voyage and I guess the
old woman can buy a new dress.”
The activity and the reawakening of the old shipyards, their
slips all filled with the frames of wooden vessels for the
foreign trade, is like a revival of the old merchant marine, a
reincarnation of ghostly memories. In mellowed dignity the square
white houses beneath the New England elms recall to mind the
mariners who dwelt therein. It seems as if their shipyards also
belonged to the past; but the summer visitor finds a fresh
attraction in watching the new schooners rise from the stocks,
and the gay pageant of launching them, every mast ablaze with
bunting, draws crowds to the water-front. And as a business
venture, with somewhat of the tang of old-fashioned romance, the
casual stranger is now and then tempted to purchase a
sixty-fourth “piece” of a splendid Yankee four-master and keep in
touch with its roving fortunes. The shipping reports of the daily
newspaper prove more fascinating than the ticker tape, and the
tidings of a successful voyage thrill one with a sense of
personal gratification. For the sea has not lost its magic and
its mystery, and those who go down to it in ships must still
battle against elemental odds--still carry on the noble and
enduring traditions of the Old Merchant Marine.
Continue...

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
