


In Asia there lived a king who had two children, a boy and a girl. The
boy’s name was Cadmus, and the girl’s name was Europa. The king’s
country was a very small one. He could stand on his house top and see
the whole of it. On one side of it there were mountains, and on the
other side was the sea. The king thought that it was the center of the
world, and he did not know much about other lands and people.
Yet he was very happy in his own little kingdom, and very fond of his
children. And he had good reason to be proud of them; for Cadmus grew up
to be the bravest young man in the land, and Europa to be the fairest
maiden that had ever been seen. But sad days came to them all at last.
One morning Europa went out into a field near the seashore to pick
flowers. Her father’s cattle were in the field, grazing among the sweet
clover. They were all very tame, and Europa knew every one of them by
name. The herdsman was lying in the shade under a tree, trying to make
music on a little flute of straw. Europa had played in the field a
thousand times before, and no one had ever thought of any harm befalling
her.
That morning she noticed that there was a strange bull with the herd. He
was very large and as white as snow; and he had soft brown eyes which
somehow made him look very gentle and kind. At first he did not even
look at Europa, but went here and there, eating the tender grass which
grew among the clover. But when she had gathered her apron full of
daisies and buttercups, he came slowly towards her. She was not at all
afraid of him; and so she stopped to look at him, he was so handsome. He
came close to her, and rubbed her arm with his nose to say
“Good-morning!”
She stroked his head and neck, and he seemed much pleased. Then she made
a wreath of daisies, and hung it round his neck. He looked at her with
his soft kind eyes, and seemed to thank her; and in a little while, he
lay down among the clover. Europa then made a smaller wreath, and
climbed upon his back to twine it round his horns. But all at once he
sprang up, and ran away so swiftly that Europa could not help herself.
She did not dare to jump off while he was going so fast, and all that
she could think to do was to hold fast to his neck and scream very
loud.
The herdsman under the tree heard her scream, and jumped up to see what
was the matter. He saw the bull running with her towards the shore. He
ran after them as fast as he could, but it was of no use. The bull
leaped into the sea, and swam swiftly away, with poor Europa on his
back. Several other people had seen him, and now they ran to tell the
king. Soon the whole town was alarmed. Everybody ran out to the shore
and looked. All that could be seen was something white moving very fast
over the calm, blue water; and soon it was out of sight.
The king sent out his fastest ship to try to overtake the bull. The
sailors rowed far out to sea, much farther than any ship had ever gone
before; but no trace of Europa could be found. When they came back,
everybody felt that there was no more hope. All the women and children
in the town wept for the lost Europa. The king shut himself up in his
house, and did not eat nor drink for three days. Then he called his son
Cadmus, and bade him take a ship and go in search of his sister; and he
told him that, no matter what dangers might be in his way, he must not
come back until she was found.
Cadmus was glad to go. He chose twenty brave young men to go with him,
and set sail the very next day. It was a great undertaking; for they
were to pass through an unknown sea, and they did not know what lands
they would come to. Indeed, it was feared that they would never come to
any land at all. Ships did not dare to go far from the shore in those
days. But Cadmus and his friends were not afraid. They were ready to
face any danger.
In a few days they came to a large island called Cyprus. Cadmus went on
shore, and tried to talk with the strange people who lived there. They
were very kind to him, but they did not understand his language. At last
he made out by signs to tell them who he was, and to ask them if they
had seen his little sister Europa or the white bull that had carried her
away. They shook their heads and pointed to the west.
Then the young men sailed on in their little ship. They came to many
islands, and stopped at every one, to see if they could find any trace
of Europa; but they heard no news of her at all. At last, they came to
the country which we now call Greece. It was a new country then, and
only a few people lived there, and Cadmus soon learned to speak their
language well. For a long time he wandered from one little town to
another, always telling the story of his lost sister.
One day an old man told Cadmus that if he would go to Delphi and ask the
Pythia, perhaps she could tell him all about Europa. Cadmus had never
heard of Delphi or of the Pythia, and he asked the old man what he
meant.
“I will tell you,” said the man. “Delphi is a town, built near the foot
of Mount Parnassus, at the very center of the earth. It is the town of
Apollo, the Bringer of Light; and there is a temple there, built close
to the spot where Apollo killed a black serpent, many, many years ago.
The temple is the most wonderful place in the world. In the middle of
the floor there is a wide crack, or crevice; and this crevice goes down,
down into the rock, nobody knows how deep. A strange odor comes up out
of the crevice; and if any one breathes much of it, he is apt to fall
over and lose his senses.”
“But who is the Pythia that you spoke about?” asked Cadmus.
“I will tell you,” said the old man. “The Pythia is a wise woman, who
lives in the temple. When anybody asks her a hard question, she takes a
three-legged stool, called a tripod, and sets it over the crevice in
the floor. Then she sits on the stool and breathes the strange odor; and
instead of losing her senses as other people would do, she talks with
Apollo; and Apollo tells her how to answer the question. Men from all
parts of the world go there to ask about things which they would like to
know. The temple is full of the beautiful and costly gifts which they
have brought for the Pythia. Sometimes she answers them plainly, and
sometimes she answers them in riddles; but what she says always comes
true.”
So Cadmus went to Delphi to ask the Pythia about his lost sister. The
wise woman was very kind to him; and when he had given her a beautiful
golden cup to pay her for her trouble, she sat down on the tripod and
breathed the strange odor which came up through the crevice in the rock.
Then her face grew pale, and her eyes looked wild, and she seemed to be
in great pain; but they said that she was talking with Apollo. Cadmus
asked her to tell him what had become of Europa. She said that Jupiter,
in the form of a white bull, had carried her away, and that it would be
of no use to look for her any more.
“But what shall I do?” said Cadmus. “My father told me not to turn back
till I should find her.”
“Your father is dead,” said the Pythia, “and a strange king rules in
his place. You must stay in Greece, for there is work here for you to
do.”
“What must I do?” said Cadmus.
“Follow the white cow,” said the Pythia; “and on the hill where she lies
down, you must build a city.”
Cadmus did not understand what she meant by this; but she would not
speak another word.
“This must be one of her riddles,” he said, and he left the temple.
When Cadmus went out of the temple, he saw a snow-white cow standing not
far from the door. She seemed to be waiting for him, for she looked at
him with her large brown eyes, and then turned and walked away. Cadmus
thought of what the Pythia had just told him, and so he followed her.
All day and all night he walked through a strange wild country where no
one lived; and two of the young men who had sailed with Cadmus from his
old home were with him.
When the sun rose the next morning, they saw that they were on the top
of a beautiful hill, with woods on one side and a grassy meadow on the
other. There the cow lay down.
“Here we will build our city,” said Cadmus.
Then the young men made a fire of dry sticks, and Cadmus killed the cow.
They thought that if they should burn some of her flesh, the smell of it
would go up to the sky and be pleasing to Jupiter and the Mighty Folk
who lived with him among the clouds; and in this way they hoped to make
friends with Jupiter so that he would not hinder them in their work.
But they needed water to wash the flesh and their hands; and so one of
the young men went down the hill to find some. He was gone so long that
the other young man became uneasy and went after him.
Cadmus waited for them till the fire had burned low. He waited and
waited till the sun was high in the sky. He called and shouted, but no
one answered him. At last he took his sword in his hand and went down to
see what was the matter.
He followed the path which his friends had taken, and soon came to a
fine stream of cold water at the foot of a hill. He saw something move
among the bushes which grew near it. It was a fierce dragon, waiting to
spring upon him. There was blood on the grass and leaves, and it was not
hard to guess what had become of the two young men.
The beast sprang at Cadmus, and tried to seize him with its sharp claws.
But Cadmus leaped quickly aside and struck it in the neck with his long
sword. A great stream of black blood gushed out, and the dragon soon
fell to the ground dead. Cadmus had seen many fearful sights, but never
anything so dreadful as this beast. He had never been in so great danger
before. He sat down on the ground and trembled; and, all the time, he
was weeping for his two friends. How now was he to build a city, with no
one to help him?
While Cadmus was still weeping he was surprised to hear some one calling
him. He stood up and looked around. On the hillside before him was a
tall woman who had a helmet on her head and a shield in her hand. Her
eyes were gray, and her face, though not beautiful, was very noble.
Cadmus knew at once that she was Athena, the queen of the air–she who
gives wisdom to men.
Athena told Cadmus that he must take out the teeth of the dragon and sow
them in the ground. He thought that would be a queer kind of seed. But
she said that if he would do this, he would soon have men enough to help
him build his city; and, before he could say a word, she had gone out of
his sight.
The dragon had a great many teeth–so many that when Cadmus had taken
them out they filled his helmet heaping full. The next thing was to find
a good place to sow them. Just as he turned away from the stream, he saw
a yoke of oxen standing a little way off. He went to them and found that
they were hitched to a plow. What more could he want? The ground in the
meadow was soft and black, and he drove the plow up and down, making
long furrows as he went. Then he dropped the teeth, one by one, into the
furrows and covered them over with the rich soil. When he had sown all
of them in this way, he sat down on the hillside and watched to see what
would happen.
In a little while the soil in the furrows began to stir. Then, at every
place that a tooth had been dropped, something bright grew up. It was a
brass helmet. The helmets pushed their way up, and soon the faces of men
were seen underneath, then their shoulders, then their arms, then their
bodies; and then, before Cadmus could think, a thousand warriors leaped
out of the furrows and shook off the black earth which was clinging to
them. Every man was clothed in a suit of brass armor; and every one had
a long spear in his right hand and a shield in his left.
Cadmus was frightened when he saw the strange crop which had grown up
from the dragon’s teeth. The men looked so fierce that he feared they
would kill him if they saw him. He hid himself behind his plow and then
began to throw stones at them. The warriors did not know where the
stones came from, but each thought that his neighbor had struck him.
Soon they began to fight among themselves. Man after man was killed, and
in a little while only five were left alive. Then Cadmus ran towards
them and called out:
“Hold! Stop fighting! You are my men, and must come with me. We will
build a city here.”
The men obeyed him. They followed Cadmus to the top of the hill; and
they were such good workmen that in a few days they had built a house on
the spot where the cow had lain down.
After that they built other houses, and people came to live in them.
They called the town Cadmeia, after Cadmus who was its first king. But
when the place had grown to be a large city, it was known by the name of
Thebes.
Cadmus was a wise king. The Mighty Folk who lived with Jupiter amid the
clouds were well pleased with him and helped him in more ways than one.
After a while he married Harmonia, the beautiful daughter of Mars. All
the Mighty Ones were at the wedding; and Athena gave the bride a
wonderful necklace about which you may learn something more at another
time.
But the greatest thing that Cadmus did is yet to be told. He was the
first schoolmaster of the Greeks, and taught them the letters which were
used in his own country across the sea. They called the first of these
letters alpha and the second beta, and that is why men speak of the
alphabet to this day. And when the Greeks had learned the alphabet
from Cadmus, they soon began to read and write, and to make beautiful
and useful books.
As for the maiden Europa, she was carried safe over the sea to a distant
shore. She may have been happy in the new, strange land to which she was
taken–I cannot tell; but she never heard of friends or home again.
Whether it was really Jupiter in the form of a bull that carried her
away, nobody knows. It all happened so long ago that there may have been
some mistake about the story; and I should not think it strange if it
were a sea robber who stole her from her home, and a swift ship with
white sails that bore her away. Of one thing I am very sure: she was
loved so well by all who knew her that the great unknown country to
which she was taken has been called after her name ever since–Europe.
Continue...

This eBook of “Old Greek Stories” by James Baldwin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Greek StoriesBy James BaldwinAt Amazon
