




In such compelling circumstances as these, necessity became the
mother of achievement. There is nothing finer in American history
than the dogged fortitude and high-hearted endeavor with which
the merchant seamen returned to their work after the Revolution
and sought and found new markets for their wares. It was then
that Salem played that conspicuous part which was, for a
generation, to overshadow the activities of all other American
seaports. Six thousand privateersmen had signed articles in her
taverns, as many as the total population of the town, and they
filled it with a spirit of enterprise and daring. Not for them
the stupid monotony of voyages coastwise if more hazardous
ventures beckoned and there were havens and islands unvexed by
trade where bold men might win profit and perhaps fight for life
and cargo.
Now there dwelt in Salem one of the great men of his time, Elias
Hasket Derby, the first American millionaire, and very much more
than this. He was a shipping merchant with a vision and with the
hard-headed sagacity to make his dreams come true. His was a
notable seafaring family, to begin with. His father, Captain
Richard Derby, born in 1712, had dispatched his small vessels to
the West Indies and Virginia and with the returns from these
voyages he had loaded assorted cargoes for Spain and Madeira and
had the proceeds remitted in bills of exchange to London or in
wine, salt, fruit, oil, lead, and handkerchiefs to America.
Richard Derby’s vessels had eluded or banged away at the
privateers during the French War from 1756 to 1763, mounting from
eight to twelve guns, “with four cannon below decks for close
quarters.” Of such a temper was this old sea-dog who led the
militia and defiantly halted General Gage’s regulars at the North
River bridge in Salem, two full months before the skirmish at
Lexington. Eight of the nineteen cannon which it was proposed to
seize from the patriots had been taken from the ships of Captain
Richard Derby and stored in his warehouse for the use of the
Provincial Congress.
It was Richard’s son, Captain John Derby, who carried to England
in the swift schooner Quero the first news of the affair at
Lexington, ahead of the King’s messenger. A sensational arrival,
if ever there was one! This Salem shipmaster, cracking on sail
like a proper son of his sire, making the passage in twenty-nine
days and handsomely beating the lubberly Royal Express Packet
Sukey which left Boston four days sooner, and startling the
British nation with the tidings which meant the loss of an
American empire! A singular coincidence was that this same
Captain John Derby should have been the first mariner to inform
the United States that peace had come, when he arrived from
France in 1783 with the message that a treaty had been signed.
Elias Hasket Derby was another son of Richard. When his manifold
energies were crippled by the war, he diverted his ability and
abundant resources into privateering. He was interested in at
least eighty of the privateers out of Salem, invariably
subscribing for such shares as might not be taken up by his
fellow-townsmen. He soon perceived that many of these craft were
wretchedly unfit for the purpose and were easily captured or
wrecked. It was characteristic of his genius that he should
establish shipyards of his own, turn his attention to naval
architecture, and begin to build a class of vessels vastly
superior in size, model, and speed to any previously launched in
the colonies. They were designed to meet the small cruiser of the
British Navy on even terms and were remarkably successful, both
in enriching their owner and in defying the enemy.
At the end of the war Elias Hasket Derby discovered that these
fine ships were too large and costly to ply up and down the
coast. Instead of bewailing his hard lot, he resolved to send
them to the other side of the globe. At a time when the British
and the Dutch East India companies insolently claimed a monopoly
of the trade of the Orient, when American merchant seamen had
never ventured beyond the two Atlantics, this was a conception
which made of commerce a surpassing romance and heralded the
golden era of the nation’s life upon the sea.
His Grand Turk of three hundred tons was promptly fitted out for
a pioneering voyage as far as the Cape of Good Hope. Salem knew
her as “the great ship” and yet her hull was not quite one
hundred feet long. Safely Captain Jonathan Ingersoll took her out
over the long road, his navigating equipment consisting of a few
erroneous maps and charts, a sextant, and Guthrie’s Geographical
Grammar. In Table Bay he sold his cargo of provisions and then
visited the coast of Guinea to dispose of his rum for ivory and
gold dust but brought not a single slave back, Mr. Derby having
declared that “he would rather sink the whole capital employed
than directly or indirectly be concerned in so infamous a
trade"--an unusual point of view for a shipping merchant of New
England in 1784!
Derby ships were first to go to Mauritius, then called the Isle
of France, first at Calcutta, and among the earliest to swing at
anchor off Canton. When Elias Hasket Derby decided to invade this
rich East India commerce, he sent his eldest son, Elias Hasket,
Jr., to England and the Continent after a course at Harvard. The
young man became a linguist and made a thorough study of English
and French methods of trade. Having laid this foundation for the
venture, the son was now sent to India, where he lived for three
years in the interests of his house, building up a trade almost
fabulously profitable.
How fortunes were won in those stirring days may be discerned
from the record of young Derby’s ventures while in the Orient. In
1788 the proceeds of one cargo enabled him to buy a ship and a
brigantine in the Isle of France. These two vessels he sent to
Bombay to load with cotton. Two other ships of his fleet, the
Astrea and Light Horse, were filled at Calcutta and Rangoon and
ordered to Salem. It was found, when the profits of these
transactions were reckoned, that the little squadron had earned
$100,000 above all outlay.
To carry on such a business as this enlisted many men and
industries. While the larger ships were making their distant
voyages, the brigs and schooners were gathering cargoes for
them, crossing to Gothenburg and St. Petersburg for iron, duck,
and hemp, to France, Spain, and Madeira for wine and lead, to the
French West Indies for molasses to be turned into rum, to New
York, Philadelphia, and Richmond for flour, provisions, and
tobacco. These shipments were assembled in the warehouses on
Derby Wharf and paid for the teas, coffees, pepper, muslin,
silks, and ivory which the ships from the Far East were fetching
home. In fourteen years the Derby ships made one hundred and
twenty-five voyages to Europe and far eastern ports and out of
the thirty-five vessels engaged only one was lost at sea.
It was in 1785 when the Grand Turk, on a second voyage, brought
back a cargo of silks, teas, and nankeens from Batavia and China,
that “The Independent Chronicle” of London, unconsciously
humorous, was moved to affirm that “the Americans have given up
all thought of a China trade which can never be carried on to
advantage without some settlement in the East Indies.”
As soon as these new sea-trails had been furrowed by the keels of
Elias Hasket Derby, other Salem merchants were quick to follow in
a rivalry which left no sea unexplored for virgin markets and
which ransacked every nook and corner of barbarism which had a
shore. Vessels slipped their cables and sailed away by night for
some secret destination with whose savage potentate trade
relations had been established. It might be Captain Jonathan
Carnes who, while at the port of Bencoolen in 1793, heard that
pepper grew wild on the northern coast of Sumatra. He whispered
the word to the Salem owner, who sent him back in the schooner
Rajah with only four guns and ten men. Eighteen months later,
Jonathan Carnes returned to Salem with a cargo of pepper in bulk,
the first direct importation, and cleared seven hundred per cent
on the voyage. When he made ready to go again, keeping his
business strictly to himself, other owners tracked him clear to
Bencoolen, but there he vanished in the Rajah, and his secret with
him, until he reappeared with another precious cargo of pepper.
When, at length, he shared this trade with other vessels, it
meant that Salem controlled the pepper market of Sumatra and for
many years supplied a large part of the world’s demand.
And so it happened that in the spicy warehouses that overlooked
Salem Harbor there came to be stored hemp from Luzon, gum copal
from Zanzibar, palm oil from Africa, coffee from Arabia, tallow
from Madagascar, whale oil from the Antarctic, hides and wool
from the Rio de la Plata, nutmeg and cloves from Malaysia. Such
merchandise had been bought or bartered for by shipmasters who
were much more than mere navigators. They had to be shrewd
merchants on their own accounts, for the success or failure of a
voyage was mostly in their hands. Carefully trained and highly
intelligent men, they attained command in the early twenties and
were able to retire, after a few years more afloat, to own ships
and exchange the quarterdeck for the counting-room, and the cabin
for the solid mansion and lawn on Derby Street. Every
opportunity, indeed, was offered them to advance their own
fortunes. They sailed not for wages but for handsome commissions
and privileges--in the Derby ships, five per cent of a cargo
outward bound, two and a half per cent of the freightage home,
five per cent profit on goods bought and sold between foreign
ports, and five per cent of the cargo space for their own use.
Such was the system which persuaded the pick and flower of young
American manhood to choose the sea as the most advantageous
career possible. There was the Crowninshield family, for example,
with five brothers all in command of ships before they were old
enough to vote and at one time all five away from Salem, each in
his own vessel and three of them in the East India trade. “When
little boys,” to quote from the memoirs of Benjamin
Crowninshield, “they were all sent to a common school and about
their eleventh year began their first particular study which
should develop them as sailors and ship captains. These boys
studied their navigation as little chaps of twelve years old and
were required to thoroughly master the subject before being sent
to sea . . . . As soon as the art of navigation was mastered, the
youngsters were sent to sea, sometimes as common sailors but
commonly as ship’s clerks, in which position they were able to
learn everything about the management of a ship without actually
being a common sailor.”
This was the practice in families of solid station and social
rank, for to be a shipmaster was to follow the profession of a
gentleman. Yet the bright lad who entered by way of the
forecastle also played for high stakes. Soon promoted to the
berth of mate, he was granted cargo space for his own adventures
in merchandise and a share of the profits. In these days the
youth of twenty-one is likely to be a college undergraduate,
rated too callow and unfit to be intrusted with the smallest
business responsibilities and tolerantly regarded as unable to
take care of himself. It provokes both a smile and a glow of
pride, therefore, to recall those seasoned striplings and what
they did.
No unusual instance was that of Nathaniel Silsbee, later United
States Senator from Massachusetts, who took command of the new
ship Benjamin in the year 1792, laden with a costly cargo from
Salem for the Cape of Good Hope and India, “with such
instructions,” says he, “as left the management of the voyage
very much to my own discretion. Neither myself nor the chief
mate, Mr. Charles Derby, had attained the age of twenty-one years
when we left home. I was not then twenty.” This reminded him to
speak of his own family. Of the three Silsbee brothers, “each of
us obtained the command of vessels and the consignment of their
cargoes before attaining the age of twenty years, viz., myself at
the age of eighteen and a half, my brother William at nineteen
and a half, and my brother Zachariah before he was twenty years
old. Each and all of us left off going to sea before reaching the
age of twenty-nine years.”
How resourcefully these children of the sea could handle affairs
was shown in this voyage of the Benjamin. While in the Indian
Ocean young Silsbee fell in with a frigate which gave him news of
the beginning of war between England and France. He shifted his
course for Mauritius and there sold the cargo for a dazzling
price in paper dollars, which he turned into Spanish silver. An
embargo detained him for six months, during which this currency
increased to three times the value of the paper money. He gave up
the voyage to Calcutta, sold the Spanish dollars and loaded with
coffee and spices for Salem. At the Cape of Good Hope, however,
he discovered that he could earn a pretty penny by sending his
cargo home in other ships and loading the Benjamin again for
Mauritius. When, at length, he arrived in Salem harbor, after
nineteen months away, his enterprises had reaped a hundred per
cent for Elias Hasket Derby and his own share was the snug little
fortune of four thousand dollars. Part of this he, of course,
invested at sea, and at twenty-two he was part owner of the
Betsy, East Indiaman, and on the road to independence.
As second mate in the Benjamin had sailed Richard Cleveland,
another matured mariner of nineteen, who crowded into one life an
Odyssey of adventure noteworthy even in that era and who had the
knack of writing about it with rare skill and spirit. In 1797,
when twenty-three years old, he was master of the bark Enterprise
bound from Salem to Mocha for coffee. The voyage was abandoned at
Havre and he sent the mate home with the ship, deciding to remain
abroad and gamble for himself with the chances of the sea. In
France he bought on credit a “cutter-sloop” of forty-three tons,
no larger than the yachts whose owners think it venturesome to
take them off soundings in summer cruises. In this little box of
a craft he planned to carry a cargo of merchandise to the Cape of
Good Hope and thence to Mauritius.
His crew included two men, a black cook, and a brace of boys who
were hastily shipped at Havre. “Fortunately they were all so much
in debt as not to want any time to spend their advance, but were
ready at the instant, and with this motley crew, (who, for aught
I knew, were robbers or pirates) I put to sea.” The only sailor
of the lot was a Nantucket lad who was made mate and had to be
taught the rudiments of navigation while at sea. Of the others he
had this to say, in his lighthearted manner:
“The first of my fore-mast hands is a great, surly, crabbed,
raw-boned, ignorant Prussian who is so timid aloft that the mate
has frequently been obliged to do his duty there. I believe him
to be more of a soldier than a sailor, though he has often
assured me that he has been a boatswain’s mate of a Dutch
Indiaman, which I do not believe as he hardly knows how to put
two ends of a rope together .... My cook . . . a good-natured
negro and a tolerable cook, so unused to a vessel that in the
smoothest weather he cannot walk fore and aft without holding
onto something with both hands. This fear proceeds from the fact
that he is so tall and slim that if he should get a cant it might
be fatal to him. I did not think America could furnish such a
specimen of the negro race . . . nor did I ever see such a
simpleton. It is impossible to teach him anything and . . . he
can hardly tell the main-halliards from the mainstay.
“Next is an English boy of seventeen years old, who from having
lately had the small-pox is feeble and almost blind, a miserable
object, but pity for his misfortunes induces me to make his duty
as easy as possible. Finally I have a little ugly French boy, the
very image of a baboon, who from having served for some time on
different privateers has all the tricks of a veteran man-of-war’s
man, though only thirteen years old, and by having been in an
English prison, has learned enough of the language to be a
proficient in swearing.”
With these human scrapings for a ship’s company, the cutter
Caroline was three months on her solitary way as far as the Cape
of Good Hope, where the inhabitants “could not disguise their
astonishment at the size of the vessel, the boyish appearance of
the master and mate, and the queer and unique characters of the
two men and boy who composed the crew.” The English officials
thought it strange indeed, suspecting some scheme of French spies
or smuggled dispatches, but Richard Cleveland’s petition to the
Governor, Lord McCartney, ingenuously patterned after certain
letters addressed to noblemen as found in an old magazine aboard
his vessel, won the day for him and he was permitted to sell the
cutter and her cargo, having changed his mind about proceeding
farther.
Taking passage to Batavia, he looked about for another venture
but found nothing to his liking and wandered on to Canton, where
he was attracted by the prospect of a voyage to the northwest
coast of America to buy furs from the Indians. In a cutter no
larger than the Caroline he risked all his cash and credit,
stocking her with $20,000 worth of assorted merchandise for
barter, and put out across the Pacific, “having on board
twenty-one persons, consisting, except two Americans, of English,
Irish, Swedes and French, but principally the first, who were
runaways from the men-of-war and Indiamen, and two from a Botany
Bay ship who had made their escape, for we were obliged to take
such as we could get, served to complete a list of as
accomplished villains as ever disgraced any country.”
After a month of weary, drenching hardship off the China coast,
this crew of cutthroats mutinied. With a loyal handful, including
the black cook, Cleveland locked up the provisions, mounted two
four-pounders on the quarterdeck, rammed them full of grape-shot,
and fetched up the flint-lock muskets and pistols from the cabin.
The mutineers were then informed that if they poked their heads
above the hatches he would blow them overboard. Losing enthusiasm
and weakened by hunger, they asked to be set ashore; so the
skipper marooned the lot. For two days the cutter lay offshore
while a truce was argued, the upshot being that four of the
rascals gave in and the others were left behind.
Fifty days more of it and, washed by icy seas, racked and
storm-beaten, the vessel made Norfolk Sound. So small was the
crew, so imminent the danger that the Indians might take her by
boarding, that screens of hides were rigged along the bulwarks to
hide the deck from view. Stranded and getting clear, warding off
attacks, Captain Richard Cleveland stayed two months on the
wilderness coast of Oregon, trading one musket for eight prime
sea-otter skins until there was no more room below. Sixty
thousand dollars was the value of the venture when he sailed for
China by way of the Sandwich Islands, forty thousand of profit,
and he was twenty-five years old with the zest for roving
undiminished.
He next appeared in Calcutta, buying a twenty-five-ton pilot boat
under the Danish flag for a fling at Mauritius and a speculation
in prizes brought in by French privateers. Finding none in port,
he loaded seven thousand bags of coffee in a ship for Copenhagen
and conveyed as a passenger a kindred spirit, young Nathaniel
Shaler, whom he took into partnership. At Hamburg these two
bought a fast brig, the Lelia Byrd, to try their fortune on the
west coast of South America, and recruited a third partner, a
boyish Polish nobleman, Count de Rousillon, who had been an aide
to Kosciusko. Three seafaring musketeers, true gentlemen rovers,
all under thirty, sailing out to beard the viceroys of Spain!
From Valparaiso, where other American ships were detained and
robbed, they adroitly escaped and steered north to Mexico and
California. At San Diego they fought their way out of the harbor,
silencing the Spanish fort with their six guns. Then to Canton
with furs, and Richard Cleveland went home at thirty years of age
after seven years’ absence and voyaging twice around the world,
having wrested success from almost every imaginable danger and
obstacle, with $70,000 to make him a rich man in his own town. He
was neither more nor less than an American sailor of the kind
that made the old merchant marine magnificent.
It was true romance, also, when the first American shipmasters
set foot in mysterious Japan, a half century before Perry’s
squadron shattered the immemorial isolation of the land of the
Shoguns and the Samurai. Only the Dutch had been permitted to
hold any foreign intercourse whatever with this hermit nation and
for two centuries they had maintained their singular commercial
monopoly at a price measured in terms of the deepest degradation
of dignity and respect. The few Dutch merchants suffered to
reside in Japan were restricted to a small island in Nagasaki
harbor, leaving it only once in four years when the Resident, or
chief agent, journeyed to Yeddo to offer gifts and most humble
obeisance to the Shogun, “creeping forward on his hands and feet,
and falling on his knees, bowed his head to the ground, and
retired again in absolute silence, crawling exactly like a crab,"
said one of these pilgrims who added: “We may not keep Sundays or
fast days, or allow our spiritual hymns or prayers to be heard;
never mention the name of Christ. Besides these things, we have
to submit to other insulting imputations which are always painful
to a noble heart. The reason which impels the Dutch to bear all
these sufferings so patiently is simply the love of gain.”
In return for these humiliations the Dutch East India Company was
permitted to send one or two ships a year from Batavia to Japan
and to export copper, silk, gold, camphor, porcelain, bronze, and
rare woods. The American ship Franklin arrived at Batavia in 1799
and Captain James Devereux of Salem learned that a charter was
offered for one of these annual voyages. After a deal of Yankee
dickering with the hard-headed Dutchmen, a bargain was struck and
the Franklin sailed for Nagasaki with cloves, chintz, sugar, tin,
black pepper, sapan wood, and elephants’ teeth. The instructions
were elaborate and punctilious, salutes to be fired right and
left, nine guns for the Emperor’s guard while passing in,
thirteen guns at the anchorage; all books on board to be sealed
up in a cask, Bibles in particular, and turned over to the
Japanese officials, all firearms sent ashore, ship dressed with
colors whenever the “Commissaries of the Chief” graciously came
aboard, and a carpet on deck for them to sit upon.
Two years later, the Margaret of Salem made the same sort of a
voyage, and in both instances the supercargoes, one of whom
happened to be a younger brother of Captain Richard Cleveland,
wrote journals of the extraordinary episode. For these mariners
alone was the curtain lifted which concealed the feudal Japan
from the eyes of the civilized world. Alert and curious, these
Yankee traders explored the narrow streets of Nagasaki, visited
temples, were handsomely entertained by officers and merchants,
and exchanged their wares in the marketplace. They were as much
at home, no doubt, as when buying piculs of pepper from a rajah
of Qualah Battoo, or dining with an elderly mandarin of Cochin
China. It was not too much to say that “the profuse stores of
knowledge brought by every ship’s crew, together with unheard of
curiosities from every savage shore, gave the community of Salem
a rare alertness of intellect.”
It was a Salem bark, the Lydia, that first displayed the American
flag to the natives of Guam in 1801. She was chartered by the
Spanish government of Manila to carry to the Marianne Islands, as
those dots on the chart of the Pacific were then called, the new
Governor, his family, his suite, and his luggage. First Mate
William Haswell kept a diary in a most conscientious fashion, and
here and there one gleans an item with a humor of its own. “Now
having to pass through dangerous straits,” he observes, “we went
to work to make boarding nettings and to get our arms in the best
order, but had we been attacked we should have been taken with
ease. Between Panay and Negros all the passengers were in the
greatest confusion for fear of being taken  and put to death in
the dark and not have time to say their prayers.”
The decks were in confusion most of the time, what with the
Governor, his lady, three children, two servant girls and twelve
men servants, a friar and his servant, a judge and two servants,
not to mention some small hogs, two sheep, an ox, and a goat to
feed the passengers who were too dainty for sea provender. The
friar was an interesting character. A great pity that the worthy
mate of the Lydia should not have been more explicit! It
intrigues the reader of his manuscript diary to be told that “the
Friar was praying night and day but it would not bring a fair
wind. His behavior was so bad that we were forced to send him to
Coventry, or in other words, no one would speak to him.”
The Spanish governors of Guam had in operation an economic system
which compelled the admiration of this thrifty Yankee mate. The
natives wore very few clothes, he concluded, because the Governor
was the only shopkeeper and he insisted on a profit of at least
eight hundred per cent. There was a native militia regiment of a
thousand men who were paid ten dollars a year. With this cash
they bought Bengal goods, cottons, Chinese pans, pots, knives,
and hoes at the Governor’s store, so that “all this money never
left the Governor’s hands. It was fetched to him by the galleons
in passing, and when he was relieved he carried it with him to
Manila, often to the amount of eighty or ninety thousand
dollars.” A glimpse of high finance without a flaw!
There is pathos, simple and moving, in the stories of shipwreck
and stranding on hostile or desert coasts. These disasters were
far more frequent then than now, because navigation was partly
guesswork and ships were very small. Among these tragedies was
that of the Commerce, bound from Boston to Bombay in 1793. The
captain lost his bearings and thought he was off Malabar when the
ship piled up on the beach in the night. The nearest port was
Muscat and the crew took to the boats in the hope of reaching it.
Stormy weather drove them ashore where armed Arabs on camels
stripped them of clothes and stores and left them to die among
the sand dunes.
On foot they trudged day after day in the direction of Muscat,
and how they suffered and what they endured was told by one of
the survivors, young Daniel Saunders. Soon they began to drop out
and die in their tracks in the manner of “Benjamin Williams,
William Leghorn, and Thomas Barnard whose bodies were exposed
naked to the scorching sun and finding their strength and spirits
quite exhausted they lay down expecting nothing but death for
relief.” The next to be left behind was Mr. Robert Williams,
merchant and part owner, “and we therefore with reluctance
abandoned him to the mercy of God, suffering ourselves all the
horrors that fill the mind at the approach of death.” Near the
beach and a forlorn little oasis, they stumbled across Charles
Lapham, who had become separated from them. He had been without
water for five days “and after many efforts he got upon his feet
and endeavored to walk. Seeing him in so wretched a condition I
could not but sympathize enough with him in his torments to go
back with him” toward water two miles away, “which both my other
companions refused to do. Accordingly they walked forward while I
went back a considerable distance with Lapham until, his strength
failing him, he suddenly fell on the ground, nor was he able to
rise again or even speak to me. Finding it vain to stay with him,
I covered him with sprays and leaves which I tore from an
adjacent tree, it being the last friendly office I could do him.”
Eight living skeletons left of eighteen strong seamen tottered
into Muscat and were cared for by the English consul. Daniel
Saunders worked his passage to England, was picked up by a
press-gang, escaped, and so returned to Salem. It was the fate of
Juba Hill, the black cook from Boston, to be detained among the
Arabs as a slave. It is worth noting that a black sea-cook
figured in many of these tales of daring and disaster, and among
them was the heroic and amazing figure of one Peter Jackson who
belonged in the brig Ceres. While running down the river from
Calcutta she was thrown on her beam ends and Peter, perhaps
dumping garbage over the rail, took a header. Among the things
tossed to him as he floated away was a sail-boom on which he was
swiftly carried out of sight by the turbid current. All on board
concluded that Peter Jackson had been eaten by sharks or
crocodiles and it was so reported when they arrived home. An
administrator was appointed for his goods and chattels and he was
officially deceased in the eyes of the law. A year or so later
this unconquerable sea-cook appeared in the streets of Salem,
grinning a welcome to former shipmates who fled from him in
terror as a ghostly visitation. He had floated twelve hours on
his sail-boom, it seemed, fighting off the sharks with his feet;
and finally drifting ashore. “He had hard work to do away with
the impressions of being dead,” runs the old account, “but
succeeded and was allowed the rights and privileges of the
living.”
The community of interests in these voyages of long ago included
not only the ship’s company but also the townspeople, even the
boys and girls, who entrusted their little private speculations
or “adventures” to the captain. It was a custom which flourished
well into the nineteenth century. These memoranda are sprinkled
through the account books of the East Indiamen out of Salem and
Boston. It might be Miss Harriet Elkins who requested the master
of the Messenger “please to purchase at Calcutta two net beads
with draperies; if at Batavia or any spice market, nutmegs or
mace; or if at Canton, two Canton shawls of the enclosed colors
at $5 per shawl. Enclosed is $10.”
Again, it might be Mr. John R. Tucker who ventured in the same
ship one hundred Spanish dollars to be invested in coffee and
sugar, or Captain Nathaniel West who risked in the Astrea fifteen
boxes of spermaceti candles and a pipe of Teneriffe wine. It is
interesting to discover what was done with Mr. Tucker’s hundred
Spanish dollars, as invested for him by the skipper of the
Messenger at Batavia and duly accounted for. Ten bags of coffee
were bought for $83.30, the extra expenses of duty, boat-hire,
and sacking bringing the total outlay to $90.19. The coffee was
sold at Antwerp on the way home for $183.75, and Mr. Tucker’s
handsome profit on the adventure was therefore $93.56, or more
than one hundred per cent.
It was all a grand adventure, in fact, and the word was aptly
chosen to fit this ocean trade. The merchant freighted his ship
and sent her out to vanish from his ken for months and months of
waiting, with the greater part of his savings, perhaps, in goods
and specie beneath her hatches. No cable messages kept him in
touch with her nor were there frequent letters from the master.
Not until her signal was displayed by the fluttering flags of the
headland station at the harbor mouth could he know whether he had
gained or lost a fortune. The spirit of such merchants was
admirably typified in the last venture of Elias Hasket Derby in
1798, when unofficial war existed between the United States and
France.
American ships were everywhere seeking refuge from the privateers
under the tricolor, which fairly ran amuck in the routes of
trade. For this reason it meant a rich reward to land a cargo
abroad. The ship Mount Vernon, commanded by Captain Elias Hasket
Derby, Jr., was laden with sugar and coffee for Mediterranean
ports, and was prepared for trouble, with twenty guns mounted and
fifty men to handle them. A smart ship and a powerful one, she
raced across to Cape Saint Vincent in sixteen days, which was
clipper speed. She ran into a French fleet of sixty sail,
exchanged broadsides with the nearest, and showed her stern to
the others.
“We arrived at 12 o’clock [wrote Captain Derby from Gibraltar]
popping at Frenchmen all the forenoon. At 10 A.M. off Algeciras
Point we were seriously attacked by a large latineer who had on
board more than one hundred men. He came so near our broadside as
to allow our six-pound grape to do execution handsomely. We then
bore away and gave him our stern guns in a cool and deliberate
manner, doing apparently great execution. Our bars having cut his
sails considerably, he was thrown into confusion, struck both his
ensign and his pennant. I was then puzzled to know what to do
with so many men; our ship was running large with all her
steering sails out, so that we could not immediately bring her to
the wind, and we were directly off Algeciras Point from whence I
had reason to fear she might receive assistance, and my port
Gibraltar in full view. These were circumstances that induced me
to give up the gratification of bringing him in. It was, however,
a satisfaction to flog the rascal in full view of the English
fleet who were to leeward.”
Continue...

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
