


You may spend pleasant days in this city of Cosenza, doing nothing
whatever. But I go there a for set purpose, and bristling with energy. I
go there to hunt for a book by a certain Salandra, which was printed on
the spot, and which I have not yet been able to find, although I once
discovered it in an old catalogue, priced at 80 grani. Gladly would I
give 8000 for it!
The author was a contemporary of that Flying Monk of whom I spoke in
Chapter X, and he belonged to the same religious order. If, in what I
then said about the flying monk, there appears to be some trace of light
fooling in regard to this order and its methods, let amends be made by
what I have to tell about old Salandra, the discovery of whose book is
one of primary importance for the history of English letters. Thus I
thought at the time; and thus I still think, with all due deference to
certain grave and discerning gentlemen, the editors of various English
monthlies to whom I submitted a paper on this subject–a paper which
they promptly returned with thanks. No; that is not quite correct. One
of them has kept it; and as six years have passed over our heads, I
presume he has now acquired a title by “adverse possession.” Much good
may it do him!
Had the discovery been mine, I should have endeavoured to hide my light
under the proverbial bushel. But it is not mine, and therefore I make
bold to say that Mr. Bliss Perry, of the “Atlantic Monthly,” knew better
than his English colleagues when he published the article from which I
take what follows.
“Charles Dunster (’Considerations on Milton’s Early Reading,’ etc.,
1810) traces the prima stamina of ’Paradise Lost’ to Sylvester’s ’Du
Bartas.’ Masenius, Cedmon, Vendei, and other older writers have also
been named in this connection, while the majority of Milton’s English
commentators–and among foreigners Voltaire and Tiraboschi–are inclined
to regard the ’Adamus Exul’ of Grotius or Andreini’s sacred drama of
’Adamo’ as the prototype.”
This latter can be consulted in the third volume of Cowper’s ’Milton’
(1810).
The matter is still unsettled, and in view of the number of recent
scholars who have interested themselves in it, one is really surprised
that no notice has yet been taken of an Italian article which goes far
towards deciding this question and proving that the chief source of
’Paradise Lost’ is the ’Adamo Caduto,’ a sacred tragedy by Serafino
della Salandra. The merit of this discovery belongs to Francesco Zicari,
whose paper, ’Sulla scoverta dell’ originale italiano da cui Milton
trasse il suo poema del paradiso perduto,’ is printed on pages 245
to 276 in the 1845 volume of the Naples ’Album scientifico-
artistico-letterario’ now lying before me. It is in the form of
a letter addressed to his friend Francesco Ruffa, a native of
Tropea in Calabria. [Footnote: Zicari contemplated another paper on
this subject, but I am unaware whether this was ever published. The
Neapolitan Minieri-Riccio, who wrote his ’Memorie Storiche’ in 1844,
speaks of this article as having been already printed in 1832, but does
not say where. This is corroborated by N. Falcone (’Biblioteca
storica-topo-grafica della Calabria,’ 2nd ed., Naples, 1846, pp.
151-154), who gives the same date, and adds that Zicari was the author
of a work on the district of Fuscaldo. He was born at Paola in Calabria,
of which he wrote a (manuscript) history, and died in 1846. In this
Milton article, he speaks of his name being ’unknown in the republic of
letters.’. He it mentioned by Nicola Leoni (’ Della Magna Grecia,’ vol.
ii, p. 153),]
Salandra, it is true, is named among the writers of sacred tragedies in
Todd’s ’Milton’ (1809, vol. ii, p. 244), and also by Hayley, but neither
of them had the curiosity, or the opportunity, to examine his ’Adamo
Caduto’; Hayley expressly says that he has not seen it. More recent
works, such as that of Moers (’De fontibus Paradisi Amissi Miltoniani,’
Bonn, 1860), do not mention Salandra at all. Byse (’Milton on the
Continent,’ 1903) merely hints at some possible motives for the Allegro
and the Penseroso.
As to dates, there can be no doubt to whom the priority belongs. The
’Adamo’ of Salandra was printed at Cosenza in 1647. Richardson thinks
that Milton entered upon his ’Paradise Lost’ in 1654, and that it was
shown, as done, in 1665; D. Masson agrees with this, adding that ’it was
not published till two years afterwards.’ The date 1665 is fixed, I
presume, by the Quaker Elwood’s account of his visit to Milton in the
autumn of that year, when the poet gave him the manuscript to read; the
two years’ delay in publication may possibly have been due to the
confusion occasioned by the great plague and fire of London.
The castigation bestowed upon Lauder by Bishop Douglas, followed, as it
was, by a terrific ’back-hander’ from the brawny arm of Samuel Johnson,
induces me to say that Salandra’s ’Adamo Caduto,’ though extremely
rare–so rare that neither the British Museum nor the Paris Bibliotheque
Nationale possesses a copy–is not an imaginary book; I have had it in
my hands, and examined it at the Naples Biblioteca Nazionale; it is a
small octavo of 251 pages (not including twenty unnumbered ones, and
another one at the end for correction of misprints); badly printed and
bearing all the marks of genuineness, with the author’s name and the
year and place of publication clearly set forth on the title-page. I
have carefully compared Zicari’s references to it, and quotations from
it with the original. They are correct, save for a few insignificant
verbal discrepancies which, so far as I can judge, betray no indication
of an attempt on his part to mislead the reader, such as using the word
tromba (trumpet) instead of Salandra’s term sambuca (sackbut). And
if further proof of authenticity be required, I may note that the ’Adamo
Caduto’ of Salandra is already cited in old bibliographies like Toppi’s
’Biblioteca Napoletana’ (1678), or that of Joannes a S. Antonio
(’Biblioteca universa Franciscana, etc.,’ Madrid, 1732-1733, vol. iii,
p. 88). It appears to have been the only literary production of its
author, who was a Franciscan monk and is described as ’Preacher, Lector
and Definitor of the Reformed Province of Basilicata.’
We may take it, then, that Salandra was a real person, who published a
mystery called ’Adamo Caduto’ in 1647; and I will now, without further
preamble, extract from Zicari’s article as much as may be sufficient to
show ground for his contention that Milton’s ’Paradise Lost’ is a
transfusion, in general and in particular, of this same mystery.
Salandra’s central theme is the Universe shattered by the disobedience
of the First Man, the origin of our unhappiness and sins. The same with
Milton.
Salandra’s chief personages are God and His angels; the first man and
woman; the serpent; Satan and his angels. The same with Milton.
Salandra, at the opening of his poem (the prologue), sets forth his
argument, and dwells upon the Creative Omnipotence and his works. The
same with Milton.
Salandra then describes the council of the rebel angels, their fall from
heaven into a desert and sulphurous region, their discourses. Man is
enviously spoken of, and his fall by means of stratagem decided upon; it
is resolved to reunite in council in Pandemonium or the Abyss, where
measures may be adopted to the end that man may become the enemy of God
and the prey of hell. The same with Milton.
Salandra personifies Sin and Death, the latter being the child of the
former. The same with Milton.
Salandra describes Omnipotence foreseeing the effects of the temptation
and fall of man, and preparing his redemption. The same with Milton.
Salandra depicts the site of Paradise and the happy life there. The same
with Milton.
Salandra sets forth the miraculous creation of the universe and of man,
and the virtues of the forbidden fruit. The same with Milton.
Salandra reports the conversation between Eve and the Serpent; the
eating of the forbidden fruit and the despair of our first parents. The
same with Milton.
Salandra describes the joy of Death at the discomfiture of Eve; the
rejoicings in hell; the grief of Adam; the flight of our first parents,
their shame and repentance. The same with Milton.
Salandra anticipates the intercession of the Redeemer, and the overthrow
of Sin and Death; he dwells upon the wonders of the Creation, the murder
of Abel by his brother Cain, and other human ills; the vices of the
Antediluvians, due to the fall of Adam; the infernal gift of war. The
same with Milton.
Salandra describes the passion of Jesus Christ, and the comforts which
Adam and Eve receive from the angel who announces the coming of the
Messiah; lastly, their departure from the earthly paradise. The same
with Milton.
So much for the general scheme of both poems. And now for a few
particular points of resemblance, verbal and otherwise.
The character of Milton’s Satan, with the various facets of pride, envy,
vindictiveness, despair, and impenitence which go to form that
harmonious whole, are already clearly mapped out in the Lucifero of
Salandra. For this statement, which I find correct, Zicari gives chapter
and verse, but it would take far too long to set forth the matter in
this place. The speeches of Lucifero, to be sure, read rather like a
caricature–it must not be forgotten that Salandra was writing for
lower-class theatrical spectators, and not for refined readers–but the
elements which Milton has utilized are already there.
Here is a coincidence:
Here we may reign secure . . .
Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.
MILTON (i, 258)
. . . . Qui propria voglia, Son capo, son qui duce, son
lor Prence.
SALANDRA (p. 49).
And another:
Milton’s Terror is partially taken from the Megera of the Italian poet.
The ’grisly Terror’ threatens Satan (ii, 699), and the office of Megera,
in Salandra’s drama, is exactly the same–that is, to threaten and
chastise the rebellious spirit, which she does very effectually (pages
123-131). The identical monsters–Cerberus, Hydras, and Chimseras–are
found in their respective abodes, but Salandra does not content himself
with these three; his list includes such a mixed assemblage of creatures
as owls, basilisks, dragons, tigers, bears, crocodiles, sphynxes,
harpies, and panthers. Terror moves with dread rapidity:
and so does Megera:
Both Milton and Salandra use the names of the gods of antiquity for
their demons, but the narrative epic of the English poet naturally
permitted of far greater prolixity and variety in this respect. A most
curious parallelism exists between Milton’s Belial and that of Salandra.
Both are described as luxurious, timorous, slothful, and scoffing, and
there is not the slightest doubt that Milton has taken over these mixed
attributes from the Italian. [Footnote: This is one of the occasions in
which Zicari appears, at first sight, to have stretched a point in order
to improve his case, because, in the reference he gives, it is Behemoth,
and not Belial, who speaks of himielf as cowardly (imbelle). But in
another place Lucifer applies this designation to Belial as well,]
The words of Milton’s Beelzebub (ii, 368):
are copied from those of the Italian Lucifero (p. 52):
Regarding the creation of the world, Salandra asks (p. 11):
which is thus echoed by Milton (vii, 112):
There is a considerable resemblance between the two poets in their
descriptions of Paradise and of its joys. In both poems, too, Adam warns
his spouse of her frailty, and in the episode of Eve’s meeting with the
serpent there are no less than four verbal coincidences. Thus Salandra
writes (p. 68):
and Milton transcribes it as follows (ix, 517-554):
Altogether, Zicari has observed that Rolli, although unacquainted with
the ’Adamo Caduto,’ has sometimes inadvertently hit upon the same words
in his Italian translation of Milton which Salandra had used before him.
Eve’s altered complexion after the eating of the forbidden fruit is
noted by both poets:
Torbata ne la faccia? Non sei quella
Qual ti lasciai contenta . . .–SALANDRA (p. 89).
Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told;
But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed. –MILTON (ix, 886).
only with this difference, that the Italian Eve adds a half-lie by way
of explaining the change:
In both poems Sin and Death reappear on the scene after the transgression.
The flight of Innocence from earth; the distempered lust which dominates
over Adam and Eve after the Fall; the league of Sin and Death to rule
henceforward over the world; the pathetic lament of Adam regarding his
misfortune and the evils in store for his progeny; his noble sentiment,
that none can withdraw himself from the all-seeing eye of God–all these
are images which Milton has copied from Salandra.
Adam’s state of mind, after the fall, is compared by Salandra to a boat
tossed by impetuous winds (p. 228):
which is thus paraphrased in Milton (ix, 1122):
Here is a still more palpable adaptation:
After the Fall, according to Salandra, vacillo la terra (i), geme
(2), e pianse (3), rumoreggiano i tuoni (4), accompagnati da
grandini (5), e dense nevi (6), (pp. 138, 142, 218). Milton
translates this as follows: Earth trembled from her entrails (1), and
nature gave a second groan (2); sky loured and, muttering thunders (4),
some sad drops wept (3), the winds, armed with ice and snow (6) and hail
(5). (’Paradise Lost,’ ix, 1000, x. 697).
Here is another translation:
It is not to my purpose to do Zicari’s work over again, as this would
entail a complete translation of his long article (it contains nearly
ten thousand words), to which, if the thing is to be done properly, must
be appended Salandra’s ’Adamo,’ in order that his quotations from it can
be tested. I will therefore refer to the originals those who wish to go
into the subject more fully, warning them, en passant, that they may
find the task of verification more troublesome than it seems, owing to a
stupid mistake on Zicari’s part. For in his references to Milton, he
claims (p. 252) to use an 1818 Venice translation of the ’Paradise Lost’
by Rolli. Now Rolli’s ’Paradiso Perduto’ is a well-known work which was
issued in many editions in London, Paris, and Italy throughout the
eighteenth century. But I cannot trace this particular one of Venice,
and application to many of the chief libraries of Italy has convinced me
that it does not exist, and that 1818 must be a misprint for some other
year. The error would be of no significance if Zicari had referred to
Rolli’s ’Paradiso’ by the usual system of cantos and lines, but he
refers to it by pages, and the pagination differs in every one of the
editions of Rolli which have passed through my hands. Despite every
effort, I have not been able to hit upon the precise one which Zicari
had in mind, and if future students are equally unfortunate, I wish them
joy of their labours. [Footnote: Let me take this opportunity of
expressing my best thanks to Baron E. Tortora Brayda, of the Naples
Biblioteca Nazionale, who has taken an infinity of trouble in this
matter.]
These few extracts, however, will suffice to show that, without
Salandra’s ’Adamo,’ the ’Paradise Lost,’ as we know it, would not be in
existence; and that Zicari’s discovery is therefore one of primary
importance for English letters, although it would be easy to point out
divergencies between the two works–divergencies often due to the
varying tastes and feelings of a republican Englishman and an Italian
Catholic, and to the different conditions imposed by an epic and a
dramatic poem. Thus, in regard to this last point, Zicari has already
noted (p. 270) that Salandra’s scenic acts were necessarily reproduced
in the form of visions by Milton, who could not avail himself of the
mechanism of the drama for this purpose. Milton was a man of the world,
traveller, scholar, and politician; but it will not do for us to insist
too vehemently upon the probable mental inferiority of the Calabrian
monk, in view of the high opinion which Milton seems to have had of his
talents. Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. The ’Adamo
Caduto,’ of course, is only one of a series of similar works concerning
which a large literature has now grown up, and it might not be difficult
to prove that Salandra was indebted to some previous writer for those
words and phrases which he passed on to the English poet.
But where did Milton become acquainted with this tragedy? It was at
Naples, according to Cowper (’Milton,’ vol. iii, p. 206), that the
English poet may first have entertained the idea of ’the loss of
paradise as a subject peculiarly fit for poetry.’ He may well have
discussed sacred tragedies, like those of Andreini, with the Marquis
Manso. But Milton had returned to England long before Salandra’s poem
was printed; nor can Manso have sent him a copy of it, for he died in
1645–two years before its publication–and Zicari is thus mistaken in
assuming (p. 245) that Milton became acquainted with it in the house of
the Neapolitan nobleman. Unless, therefore, we take for granted that
Manso was intimate with the author Salandra–he knew most of his
literary countrymen–and sent or gave to Milton a copy of the manuscript
of ’Adamo’ before it was printed, or that Milton was personally
familiar with Salandra, we may conclude that the poem was forwarded to
him from Italy by some other friend, perhaps by some member of the
Accademia, degli Oziosi which Manso had founded.
A chance therefore seems to have decided Milton; Salandra’s tragedy fell
into his hands, and was welded into the epic form which he had designed
for Arthur the Great, even as, in later years, a chance question on the
part of Elwood led to his writing ’Paradise Regained.’ [Footnote: Thou
hast said much of Paradise Lost, but what hast thou to say of Paradise
Found? He made no answer, but sat some time in a muse. . . .]
For this poem there were not so many models handy as for the other, but
Milton has written too little to enable us to decide how far its
inferiority to the earlier epic is due to this fact, and how far to the
inherent inertia of its subject-matter. Little movement can be contrived
in a mere dialogue such as ’Paradise Regained ’; it lacks the grandiose
mise-en-scene and the shifting splendours of the greater epic; the
stupendous figure of the rebellious archangel, the true hero of
’Paradise Lost,’ is here dwarfed into a puny, malignant sophist; nor is
the final issue in the later poem even for a moment in doubt–a
serious defect from an artistic point of view. Jortin holds its peculiar
excellence to be ’artful sophistry, false reasoning, set off in the most
specious manner, and refuted by the Son of God with strong unaffected
eloquence’; merits for which Milton needed no original of any kind, as
his own lofty religious sentiments, his argumentative talents and long
experience of political pamphleteering, stood him in good stead. Most of
us must have wondered how it came about that Milton could not endure to
hear ’Paradise Lost’ preferred to ’Paradise Regained,’ in view of the
very apparent inferiority of the latter. If we had known what Milton
knew, namely, to how large an extent ’Paradise Lost’ was not the child
of his own imagination, and therefore not so precious in his eyes as
’Paradise Regained,’ we might have understood his prejudice.
Certain parts of ’Paradise Lost’ are drawn, as we all know, from other
Italian sources, from Sannazario, Ariosto, Guarini, Bojardo, and others.
Zicari who, it must be said, has made the best of his case, will have it
that the musterings and battles of the good and evil angels are copied
from the ’Angeleide’ of Valvasone published at Milan in 1590. But G.
Polidori, who has reprinted the ’Angeleide’ in his Italian version of
Milton (London, 1840), has gone into this matter and thinks otherwise.
These devil-and-angel combats were a popular theme at the time, and
there is no reason why the English poet should copy continental writers
in such descriptions, which necessarily have a common resemblance. The
Marquis Manso was very friendly with the poets Tasso and Marino, and it
is also to be remarked that entire passages in ’Paradise Lost’ are
copied, totidem verbis, from the writings of these two, Manso having
no doubt drawn Milton’s attention to their beauties. In fact, I am
inclined to think that Manso’s notorious enthusiasm for the warlike
epic of Tasso may first of all have diverted Milton from purely pastoral
ideals and inflamed him with the desire of accomplishing a similar feat,
whence the well-known lines in Milton’s Latin verses to this friend,
which contain the first indication of such a design on his part. Even
the familiar invocation, ’Hail, wedded Love,’ is bodily drawn from one
of Tasso’s letters (see Newton’s ’Milton,’ 1773, vol. i, pp. 312, 313).
It has been customary to speak of these literary appropriations as
’imitations ’; but whoever compares them with the originals will find
that many of them are more correctly termed translations. The case, from
a literary-moral point of view, is different as regards ancient writers,
and it is surely idle to accuse Milton, as has been done, of pilferings
from Aeschylus or Ovid. There is no such thing as robbing the classics.
They are our literary fathers, and what they have left behind them is
our common heritage; we may adapt, borrow, or steal from them as much as
will suit our purpose; to acknowledge such ’thefts’ is sheer pedantry
and ostentation. But Salandra and the rest of them were Milton’s
contemporaries. It is certainly an astonishing fact that no scholar of
the stamp of Thyer was acquainted with the ’Adamo Caduto’; and it says
much for the isolation of England that, at a period when poems on the
subject of paradise lost were being scattered broadcast in Italy and
elsewhere–when, in short, all Europe was ringing with the doleful
history of Adam and Eve–Milton could have ventured to speak of
his work as ’Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyma’–an amazing
verse which, by the way, is literally transcribed out of Ariosto
(’Cosa, non detta in prosa mai, ne in rima’). But even now the
acquaintance of the British public with the productions of continental
writers is superficial and spasmodic, and such was the ignorance of
English scholars of this earlier period, that Birch maintained that
Milton’s drafts, to be referred to presently, indicated his intention of
writing an opera (!); while as late as 1776 the poet Mickle,
notwithstanding Voltaire’s authority, questioned the very existence of
Andreini, who has written thirty different pieces.
Some idea of the time when Salandra’s tragedy reached Milton might be
gained if we knew the date of his manuscript projects for ’Paradise
Lost’ and other writings which are preserved at Cambridge. R. Garnett
(’Life of Milton,’ 1890, p. 129) supposes these drafts to date from
about 1640 to 1642, and I am not sufficiently learned in Miltonian lore
to controvert or corroborate in a general way this assertion. But the
date must presumably be pushed further forward in the case of the
skeletons for ’Paradise Lost,’ which are modelled to a great extent upon
Salandra’s ’Adamo’ of 1647, though other compositions may also have been
present before Milton’s mind, such as that mentioned on page 234 of the
second volume of Todd’s ’Milton,’ from which he seems to have drawn the
hint of a ’prologue spoken by Moses.’
Without going into the matter exhaustively, I will only say that from
these pieces it is clear that Milton’s primary idea was to write, like
Salandra, a sacred tragedy upon this theme, and not an epic. These
drafts also contain a chorus, such as Salandra has placed in his drama,
and a great number of mutes, who do not figure in the English epic, but
who reappear in the ’Adamo Caduto’ and all similar works. Even Satan is
here designated as Lucifer, in accordance with the Italian Lucifero; and
at the end of one of Milton’s drafts we read ’at last appears Mercy,
comforts him, promises the Messiah, etc.,’ which is exactly what
Salandra’s Misericordia (Mercy) does in the same place.
Milton no doubt kept on hand many loose passages of poetry, both
original and borrowed, ready to be worked up into larger pieces; all
poets are smothered in odd scraps of verse and lore which they ’fit in’
as occasion requires; and it is therefore quite possible that some
fragments now included in ’Paradise Lost’ may have been complete before
the ’Adamo Caduto’ was printed. I am referring, more especially, to
Satan’s address to the sun, which Philips says was written before the
commencement of the epic.
Admitting Philips to be correct, I still question whether this
invocation was composed before Milton’s visit to Naples; and if it was,
the poet may well have intended it for some other of the multitudinous
works which these drafts show him to have been revolving in his mind, or
for none of them in particular.
De Quincey rightly says that Addison gave the initial bias in favour of
’Paradise Lost’ to the English national mind, which has thenceforward
shrunk, as Addison himself did, from a dispassionate contemplation of
its defects; the idea being, I presume, that a ’divine poem’ in a manner
disarmed rational criticism. And, strange to say, even the few faults
which earlier scholars did venture to point out in Milton’s poem will be
found in that of Salandra. There is the same superabundance of allegory;
the same confusion of spirit and matter among the supernatural persons;
the same lengthy astronomical treatise; the same personification of Sin
and Death; the same medley of Christian and pagan mythology; the same
tedious historico-theological disquisition at the end of both poems.
For the rest, it is to be hoped that we have outgrown our fastidiousness
on some of these points. Theological fervour has abated, and in a work
of the pure imagination, as ’Paradise Lost’ is now–is it
not?–considered to be, there is nothing incongruous or offensive in an
amiable commingling of Semitic and Hellenic deities after the approved
Italian recipe; nor do a few long words about geography or science
disquiet us any more. Milton was not writing for an uncivilized mob, and
his occasional displays of erudition will represent to a cultured person
only those breathing spaces so refreshing in all epic poetry. That
Milton’s language is saturated with Latinisms and Italianisms is
perfectly true. His English may not have been good enough for his
contemporaries. But it is quite good enough for us. That ’grand manner’
which Matthew Arnold claimed for Milton, that sustained pitch of kingly
elaboration and fullness, is not wholly an affair of high moral tone; it
results in part from the humbler ministrations of words happily
chosen–from a felicitous alloy of Mediterranean grace and Saxon mettle.
For, whether consciously or not, we cannot but be influenced by the
colour-effects of mere words, that arouse in us definite but
indefinable moods of mind. To complain of the foreign phraseology and
turns of thought in ’Paradise Lost’ would be the blackest ingratitude
nowadays, seeing that our language has become enriched by steady gleams
of pomp and splendour due, in large part, to the peculiar lustre of
Milton’s comely importations.
Continue...

This complete e-text “Old Calabria” (by Norman Douglas) belongs in the public domain.

Old Calabria at Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Calabria (Marlboro Travel)By Norman DouglasAt Amazon
