




Salem was the foremost privateering port of the Revolution, and
from this pleasant harbor, long since deserted by ships and
sailormen, there filled away past Cape Ann one hundred and
fifty-eight vessels of all sizes to scan the horizon for British
topsails. They accounted for four hundred prizes, or half the
whole number to the credit of American arms afloat. This
preeminence was due partly to freedom from a close blockade and
partly to a seafaring population which was born and bred to its
trade and knew no other. Besides the crews of Salem merchantmen,
privateering enlisted the idle fishermen of ports nearby and the
mariners of Boston whose commerce had been snuffed out by the
British occupation. Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Charleston sent
some splendid armed ships to sea but not with the impetuous rush
nor in anything like the numbers enrolled by this gray old town
whose fame was unique.
For the most part, the records of all these brave ships and the
thousands of men who sailed and sweated and fought in them are
dim and scanty, no more than routine entries in dusty log-books
which read like this: “Filled away in pursuit of a second sail in
the N. W. At 4.30 she hoisted English colors and commenced firing
her stern guns. At 5.90 took in the steering sails, at the same
time she fired a broadside. We opened a fire from our larboard
battery and at 5.30 she struck her colors. Got out the boats and
boarded her. She proved to be the British brig Acorn from
Liverpool to Rio Janeiro, mounting fourteen cannon."* But now and
then one finds in these old sea-journals an entry more intimate
and human, such as the complaint of the master of the privateer
Scorpion, cruising in 1778 and never a prize in sight. “This Book
I made to keep the Accounts of my Voyage but God knows beste what
that will be, for I am at this time very Impashent but I hope
soon there will be a Change to ease my Trubled Mind. On this Day
I was Chaced by Two Ships of War which I tuck to be Enemies, but
coming on thick Weather I have lost site of them and so conclude
myself escaped which is a small good Fortune in the midste of my
Discouragements."** A burst of gusty laughter still echoes along
the crowded deck of the letter-of-marque schooner Success, whose
master, Captain Philip Thrash, inserted this diverting comment in
his humdrum record of the day’s work: “At one half past 8
discovered a sail ahead. Tacked ship. At 9 tacked ship again and
past just to Leeward of the Sail which appeared to be a damn’d
Comical Boat, by G-d.”
* From the manuscript collections of the Essex Institute, Salem,
Mass.
** From the manuscript collections of the Essex Institute, Salem,
Mass.
There are a few figures of the time and place which stand out,
full-length, in vivid colors against a background that satisfies
the desire of romance and thrillingly conveys the spirit of the
time and the place. Such a one was Captain Jonathan Haraden,
Salem privateersman, who captured one thousand British cannon
afloat and is worthy to be ranked as one of the ablest
sea-fighters of his generation. He was a merchant mariner, a
master at the outbreak of the Revolution, who had followed the
sea since boyhood. But it was more to his taste to command the
Salem ship General Pickering of 180 tons which was fitted out
under a letter of marque in the spring of 1780. She carried
fourteen six-pounders and forty-five men and boys, nothing very
formidable, when Captain Haraden sailed for Bilbao with a cargo
of sugar. During the voyage, before his crew had been hammered
into shape, he beat off a British privateer of twenty guns and
safely tacked into the Bay of Biscay.
There he sighted another hostile privateer, the Golden Eagle,
larger than his own ship. Instead of shifting his course to avoid
her, Haraden clapped on sail and steered alongside after
nightfall, roaring through his trumpet: “What ship is this? An
American frigate, sir. Strike, or I’ll sink you with a
broadside.”
Dazed by this unexpected summons in the gloom, the master of the
Golden Eagle promptly surrendered, and a prize crew was thrown
aboard with orders to follow the Pickering into Bilbao. While
just outside that Spanish harbor, a strange sail was descried and
again Jonathan Haraden cleared for action. The vessel turned out
to be the Achilles, one of the most powerful privateers out of
London, with forty guns and a hundred and fifty men, or almost
thrice the fighting strength of the little Pickering. She was, in
fact, more like a sloop of war. Before Captain Haraden could haul
within gunshot to protect his prize, it had been recaptured by
the Achilles, which then maneuvered to engage the Pickering.
Darkness intervened, but Jonathan Haraden had no idea of escaping
under cover of it. He was waiting for the morning breeze and a
chance to fight it out to a finish. He was a handsome man with an
air of serene composure and a touch of the theatrical such as
Nelson displayed in his great moments. Having prepared his ship
for battle, he slept soundly until dawn and then dressed with
fastidious care to stroll on deck, where he beheld the Achilles
bearing down on him with her crew at quarters.
His own men were clustered behind their open ports, matches
lighted, tackles and breechings cast off, crowbars, handspikes,
and sponge-staves in place, gunners stripped to the waist,
powder-boys ready for the word like sprinters on the mark.
Forty-five of them against a hundred and fifty, and Captain
Haraden, debonair, unruffled, walking to and fro with a leisurely
demeanor, remarking that although the Achilles appeared to be
superior in force, “he had no doubt they would beat her if they
were firm and steady and did not throw away their fire.”
It was, indeed, a memorable sea-picture, the sturdy Pickering
riding deep with her burden of sugar and seeming smaller than she
really was, the Achilles towering like a frigate, and all Bilbao
turned out to watch the duel, shore and headlands crowded with
spectators, the blue harbor-mouth gay with an immense flotilla of
fishing boats and pleasure craft. The stake for which Haraden
fought was to retake the Golden Eagle prize and to gain his port.
His seamanship was flawless. Vastly outnumbered if it should come
to boarding, he handled his vessel so as to avoid the Achilles
while he poured the broadsides into her. After two hours the
London privateer emerged from the smoke which had obscured the
combat and put out to sea in flight, hulled through and through,
while a farewell flight of crowbars, with which the guns of the
Pickering had been crammed to the muzzle, ripped through her
sails and rigging.
Haraden hoisted canvas and drove in chase, but the Achilles had
the heels of him “with a mainsail as large as a ship of the
line,” and reluctantly he wore ship and, with the Golden Eagle
again in his possession, he sailed to an anchorage in Bilbao
harbor. The Spanish populace welcomed him with tremendous
enthusiasm. He was carried through the streets in a holiday
procession and was the hero of banquets and public receptions.
Such a man was bound to be the idol of his sailors and one of
them quite plausibly related that “so great was the confidence he
inspired that if he but looked at a sail through his glass and
told the helmsman to steer for her, the observation went
round,’If she is an enemy, she is ours.’”
It was in this same General Pickering, no longer sugar-laden but
in cruising trim, that Jonathan Haraden accomplished a feat which
Paul Jones might have been proud to claim. There lifted above the
sky-line three armed merchantmen sailing in company from Halifax
to New York, a brig of fourteen guns, a ship of sixteen guns, a
sloop of twelve guns. When they flew signals and formed in line,
the ship alone appeared to outmatch the Pickering, but Haraden,
in that lordly manner of his, assured his men that “he had no
doubt whatever that if they would do their duty he would quickly
capture the three vessels.” Here was performance very much out of
the ordinary, naval strategy of an exceptionally high order, and
yet it is dismissed by the only witness who took the trouble to
mention it in these few, casual words: “This he did with great
ease by going alongside of each of them, one after the other.”
One more story of this master sea-rover of the Revolution, sailor
and gentleman, who served his country so much more brilliantly
than many a landsman lauded in the written histories of the war.
While in the Pickering he attacked a heavily armed royal mail
packet bound to England from the West Indies, one of the largest
merchant vessels of her day and equipped to defend herself
against privateers. A tough antagonist and a hard nut to crack!
They battered each other like two pugilists for four hours and
even then the decision was still in the balance. Then Haraden
sheered off to mend his damaged gear and splintered hull before
closing in again.
He then discovered that all his powder had been shot away
excepting one last charge. Instead of calling it a drawn battle,
he rammed home this last shot in the locker, and ran down to
windward of the packet, so close that he could shout across to
the other quarter-deck: “I will give you five minutes to haul
down your colors. If they are not down at the end of that time, I
will fire into you and sink you, so help me God.”
It was the bluff magnificent--courage cold-blooded and
calculating. The adversary was still unbeaten. Haraden stood with
watch in hand and sonorously counted off the minutes. It was the
stronger will and not the heavier metal that won the day. To be
shattered by fresh broadsides at pistol-range was too much for
the nerves of the gallant English skipper whose decks were
already like a slaughterhouse. One by one, Haraden shouted the
minutes and his gunners blew their matches. At “four” the red
ensign came fluttering down and the mail packet was a prize of
war.
Another merchant seaman of this muster-roll of patriots was Silas
Talbot, who took to salt water as a cabin boy at the age of
twelve and was a prosperous shipmaster at twenty-one with savings
invested in a house of his own in Providence. Enlisting under
Washington, he was made a captain of infantry and was soon
promoted, but he was restless ashore and glad to obtain an odd
assignment. As Colonel Talbot he selected sixty infantry
volunteers, most of them seamen by trade, and led them aboard the
small sloop Argo in May, 1779, to punish the New York Tories who
were equipping privateers against their own countrymen and
working great mischief in Long Island Sound. So serious was the
situation that General Gates found it almost impossible to obtain
food supplies for the northern department of the Continental
army.
Silas Talbot and his nautical infantrymen promptly fell in with
the New York privateer Lively, a fair match for him, and as
promptly sent her into port. He then ran offshore and picked up
and carried into Boston two English privateers headed for New
York with large cargoes of merchandise from the West Indies. But
he was particularly anxious to square accounts with a renegade
Captain Hazard who made Newport his base and had captured many
American vessels with the stout brig King George, using her for
“the base purpose of plundering his old neighbors and friends.”
On his second cruise in the Argo, young Silas Talbot encountered
the perfidious King George to the southward of Long Island and
riddled her with one broadside after another, first hailing
Captain Hazard by name and cursing him in double-shotted phrases
for the traitorous swab that he was. Then the seagoing infantry
scrambled over the bulwarks and tumbled the Tories down their own
hatches without losing a man. A prize crew with the humiliated
King George made for New London, where there was much cheering in
the port, and “even the women, both young and old, expressed the
greatest joy.”
With no very heavy fighting, Talbot had captured five vessels and
was keen to show what his crew could do against mettlesome
foemen. He found them at last well out to sea in a large ship
which seemed eager to engage him. Only a few hundred feet apart
through a long afternoon, they briskly and cheerily belabored
each other with grape and solid shot. Talbot’s speaking-trumpet
was shot out of his hand, the tails of his coat were shorn off,
and all the officers and men stationed with him on the
quarter-deck were killed or wounded.
His crew reported that the Argo was in a sinking condition, with
the water flooding the gun-deck, but he told them to lower a man
or two in the bight of a line and they pluckily plugged the holes
from overside. There was a lusty huzza when the Englishman’s
mainmast crashed to the deck and this finished the affair. Silas
Talbot found that he had trounced the privateer Dragon, of twice
his own tonnage and with the advantage in both guns and men.
While his crew was patching the Argo and pumping the water from
her hold, the lookout yelled that another sail was making for
them. Without hesitation Talbot somehow got this absurdly
impudent one-masted craft of his under way and told those of his
sixty men who survived to prepare for a second tussle.
Fortunately another Yankee privateer joined the chase and
together they subdued the armed brig Hannah. When the Argo safely
convoyed the two prizes into New Bedford, “all who beheld her
were astonished that a vessel of her diminutive size could suffer
so much and yet get safely to port.”
Men fought and slew each other in those rude and distant days
with a certain courtesy, with a fine, punctilious regard for the
etiquette of the bloody game. There was the Scotch skipper of the
Betsy, a privateer, whom Silas Talbot hailed as follows, before
they opened fire:
“You must now haul down those British colors, my friend.”
“Notwithstanding I find you an enemy, as I suspected,” was the
dignified reply, “yet, sir, I shall let them hang a little bit
longer,--with your permission,--so fire away, Flanagan.”
During another of her cruises the Argo pursued an artfully
disguised ship of the line which could have blown her to kingdom
come with a broadside of thirty guns. The little Argo was
actually becalmed within short range, but her company got out the
sweeps and rowed her some distance before darkness and a favoring
slant of wind carried them clear. In the summer of 1780, Captain
Silas Talbot, again a mariner by title, was given the private
cruiser General Washington with one hundred and twenty men, but
he was less fortunate with her than when afloat in the tiny Argo
with his sixty Continentals. Off Sandy Hook he ran into the
British fleet under Admiral Arbuthnot and, being outsailed in a
gale of wind, he was forced to lower his flag to the great
seventy-four Culloden. After a year in English prisons he was
released and made his way home, serving no more in the war but
having the honor to command the immortal frigate Constitution in
1799 as a captain in the American Navy.
In several notable instances the privateersmen tried conclusions
with ships that flew the royal ensign, and got the better of
them. The hero of an uncommonly brilliant action of this sort was
Captain George Geddes of Philadelphia, who was entrusted with the
Congress, a noble privateer of twenty-four guns and two hundred
men. Several of the smaller British cruisers had been sending
parties ashore to plunder estates along the southern shores, and
one of them, the sloop of war Savage, had even raided
Washington’s home at Mount Vernon. Later she shifted to the coast
of Georgia in quest of loot and was unlucky enough to fall
athwart Captain Geddes in the Congress.
The privateer was the more formidable ship and faster on the
wind, forcing Captain Sterling of the Savage to accept the
challenge. Disabled aloft very early in the fight, Captain Geddes
was unable to choose his position, for which reason they
literally battled hand-to-hand, hulls grinding against each
other, the gunners scorched by the flashes of the cannon in the
ports of the opposing ship, with scarcely room to ply the
rammers, and the sailors throwing missiles from the decks, hand
grenades, cold shot, scraps of iron, belaying-pins.
As the vessels lay interlocked, the Savage was partly dismasted
and Captain Geddes, leaping upon the forecastle head, told the
boarders to follow him. Before they could swing their cutlases
and dash over the hammock-nettings, the British boatswain waved
his cap and yelled that the Savage had surrendered. Captain
Sterling was dead, eight others were killed, and twenty-four
wounded. The American loss was about the same. Captain Geddes,
however, was unable to save his prize because a British frigate
swooped down and took them both into Charleston.
When peace came in 1783, it was independence dearly bought by
land and sea, and no small part of the price was the loss of a
thousand merchant ships which would see their home ports no more.
Other misfortunes added to the toll of destruction. The great
fishing fleets which had been the chief occupation of coastwise
New England were almost obliterated and their crews were
scattered. Many of the men had changed their allegiance and were
sailing out of Halifax, and others were impressed into British
men-of-war or returned broken in health from long confinement in
British prisons. The ocean was empty of the stanch schooners
which had raced home with lee rails awash to cheer waiting wives
and sweethearts.
The fate of Nantucket and its whalers was even more tragic. This
colony on its lonely island amid the shoals was helpless against
raids by sea, and its ships and storehouses were destroyed
without mercy. Many vessels in distant waters were captured
before they were even aware that a state of war existed. Of a
fleet numbering a hundred and fifty sail, one hundred and
thirty-four were taken by the enemy and Nantucket whaling
suffered almost total extinction. These seamen, thus robbed of
their livelihood, fought nobly for their country’s cause. Theirs
was not the breed to sulk or whine in port. Twelve hundred of
them were killed or made prisoners during the Revolution. They
were to be found in the Army and Navy and behind the guns of
privateers. There were twenty-five Nantucket whalemen in the crew
of the Ranger when Paul Jones steered her across the Atlantic on
that famous cruise which inspired the old forecastle song that
begins
    ’Tis of the gallant Yankee ship
    That flew the Stripes and Stars,
    And the whistling wind from the west nor’west
    Blew through her pitch pine spars.
    With her starboard tacks aboard, my boys,
    She hung upon the gale.
    On an autumn night we raised the light
    Off the Old Head of Kinsale.
Pitiful as was the situation of Nantucket, with its only industry
wiped out and two hundred widows among the eight hundred families
left on the island, the aftermath of war seemed almost as ruinous
along the whole Atlantic coast. More ships could be built and
there were thousands of adventurous sailors to man them, but
where were the markets for the product of the farms and mills and
plantations? The ports of Europe had been so long closed to
American shipping that little demand was left for American goods.
To the Government of England the people of the Republic were no
longer fellow-countrymen but foreigners. As such they were
subject to the Navigation Acts, and no cargoes could be sent to
that kingdom unless in British vessels. The flourishing trade
with the West Indies was made impossible for the same reason, a
special Order in Council aiming at one fell stroke to “put an end
to the building and increase of American vessels” and to finish
the careers of three hundred West Indiamen already afloat. In the
islands themselves the results were appalling. Fifteen thousand
slaves died of starvation because the American traders were
compelled to cease bringing them dried fish and corn during
seasons in which their own crops were destroyed by hurricanes.
In 1776, one-third of the seagoing merchant marine of Great
Britain had been bought or built to order in America because
lumber was cheaper and wages were lower. This lucrative business
was killed by a law which denied Englishmen the privilege of
purchasing ships built in American yards. So narrow and bitter
was this commercial enmity, so ardent this desire to banish the
Stars and Stripes from blue water, that Lord Sheffield in 1784
advised Parliament that the pirates of Algiers and Tripoli really
benefited English commerce by preying on the shipping of weaker
nations. “It is not probable that the American States will have a
very free trade in the Mediterranean,” said he. “It will not be
to the interest of any of the great maritime Powers to protect
them from the Barbary States. If they know their interests, they
will not encourage the Americans to be carriers. That the Barbary
States are advantageous to maritime Powers is certain.”
Denied the normal ebb and flow of trade and commerce and with the
imports from England far exceeding the value of the merchandise
exported thence, the United States, already impoverished, was
drained of its money, and a currency of dollars, guineas, joes,
and moidores grew scarcer day by day. There was no help in a
government which consisted of States united only in name.
Congress comprised a handful of respectable gentlemen who had
little power and less responsibility, quarreling among themselves
for lack of better employment. Retaliation against England by
means of legislation was utterly impossible. Each State looked
after its commerce in its own peculiar fashion and the devil
might take the hindmost. Their rivalries and jealousies were like
those of petty kingdoms. If one State should close her ports is
to English ships, the others would welcome them in order to
divert the trade, with no feeling of national pride or federal
cooperation.
The Articles of Confederation had empowered Congress to make
treaties of commerce, but only such as did not restrain the
legislative power of any State from laying imposts and regulating
exports and imports. If a foreign power imposed heavy duties upon
American shipping, it was for the individual States and not for
Congress to say whether the vessels of the offending nation
should be allowed free entrance to the ports of the United
States: It was folly to suppose, ran the common opinion, that if
South Carolina should bar her ports to Spain because rice and
indigo were excluded from the Spanish colonies, New Hampshire,
which furnished masts and lumber for the Spanish Navy, ought to
do the same. The idea of turning the whole matter over to
Congress was considered preposterous by many intelligent
Americans.
In these thirteen States were nearly three and a quarter million
people hemmed in a long and narrow strip between the sea and an
unexplored wilderness in which the Indians were an ever present
peril. The Southern States, including Maryland, prosperous
agricultural regions, contained almost one-half the English-
speaking population of America. As colonies, they had found the
Old World eager for their rice, tobacco, indigo, and tar, and
slavery was the means of labor so firmly established that
one-fifth of the inhabitants were black. By contrast, the
Northern States were still concerned with commerce as the very
lifeblood of their existence. New England had not dreamed of the
millions of spindles which should hum on the banks of her rivers
and lure her young men and women from the farms to the clamorous
factory towns. The city of New York had not yet outgrown its
traffic in furs and its magnificent commercial destiny was still
unrevealed. It was a considerable seaport but not yet a gateway.
From Sandy Hook, however, to the stormy headlands of Maine, it
was a matter of life and death that ships should freely come and
go with cargoes to exchange. All other resources were trifling in
comparison.
Continue...

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
