


While Athens was still only a small city there lived within its walls a
man named Daedalus who was the most skillful worker in wood and stone
and metal that had ever been known. It was he who taught the people how
to build better houses and how to hang their doors on hinges and how to
support the roofs with pillars and posts. He was the first to fasten
things together with glue; he invented the plumb-line and the auger; and
he showed seamen how to put up masts in their ships and how to rig the
sails to them with ropes. He built a stone palace for AEgeus, the young
king of Athens, and beautified the Temple of Athena which stood on the
great rocky hill in the middle of the city.
Daedalus had a nephew named Perdix whom he had taken when a boy to teach
the trade of builder. But Perdix was a very apt learner, and soon
surpassed his master in the knowledge of many things. His eyes were ever
open to see what was going on about him, and he learned the lore of the
fields and the woods. Walking one day by the sea, he picked up the
backbone of a great fish, and from it he invented the saw. Seeing how a
certain bird carved holes in the trunks of trees, he learned how to make
and use the chisel. Then he invented the wheel which potters use in
molding clay; and he made of a forked stick the first pair of compasses
for drawing circles; and he studied out many other curious and useful
things.
Daedalus was not pleased when he saw that the lad was so apt and wise,
so ready to learn, and so eager to do.
“If he keeps on in this way,” he murmured, “he will be a greater man
than I; his name will be remembered, and mine will be forgotten.”
Day after day, while at his work, Daedalus pondered over this matter,
and soon his heart was filled with hatred towards young Perdix. One
morning when the two were putting up an ornament on the outer wall of
Athena’s temple, Daedalus bade his nephew go out on a narrow scaffold
which hung high over the edge of the rocky cliff whereon the temple
stood. Then, when the lad obeyed, it was easy enough, with a blow of a
hammer, to knock the scaffold from its fastenings.
Poor Perdix fell headlong through the air, and he would have been
dashed in pieces upon the stones at the foot of the cliff had not kind
Athena seen him and taken pity upon him. While he was yet whirling
through mid-air she changed him into a partridge, and he flitted away to
the hills to live forever in the woods and fields which he loved so
well. And to this day, when summer breezes blow and the wild flowers
bloom in meadow and glade, the voice of Perdix may still sometimes be
heard, calling to his mate from among the grass and reeds or amid the
leafy underwoods.
As for Daedalus, when the people of Athens heard of his dastardly deed,
they were filled with grief and rage–grief for young Perdix, whom all
had learned to love; rage towards the wicked uncle, who loved only
himself. At first they were for punishing Daedalus with the death which
he so richly deserved, but when they remembered what he had done to make
their homes pleasanter and their lives easier, they allowed him to live;
and yet they drove him out of Athens and bade him never return.
There was a ship in the harbor just ready to start on a voyage across
the sea, and in it Daedalus embarked with all his precious tools and
his young son Icarus. Day after day the little vessel sailed slowly
southward, keeping the shore of the mainland always upon the right. It
passed Troezen and the rocky coast of Argos, and then struck boldly out
across the sea.
At last the famous Island of Crete was reached, and there Daedalus
landed and made himself known; and the King of Crete, who had already
heard of his wondrous skill, welcomed him to his kingdom, and gave him a
home in his palace, and promised that he should be rewarded with great
riches and honor if he would but stay and practice his craft there as he
had done in Athens.
Now the name of the King of Crete was Minos. His grandfather, whose name
was also Minos, was the son of Europa, a young princess whom a white
bull, it was said, had brought on his back across the sea from distant
Asia. This elder Minos had been accounted the wisest of men–so wise,
indeed, that Jupiter chose him to be one of the judges of the Lower
World. The younger Minos was almost as wise as his grandfather; and he
was brave and far-seeing and skilled as a ruler of men. He had made all
the islands subject to his kingdom, and his ships sailed into every part
of the world and brought back to Crete the riches of foreign lands. So
it was not hard for him to persuade Daedalus to make his home with him
and be the chief of his artisans.
And Daedalus built for King Minos a most wonderful palace with floors of
marble and pillars of granite; and in the palace he set up golden
statues which had tongues and could talk; and for splendor and beauty
there was no other building in all the wide earth that could be compared
with it.
There lived in those days among the hills of Crete a terrible monster
called the Minotaur, the like of which has never been seen from that
time until now. This creature, it was said, had the body of a man, but
the face and head of a wild bull and the fierce nature of a mountain
lion. The people of Crete would not have killed him if they could; for
they thought that the Mighty Folk who lived with Jupiter on the mountain
top had sent him among them, and that these beings would be angry if any
one should take his life. He was the pest and terror of all the land.
Where he was least expected, there he was sure to be; and almost every
day some man, woman, or child was caught and devoured by him.
“You have done so many wonderful things,” said the king to Daedalus,
“can you not do something to rid the land of this Minotaur?”
“Shall I kill him?” asked Daedalus.
“Ah, no!” said the king. “That would only bring greater misfortunes upon
us.”
“I will build a house for him then,” said Daedalus, “and you can keep
him in it as a prisoner.”
“But he may pine away and die if he is penned up in prison,” said the
king.
“He shall have plenty of room to roam about,” said Daedalus; “and if you
will only now and then feed one of your enemies to him, I promise you
that he shall live and thrive.”
So the wonderful artisan brought together his workmen, and they built a
marvelous house with so many rooms in it and so many winding ways that
no one who went far into it could ever find his way out again; and
Daedalus called it the Labyrinth, and cunningly persuaded the Minotaur
to go inside of it. The monster soon lost his way among the winding
passages, but the sound of his terrible bellowings could be heard day
and night as he wandered back and forth vainly trying to find some place
to escape.
Not long after this it happened that Daedalus was guilty of a deed which
angered the king very greatly; and had not Minos wished him to build
other buildings for him, he would have put him to death and no doubt
have served him right.
“Hitherto,” said the king, “I have honored you for your skill and
rewarded you for your labor. But now you shall be my slave and shall
serve me without hire and without any word of praise.”
Then he gave orders to the guards at the city gates that they should not
let Daedalus pass out at any time, and he set soldiers to watch the
ships that were in port so that he could not escape by sea. But although
the wonderful artisan was thus held as a prisoner, he did not build any
more buildings for King Minos; he spent his time in planning how he
might regain his freedom.
“All my inventions,” he said to his son Icarus, “have hitherto been made
to please other people; now I will invent something to please myself.”
So, all through the day he pretended to be planning some great work for
the king, but every night he locked himself up in his chamber and
wrought secretly by candle light. By and by he had made for himself a
pair of strong wings, and for Icarus another pair of smaller ones; and
then, one midnight, when everybody was asleep, the two went out to see
if they could fly. They fastened the wings to their shoulders with wax,
and then sprang up into the air. They could not fly very far at first,
but they did so well that they felt sure of doing much better in time.
The next night Daedalus made some changes in the wings. He put on an
extra strap or two; he took out a feather from one wing, and put a new
feather into another; and then he and Icarus went out in the moonlight
to try them again. They did finely this time. They flew up to the top of
the king’s palace, and then they sailed away over the walls of the city
and alighted on the top of a hill. But they were not ready to undertake
a long journey yet; and so, just before daybreak, they flew back home.
Every fair night after that they practiced with their wings, and at the
end of a month they felt as safe in the air as on the ground, and could
skim over the hilltops like birds.
Early one morning; before King Minos had risen from his bed, they
fastened on their wings, sprang into the air, and flew out of the city.
Once fairly away from the island, they turned towards the west, for
Daedalus had heard of an island named Sicily, which lay hundreds of
miles away, and he had made up his mind to seek a new home there.
All went well for a time, and the two bold flyers sped swiftly over the
sea, skimming along only a little above the waves, and helped on their
way by the brisk east wind. Towards noon the sun shone very warm, and
Daedalus called out to the boy who was a little behind and told him to
keep his wings cool and not fly too high. But the boy was proud of his
skill in flying, and as he looked up at the sun he thought how nice it
would be to soar like it high above the clouds in the blue depths of the
sky.
“At any rate,” said he to himself, “I will go up a little higher.
Perhaps I can see the horses which draw the sun car, and perhaps I shall
catch sight of their driver, the mighty sun master himself.”
So he flew up higher and higher, but his father who was in front did not
see him. Pretty soon, however, the heat of the sun began to melt the wax
with which the boy’s wings were fastened. He felt himself sinking
through the air; the wings had become loosened from his shoulders. He
screamed to his father, but it was too late. Daedalus turned just in
time to see Icarus fall headlong into the waves. The water was very deep
there, and the skill of the wonderful artisan could not save his child.
He could only look with sorrowing eyes at the unpitying sea, and fly on
alone to distant Sicily. There, men say, he lived for many years, but he
never did any great work, nor built anything half so marvelous as the
Labyrinth of Crete. And the sea in which poor Icarus was drowned was
called forever afterward by his name, the Icarian Sea.
Continue...

This eBook of “Old Greek Stories” by James Baldwin belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Greek StoriesBy James BaldwinAt Amazon
