




Soon after the Revolution the spirit of commercial exploration
began to stir in other ports than Salem. Out from New York sailed
the ship Empress of China in 1784 for the first direct voyage to
Canton, to make the acquaintance of a vast nation absolutely
unknown to the people of the United States, nor had one in a
million of the industrious and highly civilized Chinese ever so
much as heard the name of the little community of barbarians who
dwelt on the western shore of the North Atlantic. The oriental
dignitaries in their silken robes graciously welcomed the
foreign ship with the strange flag and showed a lively interest
in the map spread upon the cabin table, offering every facility
to promote this new market for their silks and teas. After an
absence of fifteen months the Empress of China returned to her
home port and her pilgrimage aroused so much attention that the
report of the supercargo, Samuel Shaw, was read in Congress.
Surpassing this achievement was that of Captain Stewart Dean, who
very shortly afterward had his fling at the China trade in an
eighty-ton sloop built at Albany. He was a stout-hearted old
privateersman of the Revolution whom nothing could dismay, and in
this tiny Experiment of his he won merited fame as one of the
American pioneers of blue water. Fifteen men and boys sailed with
him, drilled and disciplined as if the sloop were a frigate, and
when the Experiment hauled into the stream, of Battery Park, New
York, “martial music and the boatswain’s whistle were heard on
board with all the pomp and circumstance of war.” Typhoons and
Malay proas, Chinese pirates and unknown shoals, had no terrors
for Stewart Dean. He saw Canton for himself, found a cargo, and
drove home again in a four months’ passage, which was better than
many a clipper could do at a much later day. Smallest and bravest
of the first Yankee East Indiamen, this taut sloop, with the
boatswain’s pipe trilling cheerily and all hands ready with
cutlases and pikes to repel boarders, was by no means the least
important vessel that ever passed in by Sandy Hook.
In the beginnings of this picturesque relation with the Far East,
Boston lagged behind Salem, but her merchants, too, awoke to the
opportunity and so successfully that for generations there were
no more conspicuous names and shipping-houses in the China trade
than those of Russell, Perkins, and Forbes. The first attempt was
very ambitious and rather luckless. The largest merchantman ever
built at that time in the United States was launched at Quincy in
1789 to rival the towering ships of the British East India
Company. This Massachusetts created a sensation. Her departure
was a national event. She embodied the dreams of Captain Randall
and of the Samuel Shaw who had gone as supercargo in the Empress
of China. They formed a partnership and were able to find the
necessary capital.
This six-hundred-ton ship loomed huge in the ayes of the crowds
which visited her. She was in fact no larger than such
four-masted coasting schooners as claw around Hatteras with
deck-loads of Georgia pine or fill with coal for down East, and
manage it comfortably with seven or eight men for a crew. The
Massachusetts, however, sailed in 411 the old-fashioned state and
dignity of a master, four mates, a purser, surgeon, carpenter,
gunner, four quartermasters, three midshipmen, a cooper, two
cooks, a steward, and fifty seamen. The second officer was Amasa
Delano, a man even more remarkable than the ship, who wandered
far and wide and wrote a fascinating book about his voyages, a
classic of its kind, the memoirs of an American merchant mariner
of a breed long since extinct.
While the Massachusetts was fitting out at Boston, one small
annoyance ruffled the auspicious undertaking. Three different
crews were signed before a full complement could be persuaded to
tarry in the forecastle. The trouble was caused by a
fortune-teller of Lynn, Moll Pitcher by name, who predicted
disaster for the ship. Now every honest sailor knows that certain
superstitions are gospel fact, such as the bad luck brought by a
cross-eyed Finn, a black cat, or going to sea on Friday, and
these eighteenth century shellbacks must not be too severely
chided for deserting while they had the chance. As it turned out,
the voyage did have a sorry ending and death overtook an
astonishingly large number of the ship’s people.
Though she had been designed and built by master craftsmen of New
England who knew their trade surpassingly well, it was discovered
when the ship arrived at Canton that her timbers were already
rotting. They were of white oak which had been put into her green
instead of properly seasoned. This blunder wrecked the hopes of
her owners. To cap it, the cargo of masts and spars had also been
stowed while wet and covered with mud and ice, and the hatches
had been battened. As a result the air became so foul with decay
that several hundred barrels of beef were spoiled. To repair the
ship was beyond the means of Captain Randall and Samuel Shaw, and
reluctantly they sold her to the Danish East India Company at a
heavy loss. Nothing could have been more unexpected than to find
that, for once, the experienced shipbuilders had been guilty of a
miscalculation.
The crew scattered, and perhaps the prediction of the
fortune-teller of Lynn followed their roving courses, for when
Captain Amasa Delano tried to trace them a few years later, he
jotted down such obituaries as these on the list of names:
 “John Harris. A slave in Algiers at last accounts.
  Roger Dyer. Died and thrown overboard off Cape Horn.
  William Williams. Lost overboard off Japan.
  James Crowley. Murdered by the Chinese near Macao.
  John Johnson. Died on board an English Indiaman.
  Seth Stowell. Was drowned at Whampoa in 1790.
  Jeremiah Chace. Died with the small-pox at Whampoa in 1791.
  Humphrey Chadburn. Shot and died at Whampoa in 1791.
  Samuel Tripe. Drowned off Java Head in 1790.
  James Stackpole. Murdered by the Chinese.
  Nicholas Nicholson. Died with the leprosy at Macao.
  William Murphy. Killed by Chinese pirates.
  Larry Conner. Killed at sea.”
There were more of these gruesome items--so many of them that it
appears as though no more than a handful of this stalwart crew
survived the Massachusetts by a dozen years. Incredible as it
sounds, Captain Delano’s roster accounted for fifty of them as
dead while he was still in the prime of life, and most of them
had been snuffed out by violence. As for his own career, it was
overcast by no such unlucky star, and he passed unscathed through
all the hazards and vicissitudes that could be encountered in
that rugged and heroic era of endeavor. Set adrift in Canton when
the Massachusetts was sold, he promptly turned his hand to
repairing a large Danish ship which had been wrecked by storm,
and he virtually rebuilt her to the great satisfaction of the
owners.
Thence, with money in his pocket, young Delano went to Macao,
where he fell in with Commodore John McClure of the English Navy,
who was in command of an expedition setting out to explore a part
of the South Seas, including the Pelew Islands, New Guinea, New
Holland, and the Spice Islands. The Englishman liked this
resourceful Yankee seaman and did him the honor to say, recalls
Delano, “that he considered I should be a very useful man to him
as a seaman, an officer, or a shipbuilder; and if it was
agreeable to me to go on board the Panther with him, I should
receive the some pay and emoluments with his lieutenants and
astronomers.” A signal honor it was at a time when no love was
lost between British and American seafarers who had so recently
fought each other afloat.
And so Amasa Delano embarked as a lieutenant of the Bombay
Marine, to explore tropic harbors and goons until then unmapped
and to parley with dusky kings. Commodore McClure, diplomatic and
humane, had almost no trouble with the untutored islanders,
except on the coast of New Guinea, where the Panther was attacked
by a swarm of canoes and the surgeon was killed. It was a
spirited little affair, four-foot arrows pelting like hail across
the deck, a cannon hurling grapeshot from the taffrail, Amasa
Delano hit in the chest and pulling out the arrow to jump to his
duty again.
Only a few years earlier the mutineers of the Bounty had
established themselves on Pitcairn Island, and Delano was able to
compile the first complete narrative of this extraordinary
colony, which governed itself in the light of the primitive
Christian virtues. There was profound wisdom in the comment of
Amasa Delano: “While the present natural, simple, and
affectionate character prevails among these descendants of the
mutineers, they will be delightful to our minds, they will be
amiable and acceptable in the sight of God, and they will be
useful and happy among themselves. Let it be our fervent prayer
that neither canting and hypocritical emissaries from schools of
artificial theology on the one hand, nor sensual and licentious
crews and adventurers on the other, may ever enter the charming
village of Pitcairn to give disease to the minds or the bodies of
the unsuspecting inhabitants.”
Two years of this intensely romantic existence, and Delano
started homeward. But there was a chance of profit at Mauritius,
and there he bought a tremendous East Indiaman of fourteen
hundred tons as a joint venture with a Captain Stewart and put a
crew of a hundred and fifty men on board. She had been brought in
by a French privateer and Delano was moved to remark, with an
indignation which was much in advance of his times: “Privateering
is entirely at variance with the first principle of honorable
warfare . . . . This system of licensed robbery enables a wicked
and mercenary man to insult and injure even neutral friends on
the ocean; and when he meets an honest sailor who may have all
his earnings on board his ship but who carries an enemy’s flag,
he plunders him of every cent and leaves him the poor consolation
that it is done according to law . . . . When the Malay subjects
of Abba Thule cut down the cocoanut trees of an enemy, in the
spirit of private revenge, he asked them why they acted in
opposition to the principles on which they knew he always made
and conducted a war. They answered, and let the reason make us
humble, ’The English do so.’”
In his grand East Indiaman young Captain Delano traded on the
coast of India but soon came to grief. The enterprise had been
too large for him to swing with what cash and credit he could
muster, and the ship was sold from under him to pay her debts.
Again on the beach, with one solitary gold moidore in his purse,
he found a friendly American skipper who offered him a passage to
Philadelphia, which he accepted with the pious reflection that,
although his mind was wounded and mortified by the financial
disaster, his motives had been perfectly pure and honest. He
never saw his native land with so little pleasure as on this
return to it, he assures us, and the shore on which he would have
leaped with delight was covered with gloom and sadness.
Now what makes it so well worth while to sketch in brief outline
the careers of one and another of these bygone shipmasters is
that they accurately reflected the genius and the temper of their
generation. There was, in truth, no such word as failure in their
lexicon. It is this quality that appeals to us beyond all else.
Thrown on their beam ends, they were presently planning something
else, eager to shake dice with destiny and with courage unbroken.
It was so with Amasa Delano, who promptly went to work “with what
spirits I could revive within me. After a time they returned to
their former elasticity.”
He obtained a position as master builder in a shipyard, saved
some money, borrowed more, and with one of his brothers was soon
blithely building a vessel of two hundred tons for a voyage into
the Pacific and to the northwest coast after seals. They sailed
along Patagonia and found much to interest them, dodged in and
out of the ports of Chili and Peru, and incidentally recaptured a
Spanish ship which was in the hands of the slaves who formed her
cargo.
This was all in the day’s work and happened at the island of
Santa Maria, not far from Juan Fernandez, where Captain Delano’s
Perseverance found the high-pooped Tryal in a desperate state.
Spanish sailors who had survived the massacre were leaping
overboard or scrambling up to the mastheads while the African
savages capered on deck and flourished their weapons. Captain
Delano liked neither the Spaniard nor the slavetrade, but it was
his duty to help fellow seamen in distress; so he cleared for
action and ordered two boats away to attend to the matter. The
chief mate, Rufus Low, was in charge, and a gallant sailor he
showed himself. They had to climb the high sides of the Tryal and
carry, in hand-to-hand conflict, the barricades of water-casks
and bales of matting which the slaves had built across the deck.
There was no hanging back, and even a mite of a midshipman from
Boston pranced into it with his dirk. The negroes were well armed
and fought ferociously. The mate was seriously wounded, four
seamen were stabbed, the Spanish first mate had two musket balls
in him, and a passenger was killed in the fray.
Having driven the slaves below and battened them down, the
American party returned next morning to put the irons on them. A
horrid sight confronted them. Thirsting for vengeance, the
Spanish sailors had spread-eagled several of the negroes to
ringbolts in the deck and were shaving the living flesh from them
with razor-edged boarding lances. Captain Delano thereupon
disarmed these brutes and locked them up in their turn, taking
possession of the ship until he could restore order. The sequel
was that he received the august thanks of the Viceroy of Chili
and a gold medal from His Catholic Majesty. As was the custom,
the guilty slaves, poor wretches, were condemned to be dragged to
the gibbet at the tails of mules, to be hanged, their bodies
burned, and their heads stuck upon poles in the plaza.
It was while in this Chilean port of Talcahuano that Amasa Delano
heard the tale of the British whaler which had sailed just before
his arrival. He tells it so well that I am tempted to quote it as
a generous tribute to a sailor of a rival race. After all, they
were sprung from a common stock and blood was thicker than water.
Besides, it is the sort of yarn that ought to be dragged to the
light of day from its musty burial between the covers of Delano’s
rare and ancient “Voyages and Travels.”
The whaler Betsy, it seems, went in and anchored under the guns
of the forts to seek provisions and make repairs. The captain
went ashore to interview the officials, leaving word that no
Spaniards should be allowed to come aboard because of the bad
feeling against the English. Three or four large boats filled
with troops presently veered alongside and were ordered to keep
clear. This command was resented, and the troops opened fire,
followed by the forts. Now for the deed of a man with his two
feet under him.
“The chief officer of the Betsy whose name was Hudson, a man of
extraordinary bravery, cut his cable and his ship swung the wrong
way, with her head in shore, passing close to several Spanish
ships which, with every vessel in the harbor that could bring a
gun to bear, together with three hundred soldiers in boats and on
ship’s decks and the two batteries, all kept up a constant fire
on him. The wind was light, nearly a calm. The shot flew so thick
that it was difficult for him to make sail, some part of the
rigging being cut away every minute.
“He kept his men at the guns, and when the ship swung her
broadside so as to bear upon any of the Spanish ships, he kept up
a fire at them. In this situation the brave fellow continued to
lie for three-quarters of an hour before he got his topsails
sheeted home. The action continued in this manner for near an
hour and a half. He succeeded in getting the ship to sea,
however, in defiance of all the force that could be brought
against him. The ship was very much cut to pieces in sails,
rigging, and hull; and a considerable number of men were killed
and wounded on board.
“Hudson kept flying from one part of the deck to the other during
the whole time of action, encouraging and threatening the men as
occasion required. He kept a musket in his hand most part of the
time, firing when he could find the leisure. Some of the men came
aft and begged him to give up the ship, telling him they should
all be killed--that the carpenter had all one side of him shot
away--that one man was cut in halves with a double-headed shot as
he was going aloft to loose the foretopsail and the body had
fallen on deck in two separate parts--that such a man was killed
at his duty on the forecastle, and one more had been killed in
the maintop--that Sam, Jim, Jack, and Tom were wounded and that
they would do nothing more towards getting the ship out of the
harbor.
“His reply to them was, ’then you shall be sure to die, for if
they do not kill you I will, so sure as you persist in any such
cowardly resolution,’ saying at the same time, ’OUT SHE GOES, OR
DOWN SHE GOES.’”
By this resolute and determined conduct he kept the men to their
duty and succeeded in accomplishing one of the most daring
enterprises perhaps ever attempted.
An immortal phrase, this simple dictum of first mate Hudson of
the Betsy, “Out she goes, or down she goes,” and not unworthy of
being mentioned in the same breath with Farragut’s “Damn the
torpedoes.”
Joined by his brother Samuel in the schooner Pilgrim, which was
used as a tender in the sealing trade, Amasa Delano frequented
unfamiliar beaches until he had taken his toll of skins and was
ready to bear away for Canton to sell them. There were many
Yankee ships after seals in those early days, enduring more peril
and privation than the whalemen, roving over the South Pacific
among the rock-bound islands unknown to the merchant navigator.
The men sailed wholly on shares, a seaman receiving one per cent
of the catch and the captain ten per cent, and they slaughtered
the seal by the million, driving them from the most favored
haunts within a few years. For instance, American ships first
visited Mas a Fuera in 1797, and Captain Delano estimated that
during the seven years following three million skins were taken
to China from this island alone. He found as many as fourteen
vessels there at one time, and he himself carried away one
hundred thousand skins. It was a gold mine for profit while it
lasted.
There were three Delano brothers afloat in two vessels, and of
their wanderings Amasa set down this epitome: “Almost the whole
of our connections who were left behind had need of our
assistance, and to look forward it was no more than a reasonable
calculation to make that our absence would not be less than three
years . . . together with the extraordinary uncertainty of the
issue of the voyage, as we had nothing but our hands to depend
upon to obtain a cargo which was only to be done through storms,
dangers, and breakers, and taken from barren rocks in distant
regions. But after a voyage of four years for one vessel and five
for the other, we were all permitted to return safe home to our
friends and not quite empty-handed. We had built both of the
vessels we were in and navigated them two and three times around
the globe.” Each one of the brothers had been a master builder
and rigger and a navigator of ships in every part of the world.
By far the most important voyage undertaken by American
merchantmen during the decade of brilliant achievement following
the Revolution was that of Captain Robert Gray in the Columbia,
which was the first ship to visit and explore the northwest coast
and to lead the way for such adventurers as Richard Cleveland and
Amasa Delano. On his second voyage in 1792, Captain Gray
discovered the great river he christened Columbia and so gave to
the United States its valid title to that vast territory which
Lewis and Clark were to find after toiling over the mountains
thirteen years later.
Continue...

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
