


    “There’s no place like Home."–Old English Song.
It may well be doubted which is more delightful,–to start for a holiday
which has been fully earned, or to return home from one which has been
thoroughly enjoyed; to find oneself, with renewed vigor, with a fresh
store of memories and ideas, back once more by one’s own fireside, with
one’s family, friends, and books.
“To sit at home,” says Leigh Hunt, “with an old folio (?) book of romantic
yet credible voyages and travels to read, an old bearded traveller for its
hero, a fireside in an old country house to read it by, curtains drawn,
and just wind enough stirring out of doors to make an accompaniment to the
billows or forests we are reading of–this surely is one of the perfect
moments of existence.”
It is no doubt a great privilege to visit foreign countries; to travel say
in Mexico or Peru, or to cruise among the Pacific Islands; but in some
respects the narratives of early travellers, the histories of Prescott or
the voyages of Captain Cook, are even more interesting; describing to us,
as they do, a state of society which was then so unlike ours, but which
has now been much changed and Europeanized.
Thus we may make our daily travels interesting, even though, like those of
the Vicar of Wakefield, all our adventures are by our own fireside, and
all our migrations from one room to another.
Moreover, even if the beauties of home are humble, they are still
infinite, and a man “may lie in his bed, like Pompey and his sons, in all
quarters of the earth.” [1]
It is, then, wise to “cultivate a talent very fortunate for a man of my
disposition, that of travelling in my easy chair; of transporting myself,
without stirring from my parlor, to distant places and to absent friends;
of drawing scenes in my mind’s eye; and of peopling them with the groups
of fancy, or the society of remembrance.” [2]
We may indeed secure for ourselves endless variety without leaving our own
firesides.
In the first place, the succession of seasons multiplies every home. How
different is the view from our windows as we look on the tender green of
spring, the rich foliage of summer, the glorious tints of autumn, or the
delicate tracery of winter.
Our climate is so happy, that even in the worst months of the year, “calm
mornings of sunshine visit us at times, appearing like glimpses of
departed spring amid the wilderness of wet and windy days that lead to
winter. It is pleasant, when these interludes of silver light occur, to
ride into the woods and see how wonderful are all the colors of decay.
Overhead, the elms and chestnuts hang their wealth of golden leaves, while
the beeches darken into russet tones, and the wild cherry glows like
blood-red wine. In the hedges crimson haws and scarlet hips are wreathed
with hoary clematis or necklaces of coral briony-berries; the brambles
burn with many-colored flames; the dog-wood is bronzed to purple; and here
and there the spindle-wood puts forth its fruit, like knots of rosy buds,
on delicate frail twigs. Underneath lie fallen leaves, and the brown brake
rises to our knees as we thread the forest paths.” [3]
Nay, every day gives us a succession of glorious pictures in never-ending
variety. It is remarkable how few people seem to derive any pleasure from
the beauty of the sky. Gray, after describing a sunrise–how it began with
a slight whitening, just tinged with gold and blue, lit up all at once by
a little line of insufferable brightness which rapidly grew to half an
orb, and so to a whole one too glorious to be distinctly seen–adds, “I
wonder whether any one ever saw it before. I hardly believe it.” [4]
No doubt from the dawn of poetry, the splendors of the morning and evening
skies have delighted all those who have eyes to see. But we are especially
indebted to Ruskin for enabling us more vividly to realize these glorious
sky pictures. As he says, in language almost as brilliant as the sky
itself, the whole heaven, “from the zenith to the horizon, becomes one
molten, mantling sea of color and fire; every block bar turns into massy
gold, every ripple and wave into unsullied, shadowless crimson, and
purple, and scarlet, and colors for which there are no words in language,
and no ideas in the mind–things which can only be conceived while they
are visible; the intense hollow blue of the upper sky melting through it
all, showing here deep and pure, and lightness; there, modulated by the
filmy, formless body of the transparent vapor, till it is lost
imperceptibly in its crimson and gold.”
It is in some cases indeed “not color but conflagration,” and though the
tints are richer and more varied toward morning and at sunset, the
glorious kaleidoscope goes on all day long. Yet “it is a strange thing how
little in general people know about the sky. It is the part of creation in
which Nature has done more for the sake of pleasing man, more for the sole
and evident purpose of talking to him, and teaching him, than in any other
of her works, and it is just the part in which we least attend to her.
There are not many of her other works in which some more material or
essential purpose than the mere pleasing of man is not answered by every
part of their organization; but every essential purpose of the sky might,
so far as we know, be answer, if once in three days, or thereabouts, a
great, ugly, black rain-cloud were brought up over the blue, and
everything well watered, and so all left blue again till next time, with
perhaps a film of morning and evening mist for dew. And instead of this,
there is not a moment of any day of our lives when Nature is not producing
scene after scene, picture after picture, glory after glory, and working
still upon such exquisite and constant principles of the most perfect
beauty, that it is quite certain it is all done for us, and intended for
our perpetual pleasure.” [5]
Nor does the beauty end with the day. “It is nothing to sleep under the
canopy of heaven, where we have the globe of the earth for our place of
repose, and the glories of the heavens for our spectacle?” [6] For my part
I always regret the custom of shutting up our rooms in the evening, as
though there was nothing worth seeing outside. What, however, can be more
beautiful than to “look how the floor of heaven is thick inlaid with
patines of bright gold,” or to watch the moon journeying in calm and
silver glory through the night. And even if we do not feel that “the man
who has seen the rising moon break out of the clouds at midnight, has been
present like an Archangel at the creation of light and of the world,” [7]
still “the stars say something significant to all of us: and each man has
a whole hemisphere of them, if he will but look up, to counsel and
befriend him"; [8] for it is not so much, as Helps elsewhere observes, “in
guiding us over the seas of our little planet, but out of the dark waters
of our own perturbed minds, that we may make to ourselves the most of
their significance.” Indeed,
     “How beautiful is night!
    A dewy freshness fills the silent air;
  No mist obscures, nor cloud, nor speck, nor stain,
      Breaks the serene of heaven:
    In full-orbed glory yonder moon divine
    Rolls through the dark blue depths;
     Beneath her steady ray
     The desert circle spreads,
  Like the round ocean, girdled with the sky;
      How beautiful is night!” [9]
I have never wondered at those who worshipped the sun and moon.
On the other hand, when all outside is dark and cold; when perhaps
  “Outside fall the snowflakes lightly;
    Through the night loud raves the storm;
  In my room the fire glows brightly,
    And ’tis cosy, silent, warm.

  “Musing sit I on the settle
    By the firelight’s cheerful blaze,
  Listening to the busy kettle
    Humming long forgotten lays.” [10]
For after all the true pleasures of home are not without, but within; and
“the domestic man who loves no music so well as his own kitchen clock and
the airs which the logs sing to him as they burn on the hearth, has
solaces which others never dream of.” [11]
We love the ticking of the clock, and the flicker of the fire, like the
sound of the cawing of rooks, not so much for any beauty of their own as
for their associations.
It is a great truth that when we retire into ourselves we can call up what
memories we please.
  “How dear to this heart are the scenes of my childhood,
  When fond recollection recalls them to view.–
  The orchard, the meadow, the deep-tangled wildwood
  And every lov’d spot which my infancy knew.” [12]
It is not so much the
  “Fireside enjoyments,
   And all the comforts of the lowly roof,” [13]
but rather, according to the higher and better ideal of Keble,
  “Sweet is the smile of home; the mutual look,
     When hearts are of each other sure;
  Sweet all the joys that crowd the household nook,
     The haunt of all affections pure.”
In ancient times, not only among savage races, but even among the Greeks
themselves, there seems to have been but little family life. What a
contrast was the home life of the Greeks, as it seems to have been, to
that, for instance, described by Cowley–a home happy “in books and
gardens,” and above all, in a
  “Virtuous wife, where thou dost meet
  Both pleasures more refined and sweet;
  The fairest garden in her looks
  And in her mind the wisest books.”
No one who has ever loved mother or wife, sister or daughter, can read
without astonishment and pity St. Chrysostom’s description of woman as “a
necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desirable calamity, a domestic
peril, a deadly fascination, and a painted ill.”
In few respects has mankind made a greater advance than in the relations
of men and women. It is terrible to think how women suffer in savage life;
and even among the intellectual Greeks, with rare exceptions, they seem to
have been treated rather as housekeepers or playthings than as the Angels
who make a Heaven of home.
The Hindoo proverb that you should “never strike a wife, even with a
flower,” though a considerable advance, tells a melancholy tale of what
must previously have been.
In The Origin of Civilization I have given many cases showing how small
a part family affection plays in savage life. Here I will only mention one
case in illustration. The Algonquin (North America) language contained no
word for “to love,” so that when the missionaries translated the Bible
into it they were obliged to invent one. What a life, and what a language,
without love.
Yet in marriage even the rough passion of a savage may contrast favorably
with any cold calculation, which, like the enchanted hoard of the
Nibelungs, is almost sure to bring misfortune. In the Kalevala, the
Finnish epic, the divine smith, Ilmarinnen, forges a bride of gold and
silver for Wainamoinen, who was pleased at first to have so rich a wife,
but soon found her intolerably cold, for, in spite of fires and furs,
whenever he touched her she froze him.
Moreover, apart from mere coldness, how much we suffer from foolish
quarrels about trifles; from mere misunderstandings; from hasty words
thoughtlessly repeated, sometimes without the context or tone which would
have deprived them of any sting. How much would that charity which
“beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all
things,” effect to smooth away the sorrows of life and add to the
happiness of home. Home indeed may be a sure haven of repose from the
storms and perils of the world. But to secure this we must not be content
to pave it with good intentions, but must make it bright and cheerful.
If our life be one of toil and of suffering, if the world outside be cold
and dreary, what a pleasure to return to the sunshine of happy faces and
the warmth of hearts we love.
[1] Sir T. Browne.
[2] Mackenzie, The Lounger.
[3] J. A. Symonds.
[4] Gray’s Letters.
[5] Ruskin.
[6] Seneca.
[7] Emerson.
[8] Helps.
[9] Southey.
[10] Heine, trans. by E. A. Bowring.
[11] Emerson.
[12] Woodworth.
[13] Cowper.
Continue...

This complete e-text “The Pleasures of Life” by Sir John Lubbock belongs in the public domain.

Get “Pleasures of Life” from Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
THE PLEASURES OF LIFE (complete)By SIR JOHN LUBBOCK BARTAt Amazon
