


    “They seem to take away the sun from the world who withdraw friendship
    from life; for we have received nothing better from the Immortal Gods,
    nothing more delightful."–CICERO.
Most of those who have written in praise of books have thought they could
say nothing more conclusive than to compare them to friends.
“All men,” said Socrates, “have their different objects of
ambition–horses, dogs, money, honor, as the case may be; but for his own
part he would rather have a good friend than all these put together.” And
again, men know “the number of their other possessions, although they
might be very numerous, but of their friends, though but few, they were
not only ignorant of the number, but even when they attempted to reckon it
to such as asked them, they set aside again some that they had previously
counted among their friends; so little did they allow their friends to
occupy their thoughts. Yet in comparison with what possession, of all
others, would not a good friend appear far more valuable?”
“As to the value of other things,” says Cicero, “most men differ;
concerning friendship all have the same opinion. What can be more foolish
than, when men are possessed of great influence by their wealth, power,
and resources, to procure other things which are bought by money–horses,
slaves, rich apparel, costly vases–and not to procure friends, the most
valuable and fairest furniture of life?” And yet, he continues, “every man
can tell how many goats or sheep he possesses, but not how many friends."
In the choice, moreover, of a dog or of a horse, we exercise the greatest
care: we inquire into its pedigree, its training and character, and yet we
too often leave the selection of our friends, which is of infinitely
greater importance–by whom our whole life will be more or less influenced
either for good or evil–almost to chance.
It is no doubt true, as the Autocrat of the Breakfast Table says, that
all men are bores except when we want them. And Sir Thomas Browne quaintly
observes that “unthinking heads who have not learnt to be alone, are a
prison to themselves if they be not with others; whereas, on the contrary,
those whose thoughts are in a fair and hurry within, are sometimes fain to
retire into company to be out of the crowd of themselves.” Still I do not
quite understand Emerson’s idea that “men descend to meet.” In another
place, indeed, he qualifies the statement, and says, “Almost all people
descend to meet.” Even so I should venture to question it, especially
considering the context. “All association,” he adds, “must be a
compromise, and, what is worse, the very flower and aroma of the flower of
each of the beautiful natures disappears as they approach each other."
What a sad thought! Is it really so; need it be so? And if it were, would
friends be any real advantage? I should have thought that the influence of
friends was exactly the reverse: that the flower of a beautiful nature
would expand, and the colors grow brighter, when stimulated by the warmth
and sunshine of friendship.
It has been said that it is wise always to treat a friend, remembering
that he may become an enemy, and an enemy, remembering that he may become
a friend; and whatever may be thought of the first part of the adage,
there is certainly much wisdom in the latter. Many people seem to take
more pains and more pleasure in making enemies, than in making friends.
Plutarch, indeed, quotes with approbation the advice of Pythagoras “not to
shake hands with too many,” but as long as friends are well chosen, it is
true rather that
  “He who has a thousand friends,
    Has never a one to spare,
   And he who has one enemy,
    Will meet him everywhere,”
and unfortunately, while there are few great friends there is no little
enemy.
I guard myself, however, by saying again–As long as they are well chosen.
One is thrown in life with a great many people who, though not actively
bad, though they may not wilfully lead us astray, yet take no pains with
themselves, neglect their own minds, and direct the conversation to petty
puerilities or mere gossip; who do not seem to realize that conversation
may by a little effort be made most instructive and delightful, without
being in any way pedantic; or, on the other hand, may be allowed to drift
into a mere morass of muddy thought and weedy words. There is hardly
anyone from whom we may not learn much, if only they will trouble
themselves to tell us. Nay, even if they teach us nothing, they may help
us by the stimulus of intelligent questions, or the warmth of sympathy.
But if they do neither, then indeed their companionship, if companionship
it can be called, is mere waste of time, and of such we may well say, “I
do desire that we be better strangers.”
Much certainly of the happiness and purity of our lives depends on our
making a wise choice of our companions and friends. If our friends are
badly chosen they will inevitably drag us down; if well they will raise us
up. Yet many people seem to trust in this matter to the chapter of
accident. It is well and right, indeed, to be courteous and considerate to
every one with whom we are brought into contact, but to choose them as
real friends is another matter. Some seem to make a man a friend, or try
to do so, because he lives near, because he is in the same business,
travels on the same line of railway, or for some other trivial reason.
There cannot be a greater mistake. These are only, in the words of
Plutarch, “the idols and images of friendship.”
To be friendly with every one is another matter; we must remember that
there is no little enemy, and those who have ever really loved any one
will have some tenderness for all. There is indeed some good in most men.
“I have heard much,” says Mr. Nasmyth in his charming autobiography,
“about the ingratitude and selfishness of the world. It may have been my
good fortune, but I have never experienced either of these unfeeling
conditions.” Such also has been my own experience.
  “Men talk of unkind hearts, kind deeds
    With coldness still returning.
  Alas! the gratitude of men
    Has oftener left me mourning.”
I cannot, then, agree with Emerson that “we walk alone in the world.
Friends such as we desire are dreams and fables. But a sublime hope cheers
ever the faithful heart, that elsewhere in other regions of the universal
power souls are now acting, enduring, and daring, which can love us, and
which we can love.”
No doubt, much as worthy friends add to the happiness and value of life,
we must in the main depend on ourselves, and every one is his own best
friend or worst enemy.
Sad, indeed, is Bacon’s assertion that “there is little friendship in the
world, and least of all between equals, which was wont to be magnified.
That  that is, is between superior and inferior, whose fortunes may
comprehend the one to the other.” But this can hardly be taken as his
deliberate opinion, for he elsewhere says, “but we may go farther, and
affirm most truly, that it is a mere and miserable solitude to want true
friends, without which the world is but a wilderness.” Not only, he adds,
does friendship introduce “daylight in the understanding out of darkness
and confusion of thoughts;” it “maketh a fair day in the affections from
storm and tempests:” in consultation with a friend a man “tosseth his
thoughts more easily; he marshalleth them more orderly; he seeth how they
look when they are turned into words; finally, he waxeth wiser than
himself, and that more by an hour’s discourse than by a day’s
meditation.”... “But little do men perceive what solitude is, and how far
it extendeth, for a crowd is not company, and faces are but a gallery of
pictures, and talk but a tinkling cymbal where there is no love.”
With this last assertion I cannot altogether concur. Surely even strangers
may be most interesting! and many will agree with Dr. Johnson when,
describing a pleasant evening, he summed it up–"Sir, we had a good talk.”
Epictetus gives excellent advice when he dissuades from conversation on
the very subjects most commonly chosen, and advises that it should be on
“none of the common subjects–not about gladiators, nor horse-races, nor
about athletes, nor about eating or drinking, which are the usual
subjects; and especially not about men, as blaming them;” but when he
adds, “or praising them,” the injunction seems to me of doubtful value.
Surely Marcus Aurelius more wisely advises that “when thou wishest to
delight thyself, think of the virtues of those who live with thee; for
instance, the activity of one, and the modesty of another, and the
liberality of a third, and some other good quality of a fourth. For
nothing delights so much as the examples of the virtues, when they are
exhibited in the morals of those who live with us and present themselves
in abundance, as far as is possible. Wherefore we must keep them before
us.” Yet how often we know merely the sight of those we call our friends,
or the sound of their voices, but nothing whatever of their mind or soul.
We must, moreover, be as careful to keep friends as to make them. If every
one knew what one said of the other, Pascal assures us that “there would
not be four friends in the world.” This I hope and think is too strong,
but at any rate try to be one of the four. And when you have made a
friend, keep him. Hast thou a friend, says an Eastern proverb, “visit him
often, for thorns and brushwood obstruct the road which no one treads."
The affections should not be mere “tents of a night.”
Still less does Friendship confer any privilege to make ourselves
disagreeable. Some people never seem to appreciate their friends till they
have lost them. Anaxagoras described the Mausoleum as the ghost of wealth
turned into stone.
“But he who has once stood beside the grave to look back on the
companionship which has been for ever closed, feeling how impotent then
are the wild love and the keen sorrow, to give one instant’s pleasure to
the pulseless heart, or atone in the lowest measure to the departed spirit
for the hour of unkindness, will scarcely for the future incur that debt
to the heart which can only be discharged to the dust.” [1]
Death, indeed, cannot sever friendship. “Friends,” says Cicero, “though
absent, are still present; though in poverty they are rich; though weak,
yet in the enjoyment of health; and, what is still more difficult to
assert, though dead they are alive.” This seems a paradox, yet it there
not much truth in his explanation? “To me, indeed, Scipio still lives, and
will always live; for I love the virtue of that man, and that worth is not
yet extinguished.... Assuredly of all things that either fortune or time
has bestowed on me, I have none which I can compare with the friendship of
Scipio.”
If, then, we choose our friends for what they are, not for what they have,
and if we deserve so great a blessing, then they will be always with us,
preserved in absence, and even after death, in the “amber of memory.”
[1] Ruskin.
Continue...

This complete e-text “The Pleasures of Life” by Sir John Lubbock belongs in the public domain.

Get “Pleasures of Life” from Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
THE PLEASURES OF LIFE (complete)By SIR JOHN LUBBOCK BARTAt Amazon
