


We have in life many troubles, and troubles are of many kinds. Some
sorrows, alas, are real enough, especially those we bring on ourselves,
but others, and by no means the least numerous, are mere ghosts of
troubles: if we face them boldly, we find that they have no substance or
reality, but are mere creations of our own morbid imagination, and that it
is as true now as in the time of David that “Man disquieteth himself in a
vain shadow.”
Some, indeed, of our troubles are evils, but not real; while others are
real, but not evils.
“And yet, into how unfathomable a gulf the mind rushes when the troubles
of this world agitate it. If it then forget its own light, which is
eternal joy, and rush into the outer darkness, which are the cares of this
world, as the mind now does, it knows nothing else but lamentations.” [1]
“Athens,” said Epictetus, “is a good place,–but happiness is much better;
to be free from passions, free from disturbance.”
We should endeavor to maintain ourselves in
               “That blessed mood
  In which the burden of the mystery,
  In which the heavy and the weary weight,
  Of all this unintelligible world
  Is lightened.” [2]
So shall we fear “neither the exile of Aristides, nor the prison of
Anaxagoras, nor the poverty of Socrates, nor the condemnation of Phocion,
but think virtue worthy our love even under such trials.” [3] We should
then be, to a great extent, independent of external circumstances, for
  “Stone walls do not a prison make,
    Nor iron bars a cage,
  Minds innocent and quiet take
    That for a hermitage.

  “If I have freedom in my love,
    And in my soul am free;
  Angels alone that soar above
    Enjoy such liberty.” [4]
Happiness indeed depends much more on what is within than without us. When
Hamlet says the world is “a goodly prison; in which there are many
confines, wards, and dungeons; Denmark being one of the worst,” and
Rosencrantz differs from him, he rejoins wisely, “Why then, ’tis none to
you: for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to
me it is a prison.” “All is opinion,” said Marcus Aurelius. “That which
does not make a man worse, how can it make his life worse? But death
certainly, and life, honor and dishonor, pain and pleasure, all these
things happen equally to good men and bad, being things which make us
neither better nor worse.”
“The greatest evils,” says Jeremy Taylor, “are from within us; and from
ourselves also we must look for our greatest good.”
“The mind,” says Milton,
             “is its own place, and in itself
  Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.”
Milton indeed in his blindness saw more beautiful visions, and Beethoven
in his deafness heard more heavenly music, than most of us can ever hope
to enjoy.
We are all apt, when we know not what may happen, to fear the worst. When
we know the full extent of any danger, it is half over. Hence, we dread
ghosts more than robbers, not only without reason, but against reason; for
even if ghosts existed, how could they hurt us? and in ghost stories, few,
even those who say that they have seen a ghost, ever profess or pretend to
have felt one.
Milton, in his description of death, dwells on this characteristic of
obscurity:
                                 “The other shape,
  If shape it might be call’d that shape had none
  Distinguishable, in member, joint, or limb;
  Or substance might be call’d that shadow seem’d,
  For each seem’d either; black he stood as night;
  Fierce as ten furies; terrible as hell;
  And shook a deadly dart. What seem’d his head
  The likeness of a kingly crown had on.”
The effect of darkness and night in enhancing terrors is dwelt on in one
of the sublimest passages in Job–
  “In thoughts from the visions of the night,
  When deep sleep falleth on men,
  Fear came upon me, and trembling,
  Which made all my bones to shake.
  Then a spirit passed before my face;
  The hair of my flesh stood up.
  It stood still, an image was before mine eyes.
  There was silence; and I heard a voice saying
  Shall mortal man be more just than God?”
Thus was the terror turned into a lesson of comfort and of mercy.
We often magnify troubles and difficulties, and look at them till they
seem much greater than they really are.
“Dangers are no more light, if they once seem light; and more dangers have
deceived men than forced them: nay, it were better to meet some dangers
half way, though they come nothing near, than to keep too long a watch
upon their approaches; for if a man watch too long, it is odds he will
fall asleep.” [5]
Foresight is very wise, but foresorrow is very foolish; and castles are at
any rate better than dungeons, in the air.
Some of our troubles, no doubt, are real enough, but yet are not evils.
It happens, unfortunately too often, that by some false step, intentional
or unintentional, we have missed the right road, and gone wrong. Can we
then retrace our steps? can we recover what is lost? This may be done. It
is too gloomy a view to affirm that
  “A word too much, or a kiss too long,
  And the world is never the same again.”
There are two noble sayings of Socrates, that to do evil is more to be
avoided than to suffer it; and that when a man has done evil, it is better
for him to be punished than to be unpunished.
We generally speak of selfishness as a fault, and as if it interfered with
the general happiness. But this is not altogether correct.
The pity is that so many people are foolishly selfish: that they pursue a
course of action which neither makes themselves nor any one else happy.
“Every man,” says Goethe, “ought to begin with himself, and make his own
happiness first, from which the happiness of the whole world would at last
unquestionably follow.” It is easy to say that this is too broadly stated,
and of course exceptions might be pointed out: but if every one would
avoid excess, and take care of his own health; would keep himself strong
and cheerful; would make his home happy, and give no cause for the petty
vexations which embitter domestic life; would attend to his own affairs
and keep himself sober and solvent; would, in the words of the Chinese
proverb, “sweep away the snow from before his own door, and never mind the
frost upon his neighbor’s tiles;” though it might not be the noblest
course of conduct; still, how well it would be for their family,
relations, and friends. But, unfortunately,
  “Look round the habitable world, how few
  Know their own good, or, knowing it, pursue.” [6]
It would be a great thing if people could be brought to realize that they
can never add to the sum of their happiness by doing wrong. In the case of
children, indeed, we recognize this; we perceive that a spoilt child is
not a happy one; that it would have been far better for him to have been
punished at first and thus saved from greater suffering in after life.
It is a beautiful idea that every man has with him a Guardian Angel; and
it is true too: for Conscience is ever on the watch, ever ready to warn us
of danger.
We often feel disposed to complain, and yet it is most ungrateful:
                          “For who would lose,
  Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
  Those thoughts that wander through Eternity;
  To perish rather, swallowed up, and lost
  In the wide womb of uncreated thought.” [7]
But perhaps it will be said that we are sent here in preparation for
another and a better world. Well, then, why should we complain of what is
but a preparation for future happiness?
We ought to
  “Count each affliction, whether light or grave,
    God’s messenger sent down to thee; do thou
    With courtesy receive him; rise and bow;
  And, ere his shadow pass thy threshold, crave
  Permission first his heavenly feet to lave;
    Then lay before him all thou hast; allow
    No cloud of passion to usurp thy brow,
  Or mar thy hospitality; no wave
  Of mortal tumult to obliterate
    The soul’s marmoreal calmness: Grief shall be
  Like joy, majestic, equable, sedate;
    Confirming, cleansing, raising, making free;
  Strong to consume small troubles; to commend
  Great thoughts, grave thoughts, thoughts lasting to the end.” [8]
Some persons are like the waters of Siloam, and require to be troubled
before they can exercise their virtue.
“We shall get more contentedness,” says Plutarch, “from the presence of
all these blessings if we fancy them as absent, and remember from time to
time how people when ill yearn for health, and people in war for peace,
and strangers and unknown in a great city for reputation and friends, and
how painful it is to be deprived of all these when one has once had them.
For then each of these blessings will not appear to us only great and
valuable when it is lost, and of no value when we have it.... And yet it
makes much for contentedness of mind to look for the most part at home and
to our own condition; or if not, to look at the case of people worse off
than ourselves, and not, as people do, to compare ourselves with those who
are better off.... But you will find others, Chians, or Galatians, or
Bithynians, not content with the share of glory or power they have among
their fellow-citizens, but weeping because they do not wear senators’
shoes; or, if they have them, that they cannot be praetors of Rome; or if
they get that office, that they are not consuls; or if they are consuls,
that they are only proclaimed second and not first.... Whenever, then, you
admire any one carried by in his litter as a greater man than yourself,
lower your eyes and look at those that bear the litter.” And again, “I am
very taken with Diogenes’ remark to a stranger at Lacedaemon, who was
dressing with much display for a feast, ’Does not a good man consider
every day a feast?’ ... Seeing then that life is the most complete
initiation into all these things, it ought to be full of ease of mind and
joy; and if properly understood, would enable us to acquiesce in the
present without repining, to remember the past with thankfulness, and to
meet the future hopefully and cheerfully without fear of suspicion.”
[1] King Alfred’s translations of the Consolations of Boethius.
[2] Wordsworth.
[3] Plutarch.
[4] Lovelace.
[5] Bacon.
[6] Dryden.
[7] Milton.
[8] Aubrey de Vere.
Continue...

This complete e-text “The Pleasures of Life” by Sir John Lubbock belongs in the public domain.

Get “Pleasures of Life” from Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
THE PLEASURES OF LIFE (complete)By SIR JOHN LUBBOCK BARTAt Amazon
