


A lecture which I delivered three years ago at the Working Men’s College,
and which forms the fourth chapter of this book, has given rise to a good
deal of discussion. The Pall Mall Gazette took up the subject and issued
a circular to many of those best qualified to express an opinion. This
elicited many interesting replies, and some other lists of books were
drawn up. When my book was translated, a similar discussion took place in
Germany. The result has been very gratifying, and after carefully
considering the suggestions which have been made, I see no reason for any
material change in the first list. I had not presumed to form a list of my
own, nor did I profess to give my own favorites. My attempt was to give
those most generally recommended by previous writers on the subject. In
the various criticisms on my list, while large additions, amounting to
several hundred works in all, have been proposed, very few omissions have
been suggested. As regards those works with reference to which some doubts
have been expressed–namely, the few Oriental books, Wake’s Apostolic
Fathers etc.–I may observe that I drew up the list, not as that of the
hundred best books, but, which is very different, of those which have been
most frequently recommended as best worth reading.
For instance as regards the Sheking and the Analects of Confucius, I
must humbly confess that I do not greatly admire either; but I recommended
them because they are held in the most profound veneration by the Chinese
race, containing 400,000,000 of our fellow-men. I may add that both works
are quite short.
The Ramayana and Maha Bharata (as epitomized by Wheeler) and St.
Hilaire’s Bouddha are not only very interesting in themselves, but very
important in reference to our great oriental Empire.
The authentic writings of the Apostolic Fathers are very short, being
indeed comprised in one small volume, and as the only works (which have
come down to us) of those who lived with and knew the Apostles, they are
certainly well worth reading.
I have been surprised at the great divergence of opinion which has been
expressed. Nine lists of some length have been published. These lists
contain some three hundred works not mentioned by me (without, however,
any corresponding omissions), and yet there is not one single book which
occurs in every list, or even in half of them, and only about half a dozen
which appear in more than one of the nine.
If these authorities, or even a majority of them, had concurred in their
recommendations, I would have availed myself of them; but as they differ
so greatly I will allow my list to remain almost as I first proposed it. I
have, however, added Kalidasa’s Sakuntala or The Lost Ring, and
Schiller’s William Tell, omitting, in consequence, Lucretius and Miss
Austen: Lucretius because though his work is most remarkable, it is
perhaps less generally suitable than most of the others in the list; and
Miss Austen because English novelists were somewhat over-represented.
HIGH ELMS,
DOWN, KENT, August 1890.
Continue...

This complete e-text “The Pleasures of Life” by Sir John Lubbock belongs in the public domain.

Get “Pleasures of Life” from Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
THE PLEASURES OF LIFE (complete)By SIR JOHN LUBBOCK BARTAt Amazon
