


    “All round the room my silent servants wait
    My friends in every season, bright and dim,
        Angels and Seraphim
    Come down and murmur to me, sweet and low,
    And spirits of the skies all come and go
        Early and Late.”
    PROCTOR.
And yet too often they wait in vain. One reason for this is, I think, that
people are overwhelmed by the crowd of books offered to them.
In old days books were rare and dear. Now on the contrary, it may be said
with greater truth than ever that
  “Words are things, and a small drop of ink,
  Falling like dew upon a thought, produces
  That which makes thousands, perhaps millions, think.”
Our ancestors had a difficulty in procuring them. Our difficulty now is
what to select. We must be careful what we read, and not, like the sailors
of Ulysses, take bags of wind for sacks of treasure–not only lest we
should even now fall into the error of the Greeks, and suppose that
language and definitions can be instruments of investigation as well as of
thought, but lest, as too often happens, we should waste time over trash.
There are many books to which one may apply, in the sarcastic sense, the
ambiguous remark said to have been made to an unfortunate author, “I will
lose no time in reading your book.”
There are, indeed, books and books, and there are books which, as Lamb
said, are not books at all. It is wonderful how much innocent happiness we
thoughtlessly throw away. An Eastern proverb says that calamities sent by
heaven may be avoided, but from those we bring on ourselves there is no
escape.
Many, I believe, are deterred from attempting what are called stiff books
for fear they should not understand them; but there are few who need
complain of the narrowness of their minds, if only they would do their
best with them.
In reading, however, it is most important to select subjects in which one
is interested. I remember years ago consulting Mr. Darwin as to the
selection of a course of study. He asked me what interested me most, and
advised me to choose that subject. This, indeed, applies to the work of
life generally.
I am sometimes disposed to think that the readers of the next generation
will be, not our lawyers and doctors, shopkeepers and manufacturers, but
the laborers and mechanics. Does not this seem natural? The former work
mainly with their head; when their daily duties are over the brain is
often exhausted, and of their leisure time much must be devoted to air and
exercise. The laborer and mechanic, on the contrary, besides working often
for much shorter hours, have in their work-time taken sufficient bodily
exercise, and could therefore give any leisure they might have to reading
and study. They have not done so as yet, it is true; but this has been for
obvious reasons. Now, however, in the first place, they receive an
excellent education in elementary schools, and in the second have more
easy access to the best books.
Ruskin has observed that he does not wonder at what men suffer, but he
often wonders at what they lose. We suffer much, no doubt, from the faults
of others, but we lose much more by our own ignorance.
“If,” says Sir John Herschel, “I were to pray for a taste which should
stand me in stead under every variety of circumstances, and be a source of
happiness and cheerfulness to me through life, and a shield against its
ills, however things might go amiss and the world frown upon me, it would
be a taste for reading. I speak of it of course only as a worldly
advantage, and not in the slightest degree as superseding or derogating
from the higher office and surer and stronger panoply of religious
principles–but as a taste, and instrument, and a mode of pleasurable
gratification. Give a man this taste, and the means of gratifying it, and
you can hardly fail of making a happy man, unless, indeed, you put into
his hands a most perverse selection of books.”
It is one thing to own a library; it is quite another to use it wisely. I
have often been astonished how little care people devote to the selection
of what they read. Books, we know, are almost innumerable; our hours for
reading are, alas! very few. And yet many people read almost by hazard.
They will take any book they chance to find in a room at a friend’s house;
they will buy a novel at a railway-stall if it has an attractive title;
indeed, I believe in some cases even the binding affects their choice. The
selection is, no doubt, far from easy. I have often wished some one would
recommend a list of a hundred good books. If we had such lists drawn up by
a few good guides they would be most useful. I have indeed sometimes heard
it said that in reading every one must choose for himself, but this
reminds me of the recommendation not to go into the water till you can
swim.
In the absence of such lists I have picked out the books most frequently
mentioned with approval by those who have referred directly or indirectly
to the pleasure of reading, and have ventured to include some which,
though less frequently mentioned, are especial favorites of my own. Every
one who looks at the list will wish to suggest other books, as indeed I
should myself, but in that case the number would soon run up. [1]
I have abstained, for obvious reasons, from mentioning works by living
authors, though from many of them–Tennyson, Ruskin, and others–I have
myself derived the keenest enjoyment; and I have omitted works on science,
with one or two exceptions, because the subject is so progressive.
I feel that the attempt is over bold, and I must beg for indulgence, while
hoping for criticism; indeed one object which I have had in view is to
stimulate others more competent far than I am to give us the advantage of
their opinions.
Moreover, I must repeat that I suggest these works rather as those which,
as far as I have seen, have been most frequently recommended, than as
suggestions of my own, though I have slipped in a few of my own special
favorites.
In any such selection much weight should, I think, be attached to the
general verdict of mankind. There is a “struggle for existence” and a
“survival of the fittest” among books, as well as among animals and
plants. As Alonzo of Aragon said, “Age is a recommendation in four
things–old wood to burn, old wine to drink, old friends to trust,
and old books to read.” Still, this can not be accepted without important
qualifications. The most recent books of history and science contain or
ought to contain, the most accurate information and the most trustworthy
conclusions. Moreover, while the books of other races and times have an
interest from their very distance, it must be admitted that many will
still more enjoy, and feel more at home with, those of our own century and
people.
Yet the oldest books of the world are remarkable and interesting on
account of their very age; and the works which have influenced the
opinions, or charmed the leisure hours, of millions of men in distant
times and far-away regions are well worth reading on that very account,
even if to us they seem scarcely to deserve their reputation. It is true
that to many, such works are accessible only in translations; but
translations, though they can never perhaps do justice to the original,
may yet be admirable in themselves. The Bible itself, which must stand
first in the list, is a conclusive case.
At the head of all non-Christian moralists, I must place the
Enchiridion of Epictetus, certainly one of the noblest books in the
whole of literature; it has, moreover, been admirably translated. With
Epictetus, [2] I think must come Marcus Aurelius. The Analects of
Confucius will, I believe, prove disappointing to most English readers,
but the effect it has produced on the most numerous race of men
constitutes in itself a peculiar interest. The Ethics of Aristotle,
perhaps, appear to some disadvantage from the very fact that they have so
profoundly influenced our views of morality. The Koran, like the
Analects of Confucius, will to most of us derive its principal interest
from the effect it has exercised, and still exercises, on so many millions
of our fellow-men. I doubt whether in any other respect it will seem to
repay perusal, and to most persons probably certain extracts, not too
numerous, would appear sufficient.
The writings of the Apostolic Fathers have been collected in one volume by
Wake. It is but a small one, and though I must humbly confess that I was
disappointed, they are perhaps all the more curious from the contrast they
afford to those of the Apostles themselves. Of the later Fathers I have
included only the Confessions of St. Augustine, which Dr. Pusey selected
for the commencement of the Library of the Fathers, and which, as he
observes, has “been translated again and again into almost every European
language, and in all loved;” though Luther was of opinion that St.
Augustine “wrote nothing to the purpose concerning faith.” But then Luther
was no great admirer of the Father. St. Jerome, he says, “writes, alas!
very coldly;” Chrysostom “digresses from the chief points;” St. Jerome is
“very poor;” and in fact, he says, “the more I read the books of the
Fathers the more I find myself offended;” while Renan, in his interesting
autobiography, compared theology to a Gothic Cathedral, “elle a la
grandeur, les vides immenses, et le peu de solidite.”
Among other devotional works most frequently recommended are Thomas a
Kempis’ Imitation of Christ, Pascal’s Pensees, Spinoza’s Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus, Butler’s Analogy of Religion, Jeremy Taylor’s
Holy Living and Dying, Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress, and last, not
least, Keble’s beautiful Christian Year.
Aristotle and Plato again stand at the head of another class. The
Politics of Aristotle, and Plato’s Dialogues, if not the whole, at any
rate the Phaedo, the Apology, and the Republic, will be of course
read by all who wish to know anything of the history of human thought,
though I am heretical enough to doubt whether the latter repays the minute
and laborious study often devoted to it.
Aristotle being the father, if not the creator, of the modern scientific
method, it has followed naturally–indeed, almost inevitably–that his
principles have become part of our very intellectual being, so that they
seem now almost self-evident, while his actual observations, though very
remarkable–as, for instance, when he observes that bees on one journey
confine themselves to one kind of flower–still have been in many cases
superseded by others, carried on under more favorable conditions. We must
not be ungrateful to the great master, because his lessons have taught us
how to advance.
Plato, on the other hand, I say so with all respect, seems to me in some
cases to play on words: his arguments are very able, very philosophical,
often very noble; but not always conclusive; in a language differently
constructed they might sometimes tell in exactly the opposite sense. If
this method has proved less fruitful, if in metaphysics we have made but
little advance, that very fact in one point of view leaves the
Dialogues of Socrates as instructive now as ever they were; while the
problems with which they deal will always rouse our interest, as the calm
and lofty spirit which inspires them must command our admiration. Of the
Apology and the Phaedo especially it would be impossible to speak too
gratefully.
I would also mention Demosthenes’ De Corona, which Lord Brougham
pronounced the greatest oration of the greatest of orators; Lucretius,
Plutarch’s Lives, Horace, and at least the De Officiis, De Amicitia,
and De Senectute of Cicero.
The great epics of the world have always constituted one of the most
popular branches of literature. Yet how few, comparatively, ever read
Homer or Virgil after leaving school.
The Nibelungenlied, our great Anglo-Saxon epic, is perhaps too much
neglected, no doubt on account of its painful character. Brunhild and
Kriemhild, indeed, are far from perfect, but we meet with few such “live"
women in Greek or Roman literature. Nor must I omit to mention Sir T.
Malory’s Morte d’Arthur, though I confess I do so mainly in deference to
the judgment of others.
Among the Greek tragedians I include Aeschylus, if not all his works, at
any rate Prometheus, perhaps the sublimest poem in Greek literature, and
the Trilogy (Mr. Symonds in his Greek Poets speaks of the “unrivalled
majesty” of the Agamemnon, and Mark Pattison considered it “the grandest
work of creative genius in the whole range of literature”); or, as Sir M.
E. Grant Duff recommends, the Persae; Sophocles (Oedipus Tyrannus),
Euripides (Medea), and Aristophanes (The Knights and Clouds);
unfortunately, as Schlegel says, probably even the greatest scholar does
not understand half his jokes; and I think most modern readers will prefer
our modern poets.
I should like, moreover, to say a word for Eastern poetry, such as
portions of the Maha Bharata and Ramayana (too long probably to be
read through, but of which Talboys Wheeler has given a most interesting
epitome in the first two volumes of his History of India); the
Shah-nameh, the work of the great Persian poet Firdusi; Kalidasa’s
Sakuntala, and the Sheking, the classical collection of ancient Chinese
odes. Many I know, will think I ought to have included Omar Khayyam.
In history we are beginning to feel that the vices and vicissitudes of
kings and queens, the dates of battles and wars, are far less important
than the development of human thought, the progress of art, of science,
and of law, and the subject is on that very account even more interesting
than ever. I will, however, only mention, and that rather from a literary
than a historical point of view, Herodotus, Xenophon (the Anabasis),
Thucydides, and Tacitus (Germania); and of modern historians, Gibbon’s
Decline and Fall ("the splendid bridge from the old world to the new”),
Hume’s History of England, Carlyle’s French Revolution, Grote’s
History of Greece, and Green’s Short History of the English People.
Science is so rapidly progressive that, though to many minds it is the
most fruitful and interesting subject of all, I cannot here rest on that
agreement which, rather than my own opinion, I take as the basis of my
list. I will therefore only mention Bacon’s Novum Organum, Mill’s
Logic, and Darwin’s Origin of Species; in Political Economy, which
some of our rulers do not now sufficiently value, Mill, and parts of
Smith’s Wealth of Nations, for probably those who do not intend to make
a special study of political economy would scarcely read the whole.
Among voyages and travels, perhaps those most frequently suggested are
Cook’s Voyages, Humboldt’s Travels, and Darwin’s Naturalist’s
Journal; though I confess I should like to have added many more.
Mr. Bright not long ago specially recommended the less known American
poets, but he probably assumed that every one would have read Shakespeare,
Milton (Paradise Lost, Lycidas, Comus and minor poems), Chaucer,
Dante, Spencer, Dryden, Scott, Wordsworth, Pope, Byron, and others, before
embarking on more doubtful adventures.
Among other books most frequently recommended are Goldsmith’s Vicar of
Wakefield, Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels, Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe, The
Arabian Nights, Don Quixote, Boswell’s Life of Johnson, White’s
Natural History of Selborne, Burke’s Select Works (Payne), the Essays of
Bacon, Addison, Hume, Montaigne, Macaulay, and Emerson, Carlyle’s Past
and Present, Smiles’ Self-Help, and Goethe’s Faust and
Autobiography.
Nor can one go wrong in recommending Berkeley’s Human Knowledge,
Descartes’ Discours sur la Methode, Locke’s Conduct of the
Understanding, Lewes’ History of Philosophy; while, in order to keep
within the number one hundred, I can only mention Moliere and Sheridan
among dramatists. Macaulay considered Marivaux’s La Vie de Marianne the
best novel in any language, but my number is so nearly complete that I
must content myself with English: and will suggest Thackeray (Vanity
Fair and Pendennis), Dickens (Pickwick and David Copperfield), G.
Eliot (Adam Bede or The Mill on the Floss), Kingsley (Westward Ho!),
Lytton (Last Days of Pompeii), and last, not least, those of Scott,
which indeed constitute a library in themselves, but which I must ask, in
return for my trouble, to be allowed, as a special favor, to count as one.
To any lover of books the very mention of these names brings back a crowd
of delicious memories, grateful recollections of peaceful home hours,
after the labors and anxieties of the day. How thankful we ought to be for
these inestimable blessings, for this numberless host of friends who never
weary, betray, or forsake us!
Works by Living Authors are omitted.
[1] Several longer lists have been given; for instance, by Comte,
Catechism, of Positive Philosophy; Pycroft, Course of English Reading;
Baldwin, The Book Lover; Perkins, The Best Reading; and by Mr.
Ireland, Books for General Readers.
[2] It is much to be desired that some one would publish a selection from
the works of Seneca.
Continue...

This complete e-text “The Pleasures of Life” by Sir John Lubbock belongs in the public domain.

Get “Pleasures of Life” from Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
THE PLEASURES OF LIFE (complete)By SIR JOHN LUBBOCK BARTAt Amazon
