


    “Through labor to rest, through combat to victory.”
    THOMAS A KEMPIS.
Among the troubles of life I do not, of course, reckon the necessity of
labor.
Work indeed, and hard work, if only it is in moderation, is in itself a
rich source of happiness. We all know how quickly time passes when we are
well employed, while the moments hang heavily on the hands of the idle.
Occupation drives away care and all the small troubles of life. The busy
man has no time to brood or to fret.
  “From toil he wins his spirits light,
  From busy day the peaceful night;
  Rich, from the very want of wealth,
  In Heaven’s best treasures, peace and health.” [1]
This applies especially to the labor of the field and the workshop. Humble
it may be, but if it does not dazzle with the promise of fame, it gives
the satisfaction of duty fulfilled, and the inestimable blessing of
health. As Emerson reminds those entering life, “The angels that live with
them, and are weaving laurels of life for their youthful brows, are toil
and truth and mutual faith.”
Labor was truly said by the ancients to be the price which the gods set
upon everything worth having. We all admit, though we often forget, the
marvellous power of perseverance, and yet all Nature, down to Bruce’s
spider, is continually impressing this lesson on us.
Hard writing, it has been said, makes easy reading; Plato is said to have
rewritten the first page of the Republic thirteen times; and Carlo
Maratti, we are told, sketched the head of Antinoues three hundred times
before he wrought it to his satisfaction.
It is better to wear out than to rust out, and there is “a dust which
settles on the heart, as well as that which rests upon the ledge.” [2]
But though labor is good for man, it may be, and unfortunately often is,
carried to excess. Many are wearily asking themselves
                  “Ah why
  Should life all labor be?” [3]
There is a time for all things, says Solomon, a time to work and a time to
play: we shall work all the better for reasonable change, and one reward
of work is to secure leisure.
It is a good saying that where there’s a will there’s a way; but while it
is all very well to wish, wishes must not take the place of work.
In whatever sphere his duty lies every man must rely mainly on himself.
Others can help us, but we must make ourselves. No one else can see for
us. To profit by our advantages we must learn to use for ourselves
  “The dark lantern of the spirit
  Which none can see by, but he who bears it.”
It is hardly an exaggeration to say that honest work is never thrown away.
If we do not find the imaginary treasure, at any rate we enrich the
vineyard.
“Work,” says Nature to man, “in every hour, paid or unpaid; see only that
thou work, and thou canst not escape the reward: whether thy work be fine
or coarse, planting corn or writing epics, so only it be honest work, done
to thine own approbation, it shall earn a reward to the senses as well as
to the thought: no matter how often defeated, you are born to victory. The
reward of a thing well done is to have done it.” [4]
Nor can any work, however persevering, or any success, however great,
exhaust the prizes of life.
The most studious, the most successful, must recognize that there yet
remain
  “So much to do that is not e’en begun,
  So much to hope for that we cannot see,
  So much to win, so many things to be.” [5]
At the present time, though there may be some special drawbacks, still we
come to our work with many advantages which were not enjoyed in olden
times. We live in much greater security ourselves, and are less liable to
have the fruits of our labor torn violently from us.
In olden times the difficulties of study were far greater than they are
now. Books were expensive and cumbersome, in many cases moreover chained
to the desks on which they were kept. The greatest scholars have often
been very poor. Erasmus used to read by moonlight because he could not
afford a candle, and “begged a penny, not for the love of charity, but for
the love of learning.” [6]
Want of time is no excuse for idleness. “Our life,” says Jeremy Taylor,
“is too short to serve the ambition of a haughty prince or a usurping
rebel; too little time to purchase great wealth, to satisfy the pride of a
vainglorious fool, to trample upon all the enemies of our just or unjust
interest: but for the obtaining virtue, for the purchase of sobriety and
modesty, for the actions of religion, God gives us time sufficient, if we
make the outgoings of the morning and evening, that is our infancy and old
age, to be taken into the computations of a man.”
Work is so much a necessity of existence, that it is less a question
whether, than how, we shall work. An old proverb tells us that the Devil
finds work for those who do not make it for themselves.
If we Englishmen have succeeded as a race, it has been due in no small
measure to the fact that we have worked hard. Not only so, but we have
induced the forces of Nature to work for us. “Steam,” says Emerson, “is
almost an Englishman.”
The power of work has especially characterized our greatest men. Cecil
said of Sir W. Raleigh that he “could toil terribly.”
We are most of us proud of belonging to the greatest Empire the world has
ever seen. It may be said of us with especial truth in Wordsworth’s words
that
  “The world is too much with us; late and soon
  Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers.”
Yes, but what world? The world will be with us sure enough, and whether we
please or not. But what sort of world it will be for us will depend
greatly on ourselves.
We are told to pray not to be taken out of the world, but to be kept from
the evil.
There are various ways of working. Quickness may be good, but haste is
bad.
“Like a star, without haste, without rest, let every one fulfil his own
hest.”
Newton is reported to have described as his mode of working that “I keep
the subject constantly before me, and wait till the first dawnings open
slowly by little and little into a full and clear light.”
“The secret of genius,” says Emerson, “is to suffer no fiction to exist
for us; to realize all that we know; in the high refinement of modern
life, in Arts, in Sciences, in books, in men, to exact good faith,
reality, and a purpose; and first, last, midst, and without end, to honor
every truth by use.”
Lastly, work secures the rich reward of rest, we must rest to be able to
work well, and work to be able to enjoy rest.
“We must no doubt beware that our rest become not the rest of stones,
which so long as they are torrent-tossed and thunder-stricken maintain
their majesty; but when the stream is silent, and the storm past, suffer
the grass to cover them, and the lichen to feed on them, and are ploughed
down into the dust.... The rest which is glorious is of the chamois
couched breathless in its granite bed, not of the stalled ox over his
fodder.” [8]
When we have done our best we may wait the result without anxiety.
“What hinders a man, who has clearly comprehended these things, from
living with a light heart and bearing easily the reins; quietly expecting
everything which can happen, and enduring that which has already happened?
Would you have me to bear poverty? Come and you will know what poverty is
when it has found one who can act well the part of a poor man. Would you
have me to possess power? Let me have the power, and also the trouble of
it. Well, banishment? Wherever I shall go, there it will be well with
me.” [9]
The Buddhists believe in many forms of future punishment; but the highest
reward of virtue is Nirvana–the final and eternal rest.
Very touching is the appeal of Ashmanezer to be left in peace, which was
engraved on his Sarcophagus at Sidon,–now in Paris.
“In the month of Bul, the fourteenth year of my reign, I, King Ashmanezer,
King of the Sidonians, son of King Tabuith, King of the Sidonians, spake,
saying: ’I have been stolen away before my time–a son of the flood of
days. The whilom great is dumb; the son of gods is dead. And I rest in
this grave, even in this tomb, in the place which I have built. My
adjuration to all the Ruling Powers and all men: Let no one open this
resting-place, nor search for treasure, for there is no treasure with us;
and let him not bear away the couch of my rest, and not trouble us in this
resting-place by disturbing the couch of my slumbers.... For all men who
should open the tomb of my rest, or any man who should carry away the
couch of my rest, or any one who trouble me on this couch: unto them there
shall be no rest with the departed: they shall not be buried in a grave,
and there shall be to them neither son nor seed.... There shall be to them
neither root below nor fruit above, nor honor among the living under the
sun.’” [10]
The idle man does not know what it is to rest. Hard work, moreover, tends
not only to give us rest for the body, but, what is even more important,
peace to the mind. If we have done our best to do, and to be, we can rest
in peace.
“En la sua voluntade e nostra pace.” [11] In His will is our peace; and in
such peace the mind will find its truest delight, for
  “When care sleeps, the soul wakes.”
In youth, as is right enough, the idea of exertion, and of struggles, is
inspiriting and delightful; but as years advance the hope and prospect of
peace and of rest gain ground gradually, and
  “When the last dawns are fallen on gray,
    And all life’s toils and ease complete,
  They know who work, not they who play,
    If rest is sweet.” [12]
[1] Gray.
[2] Jefferies.
[3] Tennyson.
[4] Emerson.
[5] Morris.
[6] Coleridge.
[7] Goethe.
[8] Ruskin.
[9] Epictetus.
[10] From Sir M. S. Grant Duff’s A Winter in Syria.
[11] Dante.
[12] Symonds.
Continue...

This complete e-text “The Pleasures of Life” by Sir John Lubbock belongs in the public domain.

Get “Pleasures of Life” from Amazon.com

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
THE PLEASURES OF LIFE (complete)By SIR JOHN LUBBOCK BARTAt Amazon
