




What hardens the heart of everyone I approach with the view of truth
sketched in my last lecture is that typical idol of the tribe, the
notion of THE Truth, conceived as the one answer, determinate and
complete, to the one fixed enigma which the world is believed to
propound. For popular tradition, it is all the better if the answer
be oracular, so as itself to awaken wonder as an enigma of the
second order, veiling rather than revealing what its profundities
are supposed to contain. All the great single-word answers to the
world’s riddle, such as God, the One, Reason, Law, Spirit, Matter,
Nature, Polarity, the Dialectic Process, the Idea, the Self, the
Oversoul, draw the admiration that men have lavished on them from
this oracular role. By amateurs in philosophy and professionals
alike, the universe is represented as a queer sort of petrified
sphinx whose appeal to man consists in a monotonous challenge to his
divining powers. THE Truth: what a perfect idol of the rationalistic
mind! I read in an old letter–from a gifted friend who died too
young–these words: “In everything, in science, art, morals and
religion, there MUST be one system that is right and EVERY other
wrong.” How characteristic of the enthusiasm of a certain stage of
youth! At twenty-one we rise to such a challenge and expect to find
the system. It never occurs to most of us even later that the
question ’what is THE truth?’ is no real question (being irrelative
to all conditions) and that the whole notion of THE truth is an
abstraction from the fact of truths in the plural, a mere useful
summarizing phrase like THE Latin Language or THE Law.
Common-law judges sometimes talk about the law, and school-masters
talk about the latin tongue, in a way to make their hearers think
they mean entities pre-existent to the decisions or to the words and
syntax, determining them unequivocally and requiring them to obey.
But the slightest exercise of reflexion makes us see that, instead
of being principles of this kind, both law and latin are results.
Distinctions between the lawful and the unlawful in conduct, or
between the correct and incorrect in speech, have grown up
incidentally among the interactions of men’s experiences in detail;
and in no other way do distinctions between the true and the false
in belief ever grow up. Truth grafts itself on previous truth,
modifying it in the process, just as idiom grafts itself on previous
idiom, and law on previous law. Given previous law and a novel case,
and the judge will twist them into fresh law. Previous idiom; new
slang or metaphor or oddity that hits the public taste:–and presto,
a new idiom is made. Previous truth; fresh facts:–and our mind
finds a new truth.
All the while, however, we pretend that the eternal is unrolling,
that the one previous justice, grammar or truth is simply
fulgurating, and not being made. But imagine a youth in the
courtroom trying cases with his abstract notion of ’the’ law, or a
censor of speech let loose among the theatres with his idea of ’the’
mother-tongue, or a professor setting up to lecture on the actual
universe with his rationalistic notion of ’the Truth’ with a big T,
and what progress do they make? Truth, law, and language fairly boil
away from them at the least touch of novel fact. These things MAKE
THEMSELVES as we go. Our rights, wrongs, prohibitions, penalties,
words, forms, idioms, beliefs, are so many new creations that add
themselves as fast as history proceeds. Far from being antecedent
principles that animate the process, law, language, truth are but
abstract names for its results.
Laws and languages at any rate are thus seen to be man-made: things.
Mr. Schiller applies the analogy to beliefs, and proposes the name
of ’Humanism’ for the doctrine that to an unascertainable extent our
truths are man-made products too. Human motives sharpen all our
questions, human satisfactions lurk in all our answers, all our
formulas have a human twist. This element is so inextricable in the
products that Mr. Schiller sometimes seems almost to leave it an
open question whether there be anything else. “The world,” he says,
“is essentially [u lambda nu], it is what we make of it. It is
fruitless to define it by what it originally was or by what it is
apart from us; it IS what is made of it. Hence ... the world is
PLASTIC.” [Footnote: Personal Idealism, p. 60.] He adds that we can
learn the limits of the plasticity only by trying, and that we ought
to start as if it were wholly plastic, acting methodically on that
assumption, and stopping only when we are decisively rebuked.
This is Mr. Schiller’s butt-end-foremost statement of the humanist
position, and it has exposed him to severe attack. I mean to defend
the humanist position in this lecture, so I will insinuate a few
remarks at this point.
Mr. Schiller admits as emphatically as anyone the presence of
resisting factors in every actual experience of truth-making, of
which the new-made special truth must take account, and with which
it has perforce to ’agree.’ All our truths are beliefs about
’Reality’; and in any particular belief the reality acts as
something independent, as a thing FOUND, not manufactured. Let me
here recall a bit of my last lecture.
’REALITY’ IS IN GENERAL WHAT TRUTHS HAVE TO TAKE ACCOUNT OF;
[Footnote: Mr. Taylor in his Elements of Metaphysics uses this
excellent pragmatic definition.] and the FIRST part of reality from
this point of view is the flux of our sensations. Sensations are
forced upon us, coming we know not whence. Over their nature, order,
and quantity we have as good as no control. THEY are neither true
nor false; they simply ARE. It is only what we say about them, only
the names we give them, our theories of their source and nature and
remote relations, that may be true or not.
The SECOND part of reality, as something that our beliefs must also
obediently take account of, is the RELATIONS that obtain between our
sensations or between their copies in our minds. This part falls
into two sub-parts: 1) the relations that are mutable and
accidental, as those of date and place; and 2) those that are fixed
and essential because they are grounded on the inner natures of
their terms–such as likeness and unlikeness. Both sorts of relation
are matters of immediate perception. Both are ’facts.’ But it is the
latter kind of fact that forms the more important sub-part of
reality for our theories of knowledge. Inner relations namely are
’eternal,’ are perceived whenever their sensible terms are compared;
and of them our thought–mathematical and logical thought, so-
called–must eternally take account.
The THIRD part of reality, additional to these perceptions (tho
largely based upon them), is the PREVIOUS TRUTHS of which every new
inquiry takes account. This third part is a much less obdurately
resisting factor: it often ends by giving way. In speaking of these
three portions of reality as at all times controlling our belief’s
formation, I am only reminding you of what we heard in our last
hour.
Now however fixed these elements of reality may be, we still have a
certain freedom in our dealings with them. Take our sensations. THAT
they are is undoubtedly beyond our control; but WHICH we attend to,
note, and make emphatic in our conclusions depends on our own
interests; and, according as we lay the emphasis here or there,
quite different formulations of truth result. We read the same facts
differently. ’Waterloo,’ with the same fixed details, spells a
’victory’ for an englishman; for a frenchman it spells a ’defeat.’
So, for an optimist philosopher the universe spells victory, for a
pessimist, defeat.
What we say about reality thus depends on the perspective into which
we throw it. The THAT of it is its own; but the WHAT depends on the
WHICH; and the which depends on US. Both the sensational and the
relational parts of reality are dumb: they say absolutely nothing
about themselves. We it is who have to speak for them. This dumbness
of sensations has led such intellectualists as T.H. Green and Edward
Caird to shove them almost beyond the pale of philosophic
recognition, but pragmatists refuse to go so far. A sensation is
rather like a client who has given his case to a lawyer and then has
passively to listen in the courtroom to whatever account of his
affairs, pleasant or unpleasant, the lawyer finds it most expedient
to give.
Hence, even in the field of sensation, our minds exert a certain
arbitrary choice. By our inclusions and omissions we trace the
field’s extent; by our emphasis we mark its foreground and its
background; by our order we read it in this direction or in that. We
receive in short the block of marble, but we carve the statue
ourselves.
This applies to the ’eternal’ parts of reality as well: we shuffle
our perceptions of intrinsic relation and arrange them just as
freely. We read them in one serial order or another, class them in
this way or in that, treat one or the other as more fundamental,
until our beliefs about them form those bodies of truth known as
logics, geometries, or arithmetics, in each and all of which the
form and order in which the whole is cast is flagrantly man-made.
Thus, to say nothing of the new FACTS which men add to the matter of
reality by the acts of their own lives, they have already impressed
their mental forms on that whole third of reality which I have
called ’previous truths.’ Every hour brings its new percepts, its
own facts of sensation and relation, to be truly taken account of;
but the whole of our PAST dealings with such facts is already funded
in the previous truths. It is therefore only the smallest and
recentest fraction of the first two parts of reality that comes to
us without the human touch, and that fraction has immediately to
become humanized in the sense of being squared, assimilated, or in
some way adapted, to the humanized mass already there. As a matter
of fact we can hardly take in an impression at all, in the absence
of a pre-conception of what impressions there may possibly be.
When we talk of reality ’independent’ of human thinking, then, it
seems a thing very hard to find. It reduces to the notion of what is
just entering into experience, and yet to be named, or else to some
imagined aboriginal presence in experience, before any belief about
the presence had arisen, before any human conception had been
applied. It is what is absolutely dumb and evanescent, the merely
ideal limit of our minds. We may glimpse it, but we never grasp it;
what we grasp is always some substitute for it which previous human
thinking has peptonized and cooked for our consumption. If so vulgar
an expression were allowed us, we might say that wherever we find
it, it has been already FAKED. This is what Mr. Schiller has in mind
when he calls independent reality a mere unresisting [u lambda nu],
which IS only to be made over by us.
That is Mr. Schiller’s belief about the sensible core of reality. We
’encounter’ it (in Mr. Bradley’s words) but don’t possess it.
Superficially this sounds like Kant’s view; but between categories
fulminated before nature began, and categories gradually forming
themselves in nature’s presence, the whole chasm between rationalism
and empiricism yawns. To the genuine ’Kantianer’ Schiller will
always be to Kant as a satyr to Hyperion.
Other pragmatists may reach more positive beliefs about the sensible
core of reality. They may think to get at it in its independent
nature, by peeling off the successive man-made wrappings. They may
make theories that tell us where it comes from and all about it; and
if these theories work satisfactorily they will be true. The
transcendental idealists say there is no core, the finally completed
wrapping being reality and truth in one. Scholasticism still teaches
that the core is ’matter.’ Professor Bergson, Heymans, Strong, and
others, believe in the core and bravely try to define it. Messrs.
Dewey and Schiller treat it as a ’limit.’ Which is the truer of all
these diverse accounts, or of others comparable with them, unless it
be the one that finally proves the most satisfactory? On the one
hand there will stand reality, on the other an account of it which
proves impossible to better or to alter. If the impossibility prove
permanent, the truth of the account will be absolute. Other content
of truth than this I can find nowhere. If the anti-pragmatists have
any other meaning, let them for heaven’s sake reveal it, let them
grant us access to it!
Not BEING reality, but only our belief ABOUT reality, it will
contain human elements, but these will KNOW the non-human element,
in the only sense in which there can be knowledge of anything. Does
the river make its banks, or do the banks make the river? Does a man
walk with his right leg or with his left leg more essentially? Just
as impossible may it be to separate the real from the human factors
in the growth of our cognitive experience.
Let this stand as a first brief indication of the humanistic
position. Does it seem paradoxical? If so, I will try to make it
plausible by a few illustrations, which will lead to a fuller
acquaintance with the subject.
In many familiar objects everyone will recognize the human element.
We conceive a given reality in this way or in that, to suit our
purpose, and the reality passively submits to the conception. You
can take the number 27 as the cube of 3, or as the product of 3 and
9, or as 26 PLUS 1, or 100 MINUS 73, or in countless other ways, of
which one will be just as true as another. You can take a chessboard
as black squares on a white ground, or as white squares on a black
ground, and neither conception is a false one. You can treat the
adjoined figure [Figure of a ’Star of David’] as a star, as two big
triangles crossing each other, as a hexagon with legs set up on its
angles, as six equal triangles hanging together by their tips, etc.
All these treatments are true treatments–the sensible THAT upon the
paper resists no one of them. You can say of a line that it runs
east, or you can say that it runs west, and the line per se accepts
both descriptions without rebelling at the inconsistency.
We carve out groups of stars in the heavens, and call them
constellations, and the stars patiently suffer us to do so–tho if
they knew what we were doing, some of them might feel much surprised
at the partners we had given them. We name the same constellation
diversely, as Charles’s Wain, the Great Bear, or the Dipper. None of
the names will be false, and one will be as true as another, for all
are applicable.
In all these cases we humanly make an addition to some sensible
reality, and that reality tolerates the addition. All the additions
’agree’ with the reality; they fit it, while they build it out. No
one of them is false. Which may be treated as the more true, depends
altogether on the human use of it. If the 27 is a number of dollars
which I find in a drawer where I had left 28, it is 28 minus 1. If
it is the number of inches in a shelf which I wish to insert into a
cupboard 26 inches wide, it is 26 plus 1. If I wish to ennoble the
heavens by the constellations I see there, ’Charles’s Wain’ would be
more true than ’Dipper.’ My friend Frederick Myers was humorously
indignant that that prodigious star-group should remind us Americans
of nothing but a culinary utensil.
What shall we call a THING anyhow? It seems quite arbitrary, for we
carve out everything, just as we carve out constellations, to suit
our human purposes. For me, this whole ’audience’ is one thing,
which grows now restless, now attentive. I have no use at present
for its individual units, so I don’t consider them. So of an ’army,’
of a ’nation.’ But in your own eyes, ladies and gentlemen, to call
you ’audience’ is an accidental way of taking you. The permanently
real things for you are your individual persons. To an anatomist,
again, those persons are but organisms, and the real things are the
organs. Not the organs, so much as their constituent cells, say the
histologists; not the cells, but their molecules, say in turn the
chemists.
We break the flux of sensible reality into things, then, at our
will. We create the subjects of our true as well as of our false
propositions.
We create the predicates also. Many of the predicates of things
express only the relations of the things to us and to our feelings.
Such predicates of course are human additions. Caesar crossed the
Rubicon, and was a menace to Rome’s freedom. He is also an American
school-room pest, made into one by the reaction of our schoolboys on
his writings. The added predicate is as true of him as the earlier
ones.
You see how naturally one comes to the humanistic principle: you
can’t weed out the human contribution. Our nouns and adjectives are
all humanized heirlooms, and in the theories we build them into, the
inner order and arrangement is wholly dictated by human
considerations, intellectual consistency being one of them.
Mathematics and logic themselves are fermenting with human
rearrangements; physics, astronomy and biology follow massive cues
of preference. We plunge forward into the field of fresh experience
with the beliefs our ancestors and we have made already; these
determine what we notice; what we notice determines what we do; what
we do again determines what we experience; so from one thing to
another, altho the stubborn fact remains that there IS a sensible
flux, what is true of it seems from first to last to be largely a
matter of our own creation.
We build the flux out inevitably. The great question is: does it,
with our additions, rise or fall in value? Are the additions WORTHY
or UNWORTHY? Suppose a universe composed of seven stars, and nothing
else but three human witnesses and their critic. One witness names
the stars ’Great Bear’; one calls them ’Charles’s Wain’; one calls
them the ’Dipper.’ Which human addition has made the best universe
of the given stellar material? If Frederick Myers were the critic,
he would have no hesitation in ’turning-down’ the American witness.
Lotze has in several places made a deep suggestion. We naively
assume, he says, a relation between reality and our minds which may
be just the opposite of the true one. Reality, we naturally think,
stands ready-made and complete, and our intellects supervene with
the one simple duty of describing it as it is already. But may not
our descriptions, Lotze asks, be themselves important additions to
reality? And may not previous reality itself be there, far less for
the purpose of reappearing unaltered in our knowledge, than for the
very purpose of stimulating our minds to such additions as shall
enhance the universe’s total value. “Die erhohung des vorgefundenen
daseins” is a phrase used by Professor Eucken somewhere, which
reminds one of this suggestion by the great Lotze.
It is identically our pragmatistic conception. In our cognitive as
well as in our active life we are creative. We ADD, both to the
subject and to the predicate part of reality. The world stands
really malleable, waiting to receive its final touches at our hands.
Like the kingdom of heaven, it suffers human violence willingly. Man
ENGENDERS truths upon it.
No one can deny that such a role would add both to our dignity and
to our responsibility as thinkers. To some of us it proves a most
inspiring notion. Signer Papini, the leader of italian pragmatism,
grows fairly dithyrambic over the view that it opens, of man’s
divinely-creative functions.
The import of the difference between pragmatism and rationalism is
now in sight throughout its whole extent. The essential contrast is
that for rationalism reality is ready-made and complete from all
eternity, while for pragmatism it is still in the making, and awaits
part of its complexion from the future. On the one side the universe
is absolutely secure, on the other it is still pursuing its
adventures.
We have got into rather deep water with this humanistic view, and it
is no wonder that misunderstanding gathers round it. It is accused
of being a doctrine of caprice. Mr. Bradley, for example, says that
a humanist, if he understood his own doctrine, would have to “hold
any end however perverted to be rational if I insist on it
personally, and any idea however mad to be the truth if only some
one is resolved that he will have it so.” The humanist view of
’reality,’ as something resisting, yet malleable, which controls our
thinking as an energy that must be taken ’account’ of incessantly
(tho not necessarily merely COPIED) is evidently a difficult one to
introduce to novices. The situation reminds me of one that I have
personally gone through. I once wrote an essay on our right to
believe, which I unluckily called the WILL to Believe. All the
critics, neglecting the essay, pounced upon the title.
Psychologically it was impossible, morally it was iniquitous. The
“will to deceive,” the “will to make-believe,” were wittily proposed
as substitutes for it.
THE ALTERNATIVE BETWEEN PRAGMATISM AND RATIONALISM, IN THE SHAPE IN
WHICH WE NOW HAVE IT BEFORE US, IS NO LONGER A QUESTION IN THE
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE, IT CONCERNS THE STRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSE
ITSELF.
On the pragmatist side we have only one edition of the universe,
unfinished, growing in all sorts of places, especially in the places
where thinking beings are at work.
On the rationalist side we have a universe in many editions, one
real one, the infinite folio, or edition de luxe, eternally
complete; and then the various finite editions, full of false
readings, distorted and mutilated each in its own way.
So the rival metaphysical hypotheses of pluralism and monism here
come back upon us. I will develope their differences during the
remainder of our hour.
And first let me say that it is impossible not to see a
temperamental difference at work in the choice of sides. The
rationalist mind, radically taken, is of a doctrinaire and
authoritative complexion: the phrase ’must be’ is ever on its lips.
The belly-band of its universe must be tight. A radical pragmatist
on the other hand is a happy-go-lucky anarchistic sort of creature.
If he had to live in a tub like Diogenes he wouldn’t mind at all if
the hoops were loose and the staves let in the sun.
Now the idea of this loose universe affects your typical
rationalists in much the same way as ’freedom of the press’ might
affect a veteran official in the russian bureau of censorship; or as
’simplified spelling’ might affect an elderly schoolmistress. It
affects him as the swarm of protestant sects affects a papist
onlooker. It appears as backboneless and devoid of principle as
’opportunism’ in politics appears to an old-fashioned french
legitimist, or to a fanatical believer in the divine right of the
people.
For pluralistic pragmatism, truth grows up inside of all the finite
experiences. They lean on each other, but the whole of them, if such
a whole there be, leans on nothing. All ’homes’ are in finite
experience; finite experience as such is homeless. Nothing outside
of the flux secures the issue of it. It can hope salvation only from
its own intrinsic promises and potencies.
To rationalists this describes a tramp and vagrant world, adrift in
space, with neither elephant nor tortoise to plant the sole of its
foot upon. It is a set of stars hurled into heaven without even a
centre of gravity to pull against. In other spheres of life it is
true that we have got used to living in a state of relative
insecurity. The authority of  ’the State,’ and that of an absolute
’moral law,’ have resolved themselves into expediencies, and holy
church has resolved itself into ’meeting-houses.’ Not so as yet
within the philosophic class-rooms. A universe with such as US
contributing to create its truth, a world delivered to OUR
opportunisms and OUR private judgments! Home-rule for Ireland would
be a millennium in comparison. We’re no more fit for such a part
than the Filipinos are ’fit for self-government.’ Such a world would
not be RESPECTABLE, philosophically. It is a trunk without a tag, a
dog without a collar, in the eyes of most professors of philosophy.
What then would tighten this loose universe, according to the
professors?
Something to support the finite many, to tie it to, to unify and
anchor it. Something unexposed to accident, something eternal and
unalterable. The mutable in experience must be founded on
immutability. Behind our de facto world, our world in act, there
must be a de jure duplicate fixed and previous, with all that can
happen here already there in posse, every drop of blood, every
smallest item, appointed and provided, stamped and branded, without
chance of variation. The negatives that haunt our ideals here below
must be themselves negated in the absolutely Real. This alone makes
the universe solid. This is the resting deep. We live upon the
stormy surface; but with this our anchor holds, for it grapples
rocky bottom. This is Wordsworth’s “central peace subsisting at the
heart of endless agitation.” This is Vivekananda’s mystical One of
which I read to you. This is Reality with the big R, reality that
makes the timeless claim, reality to which defeat can’t happen. This
is what the men of principles, and in general all the men whom I
called tender-minded in my first lecture, think themselves obliged
to postulate.
And this, exactly this, is what the tough-minded of that lecture
find themselves moved to call a piece of perverse abstraction-
worship. The tough-minded are the men whose alpha and omega are
FACTS. Behind the bare phenomenal facts, as my tough-minded old
friend Chauncey Wright, the great Harvard empiricist of my youth,
used to say, there is NOTHING. When a rationalist insists that
behind the facts there is the GROUND of the facts, the POSSIBILITY
of the facts, the tougher empiricists accuse him of taking the mere
name and nature of a fact and clapping it behind the fact as a
duplicate entity to make it possible. That such sham grounds are
often invoked is notorious. At a surgical operation I heard a
bystander ask a doctor why the patient breathed so deeply. “Because
ether is a respiratory stimulant,” the doctor answered. “Ah!” said
the questioner, as if relieved by the explanation. But this is like
saying that cyanide of potassium kills because it is a ’poison,’ or
that it is so cold to-night because it is ’winter,’ or that we have
five fingers because we are ’pentadactyls.’ These are but names for
the facts, taken from the facts, and then treated as previous and
explanatory. The tender-minded notion of an absolute reality is,
according to the radically tough-minded, framed on just this
pattern. It is but our summarizing name for the whole spread-out and
strung-along mass of phenomena, treated as if it were a different
entity, both one and previous.
You see how differently people take things. The world we live in
exists diffused and distributed, in the form of an indefinitely
numerous lot of eaches, coherent in all sorts of ways and degrees;
and the tough-minded are perfectly willing to keep them at that
valuation. They can stand that kind of world, their temper being
well adapted to its insecurity. Not so the tender-minded party. They
must back the world we find ourselves born into by “another and a
better” world in which the eaches form an All and the All a One that
logically presupposes, co-implicates, and secures each EACH without
exception.
Must we as pragmatists be radically tough-minded? or can we treat
the absolute edition of the world as a legitimate hypothesis? It is
certainly legitimate, for it is thinkable, whether we take it in its
abstract or in its concrete shape.
By taking it abstractly I mean placing it behind our finite life as
we place the word ’winter’ behind to-night’s cold weather. ’Winter’
is only the name for a certain number of days which we find
generally characterized by cold weather, but it guarantees nothing
in that line, for our thermometer to-morrow may soar into the 70’s.
Nevertheless the word is a useful one to plunge forward with into
the stream of our experience. It cuts off certain probabilities and
sets up others: you can put away your straw-hats; you can unpack
your arctics. It is a summary of things to look for. It names a part
of nature’s habits, and gets you ready for their continuation. It is
a definite instrument abstracted from experience, a conceptual
reality that you must take account of, and which reflects you
totally back into sensible realities. The pragmatist is the last
person to deny the reality of such abstractions. They are so much
past experience funded.
But taking the absolute edition of the world concretely means a
different hypothesis. Rationalists take it concretely and OPPOSE it
to the world’s finite editions. They give it a particular nature. It
is perfect, finished. Everything known there is known along with
everything else; here, where ignorance reigns, far otherwise. If
there is want there, there also is the satisfaction provided. Here
all is process; that world is timeless. Possibilities obtain in our
world; in the absolute world, where all that is NOT is from eternity
impossible, and all that IS is necessary, the category of
possibility has no application. In this world crimes and horrors are
regrettable. In that totalized world regret obtains not, for “the
existence of ill in the temporal order is the very condition of the
perfection of the eternal order.”
Once more, either hypothesis is legitimate in pragmatist eyes, for
either has its uses. Abstractly, or taken like the word winter, as a
memorandum of past experience that orients us towards the future,
the notion of the absolute world is indispensable. Concretely taken,
it is also indispensable, at least to certain minds, for it
determines them religiously, being often a thing to change their
lives by, and by changing their lives, to change whatever in the
outer order depends on them.
We cannot therefore methodically join the tough minds in their
rejection of the whole notion of a world beyond our finite
experience. One misunderstanding of pragmatism is to identify it
with positivistic tough-mindedness, to suppose that it scorns every
rationalistic notion as so much jabber and gesticulation, that it
loves intellectual anarchy as such and prefers a sort of wolf-world
absolutely unpent and wild and without a master or a collar to any
philosophic class-room product, whatsoever. I have said so much in
these lectures against the over-tender forms of rationalism, that I
am prepared for some misunderstanding here, but I confess that the
amount of it that I have found in this very audience surprises me,
for I have simultaneously defended rationalistic hypotheses so far
as these re-direct you fruitfully into experience.
For instance I receive this morning this question on a post-card:
“Is a pragmatist necessarily a complete materialist and agnostic?"
One of my oldest friends, who ought to know me better, writes me a
letter that accuses the pragmatism I am recommending, of shutting
out all wider metaphysical views and condemning us to the most
terre-a-terre naturalism. Let me read you some extracts from it.
“It seems to me,” my friend writes, “that the pragmatic objection to
pragmatism lies in the fact that it might accentuate the narrowness
of narrow minds.
“Your call to the rejection of the namby-pamby and the wishy-washy
is of course inspiring. But although it is salutary and stimulating
to be told that one should be responsible for the immediate issues
and bearings of his words and thoughts, I decline to be deprived of
the pleasure and profit of dwelling also on remoter bearings and
issues, and it is the TENDENCY of pragmatism to refuse this
privilege.
“In short, it seems to me that the limitations, or rather the
dangers, of the pragmatic tendency, are analogous to those which
beset the unwary followers of the ’natural sciences.’ Chemistry and
physics are eminently pragmatic and many of their devotees, smugly
content with the data that their weights and measures furnish, feel
an infinite pity and disdain for all students of philosophy and
meta-physics, whomsoever. And of course everything can be expressed-
-after a fashion, and ’theoretically’–in terms of chemistry and
physics, that is, EVERYTHING EXCEPT THE VITAL PRINCIPLE OF THE
WHOLE, and that, they say, there is no pragmatic use in trying to
express; it has no bearings–FOR THEM. I for my part refuse to be
persuaded that we cannot look beyond the obvious pluralism of the
naturalist and the pragmatist to a logical unity in which they take
no interest.”
How is such a conception of the pragmatism I am advocating possible,
after my first and second lectures? I have all along been offering
it expressly as a mediator between tough-mindedness and tender-
mindedness. If the notion of a world ante rem, whether taken
abstractly like the word winter, or concretely as the hypothesis of
an Absolute, can be shown to have any consequences whatever for our
life, it has a meaning. If the meaning works, it will have SOME
truth that ought to be held to through all possible reformulations,
for pragmatism.
The absolutistic hypothesis, that perfection is eternal, aboriginal,
and most real, has a perfectly definite meaning, and it works
religiously. To examine how, will be the subject of my next and
final lecture.
Continue...

This e-book of Pragmatism (A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking), 1907 by William James, is freeware.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on January 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Pragmatism (Philosophical Classics)By William JamesAt Amazon
