




Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and
meditations which had at length closed her eyes.  She could
not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was
impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed
for employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge
herself in air and exercise.  She was proceeding directly to her
favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’s sometimes
coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she
turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road.
The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she
soon passed one of the gates into the ground.
After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she
was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the
gates and look into the park.  The five weeks which she had now
passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and
every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees.  She was
on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse
of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park;
he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr. Darcy,
she was directly retreating.  But the person who advanced was
now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness,
pronounced her name.  She had turned away; but on hearing
herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr.
Darcy, she moved again towards the gate.  He had by that time
reached it also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively
took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been
walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.  Will
you do me the honour of reading that letter?”  And then, with a
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of
sight.
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper,
written quite through, in a very close hand.  The envelope itself
was likewise full.  Pursuing her way along the lane, she then
began it.  It was dated from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the
morning, and was as follows:–
“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the
apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments
or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to
you.  I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling
myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both,
cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation
and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been
spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly,
but I demand it of your justice.
“Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of
equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge.  The first
mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had
detached Mr. Bingley from your sister, and the other, that I had,
in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and
humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the
prospects of Mr. Wickham.  Wilfully and wantonly to have
thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought
up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the
separation of two young persons, whose affection could be the
growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison.  But
from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally
bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the
future secured, when the following account of my actions and
their motives has been read.  If, in the explanation of them,
which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating
feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I
am sorry.  The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology
would be absurd.
“I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common
with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other
young woman in the country.  But it was not till the evening of
the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his
feeling a serious attachment.  I had often seen him in love before.
At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was
first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s accidental
information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given
rise to a general expectation of their marriage.  He spoke of it
as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided.
From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviour attentively;
and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet
was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him.  Your sister I
also watched.  Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and
engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard,
and I remained convinced from the evening’s scrutiny, that
though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not
invite them by any participation of sentiment.  If you have not
been mistaken here, I must have been in error.  Your superior
knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable.  If it be
so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her,
your resentment has not been unreasonable.  But I shall not scruple
to assert, that the serenity of your sister’s countenance and air
was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction
that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be
easily touched.  That I was desirous of believing her indifferent
is certain–but I will venture to say that my investigation and
decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears.  I did
not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed
it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason.
My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last
night acknowledged to have the utmost force of passion to put
aside, in my own case; the want of connection could not be so
great an evil to my friend as to me.  But there were other causes
of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and existing
to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured
to forget, because they were not immediately before me.  These
causes must be stated, though briefly.  The situation of
your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in
comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so
almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger
sisters, and occasionally even by your father.  Pardon me.  It
pains me to offend you.  But amidst your concern for the defects
of  your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this
representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider
that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of
the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and
your elder sister, than it is honourable to the sense and
disposition of both.  I will only say farther that from what passed
that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every
inducement heightened which could have led me before, to
preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy
connection.  He left Netherfield for London, on the day
following, as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of
soon returning.
“The part which I acted is now to be explained.  His sisters’
uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence
of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time
was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved
on joining him directly in London.  We accordingly went–and
there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my
friend the certain evils of such a choice.  I described, and
enforced them earnestly.  But, however this remonstrance might
have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose
that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not
been seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of
your sister’s indifference.  He had before believed her to return
his affection with sincere, if not with equal regard.  But Bingley
has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my
judgement than on his own.  To convince him, therefore, that he
had deceived himself, was no very difficult point.  To persuade
him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction
had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment.  I cannot
blame myself for having done thus much.  There is but one part
of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with
satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the measures of
art so far as to conceal from him your sister’s being in town.  I
knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother
is even yet ignorant of it.  That they might have met without ill
consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear
to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger.
Perhaps this concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is
done, however, and it was done for the best.  On this subject
I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer.  If I
have wounded your sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done and
though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally
appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn them.
“With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having
injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you
the whole of his connection with my family.  Of what he has
particularly accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of
what I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of
undoubted veracity.
“Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for
many years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and
whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally
inclined my father to be of service to him; and on George
Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was therefore
liberally bestowed.  My father supported him at school, and
afterwards at Cambridge–most important assistance, as his own
father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would
have been unable to give him a gentleman’s education.  My
father was not only fond of this young man’s society, whose
manner were always engaging; he had also the highest opinion of
him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to
provide for him in it.  As for myself, it is many, many years since
I first began to think of him in a very different manner.  The
vicious propensities–the want of principle, which he was careful
to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape
the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with
himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded
moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have.  Here again shall
give you pain–to what degree you only can tell.  But whatever
may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a
suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding
his real character–it adds even another motive.
“My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment
to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he
particularly recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in
the best manner that his profession might allow–and if he took
orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon
as it became vacant.  There was also a legacy of one thousand
pounds.  His own father did not long survive mine, and within half
a year from these events, Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that,
having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should
not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate
pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could
not be benefited.  He had some intention, he added, of studying
law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds
would be a very insufficient support therein.  I rather wished,
than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly
ready to accede to his proposal.  I knew that Mr. Wickham
ought not to be a clergyman; the business was therefore soon
settled–he resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were
it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it,
and accepted in return three thousand pounds.  All connection
between us seemed now dissolved.  I thought too ill of him to
invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town.  In town
I believe he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere
pretence, and being now free from all restraint, his life was a
life of idleness and dissipation.  For about three years I heard
little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living
which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter
for the presentation.  His circumstances, he assured me, and I
had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad.  He had
found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely
resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living
in question–of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as
he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for,
and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions.
You will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty,
or for resisting every repetition to it.  His resentment was in
proportion to the distress of his circumstances–and he was
doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his
reproaches to myself.  After this period every appearance of
acquaintance was dropped.  How he lived I know not.  But last
summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
“I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to
forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present
should induce me to unfold to any human being.  Having said
thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy.  My sister, who is
more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of
my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.  About a
year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment
formed for her in London; and last summer she went with the
lady who presided over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went
Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have
been a prior acquaintance between him and Mrs. Younge, in
whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by
her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to
Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression
of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to
believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement.  She was
then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her
imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it
to herself.  I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the
intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the
idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost
looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me.  You
may imagine what I felt and how I acted.  Regard for my sister’s
credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I wrote
to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge
was of course removed from her charge.  Mr. Wickham’s chief
object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty
thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of
revenging himself on me was a strong inducement.  His revenge
would have been complete indeed.
“This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which
we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely
reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth
of cruelty towards Mr. Wickham.  I know not in what manner,
under what form of falsehood he had imposed on you; but his
success is not perhaps to be wondered at.  Ignorant as you
previously were of everything concerning either, detection
could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in
your inclination.
“You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last
night; but I was not then master enough of myself to know what
could or ought to be revealed.  For the truth of everything here
related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of
Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and
constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of
my father’s will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every
particular of these transactions.  If your abhorrence of meshould make my assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented
by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there
may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to
find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in
the course of the morning.  I will only add, God bless you.
“Fitzwilliam Darcy”
Chapter 36
If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect
it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no
expectation at all of its contents.  But such as they were, it
may well be supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what
a contrariety of emotion they excited.  Her feelings as she
read were scarcely to be defined.  With amazement did she first
understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and
steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation
to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal.  With a
strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his
account of what had happened at Netherfield.  She read with an
eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, and
from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring,
was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her
eyes.  His belief of her sister’s insensibility she instantly
resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst
objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of
doing him justice.  He expressed no regret for what he had done
which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty.
It was all pride and insolence.
But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr.
Wickham–when she read with somewhat clearer attention a
relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished
opinion of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to
his own history of himself–her feelings were yet more acutely
painful and more difficult of definition.  Astonishment,
apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her.  She wished to
discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false!
This cannot be!  This must be the grossest falsehood!"–and
when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely
knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away,
protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never
look in it again.
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the
letter was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she
could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related
to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the
meaning of every sentence.  The account of his connection with
the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself;
and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she had not
before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own
words.  So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she
came to the will, the difference was great.  What Wickham had
said of the living was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled
his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross
duplicity on one side or the other; and, for a few moments, she
flattered herself that her wishes did not err.  But when she
read and re-read with the closest attention, the particulars
immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to
the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as
three thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate.  She
put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she
meant to be impartiality–deliberated on the probability of each
statement–but with little success.  On both sides it was only
assertion.  Again she read on; but every line proved more clearly
that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any
contrivance could so represent as to render Mr. Darcy’s conduct
in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make
him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not
to lay at Mr. Wickham’s charge, exceedingly shocked her; the
more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice.  She had
never heard of him before his entrance into the ––shire Militia,
in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man
who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a
slight acquaintance.  Of his former way of life nothing had been
known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself.  As to his real
character, had information been in her power, she had never felt
a wish of inquiring.  His countenance, voice, and manner had
established him at once in the possession of every virtue.  She
tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the
attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue,
atone for those casual errors under which she would endeavour
to class what Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice
of many years’ continuance.  But no such recollection befriended
her.  She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of
air and address; but she could remember no more substantial
good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess.
After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more
continued to read.  But, alas! the story which followed, of his
designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what
had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the
morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of
every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself–from whom she
had previously received the information of his near concern in
all his cousin’s affairs, and whose character she had no reason
to question.  At one time she had almost resolved on applying
to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the
application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction
that Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if
he had not been well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.
She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in
conversation between Wickham and herself, in their first evening
at Mr. Phillips’s.  Many of his expressions were still fresh in
her memory.  She was now struck with the impropriety of such
communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped her
before.  She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as
he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his
conduct.  She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Darcy–that Mr. Darcy might leave the country,
but that he should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the
Netherfield ball the very next week.  She remembered also that,
till the Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told
his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal it
had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no
scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy’s character, though he had assured
her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing
the son.
How differently did everything now appear in which he was
concerned!  His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence
of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of
her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but
his eagerness to grasp at anything.  His behaviour to herself
could now have had no tolerable motive; he had either been
deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his
vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had
most incautiously shown.  Every lingering struggle in his favour
grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr.
Darcy, she could not but allow Mr. Bingley, when questioned
by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair;
that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in
the whole course of their acquaintance–an acquaintance which
had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of
intimacy with his ways–seen anything that betrayed him to be
unprincipled or unjust–anything that spoke him of irreligious
or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued–that even Wickham had allowed him
merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so
affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of someamiable feeling; that had his actions been what Mr. Wickham
represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could
hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship
between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man as Mr.
Bingley, was incomprehensible.
She grew absolutely ashamed of herself.  Of neither Darcy nor
Wickham could she think without feeling she had been blind,
partial, prejudiced, absurd.
“How despicably I have acted!” she cried; “I, who have prided
myself on my discernment!  I, who have valued myself on my
abilities!  who have often disdained the generous candour of my
sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust!
How humiliating is this discovery!  Yet, how just a humiliation!
Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind!
But vanity, not love, has been my folly.  Pleased with the
preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other,
on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where
either were concerned.  Till this moment I never knew myself.”
From herself to Jane–from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were
in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s
explanation there had appeared very insufficient, and she read
it again.  Widely different was the effect of a second perusal.
How could she deny that credit to his assertions in one instance,
which she had been obliged to give in the other?  He declared
himself to be totally unsuspicious of her sister’s attachment;
and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’s opinion
had always been.  Neither could she deny the justice of his
description of Jane.  She felt that Jane’s feelings, though fervent,
were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency
in her air and manner not often united with great sensibility.
When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her
sense of shame was severe.  The justice of the charge struck her
too forcibly for denial, and the circumstances to which he
particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball,
and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have
made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers.
The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt.  It
soothed, but it could not console her for the contempt which had
thus been self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she
considered that Jane’s disappointment had in fact been the work
of her nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit
of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt
depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.
After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to
every variety of thought–re-considering events, determining
probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to
a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection
of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she
entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual,
and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make
her unfit for conversation.
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings
had each called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few
minutes, to take leave–but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been
sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and
almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found.
Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him; she
really rejoiced at it.  Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an
object; she could think only of her letter.
Continue...

This eBook of “Pride and Prejudice” by Jane Austen belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Pride and PrejudiceBy Jane AustenAt Amazon
