


When Fosdick reached home in the evening, Dick displayed his letter
with some pride.
“It’s a nice letter,” said Fosdick, after reading it “I should like
to know Frank.”
“I’ll bet you would,” said Dick. “He’s a trump.”
“When are you going to answer it?”
“I don’t know,” said Dick, dubiously. “I never writ a letter.”
“That’s no reason why you shouldn’t. There’s always a first time,
you know.”
“I don’t know what to say,” said Dick.
“Get some paper and sit down to it, and you’ll find enough to say.
You can do that this evening instead of studying.”
“If you’ll look it over afterwards, and shine it up a little.”
“Yes, if it needs it; but I rather think Frank would like it best
just as you wrote it.”
Dick decided to adopt Fosdick’s suggestion. He had very serious
doubts as to his ability to write a letter. Like a good many other
boys, he looked upon it as a very serious job, not reflecting that,
after all, letter-writing is nothing but talking upon paper. Still,
in spite of his misgivings, he felt that the letter ought to be
answered, and he wished Frank to hear from him. After various
preparations, he at last got settled down to his task, and, before
the evening was over, a letter was written. As the first letter
which Dick had ever produced, and because it was characteristic
of him, my readers may like to read it.
Here it is,–
“DEAR FRANK,–I got your letter this mornin’, and was very glad to
hear you hadn’t forgotten Ragged Dick. I aint so ragged as I was.
Openwork coats and trowsers has gone out of fashion. I put on the
Washington coat and Napoleon pants to go to the post-office, for
fear they wouldn’t think I was the boy that was meant. On my way
back I received the congratulations of my intimate friend, Micky
Maguire, on my improved appearance.
“I’ve give up sleepin’ in boxes, and old wagons, findin’ it didn’t
agree with my constitution. I’ve hired a room in Mott Street, and
have got a private tooter, who rooms with me and looks after my
studies in the evenin’. Mott Street aint very fashionable; but my
manshun on Fifth Avenoo isn’t finished yet, and I’m afraid it won’t
be till I’m a gray-haired veteran. I’ve got a hundred dollars
towards it, which I’ve saved up from my earnin’s. I haven’t forgot
what you and your uncle said to me, and I’m tryin’ to grow up
’spectable. I haven’t been to Tony Pastor’s, or the Old Bowery, for
ever so long. I’d rather save up my money to support me in my old
age. When my hair gets gray, I’m goin’ to knock off blackin’ boots,
and go into some light, genteel employment, such as keepin’ an
apple-stand, or disseminatin’ pea-nuts among the people.
“I’ve got so as to read pretty well, so my tooter says. I’ve been
studyin’ geography and grammar also. I’ve made such astonishin’
progress that I can tell a noun from a conjunction as far away as
I can see ’em. Tell Mr. Munroe that if he wants an accomplished
teacher in his school, he can send for me, and I’ll come on by the
very next train. Or, if he wants to sell out for a hundred dollars,
I’ll buy the whole concern, and agree to teach the scholars all I
know myself in less than six months. Is teachin’ as good business,
generally speakin’, as blackin’ boots? My private tooter combines
both, and is makin’ a fortun’ with great rapidity. He’ll be as rich
as Astor some time, if he only lives long enough.
“I should think you’d have a bully time at your school. I should
like to go out in the boat, or play ball with you. When are you
comin’ to the city? I wish you’d write and let me know when you do,
and I’ll call and see you. I’ll leave my business in the hands of my
numerous clerks, and go round with you. There’s lots of things you
didn’t see when you was here before. They’re getting on fast at the
Central Park. It looks better than it did a year ago.
“I aint much used to writin’ letters. As this is the first one I
ever wrote, I hope you’ll excuse the mistakes. I hope you’ll write
to me again soon. I can’t write so good a letter as you; but, I’ll
do my best, as the man said when he was asked if he could swim over
to Brooklyn backwards. Good-by, Frank. Thank you for all your
kindness. Direct your next letter to No. – Mott Street.
  “Your true friend,
  “DICK HUNTER,”
When Dick had written the last word, he leaned back in his chair,
and surveyed the letter with much satisfaction.
“I didn’t think I could have wrote such a long letter, Fosdick,"
said he.
“Written would be more grammatical, Dick,” suggested his friend.
“I guess there’s plenty of mistakes in it,” said Dick. “Just look at
it, and see.”
Fosdick took the letter, and read it over carefully.
“Yes, there are some mistakes,” he said; “but it sounds so much like
you that I think it would be better to let it go just as it is. It
will be more likely to remind Frank of what you were when he first
saw you.”
“Is it good enough to send?” asked Dick, anxiously.
“Yes; it seems to me to be quite a good letter. It is written just
as you talk. Nobody but you could have written such a letter, Dick.
I think Frank will be amused at your proposal to come up there as
teacher.”
“P’r’aps it would be a good idea for us to open a seleck school here
in Mott Street,” said Dick, humorously. “We could call it ’Professor
Fosdick and Hunter’s Mott Street Seminary.’ Boot-blackin’ taught by
Professor Hunter.”
The evening was so far advanced that Dick decided to postpone
copying his letter till the next evening. By this time he had come
to have a very fair handwriting, so that when the letter was
complete it really looked quite creditable, and no one would have
suspected that it was Dick’s first attempt in this line. Our hero
surveyed it with no little complacency. In fact, he felt rather
proud of it, since it reminded him of the great progress he had
made. He carried it down to the post-office, and deposited it with
his own hands in the proper box. Just on the steps of the building,
as he was coming out, he met Johnny Nolan, who had been sent on an
errand to Wall Street by some gentleman, and was just returning.
“What are you doin’ down here, Dick?” asked Johnny.
“I’ve been mailin’ a letter.”
“Who sent you?”
“Nobody.”
“I mean, who writ the letter?”
“I wrote it myself.”
“Can you write letters?” asked Johnny, in amazement.
“Why shouldn’t I?”
“I didn’t know you could write. I can’t.”
“Then you ought to learn.”
“I went to school once; but it was too hard work, so I give it up.”
“You’re lazy, Johnny,–that’s what’s the matter. How’d you ever
expect to know anything, if you don’t try?”
“I can’t learn.”
“You can, if you want to.”
Johnny Nolan was evidently of a different opinion. He was a
good-natured boy, large of his age, with nothing particularly bad
about him, but utterly lacking in that energy, ambition, and natural
sharpness, for which Dick was distinguished. He was not adapted to
succeed in the life which circumstances had forced upon him; for in
the street-life of the metropolis a boy needs to be on the alert,
and have all his wits about him, or he will find himself wholly
distanced by his more enterprising competitors for popular favor. To
succeed in his profession, humble as it is, a boot-black must depend
upon the same qualities which gain success in higher walks in
life. It was easy to see that Johnny, unless very much favored by
circumstances, would never rise much above his present level. For
Dick, we cannot help hoping much better things.
Continue...

This eBook of “Ragged Dick, or, Street Life in New York With the Boot-Blacks” by Horatio Alger belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RAGGED DICK AND MARK, THE MATCH BOY: Two Novels by Horatio AlgerBy Horatio AlgerAt Amazon
