


It was the hour for morning service. The boys followed Mr. Greyson
into the handsome church, and were assigned seats in his own pew.
There were two persons already seated in it,–a good-looking lady of
middle age, and a pretty little girl of nine. They were Mrs. Greyson
and her only daughter Ida. They looked pleasantly at the boys as
they entered, smiling a welcome to them.
The morning service commenced. It must be acknowledged that Dick
felt rather awkward. It was an unusual place for him, and it need
not be wondered at that he felt like a cat in a strange garret. He
would not have known when to rise if he had not taken notice of what
the rest of the audience did, and followed their example. He was
sitting next to Ida, and as it was the first time he had ever been
near so well-dressed a young lady, he naturally felt bashful. When
the hymns were announced, Ida found the place, and offered a
hymn-book to our hero. Dick took it awkwardly, but his studies had
not yet been pursued far enough for him to read the words readily.
However, he resolved to keep up appearances, and kept his eyes
fixed steadily on the hymn-book.
At length the service was over. The people began to file slowly out
of church, and among them, of course, Mr. Greyson’s family and the
two boys. It seemed very strange to Dick to find himself in such
different companionship from what he had been accustomed, and he
could not help thinking, “Wonder what Johnny Nolan ’ould say if he
could see me now!”
But Johnny’s business engagements did not often summon him to Fifth
Avenue, and Dick was not likely to be seen by any of his friends in
the lower part of the city.
“We have our Sunday school in the afternoon,” said Mr. Greyson. “I
suppose you live at some distance from here?”
“In Mott Street, sir,” answered Dick.
“That is too far to go and return. Suppose you and your friend
come and dine with us, and then we can come here together in the
afternoon.”
Dick was as much astonished at this invitation as if he had really
been invited by the Mayor to dine with him and the Board of
Aldermen. Mr. Greyson was evidently a rich man, and yet he had
actually invited two boot-blacks to dine with him.
“I guess we’d better go home, sir,” said Dick, hesitating.
“I don’t think you can have any very pressing engagements to
interfere with your accepting my invitation,” said Mr. Greyson,
good-humoredly, for he understood the reason of Dick’s hesitation.
“So I take it for granted that you both accept.”
Before Dick fairly knew what he intended to do, he was walking down
Fifth Avenue with his new friends.
Now, our young hero was not naturally bashful; but he certainly felt
so now, especially as Miss Ida Greyson chose to walk by his side,
leaving Henry Fosdick to walk with her father and mother.
“What is your name?” asked Ida, pleasantly.
Our hero was about to answer “Ragged Dick,” when it occurred to him
that in the present company he had better forget his old nickname.
“Dick Hunter,” he answered.
“Dick!” repeated Ida. “That means Richard, doesn’t it?”
“Everybody calls me Dick.”
“I have a cousin Dick,” said the young lady, sociably. “His name is
Dick Wilson. I suppose you don’t know him?”
“No,” said Dick.
“I like the name of Dick,” said the young lady, with charming
frankness.
Without being able to tell why, Dick felt rather glad she did. He
plucked up courage to ask her name.
“My name is Ida,” answered the young lady. “Do you like it?”
“Yes,” said Dick. “It’s a bully name.”
Dick turned red as soon as he had said it, for he felt that he had
not used the right expression.
The little girl broke into a silvery laugh.
“What a funny boy you are!” she said.
“I didn’t mean it,” said Dick, stammering. “I meant it’s a tip-top
name.”
Here Ida laughed again, and Dick wished himself back in Mott Street.
“How old are you?” inquired Ida, continuing her examination.
“I’m fourteen,–goin’ on fifteen,” said Dick.
“You’re a big boy of your age,” said Ida. “My cousin Dick is a year
older than you, but he isn’t as large.”
Dick looked pleased. Boys generally like to be told that they are
large of their age.
“How old be you?” asked Dick, beginning to feel more at his ease.
“I’m nine years old,” said Ida. “I go to Miss Jarvis’s school. I’ve
just begun to learn French. Do you know French?”
“Not enough to hurt me,” said Dick.
Ida laughed again, and told him that he was a droll boy.
“Do you like it?” asked Dick.
“I like it pretty well, except the verbs. I can’t remember them
well. Do you go to school?”
“I’m studying with a private tutor,” said Dick.
“Are you? So is my cousin Dick. He’s going to college this year. Are
you going to college?”
“Not this year.”
“Because, if you did, you know you’d be in the same class with my
cousin. It would be funny to have two Dicks in one class.”
They turned down Twenty-fourth Street, passing the Fifth Avenue
Hotel on the left, and stopped before an elegant house with a brown
stone front. The bell was rung, and the door being opened, the boys,
somewhat abashed, followed Mr. Greyson into a handsome hall. They
were told where to hang their hats, and a moment afterwards were
ushered into a comfortable dining-room, where a table was spread
for dinner.
Dick took his seat on the edge of a sofa, and was tempted to rub his
eyes to make sure that he was really awake. He could hardly believe
that he was a guest in so fine a mansion.
Ida helped to put the boys at their ease.
“Do you like pictures?” she asked.
“Very much,” answered Henry.
The little girl brought a book of handsome engravings, and, seating
herself beside Dick, to whom she seemed to have taken a decided
fancy, commenced showing them to him.
“There are the Pyramids of Egypt,” she said, pointing to one engraving.
“What are they for?” asked Dick, puzzled. “I don’t see any winders.”
“No,” said Ida, “I don’t believe anybody lives there. Do they, papa?”
“No, my dear. They were used for the burial of the dead. The largest
of them is said to be the loftiest building in the world with one
exception. The spire of the Cathedral of Strasburg is twenty-four
feet higher, if I remember rightly.”
“Is Egypt near here?” asked Dick.
“Oh, no, it’s ever so many miles off; about four or five hundred.
Didn’t you know?”
“No,” said Dick. “I never heard.”
“You don’t appear to be very accurate in your information, Ida,"
said her mother. “Four or five thousand miles would be considerably
nearer the truth.”
After a little more conversation they sat down to dinner. Dick
seated himself in an embarrassed way. He was very much afraid of
doing or saying something which would be considered an impropriety,
and had the uncomfortable feeling that everybody was looking at him,
and watching his behavior.
“Where do you live, Dick?” asked Ida, familiarly.
“In Mott Street.”
“Where is that?”
“More than a mile off.”
“Is it a nice street?”
“Not very,” said Dick. “Only poor folks live there.”
“Are you poor?”
“Little girls should be seen and not heard,” said her mother, gently.
“If you are,” said Ida, “I’ll give you the five-dollar gold-piece
aunt gave me for a birthday present.”
“Dick cannot be called poor, my child,” said Mrs. Greyson, “since he
earns his living by his own exertions.”
“Do you earn your living?” asked Ida, who was a very inquisitive
young lady, and not easily silenced. “What do you do?”
Dick blushed violently. At such a table, and in presence of the
servant who was standing at that moment behind his chair, he did not
like to say that he was a shoe-black, although he well knew that
there was nothing dishonorable in the occupation.
Mr. Greyson perceived his feelings, and to spare them, said, “You
are too inquisitive, Ida. Sometime Dick may tell you, but you know
we don’t talk of business on Sundays.”
Dick in his embarrassment had swallowed a large spoonful of hot
soup, which made him turn red in the face. For the second time,
in spite of the prospect of the best dinner he had ever eaten, he
wished himself back in Mott Street. Henry Fosdick was more easy
and unembarrassed than Dick, not having led such a vagabond and
neglected life. But it was to Dick that Ida chiefly directed her
conversation, having apparently taken a fancy to his frank and
handsome face. I believe I have already said that Dick was a very
good-looking boy, especially now since he kept his face clean. He
had a frank, honest expression, which generally won its way to the
favor of those with whom he came in contact.
Dick got along pretty well at the table by dint of noticing how the
rest acted, but there was one thing he could not manage, eating with
his fork, which, by the way, he thought a very singular arrangement.
At length they arose from the table, somewhat to Dick’s relief.
Again Ida devoted herself to the boys, and exhibited a profusely
illustrated Bible for their entertainment. Dick was interested in
looking at the pictures, though he knew very little of their
subjects. Henry Fosdick was much better informed, as might have
been expected.
When the boys were about to leave the house with Mr. Greyson for the
Sunday school, Ida placed her hand in Dick’s, and said persuasively.
“You’ll come again, Dick, won’t you?”
“Thank you,” said Dick, “I’d like to,” and he could not help
thinking Ida the nicest girl he had ever seen.
“Yes,” said Mrs. Greyson, hospitably, “we shall be glad to see you
both here again.”
“Thank you very much,” said Henry Fosdick, gratefully. “We shall
like very much to come.”
I will not dwell upon the hour spent in Sunday school, nor upon the
remarks of Mr. Greyson to his class. He found Dick’s ignorance of
religious subjects so great that he was obliged to begin at the
beginning with him. Dick was interested in hearing the children
sing, and readily promised to come again the next Sunday.
When the service was over Dick and Henry walked homewards. Dick
could not help letting his thoughts rest on the sweet little girl
who had given him so cordial a welcome, and hoping that he might
meet her again.
“Mr. Greyson is a nice man,–isn’t he, Dick?” asked Henry, as they
were turning into Mott Street, and were already in sight of their
lodging-house.
“Aint he, though?” said Dick. “He treated us just as if we were
young gentlemen.”
“Ida seemed to take a great fancy to you.”
“She’s a tip-top girl,” said Dick, “but she asked so many questions
that I didn’t know what to say.”
He had scarcely finished speaking, when a stone whizzed by his head,
and, turning quickly, he saw Micky Maguire running round the corner
of the street which they had just passed.
Continue...

This eBook of “Ragged Dick, or, Street Life in New York With the Boot-Blacks” by Horatio Alger belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RAGGED DICK AND MARK, THE MATCH BOY: Two Novels by Horatio AlgerBy Horatio AlgerAt Amazon
