


The two things were originally closely connected. Men fasted in order
to give to others the savings which resulted from a reduced
expenditure on personal needs. “Lent savings” represent a modern
revival of this idea. The essence of Christian almsgiving is that it
should be the expression of Christian charity or love: and love means
the willingness to serve others, at cost to self. Gifts and
subscriptions which represent merely the largess of a man’s
superfluity and cost nothing in the way of personal self-denial are
not really in this sense almsgiving. The Gospel prefers the widow’s
mite to the rich man’s large but not really generous contribution, in
cases where the larger sum represents the lesser personal cost.
It was the rule of the ancient Jewish Law that a man should give away
a tenth part of what he possessed, but this ought not to be adopted
under modern conditions as a literal precept. The poor cannot afford
to spare so large a fraction of their incomes. The wealthy can in many
cases give away a much larger proportion without feeling particularly
stinted. It is the duty of every man whose income is above the line of
actual poverty (_i.e. exceeds what is necessary for the literal
subsistence in food, shelter, and clothing of himself and those
dependent upon him for support) to consider with his own conscience
before GOD what proportion should be set aside for educational and
other purposes, and what proportion should be directly given away in
charity. Anonymous subscriptions are the best, and the amount
available for distribution should be carefully allocated as between
rival claims. Details, of course, must vary: but a certain proportion
should in any case be given for the purposes of directly religious
work at home and abroad. A man who really believes in the universality
of the Gospel will in particular subscribe to the full extent of his
capacity to foreign missions.
With regard to fasting it has been suggested in an earlier chapter of
this book that there should be some personal rule of self-denial in a
man’s life. A table of fasts and days of abstinence is printed in the
Prayer-book, though the Church of England does not normally prescribe
in detail how such days are to be observed. It is worth remarking that
the spirit is not necessarily in contradiction to the letter; but
meticulous outward observances are not of the essence of Christianity,
nor is it desirable to obtrude such observances in an ostentatious
manner in mixed society. The rule of the Gospel with regard both to
almsgiving and to fasting is that such things should be done in
secret. It is usual, however, for Church people, at least in normal
circumstances, to pay some special regard to the observance of Lent,
and particularly of Holy Week, as a season of fasting and self-denial,
and also (with a less degree of strictness) to the four weeks of
Advent as leading up to Christmas. It is a good thing to enter into
the observance of these and other seasons of the Christian year so far
as circumstances permit: and at the least to make a point, if it is at
all possible, of reading during Lent and Advent a more or less serious
book of a religious or theological kind, or in other ways endeavouring
to deepen, by some special practice or observance, the inward
devotional life. The Sunday Collects, Epistles, and Gospels are of
course appointed with special reference to the significance of the
various seasons in the Church’s year, and provide suitable passages
for private meditation at such times. Advantage may also be taken of
the special courses of sermons and additional services provided in
almost every parish during the seasons of Lent and Advent. Loyalty to
the Brotherhood in matters even of minor observance is a great
principle to be borne in mind in this connexion. There is usually a
method in the Church’s madness, and her prescriptions and counsels are
the product of a very considerable empirical acquaintance with the
workings of the human soul.
The End
 

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
