


Politics at their worst are a discreditable struggle between parties
and groups for selfish, and sectional ends, full of dishonesty and
chicanery and corruption. It is often recognized at the present time
as desirable that none should be for party, but all for the state. The
Christian ideal goes further than this: it is that none should be for
party, but all for the Kingdom of GOD, and for the state only in so
far as the state is capable of being made the instrument of that
higher ideal. The Christian man is not to hold aloof from political
life, but to seek, so far as his personal effort and influence can be
made to tell, to Christianize the political struggle. In every
contested election he is bound to think out in the light of Christian
ideals the issues which are at stake, without either prejudice or
heat, and to register his vote in accordance with his conscience under
the most solemn sense of responsibility before GOD. He is bound, of
course, to be a reformer, standing for cleanness of methods, probity
of motives, honest thinking, class unselfishness, and the elimination
of abuses and malpractices. He will tend in most cases to be a cross-
bencher, in the sense of being independent of party caucuses and
concerned only for social and political righteousness.
A Christian man who has leisure and opportunity can render enormous
service by going into politics, more especially into municipal
politics, which are too often surrendered to the tender mercies of
corrupt, narrow-minded, or interested local wire-pullers. There is an
enormous field of unselfish social service and opportunity lying open
to Christian laymen in this connexion. There can be no truer form of
work for the Church of GOD than the work of a municipal councillor who
seeks not popularity but righteousness.
The carrying over of Christian ideals into national and international
politics is equally indispensable. In the sphere of international
affairs in particular, while other nations have, for the most part,
rendered official lip-service from time to time to ideals of
international morality, it has been reserved for Germany to declare
openly for the repudiation of “sentiment,” and for a policy of
undisguised cynicism and real-politik. The doctrine that the state
as such is exempt from moral obligation towards its neighbours, and
that the whole political duty of man is exhausted in the service of
his country and the promotion of her purely selfish interests and
“will to power,” has been exhibited in action by the Prussian
Government in such a fashion as to incur the moral reprobation of the
world. The cynical doctrines of real-politik, the belief that the
“interests” of the state are in politics and diplomacy paramount, and
that “the foreigner” is a natural enemy, the belief that in all
international relationships selfish and self-interested considerations
must really determine policy, are unfortunately by no means
unrepresented, though they are not unchallenged, in the political life
of other countries besides Germany. There are influential publicists
in England to-day the principles of whose political thinking are
really Prussian. It remains to be seen whether, when the time comes
for peace to be made between the nations, the forces of international
idealism will prove strong enough to carry the day, or whether we
shall have a merely vindictive and “realist” peace which will contain
within itself the seeds of future wars. There can be no question but
that a Christian man is bound to stand both for the freedom of
oppressed nationalities and for the right of all peoples freely to
determine their own affairs, and also for the duty of nations as of
individuals to love their neighbours as themselves, and to seek
primarily not their own but each other’s good. If these professions
are to be more than nominal they must mean a readiness for national
sacrifices and for national unselfishness in time of peace as in time
of war.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
