


Labour problems have always existed, but the development of
industrialism as we know it to-day is comparatively modern. It dates
from the introduction of machinery and mechanical transport, and
coincided in its beginnings with the vogue of the so-called
“Manchester School” in political and economic theory. The modern world
of industry has been built up by the enterprise of capitalists working
upon the basis of unrestricted competition. Joint-stock companies and
“trusts” are simply capitalistic combinations for the exploitation of
industrial opportunities upon a larger scale.
The economic theorists of the Manchester School regarded wages as
necessarily governed by the working of the “iron law” of supply and
demand. It was the “interest” of the employer to buy such labour as
was required at as cheap a rate as possible. It was assumed that in
this, as in other matters of “business,” his procedure must be
determined wholly by self-interest, to the exclusion of “sentimental"
considerations. Individual employers might be better than their creed,
and in the smaller “concerns” the relations between employer and
employed were often humanized by personal knowledge and intercourse.
With the advent of the joint-stock company this no longer held good.
“A corporation has no bowels.” Directors were not personally in
contact with their workpeople, and their main consideration was for
their shareholders. The whole tendency of the industrial order of
society as it developed was in the direction of the exploitation of
the workman in the interests of “capital.”
It was not that members of the employing class were consciously
inhuman. It was simply that they were blinded to the human problems
which were involved. They had become accustomed to regard as natural
and inevitable a wage-slavery of the many to the few. Labour was a
commodity in the market. The workman was a unit of labour. Regarded
from the point of view of Capital he represented simply the
potentiality of so many foot-pounds of more or less intelligently-
directed energy per diem. His life as a human being, apart from the
economic value of his labour, was from the “business” point of view
irrelevant.
The system was based upon a lie. “Treat human beings as machines as
much as you will, the fact remains that they are incurably personal."
The wage-slaves of the modern world asserted their personality, and
the modern Socialist-Labour Movement is the result. The forces of
organized labour have won some notable victories. They are a
recognized power in the land. There are those who hope, and those who
fear, that they will in the end become socially and politically
omnipotent. It is now generally recognized that society prior to the
war was on the brink of a struggle between the classes of great
bitterness, and that the social condition of the country after the war
is likely to be fraught with formidable possibilities. There are many
observers who regard a social revolution, in one form or another, as
inevitable.
Much, no doubt, will depend upon the temper of the returning troops,
both officers and men. That men and officers have learnt to know and
to respect one another upon the battlefield is acknowledged, but those
who imagine that herein is contained a solution of social and labour
problems are likely to prove grievously disappointed. A great deal of
nonsense is being talked about the effects of “discipline” upon the
men. Military discipline has its admirers: but men of mature years and
civilian traditions who in the present conflict have served in the
ranks of His Majesty’s Army are not included among their number. They
have submitted to discipline for the period of their military service.
They are quite able to recognize that it is essential to the
efficiency of the army as a fighting machine. But they conceive
themselves to have been fighting for freedom: and their own freedom
and that of their children and of their class is included in their
eyes among the objects for which they fight. They will be more than
ever jealous, after the war, of their recovered liberties, and
determined to assert them. It is probable that one result of
demobilization will be an enormous accession of strength to the ranks
of the Socialist and Labour parties. The “class war” with which
society was threatened before the European War broke out is not likely
to be a less present danger when “that which now restraineth “is
removed by the conclusion of peace.
What in relation to these problems is the message of the Christian
Church? The distinctively Christian ethic is based not upon self-
assertion but upon self-sacrifice, not upon class distinctions but
upon brotherhood. “Let no man seek his own, but each his neighbour’s
good.” The principle is of corporate as well as of individual
application. In an ideally Christian society, the interests of
“Labour” would be the sole concern of “Capital,” the interests of
“Capital” the sole concern of “Labour”: and the message of the Church
to the contending parties should be, now as always, “Sirs, ye are
brethren.”
Neither party, however, is likely at present to pay much heed to such
a message, which is apt to sound like an abstract and theoretical
truism remote from the actualities of life. In point of fact, the
large sections of the population who live permanently near or below
the poverty line are largely precluded by lack of leisure from
entering into the Christian heritage of the spiritual life, and are
too much obsessed by the daily struggle for material existence to have
patience with exhortations to regard with sympathy either the
temptations or the good intentions of the well-to-do. The latter in
turn are apt to resent any attempt to stir in them a social conscience
with regard to the problems of poverty or the fundamental causes of
labour “unrest,” to regard the security of dividends as conveniently
guaranteed by the laws of GOD, and to hold, in a general way, that
everything has hitherto been ordered for the best in the best of all
possible worlds. The Church–and more particularly the Church of
England–is commonly regarded both by “Labour” and by “Capital” as
traditionally identified with the Conservative Party in politics. The
Church-going classes love to have it so, and the world of Labour not
unnaturally holds aloof.
It is nevertheless sufficiently obvious that the future of
civilization after the war will be largely in the hands (or at the
mercy) of organized Labour. And it is worth remembering that our
Saviour died not for the rich only, but for the poor, having moreover
Himself lived and worked as a labouring Man. There are those who
regard the spirit of idealism and world-wide brotherhood by which the
Labour Movement is inspired as the most profoundly Christian element
in the life of the modern world, and the existing cleavage between
Labour and the Church as a tragedy comparable only to the tragedy of
the war. It is the plain duty of a Christian man to do what in him
lies to remedy this cleavage, to think hard and honestly about social
problems from a Christian point of view, and to make it his business
to have an adequate understanding and sympathy with the real character
and motives of Labour aspirations and ideals.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
