


Prayer is a difficult matter, both in theory and in practice. But it
is essential to learn to pray.
It is important to recognize that the scope of Christian prayer is
much wider than mere intercession or petition. It is the communion of
the soul with GOD, and its purpose is union with the life of GOD in
identity of purpose with His will. The beginning of prayer is a
sursum corda, a lifting up of the heart to GOD. It is well to
remember that true prayer is never a solitary act, even when a man
prays in solitude. We pray not as individuals but as members of a
Family, and our prayer is spiritually united and knit together with
the common prayer-life of the universal Church, of which it forms a
part. We pray, moreover, not to wrest to our private ends the purposes
of GOD, not to induce Him, so to speak, to do our wills instead of
His, but to unite our wills with His will, as children who have
confidence in their Father. True prayer is offered in the Name of
Christ–that is, it is prayed in His Spirit, according to His mind and
will. It can never, therefore, be selfish or self-centred. The Lord’s
Prayer is its model and its type. A few words may be said in
explanation of this prayer.
It begins with a recognition of the common Fatherhood of GOD. It is
only as members of His Family that we can approach Him: He is in no
sense our personal or private GOD, but the common Father of us all.
And our Father is “in heaven"–that is, supreme, eternal, the Lord and
Ruler of all things. His Name is holy, and to be hallowed: it is in
reverence and deepest worship that we bow before Him. He is King, and
we pray that His Kingship may be realized, in earth as it is in
heaven: and that His will may be done–that is the supreme desire of
our hearts, and the highest object of our petitions.
And therefore we are vowed to His service: and because we are sure
that He will supply whatever we really need to that end, we pray in
confidence for daily needs both spiritual and bodily–"Give us this
day our daily bread.” And remembering that we are unprofitable and
faithless and disloyal servants we ask forgiveness for our sins, well
knowing that we can only be forgiven as we ourselves are ready to
forgive. And so looking to the future and mindful of our frailty we
pray that GOD will not lead us into “temptation” or trial, without at
the same time providing a way of deliverance from the assaults of
evil. The prayer customarily ends with an ascription of praise and
glory to GOD.
That is the type and model of Christian prayer: and prayer is truly
Christian just in so far as the spirit and temper of the Lord’s Prayer
inspires it. We can only pray rightly in the Holy Spirit. “We know not
what to pray for as we ought: but the Spirit helpeth our infirmities.”
As for the technique of prayer, a man, on kneeling or standing to
pray, will do well to spend a short time first in silence and
recollection, waiting in stillness upon GOD, remembering His presence,
His holiness, His love, and His responsiveness to His children’s cry.
Let him next make an act of adoration, spoken or unspoken, and invoke
GOD the Holy Spirit to enable him to pray aright. Then let him pour
out before GOD all that is in his heart, his troubles, his anxieties,
his perplexities, his sins: let him ask for forgiveness: let him give
thanks: let him pray for the coming of GOD’S Kingdom, in its various
aspects: commending to GOD’S guidance and protection all right causes
and aspirations in the world, in things both social and political and
international, in things ecclesiastical, in things moral and religious
and missionary: let him add personal and private intercessions for
those near and dear to him and for those whom he meets in the daily
intercourse of life: and let him end as he began, in a few moments of
quiet waiting upon GOD.
That is the general scheme of a Christian’s private prayers. They
should include in due proportion the several elements of adoration,
thanksgiving, penitence, petition, and intercession. They need not be
lengthy. “Use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think
that they shall be heard for their much speaking.” It is quality and
not quantity of prayer that counts. And the prayers of a busy man must
necessarily be short.
But it is worth while taking time and trouble over the ordering of
one’s prayers. A man’s intercessions, in particular, are not likely in
practice to have the width, the range, and the variety which are
desirable, unless they are planned and ordered in accordance with a
coherent scheme which is thought out in advance. It is the part of
wisdom to keep a note-book, in which names and subjects for
intercessory prayer may be jotted down and distributed over the days
of the week for use in due rotation. Such schemes, however, if drawn
up and used, should be revised from time to time, and not suffered to
become a mechanical burden or a legal bondage. There should be freedom
and spontaneity in a Christian’s prayers. It is well to have rules,
and to try not to be prevented by mere slackness from keeping them.
But it is important to see to it that the self-imposed rule is so
framed as to prove genuinely conducive to reality in prayer, and
suitably adapted to opportunity and circumstance: and it is very often
a good thing from time to time, in the interests of freedom, quite
deliberately to break one’s rules.
With regard to forms and methods of prayer, it is desirable that men
should learn to pray freely in their own words, or even in no words at
all. Provided a man remembers reverence, he need not stand on ceremony
with GOD. But it is advisable also to use books and manuals of prayer
–at any rate in the first instance: to use them, but not to be tied to
them. Many such manuals have been compiled and published within recent
years: the majority of them are unsatisfactory in varying degrees. A
few, however, can confidently be recommended: especially Prayers
for the City of God, compiled by G. C. Binyon (Longmans); Prayers
for Common Use (Universities Mission to Central Africa, Dartmouth
St., Westminster); and Sursum Corda, a Handbook of Intercession and
Thanksgiving, arranged by W. H. Frere and A. L. Illingworth (A. E.
Mowbray and Co., Ltd.).
Prayer need not be confined to stated hours and times. Interpreting
prayer at its widest, the ideal should be to “pray without ceasing."
It was said of an early Christian writer that his life was “one
continuous prayer”: and it is well to form the habit of inwardly
lifting up the heart to GOD from time to time in the midst of daily
cares and business. Where Churches are kept open it is often possible
in passing to spare time to enter and kneel for two or three minutes
in quiet and recollection before GOD: but it is perfectly possible to
pray inwardly at any time and in any environment. Fixed times of
prayer, nevertheless, there must also be: and a man should at least
pray in the morning upon rising and in the evening before going to
bed. If a time can also be secured for midday prayer, so much the
better: but this is more difficult. To have formed a really fixed and
stable habit of daily prayer is an enormous step forwards in Christian
life. Much depends upon learning to rise regularly at a fixed hour
before breakfast: and this in turn depends upon a regularity in going
to bed, which under modern conditions of life it is not always easy to
achieve. If a man is obliged to be up so late at night that it is
morally certain that he will be too tired to pray with much reality
before turning in, he should endeavour, if it is at all possible, to
secure some time for prayer at an earlier stage in the evening.
Difficulties in the life of prayer beset everybody. Thoughts have a
way of wandering, the “saying” of prayers tends to become mechanical,
moods vary, and there are times in most men’s lives when they feel it
almost impossible to pray with any sense of reality. A man should not
lightly be discouraged. He may be recommended to remind himself that
GOD knows all about it, and that the resolute offering of his will to
GOD at such times, in defiance of distraction and difficulty, has
special value. It is well to take God into one’s confidence. “If GOD
bores you, tell Him that He does.” He is no exacting tyrant, but a
Father caring for His sons. Those who care to do so may find Prayer
and some of its Difficulties, by the Rev. W. J. Carey (Mowbray &
Co.), a helpful book to read in this connexion.
A final word may be said with regard to a theoretical difficulty which
many people feel in connexion with the intercessory and petitionary
sides of prayer. Since GOD’S will, it may be argued, is presumably
going to be done in any case, and since He knows the real needs both
of ourselves and of our friends better than we do, what is the point
of praying for them? To many people it may be a sufficient practical
answer to refer to the example and precept of Christ, who both taught
and practised intercessory prayer. But it is possible to go a little
further, and to point out that it appears to be GOD’S will, not merely
that such and such a thing should be done, but that it should be done
in response to our human prayers. True it is that “your Father knoweth
what things ye have need of, before ye ask Him”: but our Lord
emphasized this truth, not as a round for regarding prayer as futile
or unnecessary, but as a reason for praying. For prayer is an
expression of the filial spirit towards our Father, and the more
simply and naturally we approach GOD as children, making our petitions
before Him with childlike hearts, the more truly will our prayers be
in accordance with that spirit of sonship which is the mind of Christ.
At the same time, the knowledge that our Father is wiser as well as
greater than we will forbid us to clamour for what in wisdom is denied
us, and will in general govern the spirit and scope of our petitions.
Just as our Lord points out that an earthly father, if asked for
bread, will not give his child a stone, so conversely in the
experience of every Christian it often happens that in his blindness
he asks a stone, and is given bread. But no Christian will ask
deliberately and knowingly for stones.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
