


The devil is from one point of view a figure of Jewish and Christian
mythology. The Jews, like other early peoples, believed in the
existence of evil spirits or demons, to whose malignant agency they
ascribed various diseases, both functional and organic, and in
particular those unhappy cases of obsession, fixed idea, and multiple
personality, which we should now class under the general head of
insanity, and treat in asylums for the mentally deranged. The New
Testament writings are full of this point of view, which is of course
largely foreign to our minds to-day. The ordinary Englishman is not a
great believer in devils or spirits of evil: though he does in some
instances believe in ghosts, and is inclined to the practice of what
in former ages was called necromancy–the attempt to establish an
illicit connexion with the spirits of the departed–under the modern
name of psychical research. There are, no doubt, some forms of
psychical research which are genuinely scientific and legitimate. It
is probable enough that there exists a considerable area of what may
be called borderland phenomena to which scientific methods of inquiry
may be found applicable, and which it is theoretically the business of
science to investigate. But it is a region in which the way lies
readily open to all kinds of superstition and self-deceit. The pursuit
of truth for its own sake is essentially a religious thing: but the
motives of many amateur dabblers in psychical research are far from
being truly religious or spiritual. Much popular spiritualism, whether
it assumes the form of table-turnings, of spirit-rappings, or of
mediumistic seances, is thoroughly morbid and undesirable, and the
Christian Church has rightly discouraged it.
It is not, however, necessary to believe literally in the devil, or in
devils–concerning whose existence many persons will prefer to remain
agnostic–in order to find in the figure of the devil, as he appears
in Biblical and other literature, a convenient personification of
certain forms of evil. There is an atmosphere of evil about us, a
Kingdom of Evil, over against the Kingdom of Good: and there are
suggestions and impulses of evil which from time to time arise in our
minds, which–whatever may be the literal truth about them–not
infrequently present the appearance of having been prompted by some
mysterious external Tempter. Certainly deeds have been done in the
present war which can only be described as devilish. The war has
revealed on a large scale and in unmistakable terms the evil of which
the heart of man is capable, and how thin in many cases is the veneer
which separates the outwardly civilized European from the primitive
savage. “For this purpose was the Son of GOD manifested, that He might
destroy the works of the devil.” And by the works of the devil we may
understand especially cruelty, malice, envy, hatred and all
uncharitableness, the spirit of selfishness which wars against love,
and the spirit of pride which ignores GOD. We see these things
exhibited upon the large scale in the conspicuous criminals among
mankind, whom we are sometimes tempted to regard as devils incarnate.
We need to be on our guard against the beginnings of them, and indeed
in many cases their actual presence in an undetected but fairly
developed form, in ourselves.
Christian men are to be kindly affectioned one towards another in
brotherly love: in honour preferring one another–which is easier to
say than to do. They are to refrain from rendering evil for evil, and
to learn under provocation to be self-controlled. They are to be in
charity with all men, and so far as it lies within their own power
(for it takes two to make peace, as it takes two to make a quarrel)
they are to live peaceably with all men. Wrath and clamour, lying and
evil-speaking, back-biting and slandering, are all of the devil,
devilish. Contrary to the works of the devil, which may be summed up
under the three headings of lying, hatred, and pride, are the
Christian ideals of truthfulness, love, and humility, with regard to
each of which a few words may usefully be said.
(i) The devil is described in the New Testament as “a liar and the
father thereof.” A Christian is to be true and just in all his
dealings, abhorring crookedness: for the essence of lying is not
inexactitude in speech, but deceitfulness of intention. Christian
veracity means honesty, straightforwardness, and sincerity in deed as
well as in word. A writer of fiction is not a liar: to improve in the
telling an anecdote or a story is not necessarily to deceive others in
any culpable sense; and moralists have from time to time discussed the
question whether there may not be circumstances in which to tell a
verbal lie is even a moral duty–e.g. in order to prevent a murderer
or a madman from discovering the whereabouts of his intended victim.
But casuistical problems of this kind do not very frequently arise,
and in all ordinary circumstances strict literal veracity is the right
course to pursue. [Footnote: Of course such social conventions as “Not
at home,” “No trouble at all,” or “Glad to see you,” “No, you are not
interrupting me,” etc., are hardly to be classed as “lies,” since they
do not as a rule seriously mislead others, but are merely an
expression of the will to be civil.]
Christian truthfulness, however, is in any case a much wider thing
than merely verbal truth-telling: it implies inward spiritual reality,
a genuine desire to see things as they are, a thirst of the soul for
truth, and a hatred of shams. The worst form of lying is that in which
a man is not merely a deceiver of others but is self-deceived, and
suffers from “the lie in the soul.” The religion of Christ is always
remorselessly opposed to every form or kind of humbug or of sham.
Jesus Christ is the supreme spiritual realist of history. In His view
the “publican” or acknowledged sinner is preferable to the Pharisee or
hypocrite for the precise reason that the former is a more genuine
kind of person than the latter. And to tell the truth in this deeper
sense, that is, genuinely to face realities and to refuse to be put
off with shams, to see through the plausibilities and to detect the
hollowness of moral and social pretences and conventionalities, to
have, in short, the spiritual and moral instinct for reality, is a
much harder thing than to be verbally veracious. The true veracity can
come only from Him who is the Truth: it is a gift of the Spirit, and
proceeds from GOD who knows the counsels of men’s hearts, and discerns
the motives and imaginations of their minds.
It follows that just as every lie is of the devil, so all truth, of
whatever kind, is of GOD. The Lord is a God of Knowledge, and every
form of intellectual timidity and obscurantism is contrary to
godliness. There can never be any opposition between scientific and
religious truth, since both equally proceed from GOD. The Christian
Church is ideally a society of free-thinkers, that is, of men who
freely think, and the genuine Christian tradition has always been to
promote learning and freedom of inquiry. It is worth remembering that
the oldest and most justly venerable of the Universities of Europe are
without exception in their origin ecclesiastical foundations. If the
love of truth and the spirit of freedom which inspired their inception
has at particular epochs in their history been temporarily obscured,
if there is much in the ecclesiasticism both of the past and of the
present which is reactionary in tendency and spirit, at least there
have never been lacking protesting voices, and the authentic spirit of
the Gospel tells always upon the other side. “Ye shall know the
truth,” says a New Testament writer, “and the truth shall make you
free.” [Footnote: The manifestations of the persecuting spirit and
temper are not confined to the sphere of religion; the intolerance of
the platform or of the press can be as bigoted as that of the pulpit:
and secular governments also can persecute–not only in France or in
Prussia. That it is part of the mission of Christianity to cast out
the evil spirit of persecution, to destroy intolerance as it has
destroyed slavery, is none the less true, in spite of the fact that
both slavery and persecution have in the past found Christian
defenders.]
(ii) In the second place, hatred is of the devil, and love is of
Christ: the Christian is to love even his enemies. In a time of war,
that is to say, whenever actual enemies exist, the natural man
discovers in such an ideal only an immoral sentimentalism, and the
doctrinaire pacificist occasionally uses language which gives colour
to the charge. But Christianity has nothing in common with
sentimentalism, and Christian is no merely sentimental affection which
ignores the reality of evil or explains away the wrongfulness of
wrong. In order to love his enemies it is not necessary for a
Christian to pretend that they are not really hostile, to make excuses
for things that are inexcusable, or to be blind to the moral issues
which may be at stake. It has rightly been pointed out that “Love your
enemies” means “Want them to be your friends: want them to alter, so
that friendship between you and them may become possible.” More
generally what is meant is that the Christian man is by the grace of
GOD, to conquer the instinct of hatred and the spirit of revenge
within his own heart, to be willing to serve others (his enemies
included) at cost to himself in accordance with the will of GOD, to
desire on behalf of all men (his enemies included) the realization of
their true good. For wrongdoers chastisement may be the truest
kindness. To allow a man, or a nation, to pursue an evil purpose
unchecked would be no real act of love even towards the nation or the
individual concerned. To offer opposition, if necessary by force, may
in certain circumstances be a plain duty. That which we are to love,
in those whose immediate aspect and character is both unlovely and
unlovable, is not what they are, but what they are capable of
becoming. We are to love that element in them which is capable of
redemption, the true spiritual image of GOD in man, which can never be
totally effaced. We are to remember that for them also the Son of GOD
was crucified, that we also have need of forgiveness, and that “GOD
commendeth His own love towards us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.”
(iii) The third great manifestation of the spirit and temper which is
of the devil, devilish, is pride, which by Christian writers upon
these subjects is commonly regarded as the deadliest of the so-called
“deadly sins,” on the ground that it logically involves the assertion
of a false claim to be independent of GOD, and is therefore fatal in
principle to the religious life. Pagan systems of morality distinguish
between false pride, the foolish conceit of the man who claims for
himself virtues and capacities which he does not in fact possess, and
proper pride, the entirely just appreciation by a man of his own
merits and accomplishments at neither more nor less than their true
value. The Christian ideal of humility is apt from this point of view
to appear either slavish or insincere. The issue between Christian and
pagan morals here depends upon the truth or falsehood of the Christian
doctrine of GOD and of His relation to man. Once let a man take
seriously the avowal that “It is He that hath made us, and not we
ourselves,” once let him grant the position that his life belongs to
GOD and not to himself, and concur in the judgment of spiritual
experience that whatever is good in him is the result not of his own
efforts in independence of his Maker, but of the Divine Spirit
operative within him, and it becomes obvious that “boasting"–as S.
Paul expresses it–"is excluded.”
At the same time Christian humility is not self-depreciation. It has
nothing in common either with the spirit of Uriah Heep, or with the
false diffidence which refuses on the ground of personal insufficiency
a task or vocation to which a man is genuinely called. These are both
equally forms of self-consciousness. Humility is forgetfulness of
self. The true pattern and exemplar of humility is the Christ, who
claimed for Himself the greatest role in the whole history of the
world, simply on the ground that it was the work which His Father had
given Him to do. “I seek not Mine own glory: there is One that seeketh
and judgeth.” The secret of humility is devotion to the will of GOD.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
