


Christianity in the last three chapters has been considered on its
negative side as involving a conflict against temptation. But the
Christian ideal is positive rather than negative. We have only to
think for a moment of the character and life of Christ in order to
realize how ludicrously impoverished a conception of the Gospel
righteousness is that which regards it as exhausted by the meticulous
avoidance of sin. “Christian purity,” it has been said, “is not a
snowy abstinence but a white-hot passion of life towards GOD.” The
same might be said of other Christian virtues. Positively regarded,
the Christian ideal of life means sonship towards GOD and citizenship
in His Kingdom.
The precise signification of the phrase, “Kingdom of GOD,” or “Kingdom
of Heaven,” in the language of the New Testament has been the theme of
controversy and discussion among scholars. It is impossible to enter
here into the technicalities of the dispute. Broadly speaking, it may
be laid down without much fear of contradiction that the Kingdom of
GOD means the effectual realization, in every department of human life
and upon a universal scale, of the sovereignty of GOD as Christ
reveals Him. It is the vision of the goal of human history. It is
meant to be a leading motive and inspiration of Christian life.
    “I will not cease from mental strife,
     Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,
     Till we have built Jerusalem
     In England’s green and pleasant land.”
It is quite true that, according to the thought of the New Testament
writers, the mystic Jerusalem is not a city built by mortal men upon
this earth, but something which is wholly the gift of GOD, a city not
made with hands, descending from GOD out of heaven. The Kingdom of GOD
in its fulness is no product of human striving. It is the achievement
of a Divine purpose, the manifestation in the end of the days of the
completed mystery of the Divine Will.
Nevertheless it is the mission of the Church to prepare the way of the
Kingdom, and it is for Christian men to live as sons of the Divine
Kingdom even now, that is, as men in whose hearts and lives GOD and
none other is enthroned as King and Lord. This means that everything
that is good in human life is to be redeemed by being offered to GOD,
and that everything that is vile and evil is to be eliminated and cast
out. “The Son of Man shall send forth His messengers, and they shall
gather out of His Kingdom all things that offend.” “There shall in no
wise enter into it anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh
abomination, or maketh a lie.” “The Kingdom of GOD is righteousness
and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
The ideal of the Christian life, therefore, is something infinitely
richer and more positive than the merely negative morality of the Ten
Commandments. It is the ideal of the Divine Kingdom. It is a positive
devotion to the will of GOD. It means co-operation with the Divine
will and purpose, a will and a purpose which, by the patient operation
of the Divine Spirit, is in the course of world-history slowly but
surely being worked out, amid all the immediate chaos and welter of
events, to its goal in the revelation of the Jerusalem which is from
above. That is why the Christian is bidden to pray continually, “Thy
Kingdom come, Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven.”
If a man does not want the Divine Kingdom, or does not believe in it,
he ought not to pray for it. If he does want it and pray for it, he
ought also to work for it. And though no man may fully understand it,
yet if a man is to pray for it and work for it at all, he needs to
have at least some partial understanding of what it means. It is worth
while, therefore, instead of dismissing the idea as a vague dream or
an empty phrase, to try and fill it with some measure of positive
meaning for us men here and now. What is the will of GOD for humanity?
And what is meant by preparing the way of the Lord? Some things at
least we may say are certainly included in the will of GOD, and some
things are as certainly excluded.
“It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven that one of
these little ones should perish.” A Christian Church which took
seriously its vocation to go before the Lord and to prepare His ways
would be effectively and vigorously concerned with problems so prosaic
as the rate of infantile mortality and the allied questions of housing
and sanitation, with the insistence that the conditions of life among
the poorer classes of the community shall be such as make decent
living possible, and with the provision of a minimum of leisure and of
genuine opportunities of liberal education for all who have the will
and the capacity to profit by them. The combined ignorance and apathy
of the people of England with regard to questions of education, which
has made possible the shelving of Mr. Fisher’s Education Bill in
deference to the opposition of vested interests, is little to the
credit of the Christian Church in these islands, and grievously
disappointing to those who had hoped at last for a real instalment of
constructive reform. [Footnote: It is now stated that the Bill is to
be reintroduced and passed, with certain modifications. It is to be
hoped that the modifications will not be such as to destroy its
effectiveness as an instrument of real reform. It remains true that
the Bill was imperilled by the apathy and ignorance of the rank and
file of Churchmen and Christians generally, though it is fair to say
that the Bishops demonstrated unanimously in its favour.]
A system of education, moreover, which was truly Christian, would
provide not merely for the training of mind and body, and for
instruction–on the basis of some inter-denominational modus vivendi
yet to be achieved–in morality and religion. It would secure equally
for the children of all classes opportunities for the training of the
aesthetic faculties, for the cultivation of art and imagination, for
the filling of life with colour and variety and movement. The
intolerable ugliness of the domestic architecture of our cities and
towns is a totally unnecessary offence to GOD and man; and the
drabness and monotony of the life of huge masses of the population,
who find in the rival attractions of the gin-palace and the cinema the
only means of distraction at present open to them–this also is
something which cannot possibly be regarded as being in accordance
with the will of GOD. The redemption of society from all that at
present makes human life sordid or hideous is a real part of what the
ideal of the Kingdom means. It is a part of the task laid upon the
Christian Church in preparing the way of the Lord and making straight
His paths.
Included also in the will of GOD for humanity is the evangelization of
the world, the perfecting of the Church, the bringing of all nations
and races into a spiritual unity in Christ Jesus. Christianity claims
by its very nature to be the absolute religion: the climax and
fulfilment of the whole process of man’s religious quest: the
synthetic and unifying truth, in which whatever is true and positive
and permanently valuable in the religious systems of the non-Christian
world is gathered up and made complete. Of Christ it has been written
that “How many soever be the promises of GOD, in Him is the yea.” In
Christ is the fulfilment of the unconscious prophecies of the
religions of the heathen world, nor is there any true solution of the
problems of comparative religion except this. The Christian Church is
in principle and of necessity missionary, and apart from the
vitalizing breath of the missionary spirit the life of the Church
languishes and dies.
But the true spirit and method of Christian missions is not a narrow
proselytism. There are indeed things in many of the lower religions of
the world which are dark and evil. There are regions of the earth
which are full of base and cruel and degrading superstitions, immoral
rites and practices against which the Church of Christ can only set
its face, and with which it can make no terms. These are works of the
devil which the Son of GOD was manifested to destroy. But there is
much in the higher religious thought of paganism which Christ comes
not to destroy but to fulfil, and Christianity can fulfil and
interpret to the higher religions of paganism just that which is
truest and most positive in their own spiritual message. Conversely,
it is probable that there are in Christianity itself elements which
will only be fully interpreted and understood when the spiritual
genius of nations at present pagan has made its proper contribution to
Christian thought. For our own sake as well as for theirs it is
important that the nations should be evangelized and brought to a
knowledge of the truth. When we say the Lord’s Prayer we are praying,
among other things, for the success of Christian Missions.
And if Christianity contains within itself the true solution of the
problem of comparative religion, it contains also, in germ and
potentiality, the solution of the problems of race and caste, and of
the international problem also. Not until men have learnt the secret
of brotherhood in Christ will the white and the coloured races treat
one another as brothers. Not until the nations, as nations, are
genuinely Christian and have learnt, in their dealings one with
another, to manifest the spirit of unselfishness and love, will the
day be in sight when they shall beat their swords into ploughshares
and be content to learn war no more. This too, if the Gospel means
anything at all, is part of the will of GOD for the human race. It is
part of what is involved in the prayer, “Thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heaven.” It is an integral and vitally important element in
the Christian hope of the Kingdom.
The redemption of society, the evangelization of the world, the
bringing together into the corporate wholeness of a world-wide
Catholic Church of the fragmentary Christianity of the existing
multitude of sects, the elimination of war from the earth, and the
breaking down, as the result of a conscious realization of human unity
in Christ, of the dividing barriers of colour and race and caste-all
these are essential elements in the Christian vision. The man of the
world may, and probably will, pronounce each and all of them to be
chimerical, the baseless fabric of a dream. He will find no thoughtful
man who is genuinely Christian to agree with him.
For these things are, quite certainly, part of the will of GOD for
humanity. They are involved of necessity in any effectual realization
in human life of the sovereignty of the Father who is revealed in
Christ. And because GOD is GOD, the goal, for the Christian man, is
within the horizon-"The Kingdom of heaven is at hand.” In any case, be
the goal near or be it far off, it is as a citizen of that Kingdom,
and of none other, that the Christian man will set himself to live. He
will enthrone GOD in his own heart as King and Lord, and will hold
fast the heavenly vision which it has been given to him to see.
“As we look out into the future,” says a modern writer,[Footnote: The
Rev. W. Temple, in an address delivered at Liverpool on “Problems of
Society” in 1912, and published by the Student Christian Movement in
Christ and, Human Need.] “we seem to see a great army drawn from
every nation under heaven, from every social class, from every section
of Christ’s Church, pledged to one thing and to one thing only-the
establishment of Christ’s Kingdom upon earth by His method of
sacrifice and the application of His principle of brotherhood to every
phase of human life. And as they labour there takes shape a world much
like our own, and yet how different! Still individuals and
communities, but the individual always serving the community and the
community protecting the individual: still city and country life, with
all their manifold pursuits, but no leading into captivity and no
complaining in our streets: still Eastern and Western, but no grasping
worldliness in the West, no deadening pessimism in the East: still
richer and poorer, but no thoughtless luxury, no grinding destitution:
still sorrow, but no bitterness: still failure, but no oppression:
still priest and people, yet both alike unitedly presenting before the
Eternal Father the one unceasing sacrifice for human life in body
broken and blood shed: still Church and World, yet both together
celebrating unintermittently the one Divine Service, which is the
service of mankind. And in that climax of a vision, which, if we are
faithful, shall be prophecy, what is it that has happened?
“’The kingdoms of this world have become the Kingdom of our GOD and of
His Christ.’”
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
