


It is to be feared that the habit of reading the Bible in private for
purposes of devotion has largely dropped out of modern usage, partly
by reason of the general stress and urgency of modern life, and partly
because men do not quite know what to make of the Bible when they read
it. They are aware of the existence of what are called “critical
questions,” but they do not know precisely the kind of differences
which criticism has made. It is a pity to acquiesce in an attitude of
this kind, and it is greatly to be desired that the habit of reading
the Bible regularly and becoming familiar with its contents should be
revived.
There are two distinct methods of reading the Bible which are of
value. One is to take a particular book and to read it straight
through like a novel, in order to get the impression of the writer’s
message as a whole. Advantage may be taken of occasional opportunities
of Sunday or week-day leisure for this purpose. If the book is studied
with the help of a good commentary, so much the better. A man who
would be ashamed to be wholly unfamiliar with modern or classical
literature ought to be equally ashamed to be wholly unfamiliar with
the literature of the Hebrews.
The second method of reading the Bible consists in the devotional
study of particular passages, sometimes called by the formidable name
of “meditation.” The parts of the Bible best adapted for this purpose
are the Gospels, certain portions of the Epistles, many of the Psalms,
and portions of the greater Prophets. The essence of the method is to
read over a short passage quietly after prayer for spiritual guidance,
to browse over it for a few minutes and follow out any train of
thought which may be suggested by it, to apply its message in whatever
way may seem most real and practical to the spiritual problems of
immediate daily life, and to conclude with prayer and resolution for
the future. It is not practicable for the majority of men to make such
a “meditation” a matter of daily habit, though this may easily be
possible for people of leisure. But it may be suggested that it is
both practicable and abundantly worth while for ordinary people to
allot at least half an hour a week for such a purpose. Our fathers
unquestionably fed and nurtured their souls to an extraordinary degree
by spiritual reading. It ought to be possible for modern people, in
spite of modern distractions, to acquire and maintain the capacity to
do the same.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
