


Christianity in practice means the dedication of life to the unselfish
service of GOD and man, in the light of the ideals of Jesus Christ,
and in the power of an inward spiritual life which is hid with Christ
in GOD. The Christian, renouncing such merely worldly ideals as self-
advancement, personal or family ambition, the accumulation of money,
or the enjoyment, for their own sake, of the things which money can
buy, is called to seek first and in all things GOD’S Kingdom and His
righteousness, in the assurance that whatever may be really necessary
for the advancement of this aim will in due course be added unto him.
He is not to expect to find the practice of his religion to be, in a
worldly sense, profitable; and the practice of his religion is to
cover the whole of life. The desperate attempt to combine the service
of GOD with that of Mammon is therefore to be abandoned. If riches
increase, he is not to set his heart upon them. If poverty be his lot,
he is to embrace poverty as a bride. The aim and object of his life is
not to be to get his own will done, but to discover what for him is
the will of GOD, and to do it. He is to be the slave of GOD in Christ,
a living instrument in the hands of Another, called to co-operate in a
purpose not his own, though a purpose which he is to embrace, and to
make his own, in a spirit of loyal sonship.
This means, among other things, that life is to be interpreted in
terms of vocation. It means that for every man there is a “calling,” a
particular line of life which GOD intends him to follow, a specific
piece of service to GOD and to his neighbour which he is called upon
to render. The motto of a Christian’s life is to be the motto of his
Master–"My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me, and to
accomplish His work.” Gifts and capacities, aptitudes for any special
work, are therefore “talents,” to be used in accordance with the will
and purpose of the Giver. Opportunities and endowments, whatsoever
they may be, are opportunities and endowments for service.
It does not necessarily follow from this that a realization of the
truth of Christianity, and an awakening to the claims of religion,
will lead to any outward change or radical alteration in the general
conception of a man’s life-work. It may or it may not do so. There are
indubitably cases in which a man is called upon to abandon his
previous career–to forsake prospects, however promising, or to
renounce wealth and possessions, however entangling–in order to
become (for example) a minister of the Church or a missionary of the
Gospel, or to enter a religious order. Our Lord’s command to the rich
young ruler, that he should give up all that he had, in order to
follow Christ along the paths of homelessness and poverty, is a call
which sounds still with a literal force in the ears of a certain
number of His disciples. The inner spirit, moreover, of detachment
from the world and from the things of the world, the readiness to
abandon wealth and worldly position if need so require, and the
refusal to be ensnared by them, are in any case demanded of all. The
vocation, however, of the majority of men is already determined by
their circumstances, or by their training and general aptitudes. It is
only the few, comparatively speaking, who are called to become monks
or missionaries, or priests devoid of “prospects.” The majority will
best serve GOD and their neighbour by “carrying on” in their existing
occupations: and in most cases they are incidentally called also,
sooner or later, to matrimony.
But GOD calls no man to idleness. It is the duty of every Christian,
rich as well as poor, unless he be incapacitated by bodily sickness or
infirmity, to be engaged in some work of general service to the
community: and a man who proposes seriously to practise the Christian
religion needs to ask himself, with regard to the work or occupation
in which he is engaged, or by which he earns his bread, whether he can
say truly that he believes it to be the work which his Father has
given him to do: whether it can be interpreted, not simply as a means
of livelihood, but as a service rendered in Christ’s name to society
at large. If it cannot so be interpreted, then plainly it is no work
which a Christian should be doing. There are ways of making a living
which, are definitely unchristian. The work of a shoe-black or of a
tradesman or of an actor may be as true a piece of Christian service
as that of a doctor or a bishop. The work of a burglar or of a
bookmaker could not be so regarded.
Christianity–it cannot be too strongly insisted–means the
Christianization of life as a whole. It is in the daily round and the
common task that Christ is most chiefly to be served. “Whatsoever ye
do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to GOD and the Father by Him.” Religion is a wider thing than
piety, and it is a false pietism which would regard it as consisting
mainly of pious practices. The cultivation of the inner spiritual life
by means of the practices of Christian devotion is indeed essential in
its place and its degree. The life of the spirit languishes if it is
not fed. But except these things issue in the practical service of
Christ in daily life they are worse than futile. They degenerate
either into formalism and hypocrisy, or into spiritual self-
indulgence. “Herein is My Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit."
“By their fruits ye shall know them.” And the “fruits” of Christian
living are to be discovered, not in the hours spent in devotion, but
in the manifestation amid the activities of the market-place of that
temper of righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and that
spirit of unselfish service, which should be their normal product.
What is needed is a wider conception of Churchmanship and a truer
doctrine of vocation. All honest work in which a Christian can
lawfully engage should be regarded as an expression of his
Churchmanship–as truly work done for the Church of GOD in obedience
to a vocation from on high as is the work of a priest or a teacher of
religion. It is at least partly because the majority of laymen do not
so interpret their work in life that in so many cases they are
discovered to be in effect living for the sake of their leisure and
regarding their daily work as uninteresting drudgery, with the result
that life as a whole comes to be for them dreary and profitless and
stale. A Christian man’s life-work ought not to have the character of
drudgery, but of sheer delight in GOD’S service.
But is such an ideal really practicable? It is literally practicable
to a greater extent than most men think. It ought to be practicable
universally. At the same time there is no disguising the fact that
large numbers of men to-day find themselves in circumstances to which
such a doctrine cannot without palpable unreality be applied. The
structure of existing society under modern industrial conditions
forces multitudes, by an evil economic pressure, into mechanical,
uncongenial, and soul-destroying occupations: and the conditions of
some men’s labour in the world as it is are such that it would be
sheer blasphemy to regard them as a product of the will of GOD. The
problem of the Christianization of the social order is one of the
greatest of the tasks confronting the Christian Church. Its solution
has hardly yet begun to be attempted. In the meantime the mass of
Christian people, in virtue of their acquiescence, are accomplices in
the denial to the disinherited classes of the conditions and
opportunities which make life worth living for themselves. So long as
it continues to be possible for a man who genuinely desires to learn
and labour truly to get his own living to starve in the midst of
plenty: so long as multitudes are constrained to work under conditions
which rob their labour of all interest, of all idealism, and of all
hope: so long as sweating, and destitution, and such conditions of
life as obtain in the more densely crowded areas of our great towns
continue to exist: so long will it be the duty of every Christian to
be a social reformer, and to have a conscience permanently troubled
with regard to wealth and social advantage. [Footnote: Mr. George
Lansbury’s Your Part in Poverty (George Alien and Unwin, Ltd., Is.)
is a book worth reading in this particular connexion.]
Meanwhile the Christian ideal of life stands. It is the ideal of
consecration to service. It means discipleship in Christ’s school of
unselfishness, both individual and corporate: for there is a
selfishness of the family, of the class, or of the nation, which bears
as bitter fruit in the world as does the selfishness of the
individual. Christianity, in a word, means the carrying out into daily
practice of the ideal of the Imitatio Christi, the imitation of
Jesus Christ, in the spirit if not in the letter. It means that as He
was, so are we to be in the world. It means that all things,
whatsoever we do, are to be done in His Spirit and to His glory: that
our every thought is to be led captive under the obedience of Christ.
It means that we are to love GOD because GOD first loved us, and to
love men because they are our brothers in the family of GOD: because
love is of GOD, and every one that loveth is born of GOD and knoweth
GOD. It means that we are to consecrate all comradeship and loyalty
and friendship, all sorrow and all joy, by looking upon them as
friendship and loyalty and comradeship in Christ, as sorrow and joy in
Him. It means that we are to live glad, strong, free, clean lives as
sons of GOD in our Father’s House.
It means also struggle and hardship. It means truceless war against
the spirit of selfishness, against everything that tends to drag us
down, against the law of sin in our own members. It means a truceless
war against low ideals and tolerated evils in the world about us. It
means soldiership in the eternal crusade of Christ against whatsoever
things are false and dishonest and unjust and foul and ugly and of
evil report.
It is an ideal which, considered in isolation from the Christian
Gospel of redemption and the power of the Holy Spirit, could only
terrify and daunt a man who had a spark of honesty in his composition:
and for this reason the mass of men refuses to take it seriously. It
is an ideal which, in the case of all who do take it seriously,
convinces them of sin.
Nevertheless to lower the ideal, to abate one jot of its severity, to
compromise, on the score of human weakness, though it were but in a
single particular, the flawless perfection of its standard, were to
prove false to all that is highest within us, and traitor to the cause
of Christ.
“Never, O Christ–so stay me from relenting–Shall there be truce
betwixt my flesh and soul.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
