


Christianity is opposed to war, in the sense that if men and nations
universally behaved as Christians, wars would cease. The ideal of the
Kingdom of GOD involves the reign upon earth of universal peace. War
is, therefore, in itself, an unchristian thing. It is, moreover, a
barbarous and irrational method of determining disputes, since the
factors which humanly speaking are decisive for success in war, viz.
the organized and unflinching use of superior physical force, are in
principle irrelevant to the rights or wrongs of the cause which may be
at stake. The victories of might and right do not invariably coincide.
It is not surprising, therefore, that a certain proportion of
Christians–the Quakers, for example, and many individuals who have
either been influenced by the teaching of Tolstoy, or else, thinking
the matter out for themselves, have arrived at similar conclusions to
those of Tolstoy and the Quakers–should hold that in the event of war
a man’s loyalty to his earthly city must give way to his loyalty to
his heavenly King in this matter. Experience shows that there are men
who are prepared to suffer persecution, imprisonment, or death itself
rather than violate their principles by service in the armed forces of
the Crown.
There are obviously circumstances conceivable in which it would be the
duty of all Christians to become “Conscientious Objectors.” Such
circumstances would arise in any case in which the state endeavoured
to compel men’s services in a war which their conscience disapproved.
In the present European War it so happens that there are probably no
Englishmen who regard the German cause as righteous and the Allies’
cause as wrong. The problem of Conscientious Objection has, therefore,
only arisen in the case of those Christians who hold the abstract
doctrine of the absolute wrongness, in whatever circumstances, of all
war as such.
There are those who, though personally rejecting this doctrine,
consider that those who hold it are wrong only in that they are
spiritually in advance of their time. The majority, however, of
Christians have felt that the Pacifist or Quaker doctrine is not
merely impracticable under present conditions, but that it rests upon
a fallacious principle. For it appears to deny that physical force can
ever be rightfully employed as the instrument of a moral purpose. In
the last resort it is akin to the anti-sacramental doctrine which
regards what is material as essentially opposed to what is spiritual.
The questions at issue are not really to be solved by the quotation of
isolated texts or sayings of our Lord from the Gospels. What is really
in dispute is the question of the form which, in the context of a
given set of national and political circumstances, may rightfully be
given to the application of the Christian principle of universal,
righteous, and self-sacrificing Love. No one can dispute the fact that
in certain circumstances Christianity may demand the readiness to die
for others. Are there any circumstances in which Christianity may
demand the readiness to slay for others, either personally, or
mediately through service in a military machine which as a whole is
the instrument of a national purpose only to be achieved through the
slaughter of those in the ranks of the opposing armies?
The majority of Christians have answered this question in the
affirmative. They have held that there are circumstances in which the
claims of Love are more genuinely and adequately acknowledged by
taking part in warfare than by abstaining from it. They have insisted
that there are circumstances in which it is no true act of love, even
towards the aggressor, or perhaps towards the aggressor least of all,
to permit him to achieve an evil purpose unchecked: that resistance,
even by force of arms, may be in the truest interests of the enemy
himself. They have maintained that it is possible to fight in a
Christian temper and spirit, without either personal malice or hatred
of the foe: that not all killing is murder, and that to rob a man of
physical life, as an incident in the assertion of the claims of
righteousness, is not, from the point of view of those who believe in
human immortality, to do him that ultimate and essential injury which
it might otherwise be held to be.
No one, however, who has had anything to do with modern war can doubt
that it is intrinsically beastly and devilish, or that it is apt to
arouse passions, in all but the saintliest of men, which are of an
extremely ugly kind. To affirm that it is possible, as a matter of
theory, to fight in a wholly Christian spirit and temper, is not to
assert that in actual practice more than a small minority of soldiers
succeed in doing so. It is possible to be devoutly thankful that when
the issue was posed by the conduct of the Germanic powers in the
August of 1914 the British Empire replied by entering upon war, to
hold that it was emphatically the right thing to do, and that it
represented a course of conduct more intrinsically Christian than
neutrality would have been. But it is not possible to maintain with
truth that the British nation as a whole has been fighting either in a
Christian temper or from Christian motives. It is undeniable that
uglier motives and passions have crept in. Sermons in Christian
pulpits upon such themes as the duty of forgiveness or the Christian
ideal of love towards the enemy have been neither frequent nor
popular. Undoubtedly the German Government in its general policy, and
particular units of the German Army and Navy upon many occasions, have
acted in such a way as to give provocation of the very strongest kind
to the unregenerate human impulses of hatred and of revenge. It is not
surprising, though it is regrettable, that under the influence of this
provocation many persons, otherwise Christian, have either frankly
abandoned the Christian doctrine of human brotherhood, or else have
denied that the Germans are to be regarded as human beings. On the
whole, and speaking very broadly, it may be said that the troops have
shown themselves more Christian in these respects than have the civil
population, though there are many exceptions upon both sides. It is to
be feared that the Church, in so far as she has been represented by
her clergy (though here, again, there are many exceptions), has been
too anxious to be identified with a merely Jingo patriotism to
exercise any very appreciable influence in restraint of unchristian
passions. It is to be hoped and anticipated that there will be a
strong reaction after the war both against militarism and the less
desirable aspects of the military mind, and also against the
belligerent temper and spirit–especially, perhaps, on the part of the
men who have themselves served and suffered in the field.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
