


The practice of Christianity depends for its possibility upon the
existence and maintenance within the soul of an inward principle of
spiritual life towards GOD. The reason why so many nominal Christians
fail conspicuously to manifest the fruits of Christianity in their
lives is simply that they have no vital personal experience of the
power and efficacy of the life in Christ. They have never been
effectually gripped by the religion which they nominally profess. They
are not transformed, or in process of being transformed, by the Holy
Spirit’s power.
The plain man, confronted by the Christian ideal, if he does not at
once dismiss it as impracticable, is apt to ask, or at least to
wonder, how he is to begin. It is a question to which no cut-and-dried
answer can be given. But at least no beginning is likely to lead to
very much in the way of fulfilment which does not sooner or later
involve something like personal “conversion” of heart. Conversions may
be sudden, or they may be gradual: but religion, if it is to be a
reality, means in the end the establishment of vital personal
relations with the living Christ. It means the acceptance of His
challenge, self-surrender to His appeal, the combination of an
acknowledged desire to serve Him with acknowledged impotence and
bankruptcy before GOD.
Sooner or later the Spirit convinces men of sin. Either a man,
essaying light-heartedly to follow Christ, discovers in the very
attempt his inability to do so, and is found traitor to his Master’s
cause in the first encounter: or else, it may be, at the very outset,
the consciousness of what has been wrong in conduct and character and
motive in the past stands as a damning record between his soul and
GOD, and forbids him without repentance to take service in the
campaign of Christ at all. The consciousness of sin as a “horrid
impediment” in the soul is not, of course, true penitence until a man
has been brought to realize in the light of the Cross that the
difference between what he is and what he might have been is treachery
to Him whose man (in virtue of his baptism) he was meant to be, and
that by being what he is, and acting as he has acted, he has
consciously or unconsciously contributed to the wounds wherewith
Eternal Love is wounded in the house of His friends.
The measure of a man’s penitence, whether early or late developed in
him, is very apt to be the measure of his spiritual insight and of his
spiritual sincerity. The familiar words of the hymn–
    “They who fain would serve Thee best
     Are conscious most of wrong within,”
are profoundly true to Christian experience. But repentance–which is
sorrow for sin in the light of the Cross–is abortive and merely
results in spiritual paralysis unless it issues in confession–that
is, frank and open acknowledgment before GOD, and if need be also
before His Church–and the seeking and finding of reconciliation and
forgiveness as the unmerited gift of GOD in Christ.
There are those in whose case the inward conviction of sin and the
realization of the need for pardon are the first impulses of awakening
spiritual life. There are others with whom it is not so. They are
conscious of the attractiveness of the Man Christ Jesus. They would
desire to be on His side and to be of the number of His disciples.
They are dimly aware, or at least they more than half suspect, that in
Him is to be found the satisfaction of a need for which their soul
cries out. With S. Peter they find themselves saying to Christ, “Lord,
to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life,” But they
cannot as yet with any inward reality profess themselves conscience-
stricken with regard to the past. They are not aware of themselves as
conspicuous sinners, or indeed, it may be, as sinners at all. The
experience of penitence and of Divine forgiveness must come to them,
if it is to come at all, at a later stage. It is not by that postern
that they enter upon the Way of the Spirit.
But the Way is in either case the way of fellowship, and the Spirit is
the spirit of discipline. The newly found spiritual life, however
awakened, needs to be maintained and fostered by fellowship in the
Church, by regular habits of Christian devotion, by faithful communion
in the Sacrament of Life. Plainly, if a man is not already confirmed,
his first step must be to be prepared for confirmation: if he has been
confirmed, but has lapsed from communion, he must resume the
communicant life. He needs to claim the status and privilege of
effective membership in the Body of Christ, and to form for himself a
rule of inward life and discipline. Rules of devotional life must
necessarily vary in accordance with a man’s surroundings and
opportunities, and perhaps in some of their details in accordance with
a man’s temperament. But at least there ought to be a rule of regular
private prayer, a rule of regular communion, a rule of Bible-reading
or “meditation,” and a rule of self-denial and orderliness in daily
personal life.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
