


The Bible is the “sacred Book” of Christianity, as the Koran is the
sacred Book of Mohammedanism; with this difference, however, that
Christianity, as the religion of the Spirit, can never be, like
Mohammedanism, a “religion of the Book,” any more than it can be, like
ancient Judaism, a religion of the Law. The Biblical writings include
two main collections of books, known as the Old Testament and the New
Testament respectively, of which the latter alone is distinctively
Christian. Intermediate between the two “Testaments” in point of date
are the writings known as the “Apocrypha,” which though inferior, for
the most part, in spiritual value to the fully canonical books, and
frequently omitted from printed editions of the Bible, are regarded by
the Church as canonical in a secondary sense.
The various books of the Bible originally became canonical, that is,
were included in the “canon” or collection of sacred writings, on the
ground that they were read aloud or recited in the course of Divine
worship. The Old Testament canon comprises the books customarily read
aloud in the Jewish synagogue, together with certain other writings
associated with them. The books of the New Testament are a similar
collection of early Christian writings which were read side by side
with the Old Testament in Christian worship. The selection of these
particular writings for the purpose was determined in part by the
Church’s recognition of their spiritual value and in part by the
regard which was paid by the Christian community to the religious
authority of those by whom they were believed to have been written.
Speaking generally, we may say that the Old Testament is the religious
literature of Judaism. It is the literary deposit of the spiritual
life of a nation, the written record and monument of a progressive
process of religious development. It begins at the level of folklore
and primitive tribal cults, such as are portrayed or reflected, for
example, in parts of the Pentateuch and in the Books of Judges and
Samuel. It culminates, in the utterances of the greatest of the
prophets and in many of the Psalms, at the highest levels of religious
attainment which are discoverable anywhere in history prior to the
coming of our Lord.
The Old Testament will always have a value for Christianity: in part
because many of the religious lessons which it conveys can never be
superseded even by Christianity itself: in part because the study of
it provides the general knowledge of Judaism, and of Jewish
institutions and modes of thought, which is necessary for the proper
understanding of the religious background of the Gospels, and of much
else in the New Testament as well: in part also because the two
revelations–the Jewish and the Christian–hang together, interlocking
with one another as anticipation and fulfilment, in a manner which is
singularly impressive.
The various books of the Old Testament, nevertheless, require to be
read by Christians with discrimination, and with a clear realization
of their Jewish character. There is much in the Old Testament as it
stands which is liable to mislead the simple and cause needless
difficulty. There are, moreover, numerous passages, and not a few
entire books, which except in the light of historical criticism and
scholarly guidance are not really intelligible. But the study of the
Old Testament as reinterpreted in our own generation by research and
scholarship is a fascinating subject. It requires little in the way of
technical equipment, and there is no reason in the world why it should
be monopolized by specialists. To have even the most general
acquaintance with the methods and results of critical study brings
with it a great transformation of outlook. The Old Testament writers
come to life again wonderfully when they are set in their proper
historical context, and the result is a clear gain in spiritual
values. The best general introduction to the whole subject is Dr. W.
B. Selbie’s book, The Nature and Message of the Bible (Student
Christian Movement, 3s. 6d.). Canon Nairne’s volume, The Faith of
the Old Testament (Layman’s Library, Longmans, 2s. 6d.) is an
illuminating survey designed specially to bring out the religious
value of the Old Testament, [Footnote: Those who may desire a more
detailed and comprehensive treatment of the literary problems of the
Old Testament should consult G. B. Gray, A Critical Introduction to
the Literature of the Old Testament (Duckworth, 2s. 6d.).] and for
commentaries upon individual books The Century Bible (T. C. and
E. C. Jack, 3s. each volume) is to be recommended.
The books of the New Testament are the classical literature of
Christianity in a much fuller and more obvious sense. Here, again,
there is much that apart from the use of a good commentary will be
found hardly intelligible: but the greater part of the New Testament,
and especially the Gospels, can be read with profit by the ordinary
man apart from any extraneous aids. It is well to remember that S.
Paul’s Epistles were written at an earlier date than any of the
Gospels, and that they represent the occasional correspondence of a
hard-worked missionary. Of the Gospels the first three have much in
common, and the Gospels of S. Matthew and S. Luke are based partly
upon that of S. Mark. S. Mark is said to have been the companion of S.
Peter, and is probably the author of the Gospel which bears his name.
It may be taken to represent his reminiscences of S. Peter’s
preaching. The Gospel now known as that according to S. Matthew
appears to be the work of a compiler who fitted into the framework of
S. Mark’s story a considerable amount of additional matter, drawn
chiefly from a collection of “sayings of Jesus” which an early
Christian writer declares to have been made by S. Matthew in Aramaic.
S. Matthew’s name, it is thought, was subsequently attached to the
resulting document, since it contained a large preponderance of
material derived from his book on our Lord’s sayings. The name of the
actual compiler of the first Gospel has not survived.
S. Luke’s Gospel is a compilation made upon somewhat similar lines,
and is based, in large measure, upon the same two sources: but the
author’s researches extended also more widely, and his Gospel contains
a large proportion of matter peculiar to itself, which critics
commonly regard as being of high historical value. The author of the
book was a Greek doctor who attended upon S. Paul, accompanying the
latter in his travels, and writing the Acts of the Apostles as a
second volume in continuation of his Gospel. The Acts is partly based
upon a kind of diary which S. Luke kept of his experiences as S.
Paul’s companion and physician.
It is probable that both the first and the third of our four Gospels
were in existence shortly before, or at the latest very shortly after,
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in the year 70 A.D. The
second Gospel, since they both drew upon it, must be even earlier.
The Gospel according to S. John is of a somewhat later date, and bears
a different character. It is reflective and meditative, and is
penetrated throughout by a mystical symbolism. In many ways it
suggests rather a spiritual interpretation of the significance of
Jesus than a literal portrait of Him. Again, it is the product of a
Greek rather than of a Jewish atmosphere, though its narrative
presents so many touches of extraordinary vividness, and the author
shows so exact a knowledge of Jewish institutions and conditions of
life in Palestine, that it is difficult not to think that the book
must have been written by a Jew who knew Judaism before its downfall.
It is supposed that the writing dates from the closing years of the
first century, and tradition declares that the author was S. John in
old age at Ephesus. This statement is, however, in dispute, and the
authorship of the Gospel is uncertain. In point of fact, it does not
matter who the writer was. There is no one of the interpreters of
Jesus who had drunk more deeply of His Spirit than had he: nor is
there any of the books of the New Testament which brings Jesus closer
to us than the Gospel according to S. John, or speaks home with
greater power to the heart and affections of the simplest Christian.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
