


No element in Christian practice has been more widely challenged in
modern times than the Christian ideal of marriage. Our Lord’s standard
in these matters was simple and austere. “Whoso looketh on a woman to
lust after her hath committed adultery already in his heart."
“Whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication” (the exceptive clause is of disputed authenticity)
“causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is
divorced committeth adultery.”
The State in certain cases gives legal sanction to “adultery” in
this latter sense, and there is a vocal and probably increasing demand
that legal facilities for divorce upon various pretexts, with liberty
of remarriage, shall be further extended. The Divorce Law Reform Union
has announced its intention to promote in Parliament a Bill which, if
carried, would have the effect of reducing legal marriage to a
contract terminable after three years’ voluntary separation by the
will of either party. Doubtless a robust opposition will be offered by
Christian people to the adoption of so lax a conception of marriage
even by the State. Experience in other countries seems to show that
unlimited facilities for divorce do not tend to the promotion either
of happiness or of morals. But it needs to be recognized that the
State, as such, is concerned only with the legal aspect of marriage as
a civil contract, and that it has to legislate for citizens not all of
whom profess Christian standards even in theory. The law of the State
may well diverge from that of the Church with regard to this matter,
though it does not follow that so lax a standard as that which is now
proposed would be in the best interests even of the State.
The Church regards Christian marriage as indissoluble. In cases of
adultery she counsels reconciliation, wherever possible, upon the
basis of repentance on the part of the guilty and forgiveness on the
part of the injured partner. If this is not possible the Church
sanctions, if need so require, separation, but not remarriage. There
are also unfortunately other cases in which the married relationship
proves so intolerable as to render a temporary or permanent separation
admissible as a last resort. The remarriage of either party during the
lifetime of the other is nevertheless held to be unchristian. With the
practical difficulties which beset the Church in the attempt to
maintain within the circle of her own membership a stricter standard
than that which is recognized by the Civil Law and by society at large
we are not here concerned. Our concern is with the Christian standard
as a positive ideal, on the effective maintenance of which, as
Christians believe, depends the stability of the home and the
Christian family, and the redemption of sex-relations from mere
animalism and grossness.
A Christian husband takes his wife in matrimony “for better for worse,
for richer for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to
cherish, till death them do part, according to GOD’S holy ordinance."
The step is irrevocable. The union is intended to be life-long. It
has, moreover, in view not only “the mutual society, help, and comfort
that the one ought to have of the other,” but also “the procreation of
children, to be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord, and to
the praise of His holy Name.” A few words may usefully be said under
these heads.
(i) Marriage ought to be based upon love; and love, though naturally
and normally involving the element of sexual attraction, ought to
include also other and deeper elements. A Christian man who has lived
a clean and disciplined life ought to be sufficiently master of his
passions to avoid mistaking a merely temporary infatuation for such a
genuine spiritual affinity as will survive the satisfaction of
immediate desires and prove the stable basis of a life-companionship.
Hasty marriages are a common and avoidable cause of subsequent
unhappiness. It is obviously undesirable that couples should enter
upon matrimony until there has been a sufficiently prolonged and
intimate acquaintance to enable them to become reasonably sure both of
themselves and of one another. In many cases there is much to be said
for regarding betrothals in the first instance as provisional. It is
better to break them off at the last moment than to marry the wrong
person.
The Victorian conventions with regard to all these matters were
thoroughly bad. Girls were brought up in carefully-guarded ignorance
of the implications of matrimony and shielded by perpetual chaperonage
from anything approaching comradeship with the opposite sex.
Eventually they were in many cases stampeded into a marriage which had
its origin either in a clandestine flirtation or in the designing
operations of some match-making relative, who made it her business
first to “throw the young people together” and then to suggest that
they were virtually committed to one another by the mere fact of
having met.
The reaction which has taken place against all this is upon the whole
salutary. The new social tradition which is growing up makes it
possible for the unmarried of both sexes to meet one another with
comparative freedom, and to establish relations of friendship, which
may subsequently ripen into love, unhampered by any such morbidly
exciting atmosphere of intrigue and suggestion on the part of
relatives and friends. But the new freedom of social intercourse, if
it is not in its turn to prove disastrous, demands on the part of the
young of both sexes a higher standard both of responsibility and self-
control, and of knowledge of what is implied in the fact of sex. The
experience of married life is, moreover, not likely to prove a
success, save in rare instances, unless there is between the parties a
real community of interests and tastes, unanimity, so far as may be,
of ideals and of religious convictions, and at least no very great
disparity of educational and intellectual equipment.
(ii) A Christian marriage includes among its purposes the procreation
of children. It is here most of all that unanimity of ideal and of
conviction between husband and wife is essential. A man and a woman
ought not to take one another in marriage without first being assured
of each other’s mind upon this subject. “If marriage is to be a
success each must learn respect for the other’s personality, real give
and take, and the horror of treating the other just as a means to his
own pleasure, whether spiritual, intellectual, or physical: and both
must think seriously of the responsibilities of parenthood. Husband
and wife must work out their ideals together, in perfect frankness and
sincerity, and it is impossible to have true and sacred ideals of
their joint physical life unless there is the same openness and
understanding and sympathy on this point as on all others.” [Footnote:
Ideals of Home, by Gemma Bailey (National Mission Paper, No. 43).]
There must be mutual consideration and self-control: the need for
self-restraint and continence does not disappear with the entry upon
marital relations: it is if anything intensified.
There is a real problem here which needs to be thought out. To the
practice of “race-suicide,” by which is meant the artificial
restriction of parentage by the use of mechanical or other
“preventives,” Christian morality is violently opposed. On the other
hand, it may reasonably be held that people ought not to bring
children into the world in numbers which are wholly out of relation to
their capacity to feed, clothe, educate, and train them. “The enormous
families of which we hear in early Victorian times were not quite
ideal for the mother or the children, nor for the father if he were
not well off.” [Footnote: Ibid] It may be found necessary in
practice to limit the size of the family either upon economic grounds
or (in particular instances) in the interest of the mother’s health.
It is to be feared, however, that the modern tendency in both respects
is to shirk the responsibilities of parenthood on grounds which are
thoroughly selfish. The Victorian doctrine that “when GOD sends mouths
He sends food to fill them” may have been unduly happy-go-lucky. The
recent remark of an officer in a certain British regiment, that since
he and his wife had only L8000 a year between them, he felt that he
could not afford to have more than one child, was entirely shameless.
It would seem, moreover, that the comparative childlessness of modern
marriages is sometimes due not to the husband’s reluctance, upon
economic grounds, to beget children, but to the wife’s reluctance to
bear them, a reluctance which in some cases arises either from such
shrinking from the physical pain and sacrifice of motherhood as goes
beyond what is really justified, or from mere self-indulgent
absorption in social pursuits and pleasures. There ought to be in a
Christian marriage more of the true spirit of adventure and romance, a
greater readiness for sacrifice, a more willing acceptance of parental
responsibilities, and of the obligation of self-denial for the
children’s sake. There can be no question but that modern families–
with the paradoxical exception of the families of the very poor–have
been tending to be smaller than they either need be or ought to be.
At the same time it is generally conceded that some measure of
limitation is in most cases reasonable and necessary. The vitally
important thing is that such necessary and reasonable limitation
should be secured not by artificial evasion of the consequences of
intercourse, but by self-control and deliberate temporary abstinence
at certain periods from the intercourse of sex. [Footnote: It may be
suggested that in cases of genuine perplexity it is advisable to
consult, as occasion may require, either a medical man who is also a
Christian, or a wise–and preferably a married–spiritual guide.]
For the union of the sexes in marriage is according to the mind of the
Christian Church an essentially pure and holy thing. It is a sacrament
of the fusion of two personalities, whereby they are at once
individually and mutually enriched, and at the same time mystically
and spiritually knit together in such a way as to become in the sight
of GOD indissolubly one: the unity of husband and wife being
comparable, according to a famous saying of S. Paul, to the unity
which exists between Christ and His Church. Now, although, from this
point of view, the significance of married life is to a great extent
impoverished and frustrated, if intercourse is so regulated as to
render the marriage childless not in fact merely, but in intention,
yet it does not follow that procreation must be directly in view on
every individual occasion, since the mystical value of intercourse as
a spiritual sacrament of love may still exist in independence of such
intention. It is nevertheless, surely, clear that a Christian man and
his wife are morally precluded from coming together except with a deep
sense of the sacredness of what they do and of its intimate connexion
with the mysteries of life and birth, and a corresponding readiness,
in the event of conception taking place, to accept the ensuing
responsibility for the child as a sacred trust from GOD, “the Father
from whom all fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named.” With the
use of “preventives” and other devices, which degrade into a mere
means of carnal satisfaction an act which is meant to bear a deeply
spiritual and religious meaning, the Christian interpretation of
marriage seems plainly and obviously incompatible.
A few words may be added with regard to the upbringing and education
of children. Here, again, there has been a reaction–which upon the
whole is good–from the unduly rigorous disciplinary methods of the
past. It may be doubted, however, whether the reaction has not in some
cases been carried too far. Children ought to be controlled and
disciplined by their parents, and no expenditure of care and thought
and tact is too great to devote to the rightful training of their
characters. But experience seems to show that parents sometimes fail
to recognize that their children grow up. It is important that in
proportion as they grow towards maturity of character and independence
of personality the strictness of parental discipline should be
gradually relaxed. At a certain stage the real influence of parents
upon their children will depend upon their refusal to assert direct
authority. Not a few of the minor tragedies of home life arise from
the ill-judged action of parents who treat as children sons and
daughters who are virtually grown up.
The problem of the religious education of children cannot here be
discussed in detail, but three or four leading principles may be
suggested.
(1) It ought not to be necessary to say that children should not be
taught to regard as true statements or doctrines which their parents
believe to be in fact false. This applies in particular to certain
views of the Bible. The ideal should be so to teach the child that in
later life he may have nothing to unlearn.
(2) When children are old enough to read they should be encouraged to
read the Gospels. They ought not, however, to read the Old Testament,
with the exception of certain Psalms and other specially selected
passages, until they are of an age to distinguish what is Christian
from what is Jewish, and to recognize the principle of religious
development.
(3) Children should be taught in the first instance the practice
rather than the theory of religion: devotions in which doctrine is
implicit, rather than doctrine as such. As their minds expand they
will ask the reasons for what they do and the meaning of the worship
in which they engage, and they will need to have suggested to them an
elementary, but not a stereotyped, theology. They should from the
beginning be encouraged to think and question freely on religious
subjects.
(4) They should occasionally accompany their parents to Church, and in
particular should from time to time be present when the latter receive
Holy Communion. They should have the service explained to them in a
simple fashion, and should be encouraged to look forward to the time
when they will be confirmed, and become communicants themselves.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
