


Sins of the flesh include all forms of slackness and bodily self-
indulgence. A Christian is called to assert the supremacy of the
spirit over the flesh by controlling his bodily impulses and
disciplining his desires. There is, therefore, a true Christian
asceticism. But asceticism, in so far as it is genuinely Christian, is
never an end in itself. It is a discipline which promotes efficiency.
It is to be compared to an athlete’s training, not to the self-
mutilation of a fakir. There is in Christianity no doctrine of the
unlawfulness of bodily pleasures in themselves. “The Son of Man came
eating and drinking.” For Christianity every creature of GOD in itself
is good, and a man’s bodily impulses are God-given endowments of his
nature. What is essential is that their exercise should be controlled
and subordinated to the higher purposes of the spirit, that they
should be directed to their proper ends, and that they should not be
allowed to get out of hand. Christians are not meant to be Puritans,
but they are meant to be pure. The battle against fleshliness in all
its forms is a battle which has to be fought and won in every
Christian’s life.
Apart from the question of certain unmentionable forms of perverted
sexual vice, the sinfulness of what are commonly classified as “sins
of the flesh” consists in wrongful indulgence or lack of self-control
in respect of that which in itself is legitimate and good. The
Christian ideal is not abstinence, but temperance. A Christian will be
temperate, for example, in sleep, food, alcohol, and tobacco.
Intemperance means slavery to a habit, the loss of spiritual self-
mastery, whereby the whole character is enervated, and efficiency,
both physical and moral, is impaired. “All things are lawful,” as S.
Paul says, but a Christian is not to allow himself to be brought
“under the power of any.” He is meant to live hard and to live
clean.
The practice of fasting, that is, of deliberate temporary self-
discipline in these matters, even below the standard of what would
normally be a reasonable indulgence, is a valuable means of asserting
and retaining the self-mastery which is essential to Christian
freedom. But fasting should not be allowed to become a mechanical
observance, or erected into an unduly rigid law. The fish-dinner upon
Fridays and other fast-days of the Church is, as a modern dignitary
has remarked, innocuous; and it has the value which belongs to
conformity to a rule or recommendation of the Christian brotherhood;
but whether or not it is observed in practice, it is hardly adequate
by itself to the purposes of Christian self-discipline.
It appears to be a fairly widespread delusion in some sections of
society that a Christian must necessarily be a teetotaller. The ideal
Christian policy, here as elsewhere, if we may judge from the example
of our Lord, would seem to be that of a temperate use of the gifts of
GOD. It is unfortunate that in this country most of the societies
which exist for the purpose of promoting temperance have virtually
committed themselves to the confusion of temperance with total
abstinence, and their fanaticism is, in the judgment of many persons,
a hindrance to genuine reform. But it cannot reasonably be denied that
drunkenness, and the still wider prevalence of an excessive drinking
which falls short of actual drunkenness, is a frightful evil in the
national life; and what is commonly known as the “Liquor Interest"
plays a sinister part as an organized obstructive force standing in
the way of needed reforms. The number of public-houses and drinking-
bars in English towns and villages is monstrously out of proportion to
any reasonable needs of the population: and it must be more than
ordinarily difficult for brewers and publicans, under existing
conditions, to resist the temptation to exploit for the sake of gain
the weaknesses of others. A Christian need not be a teetotaller in
order to have this problem upon his conscience, and to be ready to
support, by his vote and influence, some considered and constructive
policy of reform. A man who by experience finds that alcohol is to him
personally a temptation will be wise if he becomes a teetotaller. “If
thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off.” In certain social
environments it may also be wise for a man to become a total
abstainer, not in his own interests, but for the sake of others with
whom he is brought into immediate contact. There can be no question
but that drunkenness, which is a vice both degrading and repulsive in
itself, is in many strata of English social life still far too lightly
regarded.
It is, moreover, worth remarking that even a degree of indulgence in
alcohol which would commonly be regarded as falling well within the
limit of temperance is regarded by some authorities as having the
effect–which actual drunkenness certainly has–of stimulating
sexuality: and when all is said, probably the most insistent of
fleshly temptations, at least in the earlier years of manhood, are
those which are connected with the life of sex. Many make shipwreck
upon these rocks through lack of knowledge or want of thought; but
neither thought nor knowledge will avail to safeguard a man’s purity
apart from sound moral principle: nor are even moral principles
effectual in the hour of strong temptation apart from the grace of
GOD.
Christianity teaches that to every man there is entrusted, in virtue
of his manhood, the seed of life as a divine treasure. It is meant not
to be turned into a means of self-indulgence, or suffered to run riot
in a blaze of passion, but to be restrained and safeguarded in purity
against the day–if the day arrives–upon which a man is called to use
it for the purpose for which it was given him, namely, that of
bringing new lives into the world through union with a woman in pure
marriage.
Most men are sorely tempted to lack of self-control, and to the misuse
of their sexual endowment in a variety of ways: and the maintenance of
chastity–never an easy ideal–is made doubly difficult by the fact
that in the existing social system marriage, except among the poorer
classes, is commonly deferred until an age much later than that at
which a man becomes physically mature, and also by the widespread
prevalence, in masculine society, of a corrupt public opinion which
regards sexual indulgence as morally tolerable, or even as essential
to physical health. This latter doctrine, even were it as true as it
is in fact false, would not in any case justify a man in taking
advantage of a woman’s ruin: but experience shows that there is no
form of sin or indulgence which so effectually degrades a man’s moral
outlook, blunts his finer perceptions, and destroys the instinct of
chivalry within him, as does the sin of fornication. The majority of
those who practise promiscuous sexual intercourse are found to greet
with frank and obviously genuine incredulity the assertion that there
exists a not inconsiderable proportion of men whose lives are clean;
while at the other end of the scale men of pure lives and clean ideals
often find it difficult to believe that more than a small minority of
peculiarly degraded individuals are clients of the women of the
streets.
The publication of the Report of the Royal Commission on Venereal
Diseases, taken in conjunction with what is known or suspected with
regard to the state of morals in the Army, has had the effect of
drawing public attention to certain aspects of these problems. The
Victorian convention of prudery has to a great extent been discarded.
The subject is freely discussed, and it is generally acknowledged that
something must be done. There is danger, however, lest public opinion,
rightly concerned to promote measures for the eradication of disease,
should ignore the essentially moral aspect of the matter. A Christian
man is here concerned, not simply with the personal struggle against
the temptations of sex in his own life, but with a further conflict on
behalf of Christian ideals against the public opinion of the world.
For if ecclesiastical opinion in the past has been both prudish and
Pharisaic, the public opinion of the world is frankly cynical. Roughly
speaking, the world expects the majority of women to be pure,
acquiesces in the prostitution of the remainder, and treats masculine
immorality as a venial offence. Numbers of would-be reformers–of the
male sex–are not ashamed to advocate, in private if not in public,
the establishment of licensed brothels on the continental model. It
ought not to be necessary to say that no Christian man can possibly
tolerate a proposal to give deliberate public sanction to the
prostitution of a certain proportion of the nation’s womanhood to the
lusts of men, or acquiesce in the complacent sex-selfishness which is
concerned only for the physical health of sinners of the male sex.
The point of view of the Christian Church is determined by that of our
Lord, who on the one hand numbered a reclaimed prostitute among His
intimate friends, and on the other taught that whoso looketh on a
woman to lust after her hath committed adultery already in his heart.
The Church, therefore, differs from the world, first in holding that
what is wrong for women is equally wrong for men, that there is one
and the same standard in these matters for both sexes, namely,
absolute sexual purity; and secondly, in extending equally to the
fallen of both sexes the promise of Divine forgiveness upon identical
terms, namely, genuine repentance, unreserved confession, desire and
purpose of amendment, and faith in GOD. The world, which condones the
iniquity of the man who falls, is apt to be uncommonly hard upon the
fallen woman, forgetting that she also is a sister for whom Christ
died, and that the woman who to-day plays the part of a temptress of
men was originally, in the majority of cases, more sinned against than
sinning. Very few of those who ply the trade of shame will be found to
have adopted such a mode of life, in the first instance, of their own
unfettered choice. We are members one of another, and society as a
whole, which both creates the demand and provides the supply, must
share the guilt of their downfall.
This book is written primarily for men: and there are therefore other
aspects of the life of sex upon which it is necessary to touch, though
they are difficult matters to handle. It is well known that large
numbers of men in boyhood, either through untutored ignorance of the
physiology of their own bodies, or as a result of the corrupt example
and teaching of others, become addicted to habits of solitary vice, in
which the seed of life within them is deliberately excited, stirred up
and wasted, to the sapping of their physical well-being and the
defilement of their minds. Habits of self-abuse, when once they are
established, are apt to be extremely difficult to break. The minds of
their victims are liable to be morbidly obsessed by the physical facts
of sex, and their thoughts continually directed into turbid channels.
But it is possible by the grace of GOD to conquer, though there may be
relapses before the final victory is won. It is important neither on
the one hand to belittle the gravity of the evil, nor on the other to
grow hopeless and despondent, but to have faith in GOD. It is also a
counsel of common sense to distract the mind, so far as possible, in
other directions, and to avoid deliberately whatever is likely to
prove an occasion or stimulus to this particular form of sin. The
battle of purity can only be successfully fought in the region of
outward act if the victory is at the same time won in the region of
thought and desire. Books and pictures, or trains of thought and
imagination, which are either unclean in themselves, or are discovered
by experience to be sexually exciting to particular individuals, ought
obviously to be avoided by those concerned, and the mind directed
towards the contemplation of whatsoever things are true and honest and
just and pure and lovely and of good report. In the hour of strong
temptation it is often best, instead of trying to meet the assault
directly, to change the immediate environment, or in some other way to
concentrate the mind: for example, to sit down and read a clean novel
until the stress of the obsession is past. Physical cleanliness,
plenty of healthy exercise in the open air (it is unfortunate that the
circumstances of many men’s lives do not give adequate opportunity for
this), temperance in food, and especially–in the light of what has
been said above–temperance in drink, are all incidentally of value as
aids to the maintenance of purity. So also is the avoidance of the
habit of lying in bed in a semi-somnolent condition after true sleep
has finally departed. A Christian’s body is meant to be a temple of
the Holy Ghost, and no other spirit, whether of impurity or of sloth,
should be allowed to have domination over him.
Other sins there are which should not be so much as named among
Christian men-those, namely, in which men with men work that which is
unseemly, and burn with lust one towards another. It is necessary to
refer to these, because their prevalence is said to be increasing. A
considerable proportion of men are temperamentally liable to be
sexually attracted by members of their own sex; and passionate
friendships, in which there is an element which is in the last
analysis sexual, are not uncommon both between boys and youths at the
age of early manhood, and between men of mature age and adolescents.
The true character of these relationships is not always in their
initial stages obvious, even to those concerned. As a guiding
principle it may be laid down that a friendship between members of the
same sex begins to enter upon dangerous ground whenever an element of
jealousy betrays itself, when there is a desire habitually to
monopolize the other’s company to the exclusion of third persons, or
when the life and interests of the one appear to be disproportionately
wrapped up in the concerns and doings of the other. Friendships of
this character are always selfish and may all too easily become
impure. It is the business of a Christian man to be on his guard and
to love his male friends not as a woman is loved and not in a spirit
of selfish monopoly, but with the pure and clean and essentially
unselfish affection of Christian manhood.
A word may be said, lastly, with regard to prurient and polluted talk
and unclean stories. Against these a Christian man will do well firmly
and resolutely to set his face. Such things defile the mind. They are
injurious both to him that hears and to him that speaks, in that they
tend to engender a mental atmosphere in which the suggestions of
actual vice are likely to meet with an enfeebled power of resistance.
Of course it is possible to be too tragical on the subject of
“language,” and to exaggerate the harm done by “smoking-room” stories.
But whatever is definitely unclean is definitely evil, and should be
both avoided and discouraged. To assume, however, a pious demeanour
and to appear to be shocked is a fatal method of protest. Christians
have no business to be shocked, nor are they meant to be prigs. There
are other forms of social pressure which are more effective. It is,
moreover, sometimes possible to combine moral reprobation with a sense
of humour.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
