


“The unexamined life,” said Plato, “is not worth living.” Similar
advice was given by Marcus Aurelius. The practice of self-examination,
therefore, is not distinctive of Christianity: it is an obvious
dictate of wisdom, wherever life and conduct are regarded seriously,
that a man should from time to time take stock of himself in the light
of his ideals and learn to know and recognize in detail where and how
he has fallen short, and what are the besetting sins and weaknesses
against which he must contend.
The Christian man will judge and try his life by the standards of
Christ, with growing sensitiveness of conscience as spiritual
experience deepens: not shrinking from the confession of sin and
failure, desiring not to be self-deceived, but to know and to
acknowledge the truth. There is nothing in this of priggishness or
unreality. It is a necessary discipline. The Christian life is meant
to bear the fruit of a character developing in growing likeness to the
character of Christ: but none is suddenly made perfect: the old Adam
dies hard: and the Christian by confession of repeated failure may at
least learn the lesson of humility and self-distrust.
The rightful complement of self-distrust is trust in GOD: the rightful
issue of self-examination and confession is the realization of divine
forgiveness, fresh courage, and a new start. The very core of the
Gospel is here. He who has bidden men forgive those who trespass
against them “unto seventy times seven” is not to be outdone in
generosity by man. But in order that sin may be forgiven it must be
acknowledged as sin against GOD and treachery to Christ, and repented
of with true sorrow of heart. Repentance is not mere self-contempt,
self-pity, or remorse. It is sorrow for sin, which has for its motive
the love of GOD and the realization that human sin meant and means in
the experience of GOD the Cross.
Nothing so deepens the religious life as true repentance, nor is there
anything so fatal to true religion as self-righteousness. “If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us.” “To whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.” But the
first prerequisite of repentance is self-knowledge–a difficult
matter. Gross carnal offences, strong and flagrant sins, if such there
be, are obvious and upon the surface. The subtler sins of the spirit–
thoughtlessness, for example, or snobbishness or priggishness and
pride–though we are quick to remark upon them in others, are apt in
our own case to pass undetected. It is the Spirit who convinces men of
sin. Only as we are resolute to enter into “the mind of the Spirit"
can we hope to know ourselves as in the sight of GOD we really are.
The matter is complicated by the fact that those who, as things are,
most systematically practise self-examination and confession of sin
too often view the matter in a somewhat narrowly ecclesiastical
spirit, and make use of forms of self-examination which mix up real
and serious moral offences with “sins” which are merely ceremonial,
trivial, or imaginary, as though the two stood precisely upon the same
level. “One must abstain from sexual sin and not go to dissenting
places of worship; one must not steal and must be sure to abstain
from meat on Fridays.” A man’s own sense of reality should enable him
to guard against this sort of thing, and if fixed forms of self-
examination are used, to use them with discretion.
The forms most commonly suggested in manuals of devotion are based
upon the Ten Commandments. This is in accordance with the teaching of
the compilers of the English Prayer-book, who, after bidding intending
communicants to “search and examine” their “own consciences (and that
not lightly, and after the manner of dissemblers with GOD),” proceed
to lay down that “the way and means thereto is: First, to examine your
lives and conversations by the rule of God’s commandments: and
whereinsoever ye shall perceive yourselves to have offended, either by
will, word or deed, there to bewail your own sinfulness, and to
confess yourselves to Almighty GOD, with full purpose of amendment of
life.”
The Commandments are, however, as they stand, both negative in form
and Judaistic in character, and if used in this way as a “rule” of
Christian conduct must be spiritualized and reinterpreted in the light
of the Gospel. The second and fourth Commandments, in particular, are
in their literal significance obsolete for Christians: it is a false
Puritanism which would forbid sculpture and religious symbolism in the
adornment of a Christian church, nor is any one in the modern world
likely to confuse the symbol with the thing symbolized: while the
observance of the Sabbath is part of that older ceremonial “law” from
which S. Paul insisted that Christian converts should be free (Coloss.
ii. 16). There is, however, a spiritual idolatry which consists in
allowing any other object than the glory of GOD and the doing of His
will to have the primary place in the determination of conduct–there
are men who worship money, or comfort, or ambition, or their own
domestic happiness, or even themselves. And the Commandment about the
Sabbath, though it has no literal value to-day (and certainly no
direct bearing upon the sanction or significance of Sunday) may serve
to suggest the important principle that a man is responsible before
GOD for the use he makes of his time, and that it is a religious duty
(not confined to any particular day of the week) to distribute it in
due proportion, according to circumstance and opportunity, with proper
regard to the rightful claims of work, of worship, and of recreation
and rest. The remaining Commandments are capable of being similarly
interpreted as suggesting broad positive principles rather than as
merely prohibiting wrong actions of a particular and definite kind:
and so treated they form as convenient a framework as any other for a
scheme of questions for self-examination.
It is possible, however, that some men may prefer to use as their
basis some standard more distinctively Christian than the ancient law
of Judaism–for example, the Beatitudes (Matt. v. 1-12) or the “fruits
of the Spirit” (Gal. v. 22). A man will in any case do well either to
frame or to adapt his own scheme for self-examination, with special
regard paid to whatever he may discover by experience to be a
besetting sin or weakness, or a temptation to which he is particularly
exposed. It should be remembered that the measure of what is wrong in
a man’s life is the measure of the contrast between his character and
that of Christ, and that the chief flaws in Christian character and
achievement (which are also those most likely to pass undetected) are
not uncommonly such as fall under the head of “sins of omission"
rather than of commission–the leaving undone of what ought to have
been done, the failure to exhibit positively in relation to GOD and
man the qualities of faith and hope and love. A man should ask himself
wherein he has chiefly failed, and come short of the glory of GOD:
whether he is loyally observing any self-imposed rule of life and
discipline, and fulfilling any resolutions which may have been made,
or any obligations which have been undertaken. Having made in this
manner an honest attempt to discover his own shortcomings and failures
before GOD, let him with equal honesty confess them, seek forgiveness,
and in the spirit of repentance and restored sonship start again.
The late Lieutenant Donald Hankey, better known as “A Student in
Arms,” criticizes Churchmen of a certain type as being unwholesomely
preoccupied with the thought of their sins, and allowing their
consciences to become a burden to them. They should, he says, ’think
less of themselves, and trust the Holy Spirit more. The advice is
excellent: but morbid scrupulosity is not a common fault of English
laymen. The habit, as Mr. Chesterton expresses it, of “chopping up
life into small sins with a hatchet” is, of course, to be avoided: but
the purpose of self-examination and self-knowledge is not to encourage
morbid introspection, but by frank acknowledgment and repentance to
get rid of the past and with recovered hope and serenity to reach
forward towards the future. A man cannot “walk in the Spirit” unless
he is inwardly “right with GOD.”
With regard to sacramental confession, the rule of the Church of
England is sane and clear. It may be expressed by saying that “none
must, but all may, and some should” make use of it. In the case
of a conscience seriously burdened in such a way that a man hesitates
to present himself for Holy Communion unabsolved, to go to confession
is obviously the right remedy. There are other cases in which men find
by experience that it helps them to be more honest and candid with
themselves, with GOD, and with the Church, if they go to confession
from time to time as a piece of self-discipline and a needed spiritual
tonic. Yet others discover that they flounder less in spiritual
things, and that their religious life is deepened and made stronger,
if they place themselves for a time under wise direction. Systematic
direction, of course, has obvious dangers. It may tend to destroy
independence of character. It may cause a man to become “priest-
ridden.” But the dangers are not inevitable, and there are without
doubt cases in which it is of value. Much obviously depends upon the
wisdom and common sense of the director. The Prayer-book refers
penitents to a “discreet and learned” minister of GOD’S Word. If a man
proposes to practise habitual confession he will do well to assure
himself of the discretion and learning of the priest whose help he
seeks.
The method of making a sacramental confession is simple. Self-
examination is made beforehand, the results being, if need be, written
down, either in full, or in the form of notes to assist the memory. A
first confession should cover the whole life so far as remembered,
from childhood upwards: subsequent confessions the period since the
last was made. The confession should aim at completeness, an effort
being made to remember not only specific acts of wrongdoing, but
slight failings and weaknesses of character and the general lines and
tendencies of faulty spiritual development. Symptoms should, if
possible, be distinguished from causes, habits and tendencies and
besetting sins from isolated acts. Cases in which a sin has been
deliberate should be noted as such: but there should be no dwelling
upon extenuating circumstances or intermingling of claims to virtues
or graces of character with the admission of defects. No names may be
mentioned, nor may third persons be incriminated by any form of words
which would enable the confessor to recognize their identity. The
priest hears the confession sitting in a chair. The penitent kneels
beside him and confesses as follows:–"I confess to GOD Almighty, the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, before the whole company of
heaven, and before you, that I have sinned in thought, word, and deed,
by my own fault. Especially I accuse myself that (since my last
confession, which was...ago) I have committed the following sins....
[Here follows the confession in detail: after which]. ... For these
and all my other sins which I cannot now remember, I humbly ask pardon
of GOD, and of you, father, penance, counsel and absolution. Wherefore
I ask GOD to have mercy upon me, and you to pray for me to the Lord
our GOD. Amen.”
The confessor then gives advice and counsel according to his wisdom,
commonly imposes a penance, and if assured of the sincerity of the
penitent, pronounces absolution according to the form prescribed in
the Prayer-book Office for the Visitation of the Sick.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
