


This chapter ought properly to be written by a layman who is also a
Christian man of business. It is inserted here mainly to challenge
inquiry and to provoke thought. The writer has no first-hand
acquaintance either with business life or with business methods. He
desires simply to chronicle an impression that the level of morality
in the business world has been declining in recent years, and that the
more thoughtful and candid of Christian laymen in business are
beginning to be deeply disquieted. It is not uncommon to be confronted
by the statement that it is impossible in modern business life to
regulate conduct by Christian standards. The impression exists that if
large numbers of business men abstain from the outward observances of
religion, it is in many cases because they are conscious of a lack of
correspondence between Sunday professions and weekday practice, and
have no desire to add hypocrisy to existing burdens upon conscience.
The clergy are by the circumstances of their calling sheltered from
the particular difficulties and temptations which beset laymen in the
business world. Their exhortations are apt to sound in the ears of
laymen abstract and remote from life.
If the situation has been diagnosed correctly the matter is serious.
What is suggested is not that men to-day are deliberately more
unprincipled than were their fathers, but that modern conditions have
made the way of righteousness more difficult. Things have been speeded
up. The competitive struggle has been intensified. Men are beset, it
has been said, by a “moral powerlessness.” They are “as good as they
dare be.” Absorbed in money-making, and pressed hard by unscrupulous
rivals, they cannot afford to scrutinize too narrowly the social
consequences of what they do, or the strict morality of the methods
which they employ. Honesty, as experience demonstrates, is by no means
always the best policy from a worldly point of view. “The children of
this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light."
This being so, it is to be feared that men are apt to prefer the
wisdom of the serpent to the harmlessness of the dove.
Moreover the man of business in the majority of cases does not stand
alone. He is a breadwinner on behalf of others. Very commonly he
regards it as a point of honour to refrain from disclosing to those at
home his business perplexities and trials. It is assumed that they
would not be understood, or that in any case it is unfair to burden
wife and children with financial troubles. In the result it sometimes
happens that a man’s foes are found to be they of his own household,
and that for the sake of wife and child he stoops to procedures which
his own conscience condemns, and which those for whose sake he embarks
upon them would be the first to disapprove. A wife, it may be
suggested, ought to share the knowledge of her husband’s difficulties,
and to be willing, if need so require, to suffer loss and diminution
of income as the price of her husband’s honour. A wife takes her
husband in matrimony “for poorer” as well as “for richer,” for
sickness and poverty as well as for health and wealth. It is a tragedy
that in modern marriages too often only the more pleasurable
alternative is seriously meant.
Enough has been said to make it evident that in the world of modern
business there is a battle to be fought on behalf of Christ. Precisely
for the reason that the vocation of a Christian in this sphere is in
some ways the most difficult it is also the most necessary. There is a
call for courage and consecration, for hard thinking and readiness for
sacrifice, and from the nature of the case it must be mainly a
laymen’s battle. There may have to be financial martyrdoms for the
sake of Christ before the victory is won. But the prize and the goal
is worth striving for, for it is nothing less than the redemption of a
large element in human life from the tyranny of selfishness and greed.
[Footnote: It may, of course, be argued that so long as the
competitive system prevails in the business world, a Christian man in
business must compete, just as in the existing state; though in an
ideally Christian world competition would be replaced by co-operative
and war would be unknown. This is perfectively true. But it should be
possible, nevertheless, to hold fast the Christian ideal as a
regulative principle even under present conditions. Only in proportion
as this is done is the redemption of business life a possibility.]
In principle the issues are clear enough. The interchange of
commodities is a service rendered to the community. It ought to be so
regarded, and the service rendered, rather than the gain secured,
should be its inspiration and motive. The service of man is a form of
the service of GOD, and the operations of financiers and business men
ought to be capable of interpretation as forms of social service. It
is only as this spirit is infused into the lives and practice of men
in business that the world of business can be saved from degenerating
into a soulless mechanism, dominated by the idea of purely selfish
profit, or a tissue of dishonest speculation and sordid gambling. The
business man, like any other servant of the community, is entitled to
a living wage. He is not entitled either by chicanery and trickery, or
by taking advantage of the needs of others and his own control of
markets, to become a “profiteer.” Profiteering in time of war is
condemned by the common conscience. It is equally to be condemned in
time of peace. The Christian man in business will stand for integrity
and just dealing, for human sympathy and the spirit of service, for
the renunciation of profits which are unreasonable and unfair. His
function is not to exploit the community in his own personal or
sectional interests, but to be a servant of the Christian
commonwealth. Some procedures and some methods of making money the
Christian man will feel himself debarred from employing. For the rest
what is needed is mainly a change of heart, a shifting of emphasis, a
modification of the inward spirit and motive of business life.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
