


The three traditional enemies of the Christian life are symbolized
under the headings of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and the
classification has a certain convenience. The “World” stands in this
connexion for human society in so far as it is organized apart from
Christ. It is obvious that “the way of the world,” as represented by
the general outlook of conventional society, is in many respects in
manifest conflict with the principles of the Gospel. The existing
social order is the product of a compromise between inherited
influences and standards which are in a certain sense broadly
Christian, and the natural man’s instinctive selfishness in matters
both individual and social. The conflict against the spirit of
worldliness which should be one of the marks of a genuine Christian
life is beset by peculiar difficulties, precisely because in a society
which is in some respects partially Christian the issues are confused.
Public opinion indubitably tolerates many things which should not be
tolerated, and condones others which should not be condoned. But
public opinion approves much that is good, and does lip-service to a
variety of Christian ideals, even while reserving the reality of its
devotion for the worship of success and material comfort.
Perhaps it may be said that the most fundamental characteristic of
essentially “worldly” opinion is absence of idealism. Worldliness is
the principle of contentment with things as they are. Against
worldliness, so defined, the Christian is committed to a conflict all
along the line, since even in those regions of life and conduct in
which the standards recognized by the world are right and good so far
as they go, “the good is the enemy of the best.” To rest content at
any point with what has already been attained is fatal to all
spiritual advance. It is, in effect, the death of the soul.
Mr. William Temple has remarked that in the conflict of Christians
against the Devil and the Flesh the public opinion of the Church, as
visibly organized, is on their side, but that in their conflict with
the World it is decidedly against them. That is an over-statement, but
it conveys a truth. Undoubtedly the Church has made compromises with
the World, a fact which arises partly as the result of the inclusion
within her fold of a large proportion of merely nominal members whose
Christianity is no more than an inherited or conventional tradition. A
further point of importance is this. Two thousand years is not a long
period in relation to the scale of the world’s history as a whole, and
Christianity is still a comparatively young religion. The problem of
worldliness is mainly a problem of the relation of the Church to the
social order; and there are reasons why it was natural that the
working out of the Christian ideal of conduct should first have been
developed in relation to the affairs of private and domestic life.
Christians in the early days were a “little flock,” surrounded by a
society whose standards and conventions and beliefs were frankly pagan
and hostile. So long as these conditions obtained the issues were
plain: the contrast in ideals between Church and World stood out sharp
and clear. The world, it was held, was ready to perish, and destined
at no distant date to do so. “The whole world,” writes S. John, “lieth
in wickedness.” The Church stood apart as the spiritual brotherhood of
GOD’S elect who were called to assist at the obsequies of a world
which was in process of passing away. “The world passeth away, and the
lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of GOD abideth for ever.”
The words contain an eternal truth: but in their literal sense they
expressed a mistaken judgment. The world–that is, secular society–
did not pass away. It is with us still. For a period of some three
hundred years it persecuted the Church. At the end of that period it
accepted baptism, but not its implications. The Church has been
engaged ever since in the task of attempting to Christianize the
heathen within her own borders.
The Church was outwardly secularized: and the minority who could not
tolerate the secularization of her ideals took refuge in the hermit’s
cell or in the cloister. In these retreats was developed the practice
of Christianity as an art or science of individual sanctity, but at
the cost of a certain aloofness from the rough and tumble of workaday
life. The Christianity of the Middle Ages was fertilized from the
cloister, with the result that the spiritual ideals even of those
Christians who remained “in the world” tended to be coloured by the
monastic tradition. The Christian man of the world who took seriously
the practice of his religion aimed at reproducing at second hand the
Christianity of the monk. The salvation of the individual soul tended
to be regarded as the supreme end of Christian endeavour, rather than
the service of the brethren.
The Reformation, when it came, did nothing to diminish this
individualism of the religious outlook, but rather accentuated it. The
whole emphasis of Protestantism was thrown upon the life of the
individual soul in relation to GOD, to the comparative neglect of the
importance of the conception of membership in the Church. To the
ordinary worldling the advent of Protestantism meant simply that he
need no longer trouble to go to Mass or to Confession. The Protestant
who took his religion seriously became a Puritan, a type resembling
the monk of Catholicism in his attempted isolation from the world, yet
lacking the peculiar otherworldly mysticism of the monkish character
at its best, and having a peculiar knack of making religion appear
repellent to the ordinary man.
The emergence of the ideal of a genuinely social Christianity, aiming
not at escape from the world by way of flight, but at the deliberate
conquest of the world for Christ by the resolute application of
Christian standards to the ordinary life of men in society, is of
comparatively recent date. It began in this country with the writings
of Kingsley and Maurice, and various living teachers both in England
and in America have carried on their work. It is one of the
misfortunes of Germany that she has had no corresponding movement. As
a consequence we are confronted at the present time with the spectacle
of various leaders of religious thought in Germany, too honest not to
perceive the glaring contrasts between the way of the world and the
precepts of the Gospel, deliberately maintaining the position that
Christianity is solely adapted to be a religion of private life, and
that Christian standards and ideals have no application as between
class and class, or as between nation and nation. To adopt such an
attitude is to abandon all hope of the redemption of society. It is to
condemn the world in perpetuity to a fate of which the present war is
the appropriate symbol.
The war is, in effect, a kind of sacrament of the power of Antichrist.
It is the outward and visible sign of the inward character and essence
of a civilisation founded upon principles which are the opposite of
those of the Gospel. Neither men nor nations, in the world as we have
known it, have been wont to love their neighbours as themselves. The
way of the world is, and has been, the way of selfishness.
This is not any the less true because the world’s selfishness has been
to a considerable extent unconscious, and has arisen rather from
absence of thought than from deliberate badness of heart. The world
does not always realize how cruel are its ways towards the weak and
the socially unfortunate, or towards those who, for whatever reason,
transgress its code. For the world has a code of its own, both in
manners and in morals, though the basis of its code is convention, and
its standard respectability rather than virtue. The world is very apt
to show itself implacable towards those whom it regards as being
beyond its pale, and to exhibit, in effect, the spirit and temper
which, when manifested in the religious sphere, we know and loathe as
Pharisaism. Pharisaism, like worldliness, has penetrated to an
alarming extent into the Church of England.
Parallel and proportionate to the world’s selfishness is its cynicism.
This also is largely unconscious. Lacking any true insight into
spiritual realities, the world lacks vision and lacks hope. It
presumes always that “the thing which has been, it is that which shall
be.” It beholds the evil that is done under the sun, and pronounces it
inevitable. It fails to understand that to pronounce any evil
inevitable is to be guilty of blasphemy against the GOD of heaven.
Against the spirit of the worldly world, its selfishness and cynicism,
its conventional judgments and shallowness of mind, the Christian is
called deliberately to make war. The Church exists to be to the world
and its ways a permanent challenge: to be the champion in all
circumstances and times of righteousness and truth; to insist upon
bringing to bear on human life in all its relationships, both
corporate and individual, the spirit of brotherhood, which is the
Spirit of Christ. It was a true instinct which led S. Ignatius Loyola
to pray on behalf of the Order which he founded that it might be hated
by the world. “Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.... If
ye were of the world, the world would love his own.” If the world does
not hate the Church it is not because the world has become Christian,
but because worldliness has taken possession of the Church. The world
to-day regards the Church as not worth hating, as a negligible
quantity. When the Church is once more ready to be crucified, then the
opposition of the world will be revived, and the Church will suffer
martyrdom afresh.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
