


This book has grown out of the writer’s experience in preparing men
and officers in military hospitals for Confirmation. It represents, in
a considerably expanded but–as it is hoped–still simple form, the
kind of things which he would have wished to say to them, and to
others with whom he was brought into contact, if he had had more time
and opportunity than was usually afforded him. It seemed necessary to
write the book, because there did not appear to be in existence any
reasonably short book on similar lines which covered the ground of
Christian faith and practice as a whole, and which approached the
subject from the point of view which seems to the writer to be the
most real.
The writer is consciously indebted in the first chapter to the
discussion of our Lord’s teaching and character in Dr. T. B. Glover’s
fascinating book, The Jesus of History. It is possible that there
are other and unconscious obligations which have been overlooked. Here
and there acknowledgment is made in footnotes, and an occasional
phrase, “lifted” from some other writer, has been placed in inverted
commas.
In Chapter VIII. of Part I. the author has echoed the thought, and to
a certain extent the wording, of parts of his own essay on “The
Principle of Authority” in Foundations.
For help in the correction of the proofs, and for criticisms and
suggestions which have led to numerous modifications and improvements
in matters of detail, the thanks of the writer are due to various
friends, and more particularly to his brother, Lieutenant A. C.
Rawlinson, of the Queen’s Own Oxfordshire Hussars; to the Rev. Austin
Thompson, Vicar of S. Peter’s, Eaton Square; and to the Rev. Leonard
Hodgson, Vice-Principal of S. Edmund Hall, Oxford.
November, 1917.
Continue...

This eBook of “Religious Reality” by A. E. J. Rawlinson (Student of Christ Church, Oxford; Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Lichfield; Priest-In-Charge of St. John The Evangelist, Wilton Road, S.W.; Formerly Tutor of Keble College and Late Chaplain to the Forces) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Religious RealityBy A. E. J. RawlinsonAt Amazon
