


I have always taken a great interest in war incidents, and more so,
perhaps, because I wasn’t old enough to put down the rebellion myself. I
have been very eager to get hold of and hoard up in my memory all its
gallant deeds of both sides, and to know the history of those who figured
prominently in that great conflict has been one of my ambitions.
I have also watched with interest the steady advancement of Phil Sheridan,
the black-eyed warrior with the florid face and the Winchester record. I
have also taken some pains to investigate the later history of the old
Winchester war horse.
“Old Rienzi died in our stable a few years after the war,” said a Chicago
livery man to me, a short time ago. “General Sheridan left him with us and
instructed us to take good care of him, which we did, but he got old at
last, and his teeth failed upon him, and that busted his digestion, and he
kind of died of old age, I reckon.”
“How did General Sheridan take it?”
“Oh, well, Phil Sheridan is no school girl. He didn’t turn away when old
Rienzi died and weep the manger full of scalding regret. If you know
Sheridan, you know that he don’t rip the blue dome of heaven wide open
with unavailing wails. He just told us to take care of its remains, patted
the old cuss on the head a little and walked off. Phil Sheridan don’t go
around weeping softly into a pink bordered wipe when a horse dies. He
likes a good horse, but Rienzi was no Jay-Eye-See for swiftness, and he
wasn’t the purtiest horse you ever see, by no means.”
“Did you read lately how General Sheridan don’t ride on horseback since
his old war horse died, and seems to have lost all interest in horses?”
“No, I never did. He no doubt would rather ride in a cable car or a
carriage than to jar himself up on a horse. That’s all likely enough,
but, as I say, he’s a matter of fact little fighter from Fighttown. He
never stopped to snoot and paw up the ground and sob himself into
bronchitis over old Rienzi. He went right on about his business, and,
like old King What’s-His-name he hollered for another hoss, and the War
Department never slipped a cog.”
Later on I read that the old war horse was called Winchester and that he
was still alive in a blue grass pasture in Kentucky. The report said that
old Winchester wasn’t very coltish, and that he was evidently failing. I
gathered the idea that he was wearing store teeth, and that his memory was
a little deficient, but that he might live yet for years. After that I met
a New York livery stable prince, at whose palace General Sheridan’s
well-known Winchester war horse died of botts in ’71. He told me all
about it and how General Sheridan came on from Chicago at the time, and
held the horse’s head in his lap while the fleet limbs that flew from
Winchester down and saved the day, stiffened in the great, mysterious
repose of death. He said Sheridan wept like a child, and as he told the
touching tale to me I wept also. I say I wept. I wept about a quart, I
would say. He said also that the horse’s name wasn’t Winchester nor
Rienzi; it was Jim.
I was sorry to know it. Jim is no name for a war horse who won a victory
and a marble bust and a poem. You can’t respect a horse much if his name
was Jim.
After that I found out that General Sheridan’s celebrated Winchester horse
was raised in Kentucky, also in Pennsylvania and Michigan; that he went
out as a volunteer private; that he was in the regular service prior to
the war, and that he was drafted, and that he died on the field of battle,
in a sorrel pasture, in ’73, in great pain on Governor’s Island; that he
was buried with Masonic honors by the Good Templars and the Grand Army of
the Republic; that he was resurrected by a medical college and dissected;
that he was cremated in New Orleans and taxidermed for the Military Museum
at New York. Every little while I run up against a new fact relative to
this noted beast. He has died in nine different States, and been buried in
thirteen different styles, while his soul goes marching on. Evidently we
live in an age of information. You can get more information nowadays, such
as it is, than you know what to do with.
Continue...

This full etext Remarks (Part B, also see Part A) of 1888 by Bill Nye (Edgar W. Nye) is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RemarksBy Bill NyeAt Amazon
