


Referring to religious matters, the other day, Squaw Jim said: “I was up
at the Post yesterday to kind of rub up against royalty, and refresh my
memory with a few papers. I ain’t a regular subscriber to any paper, for I
can’t always get my mail on time. We’re liable to be here, there and
everywhere, mebbe at some celebrated Sioux watering place and mebbe on the
warpath, so I can’t rely on the mails much, but I manage, generally, to
get hold of a few old papers and magazines now and then. I don’t always
know who’s president before breakfast the day after election, but I manage
to skirmish around and find out before his term expires.
“Now, speaking about the religion of the day, or, rather, the place where
it used to be, it seems to me as if there’s a mistake somewhere. It looks
as if religion meant greenness, and infidelity meant science and
smartness, according to the papers. I’m no scientist myself. I don’t know
evolution from the side of a house. As an evolver I couldn’t earn my
board, probably, and I wouldn’t know a protoplasm from a side of sole
leather; but I know when I get to the end of my picket rope, and I know
just as sure where the knowable quits and the unknowable begins as
anybody. I mean I can crawl into a prairie dog hole, and pull the hole in
and put it in my pocket, in my poor, weak way, just as well as a scientist
can. If a man offered to trade me a spavined megatherium for a foundered
hypothesis, I couldn’t know enough about either of the blamed brutes to
trade and make a profit. I never run around after delightful worms and
eccentric caterpillers. I have so far controlled myself and escaped the
habit, but I am able to arrive at certain conclusions. You think that
because I am the brother-in-law to an Indian outbreak, I don’t care
whether Zion languishes or not; but you are erroneous. You make a very
common mistake.
“Mind you, I don’t pretend to be up on the plan of salvation, and so far
as vicarious atonement goes, I don’t even know who is the author of it,
but I’ve got a kind of hand-made religion that suits me. It’s cheap, and
portable, and durable, and stands our severe northern climate first rate.
It ain’t the protuberant kind. It don’t protrude into other people’s way
like a sore thumb. All-wool religion don’t go around with a chip on it’s
shoulder looking for a personal deal.
“If I had time and could move my library around with me during our summer
tour, I might monkey with speculative science and expose the plan of
creation, but as it is now, I really haven’t time.
“I say this, however, friends, Romans and backsliders: I think sometimes
when my little half-breed girl comes to me in the evening in her night
dress, and kneels by me with her little brown face in between my knees,
and with my hard hands in her unbraided hair, that she’s got something
better than speculative science when she says:
  ’Now I lay me down to sleep.
  I pray the Lord my soul to keep;
  If I should die before I wake,
  I pray the Lord my soul to take:
  This I ask for Jesus’ sake;’
“and I know that a million more little angels are saying that same thing,
at that same hour, to the same imaginary God, I say to myself, if that is
a vain, empty infatuation, blessed be that holy infatuation.
“If that’s a wild and crazy delusion, let me be always deluded. If forty
millions of chubby little angels bow their dimpled knees every evening to
a false and foolish tradition, let me do so, too. If I die, then I will be
in good company, even if I go no farther than the clouds of the valley.”
Continue...

This full etext Remarks (Part A, also see Part B) of 1888 by Bill Nye (Edgar W. Nye) is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RemarksBy Bill NyeAt Amazon
