


“Speaking about prohibition,” said Misery Brown one day, while we sat lying
on the damp of the Blue Tail Fly, “I am prone to allow that the more you
prohibit, the more you–all at once–discover that you have more or less
failed to prohibit.
“Now, you can win a man over to your way of thinking, sometimes, but you
mustn’t do it with the butt-end of a telegraph-pole. You might convert him
that way, perhaps, but the mental shock and phrenological concussion of
the argument might be disastrous to the convert himself.
“A man once said to me that rum was the devil’s drink, that Satan’s home
was filled with the odor of hot rum, that perdition was soaked with spiced
rum and rum punch. ’You wot not,’ said he, ’the ruin rum has rot. Why,
Misery Brown,’ said he, ’rum is my bete noir.’ I said I didn’t care what
he used it for, he’d always find it very warming to the system. I told him
he could use it for a hot bete noir, or a blanc mange, or any of those
fancy drinks; I didn’t care.
“But the worst time I ever had grappling with the great enemy, I reckon,
was in the later years of the war, when I pretty near squashed the
rebellion. Grim-visaged war had worn me down pretty well. I played the big
tuba in the regimental band, and I began to sigh for peace.
“We had been on the march all summer, it seemed to me. We’d travel through
dust ankle-deep all day that was just like ashes, and halt in the red-hot
sun five minutes to make coffee. We’d make our coffee in five minutes, and
sometimes we’d make it in the middle of the road; but that’s neither here
nor there.
“We finally found out that we would make a stand in a certain town, and
that the Q.M. had two barrels of old and reliable whisky in store. We
also found out that we couldn’t get any for medical purposes nor anything
else All we could do was to suffer on and wait till the war closed. I
didn’t feel like postponing the thing myself, so I began to investigate.
The great foe of humanity was stored in a tobacco-house, and the Q.M.
slept three nights between the barrels. The chances for a debauch looked
peaked and slim in the extreme. However, there was a basement below, and I
got in there one night with a half-inch auger, and two wash-tubs. Later on
there was a sound of revelry by night. There was considerable ’on with the
dance, let joy be unconfined.’
“The next day there was a spongy appearance to the top of the head, which
seemed to be confined to our regiment, as a result of the sudden giving
way, as it were, of prohibitory restrictions. It was a very disagreeable
day, I remember. All nature seemed clothed in gloom, and R.E. Morse,
P.D.Q., seemed to be in charge of the proceedings. Redeyed Regret was
everywhere.
“We then proceeded to yearn for the other barrel of woe, that we might
pile up some more regret, and have enough misery to last us through the
balance of the campaign. We acted on this suggestion, and, with a firm
resolve and the same half-inch auger, we stole once more into the basement
of the tobacco-house.
“I bored nineteen consecutive holes in the atmosphere, and then an
intimate friend of mine bored twenty-seven distinct holes in the floor,
only to bore through the bosom of the night. Eleven of us spent the most
of the night boring into the floor, and at three o’clock A.M. it looked
like a hammock, it was so full of holes. The quartermaster slept on
through it all. He slept in a very audible tone of voice, and every now
and then we could hear him slumbering on.
“At last we decided that he was sleeping middling close to that barrel, so
we began to bore closer to the snore. It was my turn to bore, I remember,
and I took the auger with a heavy heart. I bored through the floor, and
for the first time bored into something besides oxygen. It was the
quartermaster. A wild yell echoed through the southern confederacy, and I
pulled out my auger. It had on the point a strawberry mark, and a fragment
of one of those old-fashioned woven wire gray shirts, such as
quartermasters used to wear.
“I remember that we then left the tobacco-house. In the hurry we forgot
two wash-tubs, a half-inch auger, and 980,361 new half-inch auger holes
that had never been used.”
“Done It A-Purpose.”
At Greeley a young man with a faded cardigan jacket and a look of woe got
on the train, and as the car was a little crowded he sat in the seat with
me. He had that troubled and anxious expression that a rural young man
wears when he first rides on the train. When the engine whistled he would
almost jump out of that cardigan jacket, and then he would look kind of
foolish, like a man who allows his impulses to get the best of him. Most
everyone noticed the young man and his cardigan jacket, for the latter had
arrived at the stage of droopiness and jaded-across-the-shoulders look
that the cheap knit jacket of commerce acquires after awhile, and it had
shrunken behind and stretched out in front so that the horizon, as you
stood behind the young man, seemed to be bound by the tail of this
garment, which started out at the pocket with good intentions and suddenly
decided to rise above the young man’s shoulder blades.
He seemed so diffident and so frightened among strangers, that I began to
talk with him.
“Do you live at Greeley?” I inquired.
“No, sir,” he said, in an embarrassed way, as most anyone might in the
presence of greatness. “I live on a ranch up the Pandre. I was just at
Greeley to see the circus.”
I thought I would play the tenderfoot and inquiring pilgrim from the
cultured East, so I said: “You do not see the circus often in the West, I
presume, the distance is so great between towns and the cost of
transportation is so great?”
“No, sir. This is the first circus I ever was to. I have never saw a
circus before.”
“How did you like it?”
“O, tip-top. It was a good thing. I’d like to see it every day if I could,
I laughed and drank lemonade till I’ve got my cloze all pinned up with
pins, and I’d as soon tell you, if you wont give it away, that my pants is
tied on me with barbed fence wire.”
“Probably that’s what gives you that anxious and apprehensive look?”
“Yes, sir. If I look kind of doubtless about something, its because I’m
afraid my pantaloons will fall off on the floor and I will have to borrow
a roller towel to wear home.”
“How did you like the animals?”
“I liked that part of the Great Moral Aggregation the best of all. I have
not saw such a sight before. I could stand there and watch that there old
scaly elephant stuff hay into his bosom with his long rubber nose for
hours. I’d read a good deal first and last about the elephant, the king of
beasts, but I had never yet saw one. Yesterday father told me there hadn’t
been much joy into my young life, and so he gave me a dollar and told me
to go over to the circus and have a grand time. I tell you, I just turned
myself loose and gave myself up to pleasure.”
“What other animals seemed to please you?” I asked, seeing that he was
getting a little freer to talk.
“Oh, I saw the blue-nosed baboon from Farther India, and the red-eyed
sandhill crane from Maddygasker, I think it was, and the sacred
Jack-rabbit from Scandihoovia, and the lop-eared layme from South America.
Then there was the female acrobat with her hair tied up with red ribbon.
It’s funny about them acrobat wimmen. They get big pay, but they never buy
cloze with their money. Now, the idea of a woman that gets $2 or $3 a day,
for all I know, coming out there before 2,000 total strangers, wearing a
pair of Indian war clubs and a red ribbon in her hair. I tell you,
pardner, them acrobat prima donnars are mighty stingy with their money, or
else they’re mighty economical with their cloze.”
“Did you go into the side show?”
“No, sir. I studied the oil paintings on the outside, but I didn’t go in,
I met a handsome looking man there near the side show, though, that seemed
to take an interest in me. There was a lottery along with the show and he
wanted me to go and throw for him.”
“Capper, probably?”
“Perhaps so. Anyhow, he gave me a dollar and told me to go and throw for
him.”
“Why didn’t he throw for himself?”
“O, he said the lottery man knew him and wouldn’t let him throw.”
“Of course. Same old story. He saw you were a greeney and got you to throw
for him. He stood in with the game so that you drew a big prize for the
capper, created a big excitement, and you and the crowd sailed in and lost
all the money you had. I’ll bet he was a man with a velvet coat, and a
moustache dyed a dead black and waxed as sharp as a cambric needle.”
“Yes; that’s his description to a dot. I wonder if he really did do that
a-purpose.”
“Well, tell us about it. It does me good to hear a blamed fool tell how he
lost his money. Don’t you see that your awkward ways and general greenness
struck the capper the first thing, and you not only threw away your own
money, but two or three hundred other wappy-jawed pelicans saw you draw a
big prize and thought it was yours, then they deposited what little they
had and everything was lovely.”
“Well, I’ll tell you how it was, if it’ll do any good and save other young
men in the future. You see this capper, as you call him, gave me a $1 bill
to throw for him, and I put it into my vest pocket so, along with the
dollar bill father gave me. I always carry my money in my right hand vest
pocket. Well, I sailed up to the game, big as old Jumbo himself, and put a
dollar into the game. As you say, I drawed a big prize, $20 and a silver
cup. The man offered me $5 for the cup and I took it.”
“Then it flashed over my mind that I might have got my dollar and the
other feller’s mixed, so I says to the proprietor, ’I will now invest a
dollar for a gent who asked me to draw for him.’
“Thereupon I took out the other dollar, and I’ll be eternally chastised if
I didn’t draw a brass locket worth about two bits a bushel.”
I didn’t say anything for a long time. Then I asked him how the capper
acted when he got his brass locket.
“Well, he seemed pained and grieved about something, and he asked me if I
hadn’t time to go away into a quiet place where we could talk it over by
ourselves; but he had a kind of a cruel, insincere look in his eye, and I
said no, I believed I didn’t care to, and that I was a poor
conversationalist, anyhow; and so I came away, and left him looking at his
brass locket and kicking holes in the ground and using profane language.
“Afterward I saw him talking to the proprietor of the lottery, and I feel,
somehow, that they had lost confidence in me. I heard them speak of me in
a jeering tone of voice, and one said as I passed by: ’There goes the
meek-eyed rural convict now,’ and he used a horrid oath at the same time.
“If it hadn’t been for that one little quincidence, there would have been
nothing to mar the enjoyment of the occasion.”
Continue...

This full etext Remarks (Part A, also see Part B) of 1888 by Bill Nye (Edgar W. Nye) is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RemarksBy Bill NyeAt Amazon
