


I have just returned from a little impromptu farewell tour in the lumber
camps toward Lake Superior. It was my idea to wade around in the snow for
a few weeks and swallow baked beans and ozone on the 1/2 shell. The affair
was a success. I put up at Bootjack camp on the raging Willow River, where
the gay-plumaged chipmunk and the spruce gum have their home.
Winter in the pine woods is fraught with fun and frolic. It is more
fraught with fatigue than funds, however. This winter a man in the
Michigan and Wisconsin lumber camps could arise at 4:30 A.M., eat a
patent pail full of dried apples soaked with Young Hyson and sweetened
with Persian glucose, go out to the timber with a lantern, hew down the
giants of the forest, with the snow up to the pit of his stomach, till the
gray owl in the gathering gloom whooped and hooted in derision, and all
for $12 per month and stewed prunes.
I did not try to accumulate wealth while I was in camp. I just allowed
others to enter into the mad rush and wrench a fortune from the hand of
fate while I studied human nature and the cook. I had a good many pleasant
days there, too. I read such literary works as I could find around the
camp, and smoked the royal Havana smoking tobacco of the cookee. Those who
have not lumbered much do not know much of true joy and sylvan smoking
tobacco.
They are not using a very good grade of the weed in the lumber regions
this winter. When I say lumber regions I do not refer entirely to the
circumstances of a weak back. (Monkey-wrench, oil can and screwdriver sent
with this joke; also rules for working it in all kinds of goods.) The
tobacco used by the pine choppers of the northern forest is called the
Scandihoovian. I do not know why they call it that, unless it is because
yon can smoke it in Wisconsin and smell it in Scandihoovia.
When night came we would gather around the blazing fire and talk over old
times and smoke this tobacco. I smoked it till last week, then I bought a
new mouth and resolved to lead a different life.
I shall never forget the evenings we spent together in that log shack in
the heart of the forest. They are graven on my memory where time’s
effacing fingers can not monkey with them. We would most always converse.
The crew talked the Norwegian language and I am using the English language
mostly this winter. So each enjoyed himself in his own quiet way. This
seemed to throw the Norwegians a good deal together. It also threw me a
good deal together. The Scandinavians soon learn our ways and our
language, but prior to that they are quite clannish.
The cook, however, was an Ohio man. He spoke the Sandusky dialect with a
rich, nut brown flavor that did me much good, so that after I talked with
the crew a few hours in English, and received their harsh, corduroy
replies in Norske, I gladly fled to the cook shanty. There I could rapidly
change to the smoothly flowing sentences peculiar to the Ohio tongue, and
while I ate the common twisted doughnut of commerce, we would talk on and
on of the pleasant days we had spent in our native land. I don’t know how
many hours I have thus spent, bringing the glad light into the eye of the
cook as I spoke to him of Mrs. Hayes, an estimable lady, partially
married, and now living at Fremont, Ohio.
I talked to him of his old home till the tears would unbidden start, as he
rolled out the dough with a common Budweiser beer bottle, and shed the
scalding into the flour barrel. Tears are always unavailing, but sometimes
I think they are more so when they are shed into a barrel of flour. He was
an easy weeper. He would shed tears on the slightest provocation, or
anything else. Once I told him something so touchful that his eyes were
blinded with tears for the nonce. Then I took a pie, and stole away so
that he could be alone with his sorrow.
He used to grind the coffee at 2 A.M. The coffee mill was nailed up
against a partition on the opposite side from my bed. That is one reason I
did not stay any longer at the camp. It takes about an hour to grind
coffee enough for thirty men, and as my ear was generally against the pine
boards when the cook began, it ruffled my slumbers and made me a morose
man.
We had three men at the camp who snored. If they had snored in my own
language I could have endured it, but it was entirely unintelligible to me
as it was. Still, it wasn’t bad either. They snored on different keys, and
still there was harmony in it–a kind of chime of imported snore as it
were. I used to lie and listen to it for hours. Then the cook would begin
his coffee mill overture and I would arise.
When I got home I slept from Monday morning till Washington’s Birthday,
without food or water.
Continue...

This full etext Remarks (Part A, also see Part B) of 1888 by Bill Nye (Edgar W. Nye) is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RemarksBy Bill NyeAt Amazon
