


Most everyone who has tried the publication of a newspaper will call to
mind as he reads this item, a similar experience, though, perhaps, not so
pronounced and protuberant.
Early one summer morning a gawky young tenderfoot, both as to the West and
the details of journalism, came into the office and asked me for a job as
correspondent to write up the mines in North Park. He wore his hair
longish and tried to make it curl. The result was a greasy coat collar and
the general tout ensemble of the genus “smart Aleck.” He had also
clothed himself in the extravagant clothes of the dime novel scout and
beautiful girl-rescuer of the Indian country. He had been driven west by a
wild desire to hunt the flagrant Sioux warrior, and do a general Wild Bill
business; hoping, no doubt, before the season closed, to rescue enough
beautiful captive maidens to get up a young Vassar College in Wyoming or
Montana.
I told him that we did not care for a mining correspondent who did not
know a piece of blossom rock from a geranium. I knew it took a man a good
many years to gain knowledge enough to know where to sink a prospect shaft
even, and as to passing opinions on a vein, it would seem almost wicked
and sacriligious to send a man out there among those old grizzly miners
who had spent their lives in bitter experience, unless the young man could
readily distinguish the points of difference between a chunk of free
milling quartz and a fragment of bologna sausage.
He still thought he could write us letters that would do the paper some
eternal good, and though I told him, as he wrung my hand and left, to
refrain from writing or doing any work for us, he wrote a letter before he
had reached the home station on the stage road, or at least sent us a long
letter from there. It might have been written before he started, however.
The letter was of the “we-have-went” and “I-have-never-saw” variety, and
he spelt curiosity “qrossity.” He worked hard to get the word into his
alleged letter, and then assassinated it.
Well, we paid no attention whatever to the letter, but meantime he got
into the mines, and the way he dead-headed feed and sour mash, on the
strength of his relations with the press, made the older miners weep.
Buck Bramel got a little worried and wrote to me about it. He said that
our soft-eyed mining savant was getting us a good many subscribers, and
writing up every little gopher hole in North Park, and living on
Cincinnati quail, as we miners call bacon; but he said that none of these
fine, blooming letters, regarding the assays on “The Weasel Asleep,” “The
Pauper’s Dream,” “The Mary Ellen” and “The Over Draft,” ever seemed to
crop out in the paper.
Why was it?
I wrote back that the white-eyed pelican from the buckwheat-enamelled
plains of Arkansas had not remitted, was not employed by us, and that I
would write and publish a little card of introduction for the bilious
litterateur that would make people take in their domestic animals, and
lock up their front fences and garden fountains.
In the meantime they sent him up the gulch to find some “float.” He had
wandered away from camp thirty miles before he remembered that he didn’t
know what float looked like. Then he thought he would go back and inquire.
He got lost while in a dark brown study and drifted into the bosom of the
unknowable. He didn’t miss the trail until a perpendicular wall of the
Rocky Mountains, about 900 feet high, rose up and hit him athwart the
nose.
He communed with nature and the coyotes one night and had a pretty tough
time of it. He froze his nose partially off, and the coyotes came and
gnawed his little dimpled toes. He passed a wretched night, and was
greatly annoyed by the cold, which at that elevation sends the mercury
toward zero all through the summer nights.
Of course he pulled the zodiac partially over him, and tried to button his
alapaca duster a little closer, but his sleep was troubled by the
sociability of the coyotes and the midnight twitter of the mountain lion.
He ate moss agates rare and spruce gum for breakfast. When he got to the
camp he looked like a forty-day starvationist hunting for a job.
They asked him if he found any float, and he said he didn’t find a blamed
drop of water, say nothing about float, and then they all laughed a merry
laugh, and said that if he showed up at daylight the next morning within
the limits of the park, the orders were to burn him at the stake.
The next morning neither he nor the best bay mule on the Troublesome was
to be seen with naked eye. After that we heard of him in the San Juan
country.
He had lacerated the finer feelings of the miners down there, and had
violated the etiquette of San Juan, so they kicked a flour barrel out from
under him one day when he was looking the other way, and being a poor
tight-rope performer, he got tangled up with a piece of inch rope in such
a way that he died of his injuries.
Continue...

This full etext Remarks (Part A, also see Part B) of 1888 by Bill Nye (Edgar W. Nye) is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RemarksBy Bill NyeAt Amazon
