


“I believe I’ve got about the most instinct bulldog in the United States,"
said Cayote Van Gobb yesterday. “Other pups may show cuteness and cunning,
you know, but my dog, the Duke of Rawhide Buttes, is not only generally
smart, but he keeps up with the times. He’s not only a talented cuss, but
his genius is always fresh and original.”
“What are some of his specialties, Van?” said I.
“Oh, there’s a good many of ’em, fust and last. He never seems to be
content with the achievements that please other dogs. You watch him and
you’ll see that his mind is active all the time. When he is still he’s
working up some scheme or another, that he will ripen and fructify later
on.
“For three year’s I’ve had a watermelon patch and run it with more or less
success, I reckon. The Duke has tended to ’em after they got ripe, and I
was going to say that it kept his hands pretty busy to do it, but, to be
more accurate, I should say that it kept his mouth full. Hardly a night
after the melons got ripe and in the dark of the moon, but the Dude would
sample a cowboy or a sheep-herder from the lower Poudre. Watermelons were
generally worth ten cents a pound along the Union Pacific for the first
two weeks, and a fifty-pounder was worth $5. That made it an object to
keep your melons, for in a good year you could grow enough on ten acres to
pay off the national debt.
“Well, to return to my subject. Duke would sleep days during the season
and gather fragments of the rear breadths of Western pantaloons at night.
One morning Duke had a piece of fancy cassimere in his teeth that I tried
to pry out and preserve, so that I could identify the owner, perhaps, but
he wouldn’t give it up. I coaxed him and lammed him across the face and
eyes with an old board, but he wouldn’t give it to me. Then I watched him.
I’ve been watchin’ him ever since. He took all these fragments of goods I
found, over into the garret above the carriage shed.
“Yesterday I went in there and took a lantern with me. There on the floor
the Duke of Rawhide had arranged all the samples of Rocky Mountain
pantaloons with a good deal of taste, and I don’t suppose you’d believe
it, but that blamed pup is collecting all these little scraps to make
himself a crazy quilt.
“You can talk about instinct in animals, but, so far as the Duke of
Rawhide Buttes is concerned, it seems to me more like all-wool genius a
yard wide.”
Continue...

This full etext Remarks (Part B, also see Part A) of 1888 by Bill Nye (Edgar W. Nye) is public domain (thanks to Project Gutenberg).

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
RemarksBy Bill NyeAt Amazon
