




That sense of the complexity of the Bois de Boulogne which made it an
artificial place and, in the zoological or mythological sense of the word,
a Garden, I captured again, this year, as I crossed it on my way to
Trianon, on one of those mornings, early in November, when in Paris, if we
stay indoors, being so near and yet prevented from witnessing the
transformation scene of autumn, which is drawing so rapidly to a close
without our assistance, we feel a regret for the fallen leaves that
becomes a fever, and may even keep us awake at night. Into my closed room
they had been drifting already for a month, summoned there by my desire to
see them, slipping between my thoughts and the object, whatever it might
be, upon which I was trying to concentrate them, whirling in front of me
like those brown spots that sometimes, whatever we may be looking at, will
seem to be dancing or swimming before our eyes. And on that morning, not
hearing the splash of the rain as on the previous days, seeing the smile
of fine weather at the corners of my drawn curtains, as from the corners
of closed lips may escape the secret of their happiness, I had felt that I
could actually see those yellow leaves, with the light shining through
them, in their supreme beauty; and being no more able to restrain myself
from going to look at the trees than, in my childhood’s days, when the
wind howled in the chimney, I had been able to resist the longing to visit
the sea, I had risen and left the house to go to Trianon, passing through
the Bois de Boulogne.  It was the hour and the season in which the Bois
seems, perhaps, most multiform, not only because it is then most divided,
but because it is divided in a different way. Even in the unwooded parts,
where the horizon is large, here and there against the background of a
dark and distant mass of trees, now leafless or still keeping their summer
foliage unchanged, a double row of orange-red chestnuts seemed, as in a
picture just begun, to be the only thing painted, so far, by an artist who
had not yet laid any colour on the rest, and to be offering their
cloister, in full daylight, for the casual exercise of the human figures
that would be added to the picture later on.
Farther off, at a place where the trees were still all green, one alone,
small, stunted, lopped, but stubborn in its resistance, was tossing in the
breeze an ugly mane of red. Elsewhere, again, might be seen the first
awakening of this Maytime of the leaves, and those of an ampelopsis, a
smiling miracle, like a red hawthorn flowering in winter, had that very
morning all ’come out,’ so to speak, in blossom. And the Bois had the
temporary, unfinished, artificial look of a nursery garden or a park in
which, either for some botanic purpose or in preparation for a festival,
there have been embedded among the trees of commoner growth, which have
not yet been uprooted and transplanted elsewhere, a few rare specimens,
with fantastic foliage, which seem to be clearing all round themselves an
empty space, making room, giving air, diffusing light. Thus it was the
time of year at which the Bois de Boulogne displays more separate
characteristics, assembles more distinct elements in a composite whole
than at any other.  It was also the time of day. In places where the trees
still kept their leaves, they seemed to have undergone an alteration of
their substance from the point at which they were touched by the sun’s
light, still, at this hour in the morning, almost horizontal, as it would
be again, a few hours later, at the moment when, just as dusk began, it
would flame up like a lamp, project afar over the leaves a warm and
artificial glow, and set ablaze the few topmost boughs of a tree that
would itself remain unchanged, a sombre incombustible candelabrum beneath
its flaming crest.  At one spot the light grew solid as a brick wall, and
like a piece of yellow Persian masonry, patterned in blue, daubed coarsely
upon the sky the leaves of the chestnuts; at another, it cut them off from
the sky towards which they stretched out their curling, golden fingers.
Half-way up the trunk of a tree draped with wild vine, the light had
grafted and brought to blossom, too dazzling to be clearly distinguished,
an enormous posy, of red flowers apparently, perhaps of a new variety of
carnation.  The different parts of the Bois, so easily confounded in
summer in the density and monotony of their universal green, were now
clearly divided. A patch of brightness indicated the approach to almost
every one of them, or else a splendid mass of foliage stood out before it
like an oriflamme. I could make out, as on a coloured map, Armenonville,
the Pré Catalan, Madrid, the Race Course and the shore of the lake. Here
and there would appear some meaningless erection, a sham grotto, a mill,
for which the trees made room by drawing away from it, or which was borne
upon the soft green platform of a grassy lawn.  I could feel that the Bois
was not really a wood, that it existed for a purpose alien to the life of
its trees; my sense of exaltation was due not only to admiration of the
autumn tints but to a bodily desire. Ample source of a joy which the heart
feels at first without being conscious of its cause, without understanding
that it results from no external impulse! Thus I gazed at the trees with
an unsatisfied longing which went beyond them and, without my knowledge,
directed itself towards that masterpiece of beautiful strolling women
which the trees enframed for a few hours every day. I walked towards the
Allée des Acacias. I passed through forest groves in which the morning
light, breaking them into new sections, lopped and trimmed the trees,
united different trunks in marriage, made nosegays of their branches. It
would skilfully draw towards it a pair of trees; making deft use of the
sharp chisel of light and shade, it would cut away from each of them half
of its trunk and branches, and, weaving together the two halves that
remained, would make of them either a single pillar of shade, defined by
the surrounding light, or a single luminous phantom whose artificial,
quivering contour was encompassed in a network of inky shadows.  When a
ray of sunshine gilded the highest branches, they seemed, soaked and still
dripping with a sparkling moisture, to have emerged alone from the liquid,
emerald-green atmosphere in which the whole grove was plunged as though
beneath the sea. For the trees continued to live by their own vitality,
and when they had no longer any leaves, that vitality gleamed more
brightly still from the nap of green velvet that carpeted their trunks, or
in the white enamel of the globes of mistletoe that were scattered all the
way up to the topmost branches of the poplars, rounded as are the sun and
moon in Michelangelo’s ’Creation.’ But, forced for so many years now, by a
sort of grafting process, to share the life of feminine humanity, they
called to my mind the figure of the dryad, the fair worldling, swiftly
walking, brightly coloured, whom they sheltered with their branches as
she passed beneath them, and obliged to acknowledge, as they themselves
acknowledged, the power of the season; they recalled to me the happy days
when I was young and had faith, when I would hasten eagerly to the spots
where masterpieces of female elegance would be incarnate for a few moments
beneath the unconscious, accommodating boughs. But the beauty for which
the firs and acacias of the Bois de Boulogne made me long, more
disquieting in that respect than the chestnuts and lilacs of Trianon which
I was going to see, was not fixed somewhere outside myself in the relics
of an historical period, in works of art, in a little temple of love at
whose door was piled an oblation of autumn leaves ribbed with gold. I
reached the shore of the lake; I walked on as far as the pigeon-shooting
ground.  The idea of perfection which I had within me I had bestowed, in
that other time, upon the height of a victoria, upon the raking thinness
of those horses, frenzied and light as wasps upon the wing, with bloodshot
eyes like the cruel steeds of Diomed, which now, smitten by a desire to
sea again what I had once loved, as ardent as the desire that had driven
me, many years before, along the same paths, I wished to see renewed
before my eyes at the moment when Mme. Swann’s enormous coachman,
supervised by a groom no bigger than his fist, and as infantile as Saint
George in the picture, endeavoured to curb the ardour of the flying,
steel-tipped pinions with which they thundered along the ground. Alas!
there was nothing now but motor-cars driven each by a moustached mechanic,
with a tall footman towering by his side. I wished to hold before my
bodily eyes, that I might know whether they were indeed as charming as
they appeared to the eyes of memory, little hats, so low-crowned as to
seem no more than garlands about the brows of women. All the hats now were
immense; covered with fruits and flowers and all manner of birds. In place
of the lovely gowns in which Mme. Swann walked like a Queen, appeared
Greco-Saxon tunics, with Tanagra folds, or sometimes, in the Directoire
style, ’Liberty chiffons’ sprinkled with flowers like sheets of wallpaper.
On the heads of the gentlemen who might have been eligible to stroll with
Mme. Swann in the Allée de la Reine Marguerite, I found not the grey
’tile’ hats of old, nor any other kind. They walked the Bois bare-headed.
And seeing all these new elements of the spectacle, I had no longer the
faith which, applied to them, would have given them consistency, unity,
life; they passed in a scattered sequence before me, at random, without
reality, containing in themselves no beauty that my eyes might have
endeavoured as in the old days, to extract from them and to compose in a
picture. They were just women, in whose elegance I had no belief, and
whose clothes seemed to me unimportant. But when a belief vanishes, there
survives it–more and more ardently, so as to cloak the absence of the
power, now lost to us, of imparting reality to new phenomena–an
idolatrous attachment to the old things which our belief in them did once
animate, as if it was in that belief and not in ourselves that the divine
spark resided, and as if our present incredulity had a contingent
cause–the death of the gods.
“Oh, horrible!” I exclaimed to myself: “Does anyone really imagine that
these motor-cars are as smart as the old carriage-and-pair? I dare say.  I
am too old now–but I was not intended for a world in which women shackle
themselves in garments that are not even made of cloth. To what purpose
shall I walk among these trees if there is nothing left now of the
assembly that used to meet beneath the delicate tracery of reddening
leaves, if vulgarity and fatuity have supplanted the exquisite thing that
once their branches framed? Oh, horrible! My consolation is to think of
the women whom I have known, in the past, now that there is no standard
left of elegance. But how can the people who watch these dreadful
creatures hobble by, beneath hats on which have been heaped the spoils of
aviary or garden-bed,–how can they imagine the charm that there was in
the sight of Mme. Swann, crowned with a close-fitting lilac bonnet, or
with a tiny hat from which rose stiffly above her head a single
iris?” Could I ever have made them understand the emotion that I used to
feel on winter mornings, when I met Mme. Swann on foot, in an otter-skin
coat, with a woollen cap from which stuck out two blade-like
partridge-feathers, but enveloped also in the deliberate, artificial
warmth of her own house, which was suggested by nothing more than the
bunch of violets crushed into her bosom, whose flowering, vivid and blue
against the grey sky, the freezing air, the naked boughs, had the same
charming effect of using the season and the weather merely as a setting,
and of living actually in a human atmosphere, in the atmosphere of this
woman, as had in the vases and beaupots of her drawing-room, beside the
blazing fire, in front of the silk-covered sofa, the flowers that looked
out through closed windows at the falling snow? But it would not have
sufficed me that the costumes alone should still have been the same as in
those distant years.  Because of the solidarity that binds together the
different parts of a general impression, parts that our memory keeps in a
balanced whole, of which we are not permitted to subtract or to decline
any fraction, I should have liked to be able to pass the rest of the day
with one of those women, over a cup of tea, in a little house with
dark-painted walls (as Mme.  Swann’s were still in the year after that in
which the first part of this story ends) against which would glow the
orange flame, the red combustion, the pink and white flickering of her
chrysanthemums in the twilight of a November evening, in moments similar
to those in which (as we shall see) I had not managed to discover the
pleasures for which I longed. But now, albeit they had led to nothing,
those moments struck me as having been charming enough in themselves. I
sought to find them again as I remembered them. Alas! there was nothing
now but flats decorated in the Louis XVI style, all white paint, with
hortensias in blue enamel. Moreover, people did not return to Paris, now,
until much later. Mme. Swann would have written to me, from a country
house, that she would not be in town before February, had I asked her to
reconstruct for me the elements of that memory which I felt to belong to a
distant era, to a date in time towards which it was forbidden me to ascend
again the fatal slope, the elements of that longing which had become,
itself, as inaccessible as the pleasure that it had once vainly pursued.
And I should have required also that they be the same women, those whose
costume interested me because, at a time when I still had faith, my
imagination had individualised them and had provided each of them with a
legend. Alas! in the acacia-avenue–the myrtle-alley–I did see some of
them again, grown old, no more now than grim spectres of what once they
had been, wandering to and fro, in desperate search of heaven knew what,
through the Virgilian groves. They had long fled, and still I stood vainly
questioning the deserted paths. The sun’s face was hidden.  Nature began
again to reign over the Bois, from which had vanished all trace of the
idea that it was the Elysian Garden of Woman; above the gimcrack windmill
the real sky was grey; the wind wrinkled the surface of the Grand Lac in
little wavelets, like a real lake; large birds passed swiftly over the
Bois, as over a real wood, and with shrill cries perched, one after
another, on the great oaks which, beneath their Druidical crown, and with
Dodonaic majesty, seemed to proclaim the unpeopled vacancy of this
estranged forest, and helped me to understand how paradoxical it is to
seek in reality for the pictures that are stored in one’s memory, which
must inevitably lose the charm that comes to them from memory itself and
from their not being apprehended by the senses. The reality that I had
known no longer existed. It sufficed that Mme. Swann did not appear, in
the same attire and at the same moment, for the whole avenue to be
altered. The places that we have known belong now only to the little world
of space on which we map them for our own convenience. None of them was
ever more than a thin slice, held between the contiguous impressions that
composed our life at that time; remembrance of a particular form is but
regret for a particular moment; and houses, roads, avenues are as
fugitive, alas, as the years.
 

This full text of Swann’s Way (Vol. 1 of “Remembrance of Things Past”)
by Marcel Proust, translated from the French by C. K. Scott
Moncrieff (1922), is in the public domain. Thanks to Project Gutenberg for
bringing books to the digital world in the form of electronic texts.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Also see ">Swann’s Way I.

Page last updated on February 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
