




The name of Beuzeval had suggested to him that of another place in the
same district, Beuzeville, which carried also, bound to it by a hyphen, a
second name, to wit Bréauté, which he had often seen on maps, but without
ever previously remarking that it was the same name as that borne by his
friend M. de Bréauté, whom the anonymous letter accused of having been
Odette’s lover. After all, when it came to M. de Bréauté, there was
nothing improbable in the charge; but so far as Mme. Verdurin was
concerned, it was a sheer impossibility. From the fact that Odette did
occasionally tell a lie, it was not fair to conclude that she never, by
any chance, told the truth, and in these bantering conversations with Mme.
Verdurin which she herself had repeated to Swann, he could recognize those
meaningless and dangerous pleasantries which, in their inexperience of
life and ignorance of vice, women often utter (thereby certifying their
own innocence), who–as, for instance, Odette,–would be the last people
in the world to feel any undue affection for one another. Whereas, on the
other hand, the indignation with which she had scattered the suspicions
which she had unintentionally brought into being, for a moment, in his
mind by her story, fitted in with everything that he knew of the tastes,
the temperament of his mistress. But at that moment, by an inspiration of
jealousy, analogous to the inspiration which reveals to a poet or a
philosopher, who has nothing, so far, but an odd pair of rhymes or a
detached observation, the idea or the natural law which will give power,
mastery to his work, Swann recalled for the first time a remark which
Odette had made to him, at least two years before: “Oh, Mme. Verdurin, she
won’t hear of anything just now but me. I’m a ’love,’ if you please, and
she kisses me, and wants me to go with her everywhere, and call her by her
Christian name.” So far from seeing in these expressions any connection
with the absurd insinuations, intended to create an atmosphere of vice,
which Odette had since repeated to him, he had welcomed them as a proof of
Mme. Verdurin’s warm-hearted and generous friendship. But now this old
memory of her affection for Odette had coalesced suddenly with his more
recent memory of her unseemly conversation. He could no longer separate
them in his mind, and he saw them blended in reality, the affection
imparting a certain seriousness and importance to the pleasantries which,
in return, spoiled the affection of its innocence. He went to see Odette.
He sat down, keeping at a distance from her. He did not dare to embrace
her, not knowing whether in her, in himself, it would be affection or
anger that a kiss would provoke. He sat there silent, watching their love
expire. Suddenly he made up his mind.
“Odette, my darling,” he began, “I know, I am being simply odious, but I
must ask you a few questions. You remember what I once thought about you
and Mme. Verdurin? Tell me, was it true? Have you, with her or anyone
else, ever?”
She shook her head, pursing her lips together; a sign which people
commonly employ to signify that they are not going, because it would bore
them to go, when some one has asked, “Are you coming to watch the
procession go by?”, or “Will you be at the review?”. But this shake of the
head, which is thus commonly used to decline participation in an event
that has yet to come, imparts for that reason an element of uncertainty to
the denial of participation in an event that is past. Furthermore, it
suggests reasons of personal convenience, rather than any definite
repudiation, any moral impossibility. When he saw Odette thus make him a
sign that the insinuation was false, he realised that it was quite
possibly true.
“I have told you, I never did; you know quite well,” she added, seeming
angry and uncomfortable.
“Yes, I know all that; but are you quite sure? Don’t say to me, ’You know
quite well’; say, ’I have never done anything of that sort with any
woman.’”
She repeated his words like a lesson learned by rote, and as though she
hoped, thereby, to be rid of him: “I have never done anything of that sort
with any woman.”
“Can you swear it to me on your Laghetto medal?”
Swann knew that Odette would never perjure herself on that.
“Oh, you do make me so miserable,” she cried, with a jerk of her body as
though to shake herself free of the constraint of his question. “Have you
nearly done? What is the matter with you to-day? You seem to have made up
your mind that I am to be forced to hate you, to curse you! Look, I was
anxious to be friends with you again, for us to have a nice time together,
like the old days; and this is all the thanks I get!”
However, he would not let her go, but sat there like a surgeon who waits
for a spasm to subside that has interrupted his operation but need not
make him abandon it.
“You are quite wrong in supposing that I bear you the least ill-will in
the world, Odette,” he began with a persuasive and deceitful gentleness.
“I never speak to you except of what I already know, and I always know a
great deal more than I say. But you alone can mollify by your confession
what makes me hate you so long as it has been reported to me only by other
people. My anger with you is never due to your actions–I can and do
forgive you everything because I love you–but to your untruthfulness, the
ridiculous untruthfulness which makes you persist in denying things which
I know to be true. How can you expect that I shall continue to love you,
when I see you maintain, when I hear you swear to me a thing which I know
to be false? Odette, do not prolong this moment which is torturing us
both. If you are willing to end it at once, you shall be free of it for
ever.  Tell me, upon your medal, yes or no, whether you have ever done
those things.”
“How on earth can I tell?” she was furious. “Perhaps I have, ever so long
ago, when I didn’t know what I was doing, perhaps two or three times.”
Swann had prepared himself for all possibilities. Reality must, therefore,
be something which bears no relation to possibilities, any more than the
stab of a knife in one’s body bears to the gradual movement of the clouds
overhead, since those words “two or three times” carved, as it were, a
cross upon the living tissues of his heart. A strange thing, indeed, that
those words, “two or three times,” nothing more than a few words, words
uttered in the air, at a distance, could so lacerate a man’s heart, as if
they had actually pierced it, could sicken a man, like a poison that he
had drunk. Instinctively Swann thought of the remark that he had heard at
Mme. de Saint-Euverte’s: “I have never seen anything to beat it since the
table-turning.” The agony that he now suffered in no way resembled what he
had supposed. Not only because, in the hours when he most entirely
mistrusted her, he had rarely imagined such a culmination of evil, but
because, even when he did imagine that offence, it remained vague,
uncertain, was not clothed in the particular horror which had escaped with
the words “perhaps two or three times,” was not armed with that specific
cruelty, as different from anything that he had known as a new malady by
which one is attacked for the first time. And yet this Odette, from whom
all this evil sprang, was no less dear to him, was, on the contrary, more
precious, as if, in proportion as his sufferings increased, there
increased at the same time the price of the sedative, of the antidote
which this woman alone possessed. He wished to pay her more attention, as
one attends to a disease which one discovers, suddenly, to have grown more
serious. He wished that the horrible thing which, she had told him, she
had done “two or three times” might be prevented from occurring again. To
ensure that, he must watch over Odette. People often say that, by pointing
out to a man the faults of his mistress, you succeed only in strengthening
his attachment to her, because he does not believe you; yet how much more
so if he does! But, Swann asked himself, how could he manage to protect
her? He might perhaps be able to preserve her from the contamination of
any one woman, but there were hundreds of other women; and he realised how
insane had been his ambition when he had begun (on the evening when he had
failed to find Odette at the Verdurins’) to desire the possession–as if
that were ever possible–of another person. Happily for Swann, beneath the
mass of suffering which had invaded his soul like a conquering horde of
barbarians, there lay a natural foundation, older, more placid, and
silently laborious, like the cells of an injured organ which at once set
to work to repair the damaged tissues, or the muscles of a paralysed limb
which tend to recover their former movements. These older, these
autochthonous in-dwellers in his soul absorbed all Swann’s strength, for a
while, in that obscure task of reparation which gives one an illusory
sense of repose during convalescence, or after an operation. This time it
was not so much–as it ordinarily was–in Swann’s brain that the
slackening of tension due to exhaustion took effect, it was rather in his
heart. But all the things in life that have once existed tend to recur,
and, like a dying animal that is once more stirred by the throes of a
convulsion which was, apparently, ended, upon Swann’s heart, spared for a
moment only, the same agony returned of its own accord to trace the same
cross again. He remembered those moonlit evenings, when, leaning back in
the victoria that was taking him to the Rue La Pérouse, he would cultivate
with voluptuous enjoyment the emotions of a man in love, ignorant of the
poisoned fruit that such emotions must inevitably bear. But all those
thoughts lasted for no more than a second, the time that it took him to
raise his hand to his heart, to draw breath again and to contrive to
smile, so as to dissemble his torment. Already he had begun to put further
questions. For his jealousy, which had taken an amount of trouble, such as
no enemy would have incurred, to strike him this mortal blow, to make him
forcibly acquainted with the most cruel pain that he had ever known, his
jealousy was not satisfied that he had yet suffered enough, and sought to
expose his bosom to an even deeper wound. Like an evil deity, his jealousy
was inspiring Swann, was thrusting him on towards destruction. It was not
his fault, but Odette’s alone, if at first his punishment was not more
severe.
“My darling,” he began again, “it’s all over now; was it with anyone I
know?”
“No, I swear it wasn’t; besides, I think I exaggerated, I never really
went as far as that.”
He smiled, and resumed with: “Just as you like. It doesn’t really matter,
but it’s unfortunate that you can’t give me any name. If I were able to
form an idea of the person that would prevent my ever thinking of her
again. I say it for your own sake, because then I shouldn’t bother you any
more about it. It’s so soothing to be able to form a clear picture of
things in one’s mind. What is really terrible is what one cannot imagine.
But you’ve been so sweet to me; I don’t want to tire you. I do thank you,
with all my heart, for all the good that you have done me. I’ve quite
finished now.  Only one word more: how many times?”
“Oh, Charles! can’t you see, you’re killing me? It’s all ever so long ago.
I’ve never given it a thought. Anyone would say that you were positively
trying to put those ideas into my head again. And then you’d be a lot
better off!” she concluded, with unconscious stupidity but with
intentional malice.
“I only wished to know whether it had been since I knew you. It’s only
natural. Did it happen here, ever? You can’t give me any particular
evening, so that I can remind myself what I was doing at the time? You
understand, surely, that it’s not possible that you don’t remember with
whom, Odette, my love.”
“But I don’t know; really, I don’t. I think it was in the Bois, one
evening when you came to meet us on the Island. You had been dining with
the Princesse des Laumes,” she added, happy to be able to furnish him with
an exact detail, which testified to her veracity. “At the next table there
was a woman whom I hadn’t seen for ever so long. She said to me, ’Come
along round behind the rock, there, and look at the moonlight on the
water!’ At first I just yawned, and said, ’No, I’m too tired, and I’m
quite happy where I am, thank you.’ She swore there’d never been anything
like it in the way of moonlight. ’I’ve heard that tale before,’ I said to
her; you see, I knew quite well what she was after.” Odette narrated this
episode almost as if it were a joke, either because it appeared to her to
be quite natural, or because she thought that she was thereby minimising
its importance, or else so as not to appear ashamed. But, catching sight
of Swann’s face, she changed her tone, and:
“You are a fiend!” she flung at him, “you enjoy tormenting me, making me
tell you lies, just so that you’ll leave me in peace.”
This second blow struck at Swann was even more excruciating than the
first. Never had he supposed it to have been so recent an affair, hidden
from his eyes that had been too innocent to discern it, not in a past
which he had never known, but in evenings which he so well remembered,
which he had lived through with Odette, of which he had supposed himself
to have such an intimate, such an exhaustive knowledge, and which now
assumed, retrospectively, an aspect of cunning and deceit and cruelty. In
the midst of them parted, suddenly, a gaping chasm, that moment on the
Island in the Bois de Boulogne. Without being intelligent, Odette had the
charm of being natural. She had recounted, she had acted the little scene
with so much simplicity that Swann, as he gasped for breath, could vividly
see it: Odette yawning, the “rock there,”... He could hear her
answer–alas, how lightheartedly–"I’ve heard that tale before!” He felt
that she would tell him nothing more that evening, that no further
revelation was to be expected for the present. He was silent for a time,
then said to her:
“My poor darling, you must forgive me; I know, I am hurting you
dreadfully, but it’s all over now; I shall never think of it again.”
But she saw that his eyes remained fixed upon the things that he did not
know, and on that past era of their love, monotonous and soothing in his
memory because it was vague, and now rent, as with a sword-wound, by the
news of that minute on the Island in the Bois, by moonlight, while he was
dining with the Princesse des Laumes. But he had so far acquired the habit
of finding life interesting–of marvelling at the strange discoveries that
there were to be made in it–that even while he was suffering so acutely
that he did not believe it possible to endure such agony for any length of
time, he was saying to himself: “Life is indeed astonishing, and holds
some fine surprises; it appears that vice is far more common than one has
been led to believe. Here is a woman in whom I had absolute confidence,
who looks so simple, so honest, who, in any case, even allowing that her
morals are not strict, seemed quite normal and healthy in her tastes and
inclinations. I receive a most improbable accusation, I question her, and
the little that she admits reveals far more than I could ever have
suspected.” But he could not confine himself to these detached
observations.  He sought to form an exact estimate of the importance of
what she had just told him, so as to know whether he might conclude that
she had done these things often, and was likely to do them again. He
repeated her words to himself: “I knew quite well what she was after."
“Two or three times.” “I’ve heard that tale before.” But they did not
reappear in his memory unarmed; each of them held a knife with which it
stabbed him afresh.  For a long time, like a sick man who cannot restrain
himself from attempting, every minute, to make the movement that, he
knows, will hurt him, he kept on murmuring to himself: “I’m quite happy
where I am, thank you,” “I’ve heard that tale before,” but the pain was so
intense that he was obliged to stop. He was amazed to find that actions
which he had always, hitherto, judged so lightly, had dismissed, indeed,
with a laugh, should have become as serious to him as a disease which
might easily prove fatal. He knew any number of women whom he could ask to
keep an eye on Odette, but how was he to expect them to adjust themselves
to his new point of view, and not to remain at that which for so long had
been his own, which had always guided him in his voluptuous existence; not
to say to him with a smile: “You jealous monster, wanting to rob other
people of their pleasure!” By what trap-door, suddenly lowered, had he
(who had never found, in the old days, in his love for Odette, any but the
most refined of pleasures) been precipitated into this new circle of hell
from which he could not see how he was ever to escape. Poor Odette! He
wished her no harm. She was but half to blame. Had he not been told that
it was her own mother who had sold her, when she was still little more
than a child, at Nice, to a wealthy Englishman? But what an agonising
truth was now contained for him in those lines of Alfred de Vigny’s
Journal d’un Poète which he had previously read without emotion: “When
one feels oneself smitten by love for a woman, one ought to say to
oneself, ’What are ’her surroundings? What has been her life?’ All one’s
future happiness lies in the answer.” Swann was astonished that such
simple phrases, spelt over in his mind as, “I’ve heard that tale before,"
or “I knew quite well what she was after,” could cause him so much pain.
But he realised that what he had mistaken for simple phrases were indeed
parts of the panoply which held and could inflict on him the anguish that
he had felt while Odette was telling her story. For it was the same
anguish that he now was feeling afresh. It was no good, his knowing
now,–indeed, it was no good, as time went on, his having partly forgotten
and altogether forgiven the offence–whenever he repeated her words his
old anguish refashioned him as he had been before Odette began to speak:
ignorant, trustful; his merciless jealousy placed him once again, so that
he might be effectively wounded by Odette’s admission, in the position of
a man who does not yet know the truth; and after several months this old
story would still dumbfounder him, like a sudden revelation. He marvelled
at the terrible recreative power of his memory. It was only by the
weakening of that generative force, whose fecundity diminishes as age
creeps over one, that he could hope for a relaxation of his torments. But,
as soon as the power that any one of Odette’s sentences had to make Swann
suffer seemed to be nearly exhausted, lo and behold another, one of those
to which he had hitherto paid least attention, almost a new sentence, came
to relieve the first, and to strike at him with undiminished force. The
memory of the evening on which he had dined with the Princesse des Laumes
was painful to him, but it was no more than the centre, the core of his
pain. That radiated vaguely round about it, overflowing into all the
preceding and following days. And on whatever point in it he might intend
his memory to rest, it was the whole of that season, during which the
Verdurins had so often gone to dine upon the Island in the Bois, that
sprang back to hurt him.  So violently, that by slow degrees the curiosity
which his jealousy was ever exciting in him was neutralised by his fear of
the fresh tortures which he would be inflicting upon himself were he to
satisfy it. He recognised that all the period of Odette’s life which had
elapsed before she first met him, a period of which he had never sought to
form any picture in his mind, was not the featureless abstraction which he
could vaguely see, but had consisted of so many definite, dated years,
each crowded with concrete incidents. But were he to learn more of them,
he feared lest her past, now colourless, fluid and supportable, might
assume a tangible, an obscene form, with individual and diabolical
features. And he continued to refrain from seeking a conception of it, not
any longer now from laziness of mind, but from fear of suffering. He hoped
that, some day, he might be able to hear the Island in the Bois, or the
Princesse des Laumes mentioned without feeling any twinge of that old
rending pain; meanwhile he thought it imprudent to provoke Odette into
furnishing him with fresh sentences, with the names of more places and
people and of different events, which, when his malady was still scarcely
healed, would make it break out again in another form.
But, often enough, the things that he did not know, that he dreaded, now,
to learn, it was Odette herself who, spontaneously and without thought of
what she did, revealed them to him; for the gap which her vices made
between her actual life and the comparatively innocent life which Swann
had believed, and often still believed his mistress to lead, was far wider
than she knew. A vicious person, always affecting the same air of virtue
before people whom he is anxious to keep from having any suspicion of his
vices, has no register, no gauge at hand from which he may ascertain bow
far those vices (their continuous growth being imperceptible by himself)
have gradually segregated him from the normal ways of life. In the course
of their cohabitation, in Odette’s mind, with the memory of those of her
actions which she concealed from Swann, her other, her innocuous actions
were gradually coloured, infected by these, without her being able to
detect anything strange in them, without their causing any explosion in
the particular region of herself in which she made them live, but when she
related them to Swann, he was overwhelmed by the revelation of the
duplicity to which they pointed. One day, he was trying–without hurting
Odette–to discover from her whether she had ever had any dealings with
procuresses. He was, as a matter of fact, convinced that she had not; the
anonymous letter had put the idea into his mind, but in a purely
mechanical way; it had been received there with no credulity, but it had,
for all that, remained there, and Swann, wishing to be rid of the
burden–a dead weight, but none the less disturbing–of this suspicion,
hoped that Odette would now extirpate it for ever.
“Oh dear, no! Not that they don’t simply persecute me to go to them,” her
smile revealed a gratified vanity which she no longer saw that it was
impossible should appear legitimate to Swann. “There was one of them
waited more than two hours for me yesterday, said she would give me any
money I asked. It seems, there’s an Ambassador who said to her, ’I’ll kill
myself if you don’t bring her to me’–meaning me! They told her I’d gone
out, but she waited and waited, and in the end I had to go myself and
speak to her, before she’d go away. I do wish you could have seen the way
I tackled her; my maid was in the next room, listening, and told me I
shouted fit to bring the house down:–’But when you hear me say that I
don’t want to! The idea of such a thing, I don’t like it at all! I should
hope I’m still free to do as I please and when I please and where I
please! If I needed the money, I could understand...’ The porter has
orders not to let her in again; he will tell her that I am out of town.
Oh, I do wish I could have had you hidden somewhere in the room while I
was talking to her.  I know, you’d have been pleased, my dear. There’s
some good in your little Odette, you see, after all, though people do say
such dreadful things about her.”
Besides, her very admissions–when she made any–of faults which she
supposed him to have discovered, rather served Swann as a starting-point
for fresh doubts than they put an end to the old. For her admissions never
exactly coincided with his doubts. In vain might Odette expurgate her
confession of all its essential part, there would remain in the
accessories something which Swann had never yet imagined, which crushed
him anew, and was to enable him to alter the terms of the problem of his
jealousy.  And these admissions he could never forget. His spirit carried
them along, cast them aside, then cradled them again in its bosom, like
corpses in a river. And they poisoned it.
She spoke to him once of a visit that Forcheville had paid her on the day
of the Paris-Murcie Fête. “What! you knew him as long ago as that?  Oh,
yes, of course you did,” he corrected himself, so as not to shew that he
had been ignorant of the fact. And suddenly he began to tremble at the
thought that, on the day of the Paris-Murcie Fête, when he had received
that letter which he had so carefully preserved, she had been having
luncheon, perhaps, with Forcheville at the Maison d’Or. She swore that she
had not. “Still, the Maison d’Or reminds me of something or other which, I
knew at the time, wasn’t true,” he pursued, hoping to frighten her. “Yes
that I hadn’t been there at all that evening when I told you I had just
come from there, and you had been looking for me at Prévost’s,” she
replied (judging by his manner that he knew) with a firmness that was
based not so much upon cynicism as upon timidity, a fear of crossing
Swann, which her own self-respect made her anxious to conceal, and a
desire to shew him that she could be perfectly frank if she chose. And so
she struck him with all the sharpness and force of a headsman wielding his
axe, and yet could not be charged with cruelty, since she was quite
unconscious of hurting him; she even began to laugh, though this may
perhaps, it is true, have been chiefly to keep him from thinking that she
was ashamed, at all, or confused. “It’s quite true, I hadn’t been to the
Maison Dorée. I was coming away from Forcheville’s. I had, really, been to
Prévost’s–that wasn’t a story–and he met me there and asked me to come
in and look at his prints. But some one else came to see him. I told you
that I was coming from the Maison d’Or because I was afraid you might be
angry with me. It was rather nice of me, really, don’t you see? I admit, I
did wrong, but at least I’m telling you all about it now, a’n’t I? What
have I to gain by not telling you, straight, that I lunched with him on
the day of the Paris-Murcie Fête, if it were true? Especially as at that
time we didn’t know one another quite so well as we do now, did we, dear?”
He smiled back at her with the sudden, craven weakness of the utterly
spiritless creature which these crushing words had made of him. And so,
even in the months of which he had never dared to think again, because
they had been too happy, in those months when she had loved him, she was
already lying to him! Besides that moment (that first evening on which
they had “done a cattleya”) when she had told him that she was coming from
the Maison Dorée, how many others must there have been, each of them
covering a falsehood of which Swann had had no suspicion.  He recalled how
she had said to him once: “I need only tell Mme. Verdurin that my dress
wasn’t ready, or that my cab came late. There is always some excuse.” From
himself too, probably, many times when she had glibly uttered such words
as explain a delay or justify an alteration of the hour fixed for a
meeting, those moments must have hidden, without his having the least
inkling of it at the time, an engagement that she had had with some other
man, some man to whom she had said: “I need only tell Swann that my dress
wasn’t ready, or that my cab came late. There is always some excuse.” And
beneath all his most pleasant memories, beneath the simplest words that
Odette had ever spoken to him in those old days, words which he had
believed as though they were the words of a Gospel, beneath her daily
actions which she had recounted to him, beneath the most ordinary places,
her dressmaker’s flat, the Avenue du Bois, the Hippodrome, he could feel
(dissembled there, by virtue of that temporal superfluity which, after the
most detailed account of how a day has been spent, always leaves something
over, that may serve as a hiding place for certain unconfessed actions),
he could feel the insinuation of a possible undercurrent of falsehood
which debased for him all that had remained most precious, his happiest
evenings, the Rue La Pérouse itself, which Odette must constantly have
been leaving at other hours than those of which she told him; extending
the power of the dark horror that had gripped him when he had heard her
admission with regard to the Maison Dorée, and, like the obscene creatures
in the ’Desolation of Nineveh,’ shattering, stone by stone, the whole
edifice of his past.... If, now, he turned aside whenever his memory
repeated the cruel name of the Maison Dorée it was because that name
recalled to him, no longer, as, such a little time since, at Mme. de
Saint-Euverte’s party, the good fortune which he long had lost, but a
misfortune of which he was now first aware. Then it befell the Maison
Dorée, as it had befallen the Island in the Bois, that gradually its name
ceased to trouble him. For what we suppose to be our love, our jealousy
are, neither of them, single, continuous and individual passions. They are
composed of an infinity of successive loves, of different jealousies, each
of which is ephemeral, although by their uninterrupted multitude they give
us the impression of continuity, the illusion of unity.  The life of
Swann’s love, the fidelity of his jealousy, were formed out of death, of
infidelity, of innumerable desires, innumerable doubts, all of which had
Odette for their object. If he had remained for any length of time without
seeing her, those that died would not have been replaced by others. But
the presence of Odette continued to sow in Swann’s heart alternate seeds
of love and suspicion.
On certain evenings she would suddenly resume towards him a kindness of
which she would warn him sternly that he must take immediate advantage,
under penalty of not seeing it repeated for years to come; he must
instantly accompany her home, to “do a cattleya,” and the desire which she
pretended to have for him was so sudden, so inexplicable, so imperious,
the kisses which she lavished on him were so demonstrative and so
unfamiliar, that this brutal and unnatural fondness made Swann just as
unhappy as any lie or unkind action. One evening when he had thus, in
obedience to her command, gone home with her, and while she was
interspersing her kisses with passionate words, in strange contrast to her
habitual coldness, he thought suddenly that he heard a sound; he rose,
searched everywhere and found nobody, but he had not the courage to return
to his place by her side; whereupon she, in a towering rage, broke a vase,
with “I never can do anything right with you, you impossible person!” And
he was left uncertain whether she had not actually had some man concealed
in the room, whose jealousy she had wished to wound, or else to inflame
his senses.
Sometimes he repaired to ’gay’ houses, hoping to learn something about
Odette, although he dared not mention her name. “I have a little thing
here, you’re sure to like,” the ’manageress’ would greet him, and he would
stay for an hour or so, talking dolefully to some poor girl who sat there
astonished that he went no further. One of them, who was still quite young
and attractive, said to him once, “Of course, what I should like would be
to find a real friend, then he might be quite certain, I should never go
with any other men again.” “Indeed, do you think it possible for a woman
really to be touched by a man’s being in love with her, and never to be
unfaithful to him?” asked Swann anxiously. “Why, surely! It all depends on
their characters!” Swann could not help making the same remarks to these
girls as would have delighted the Princesse des Laumes. To the one who was
in search of a friend he said, with a smile: “But how nice of you, you’ve
put on blue eyes, to go with your sash.” “And you too, you’ve got blue
cuffs on.” “What a charming conversation we are having, for a place of
this sort! I’m not boring you, am I; or keeping you?” “No, I’ve nothing to
do, thank you. If you bored me I should say so. But I love hearing you
talk.” “I am highly flattered.... Aren’t we behaving prettily?” he asked
the ’manageress,’ who had just looked in. “Why, yes, that’s just what I
was saying to myself, how sensibly they’re behaving! But that’s how it is!
People come to my house now, just to talk. The Prince was telling me, only
the other day, that he’s far more comfortable here than with his wife.  It
seems that, nowadays, all the society ladies are like that; a perfect
scandal, I call it. But I’ll leave you in peace now, I know when I’m not
wanted,” she ended discreetly, and left Swann with the girl who had the
blue eyes. But presently he rose and said good-bye to her. She had ceased
to interest him. She did not know Odette.
The painter having been ill, Dr. Cottard recommended a sea-voyage; several
of the ’faithful’ spoke of accompanying him; the Verdurins could not face
the prospect of being left alone in Paris, so first of all hired, and
finally purchased a yacht; thus Odette was constantly going on a cruise.
Whenever she had been away for any length of time, Swann would feel that
he was beginning to detach himself from her, but, as though this moral
distance were proportionate to the physical distance between them,
whenever he heard that Odette had returned to Paris, he could not rest
without seeing her. Once, when they had gone away, as everyone thought,
for a month only, either they succumbed to a series of temptations, or
else M.  Verdurin had cunningly arranged everything beforehand, to please
his wife, and disclosed his plans to the ’faithful’ only as time went on;
anyhow, from Algiers they flitted to Tunis; then to Italy, Greece,
Constantinople, Asia Minor. They had been absent for nearly a year, and
Swann felt perfectly at ease and almost happy. Albeit M. Verdurin had
endeavoured to persuade the pianist and Dr. Cottard that their respective
aunt and patients had no need of them, and that, in any event, it was most
rash to allow Mme. Cottard to return to Paris, where, Mme. Verdurin
assured him, a revolution had just broken out, he was obliged to grant
them their liberty at Constantinople. And the painter came home with them.
One day, shortly after the return of these four travellers, Swann, seeing
an omnibus approach him, labelled ’Luxembourg,’ and having some business
there, had jumped on to it and had found himself sitting opposite Mme.
Cottard, who was paying a round of visits to people whose ’day’ it was, in
full review order, with a plume in her hat, a silk dress, a muff, an
umbrella (which do for a parasol if the rain kept off), a card-case, and a
pair of white gloves fresh from the cleaners. Wearing these badges of
rank, she would, in fine weather, go on foot from one house to another in
the same neighbourhood, but when she had to proceed to another district,
would make use of a transfer-ticket on the omnibus. For the first minute
or two, until the natural courtesy of the woman broke through the starched
surface of the doctor’s-wife, not being certain, either, whether she ought
to mention the Verdurins before Swann, she produced, quite naturally, in
her slow and awkward, but not unattractive voice, which, every now and
then, was completely drowned by the rattling of the omnibus, topics
selected from those which she had picked up and would repeat in each of
the score of houses up the stairs of which she clambered in the course of
an afternoon.
“I needn’t ask you, M. Swann, whether a man so much in the movement as
yourself has been to the Mirlitons, to see the portrait by Machard that
the whole of Paris is running after. Well, and what do you think of it?
Whose camp are you in, those who bless or those who curse? It’s the same
in every house in Paris now, no one will speak of anything else but
Machard’s portrait; you aren’t smart, you aren’t really cultured, you
aren’t up-to-date unless you give an opinion on Machard’s portrait.”
Swann having replied that he had not seen this portrait, Mme. Cottard was
afraid that she might have hurt his feelings by obliging him to confess
the omission.
“Oh, that’s quite all right! At least you have the courage to be quite
frank about it. You don’t consider yourself disgraced because you haven’t
seen Machard’s portrait. I do think that so nice of you. Well now, I have
seen it; opinion is divided, you know, there are some people who find it
rather laboured, like whipped cream, they say; but I think it’s just
ideal.  Of course, she’s not a bit like the blue and yellow ladies that
our friend Biche paints. That’s quite clear. But I must tell you,
perfectly frankly (you’ll think me dreadfully old-fashioned, but I always
say just what I think), that I don’t understand his work. I can quite see
the good points there are in his portrait of my husband; oh, dear me, yes;
and it’s certainly less odd than most of what he does, but even then he
had to give the poor man a blue moustache! But Machard! Just listen to
this now, the husband of my friend, I am on my way to see at this very
moment (which has given me the very great pleasure of your company), has
promised her that, if he is elected to the Academy (he is one of the
Doctor’s colleagues), he will get Machard to paint her portrait. So she’s
got something to look forward to! I have another friend who insists that
she’d rather have Leloir.  I’m only a wretched Philistine, and I’ve no
doubt Leloir has perhaps more knowledge of painting even than Machard. But
I do think that the most important thing about a portrait, especially when
it’s going to cost ten thousand francs, is that it should be like, and a
pleasant likeness, if you know what I mean.”
Having exhausted this topic, to which she had been inspired by the
loftiness of her plume, the monogram on her card-case, the little number
inked inside each of her gloves by the cleaner, and the difficulty of
speaking to Swann about the Verdurins, Mme. Cottard, seeing that they had
still a long way to go before they would reach the corner of the Rue
Bonaparte, where the conductor was to set her down, listened to the
promptings of her heart, which counselled other words than these.
“Your ears must have been burning,” she ventured, “while we were on the
yacht with Mme. Verdurin. We were talking about you all the time.”
Swann was genuinely astonished, for he supposed that his name was never
uttered in the Verdurins’ presence.
“You see,” Mme. Cottard went on, “Mme. de Crécy was there; need I say
more? When Odette is anywhere it’s never long before she begins talking
about you. And you know quite well, it isn’t nasty things she says.  What!
you don’t believe me!” she went on, noticing that Svrann looked sceptical.
And, carried away by the sincerity of her conviction, without putting any
evil meaning into the word, which she used purely in the sense in which
one employs it to speak of the affection that unites a pair of friends:
“Why, she adores you! No, indeed; I’m sure it would never do to say
anything against you when she was about; one would soon be taught one’s
place! Whatever we might be doing, if we were looking at a picture, for
instance, she would say, ’If only we had him here, he’s the man who could
tell us whether it’s genuine or not. There’s no one like him for that.’
And all day long she would be saying, ’What can he be doing just now?  I
do hope, he’s doing a little work! It’s too dreadful that a fellow with
such gifts as he has should be so lazy.’ (Forgive me, won’t you.) ’I can
see him this very moment; he’s thinking of us, he’s wondering where we
are.’ Indeed, she used an expression which I thought very pretty at the
time.  M. Verdurin asked her, ’How in the world can you see what he’s
doing, when he’s a thousand miles away?’ And Odette answered, ’Nothing is
impossible to the eye of a friend.’
“No, I assure you, I’m not saying it just to flatter you; you have a true
friend in her, such as one doesn’t often find. I can tell you, besides, in
case you don’t know it, that you’re the only one. Mme. Verdurin told me as
much herself on our last day with them (one talks more freely, don’t you
know, before a parting), ’I don’t say that Odette isn’t fond of us, but
anything that we may say to her counts for very little beside what Swann
might say.’ Oh, mercy, there’s the conductor stopping for me; here have I
been chatting away to you, and would have gone right past the Rue
Bonaparte, and never noticed... Will you be so very kind as to tell me
whether my plume is straight?”
And Mme. Cottard withdrew from her muff, to offer it to Swann, a
white-gloved hand from which there floated, with a transier-ticket, an
atmosphere of fashionable life that pervaded the omnibus, blended with the
harsher fragrance of newly cleaned kid. And Swann felt himself overflowing
with gratitude to her, as well as to Mme. Verdurin (and almost to Odette,
for the feeling that he now entertained for her was no longer tinged with
pain, was scarcely even to be described, now, as love), while from the
platform of the omnibus he followed her with loving eyes, as she gallantly
threaded her way along the Rue Bonaparte, her plume erect, her skirt held
up in one hand, while in the other she clasped her umbrella and her
card-case, so that its monogram could be seen, her muff dancing in the air
before her as she went.
To compete with and so to stimulate the moribund feelings that Swann had
for Odette, Mme. Cottard, a wiser physician, in this case, than ever her
husband would have been, had grafted among them others more normal,
feelings of gratitude, of friendship, which in Swann’s mind were to make
Odette seem again more human (more like other women, since other women
could inspire the same feelings in him), were to hasten her final
transformation back into that Odette, loved with an undisturbed affection,
who had taken him home one evening after a revel at the painter’s, to
drink orangeade with Forcheville, that Odette with whom Swann had
calculated that he might live in happiness.
In former times, having often thought with terror that a day must come
when he would cease to be in love with Odette, he had determined to keep a
sharp look-out, and as soon as he felt that love was beginning to escape
him, to cling tightly to it and to hold it back. But now, to the faintness
of his love there corresponded a simultaneous faintness in his desire to
remain her lover. For a man cannot change, that is to say become another
person, while he continues to obey the dictates of the self which he has
ceased to be. Occasionally the name, if it caught his eye in a newspaper,
of one of the men whom he supposed to have been Odette’s lovers,
reawakened his jealousy. But it was very slight, and, inasmuch as it
proved to him that he had not completely emerged from that period in which
he had so keenly suffered–though in it he had also known a way of feeling
so intensely happy–and that the accidents of his course might still
enable him to catch an occasional glimpse, stealthily and at a distance,
of its beauties, this jealousy gave him, if anything, an agreeable thrill,
as to the sad Parisian, when he has left Venice behind him and must return
to France, a last mosquito proves that Italy and summer are still not too
remote. But, as a rule, with this particular period of his life from which
he was emerging, when he made an effort, if not to remain in it, at least
to obtain, while still he might, an uninterrupted view of it, he
discovered that already it was too late; he would have looked back to
distinguish, as it might be a landscape that was about to disappear, that
love from which he had departed, but it is so difficult to enter into a
state of complete duality and to present to oneself the lifelike spectacle
of a feeling which one has ceased to possess, that very soon, the clouds
gathering in his brain, he could see nothing, he would abandon the
attempt, would take the glasses from his nose and wipe them; and he told
himself that he would do better to rest for a little, that there would be
time enough later on, and settled back into his corner with as little
curiosity, with as much torpor as the drowsy traveller who pulls his cap
down over his eyes so as to get some sleep in the railway-carriage that is
drawing him, he feels, faster and faster, out of the country in which he
has lived for so long, and which he vowed that he would not allow to slip
away from him without looking out to bid it a last farewell. Indeed, like
the same traveller, if he does not awake until he has crossed the frontier
and is again in France, when Swann happened to alight, close at hand, upon
something which proved that Forcheville had been Odette’s lover, he
discovered that it caused him no pain, that love was now utterly remote,
and he regretted that he had had no warning of the moment in which he had
emerged from it for ever. And just as, before kissing Odette for the first
time, he had sought to imprint upon his memory the face that for so long
had been familiar, before it was altered by the additional memory of their
kiss, so he could have wished–in thought at least–to have been in a
position to bid farewell, while she still existed, to that Odette who had
inspired love in him and jealousy, to that Odette who had caused him so to
suffer, and whom now he would never see again.  He was mistaken. He was
destined to see her once again, a few weeks later.  It was while he was
asleep, in the twilight of a dream. He was walking with Mme. Verdurin, Dr.
Cottard, a young man in a fez whom he failed to identify, the painter,
Odette, Napoleon III and my grandfather, along a path which followed the
line of the coast, and overhung the sea, now at a great height, now by a
few feet only, so that they were continually going up and down; those of
the party who had reached the downward slope were no longer visible to
those who were still climbing; what little daylight yet remained was
failing, and it seemed as though a black night was immediately to fall on
them. Now and then the waves dashed against the cliff, and Swann could
feel on his cheek a shower of freezing spray. Odette told him to wipe this
off, but he could not, and felt confused and helpless in her company, as
well as because he was in his nightshirt. He hoped that, in the darkness,
this might pass unnoticed; Mme. Verdurin, however, fixed her astonished
gaze upon him for an endless moment, in which he saw her face change its
shape, her nose grow longer, while beneath it there sprouted a heavy
moustache. He turned away to examine Odette; her cheeks were pale, with
little fiery spots, her features drawn and ringed with shadows; but she
looked back at him with eyes welling with affection, ready to detach
themselves like tears and to fall upon his face, and he felt that he loved
her so much that he would have liked to carry her off with him at once.
Suddenly Odette turned her wrist, glanced at a tiny watch, and said: “I
must go.” She took leave of everyone, in the same formal manner, without
taking Swann aside, without telling him where they were to meet that
evening, or next day. He dared not ask, he would have liked to follow her,
he was obliged, without turning back in her direction, to answer with a
smile some question by Mme. Verdurin; but his heart was frantically
beating, he felt that he now hated Odette, he would gladly have crushed
those eyes which, a moment ago, he had loved so dearly, have torn the
blood into those lifeless cheeks. He continued to climb with Mme.
Verdurin, that is to say that each step took him farther from Odette, who
was going downhill, and in the other direction. A second passed and it was
many hours since she had left him. The painter remarked to Swann that
Napoleon III had eclipsed himself immediately after Odette. “They had
obviously arranged it between them,” he added; “they must have agreed to
meet at the foot of the cliff, but they wouldn’t say good-bye together; it
might have looked odd. She is his mistress.” The strange young man burst
into tears. Swann endeavoured to console him. “After all, she is quite
right,” he said to the young man, drying his eyes for him and taking off
the fez to make him feel more at ease. “I’ve advised her to do that,
myself, a dozen times. Why be so distressed? He was obviously the man to
understand her.” So Swann reasoned with himself, for the young man whom he
had failed, at first, to identify, was himself also; like certain
novelists, he had distributed his own personality between two characters,
him who was the ’first person’ in the dream, and another whom he saw
before him, capped with a fez.
As for Napoleon III, it was to Forcheville that some vague association of
ideas, then a certain modification of the Baron’s usual physiognomy, and
lastly the broad ribbon of the Legion of Honour across his breast, had
made Swann give that name; but actually, and in everything that the person
who appeared in his dream represented and recalled to him, it was indeed
Forcheville. For, from an incomplete and changing set of images, Swann in
his sleep drew false deductions, enjoying, at the same time, such creative
power that he was able to reproduce himself by a simple act of division,
like certain lower organisms; with the warmth that he felt in his own palm
he modelled the hollow of a strange hand which he thought that he was
clasping, and out of feelings and impressions of which he was not yet
conscious, he brought about sudden vicissitudes which, by a chain of
logical sequences, would produce, at definite points in his dream, the
person required to receive his love or to startle him awake. In an instant
night grew black about him; an alarum rang, the inhabitants ran past him,
escaping from their blazing houses; he could hear the thunder of the
surging waves, and also of his own heart, which, with equal violence, was
anxiously beating in his breast. Suddenly the speed of these palpitations
redoubled, he felt a pain, a nausea that were inexplicable; a peasant,
dreadfully burned, flung at him as he passed: “Come and ask Charlus where
Odette spent the night with her friend. He used to go about with her, and
she tells him everything. It was they that started the fire.” It was his
valet, come to awaken him, and saying:–-
“Sir, it is eight o’clock, and the barber is here. I have told him to call
again in an hour.”
But these words, as they dived down through the waves of sleep in which
Swann was submerged, did not reach his consciousness without undergoing
that refraction which turns a ray of light, at the bottom of a bowl of
water, into another sun; just as, a moment earlier, the sound of the
door-bell, swelling in the depths of his abyss of sleep into the clangour
of an alarum, had engendered the episode of the fire. Meanwhile the
scenery of his dream-stage scattered in dust, he opened his eyes, heard
for the last time the boom of a wave in the sea, grown very distant. He
touched his cheek. It was dry. And yet he could feel the sting of the cold
spray, and the taste of salt on his lips. He rose, and dressed himself. He
had made the barber come early because he had written, the day before, to
my grandfather, to say that he was going, that afternoon, to Combray,
having learned that Mme. de Cambremer–Mlle. Legrandin that had been–was
spending a few days there. The association in his memory of her young and
charming face with a place in the country which he had not visited for so
long, offered him a combined attraction which had made him decide at last
to leave Paris for a while. As the different changes and chances that
bring us into the company of certain other people in this life do not
coincide with the periods in which we are in love with those people, but,
overlapping them, may occur before love has begun, and may be repeated
after love is ended, the earliest appearances, in our life, of a creature
who is destined to afford us pleasure later on, assume retrospectively in
our eyes a certain value as an indication, a warning, a presage. It was in
this fashion that Swann had often carried back his mind to the image of
Odette, encountered in the theatre, on that first evening when he had no
thought of ever seeing her again–and that he now recalled the party at
Mme. de Saint-Euverte’s, at which he had introduced General de
Frober-ville to Mme. de Cambremer. So manifold are our interests in life
that it is not uncommon that, on a single occasion, the foundations of a
happiness which does not yet exist are laid down simultaneously with
aggravations of a grief from which we are still suffering. And, no doubt,
that might have occurred to Swann elsewhere than at Mme. de
Saint-Euverte’s. Who, indeed, can say whether, in the event of his having
gone, that evening, somewhere else, other happinesses, other griefs would
not have come to him, which, later, would have appeared to have been
inevitable? But what did seem to him to have been inevitable was what had
indeed taken place, and he was not far short of seeing something
providential in the fact that he had at last decided to go to Mme. de
Saint-Euverte’s that evening, because his mind, anxious to admire the
richness of invention that life shews, and incapable of facing a difficult
problem for any length of time, such as to discover what, actually, had
been most to be wished for, came to the conclusion that the sufferings
through which he had passed that evening, and the pleasures, at that time
unsuspected, which were already being brought to birth,–the exact balance
between which was too difficult to establish–were linked by a sort of
concatenation of necessity.
But while, an hour after his awakening, he was giving instructions to the
barber, so that his stiffly brushed hair should not become disarranged on
the journey, he thought once again of his dream; he saw once again, as he
had felt them close beside him, Odette’s pallid complexion, her too thin
cheeks, her drawn features, her tired eyes, all the things which–in the
course of those successive bursts of affection which had made of his
enduring love for Odette a long oblivion of the first impression that he
had formed of her–he had ceased to observe after the first few days of
their intimacy, days to which, doubtless, while he slept, his memory had
returned to seek the exact sensation of those things. And with that old,
intermittent fatuity, which reappeared in him now that he was no longer
unhappy, and lowered, at the same time, the average level of his morality,
he cried out in his heart: “To think that I have wasted years of my life,
that I have longed for death, that the greatest love that I have ever
known has been for a woman who did not please me, who was not in my
style!”
Continue...

This full text of Swann’s Way (Vol. 1 of “Remembrance of Things Past”)
by Marcel Proust, translated from the French by C. K. Scott
Moncrieff (1922), is in the public domain. Thanks to Project Gutenberg for
bringing books to the digital world in the form of electronic texts.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Also see ">Swann’s Way I.

Page last updated on February 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
