




One day, as I was weary of our usual place, beside the wooden horses,
Françoise had taken me for an excursion–across the frontier guarded at
regular intervals by the little bastions of the barley-sugar women–into
those neighbouring but foreign regions, where the faces of the passers-by
were strange, where the goat-carriage went past; then she had gone away to
lay down her things on a chair that stood with its back to a shrubbery of
laurels; while I waited for her I was pacing the broad lawn, of meagre
close-cropped grass already faded by the sun, dominated, at its far end,
by a statue rising from a fountain, in front of which a little girl with
reddish hair was playing with a shuttlecock; when, from the path, another
little girl, who was putting on her cloak and covering up her battledore,
called out sharply: “Good-bye, Gilberte, I’m going home now; don’t forget,
we’re coming to you this evening, after dinner.” The name Gilberte passed
close by me, evoking all the more forcibly her whom it labelled in that it
did not merely refer to her, as one speaks of a man in his absence, but
was directly addressed to her; it passed thus close by me, in action, so
to speak, with a force that increased with the curve of its trajectory and
as it drew near to its target;–carrying in its wake, I could feel, the
knowledge, the impression of her to whom it was addressed that belonged
not to me but to the friend who called to her, everything that, while she
uttered the words, she more or less vividly reviewed, possessed in her
memory, of their daily intimacy, of the visits that they paid to each
other, of that unknown existence which was all the more inaccessible, all
the more painful to me from being, conversely, so familiar, so tractable
to this happy girl who let her message brush past me without my being able
to penetrate its surface, who flung it on the air with a light-hearted
cry: letting float in the atmosphere the delicious attar which that
message had distilled, by touching them with precision, from certain
invisible points in Mlle.  Swann’s life, from the evening to come, as it
would be, after dinner, at her home,–forming, on its celestial passage
through the midst of the children and their nursemaids, a little cloud,
exquisitely coloured, like the cloud that, curling over one of Poussin’s
gardens, reflects minutely, like a cloud in the opera, teeming with
chariots and horses, some apparition of the life of the gods; casting,
finally, on that ragged grass, at the spot on which she stood (at once a
scrap of withered lawn and a moment in the afternoon of the fair player,
who continued to beat up and catch her shuttlecock until a governess, with
a blue feather in her hat, had called her away) a marvellous little band
of light, of the colour of heliotrope, spread over the lawn like a carpet
on which I could not tire of treading to and fro with lingering feet,
nostalgic and profane, while Françoise shouted: “Come on, button up your
coat, look, and let’s get away!” and I remarked for the first time how
common her speech was, and that she had, alas, no blue feather in her hat.
Only, would she come again to the Champs-Elysées? Next day she was not
there; but I saw her on the following days; I spent all my time revolving
round the spot where she was at play with her friends, to such effect that
once, when, they found, they were not enough to make up a prisoner’s base,
she sent one of them to ask me if I cared to complete their side, and from
that day I played with her whenever she came. But this did not happen
every day; there were days when she had been prevented from coming by her
lessons, by her catechism, by a luncheon-party, by the whole of that life,
separated from my own, which twice only, condensed into the name of
Gilberte, I had felt pass so painfully close to me, in the hawthorn lane
near Combray and on the grass of the Champs-Elysées.  On such days she
would have told us beforehand that we should not see her; if it were
because of her lessons, she would say: “It is too tiresome, I sha’n’t be
able to come to-morrow; you will all be enjoying yourselves here without
me,” with an air of regret which to some extent consoled me; if, on the
other hand, she had been invited to a party, and I, not knowing this,
asked her whether she was coming to play with us, she would reply: “Indeed
I hope not! Indeed I hope Mamma will let me go to my friend’s.” But on
these days I did at least know that I should not see her, whereas on
others, without any warning, her mother would take her for a drive, or
some such thing, and next day she would say: “Oh, yes! I went out with
Mamma,” as though it had been the most natural thing in the world, and not
the greatest possible misfortune for some one else. There were also the
days of bad weather on which her governess, afraid, on her own account, of
the rain, would not bring Gilberte to the Champs-Elysées.
And so, if the heavens were doubtful, from early morning I would not cease
to interrogate them, observing all the omens. If I saw the lady opposite,
just inside her window, putting on her hat, I would say to myself: “That
lady is going out; it must, therefore, be weather in which one can go out.
Why should not Gilberte do the same as that lady?” But the day grew dark.
My mother said that it might clear again, that one burst of sunshine would
be enough, but that more probably it would rain; and if it rained, of what
use would it be to go to the Champs-Elysées? And so, from breakfast-time,
my anxious eyes never left the uncertain, clouded sky.  It remained dark:
Outside the window, the balcony was grey. Suddenly, on its sullen stone, I
did not indeed see a less negative colour, but I felt as it were an effort
towards a less negative colour, the pulsation of a hesitating ray that
struggled to discharge its light. A moment later the balcony was as pale
and luminous as a standing water at dawn, and a thousand shadows from the
iron-work of its balustrade had come to rest on it. A breath of wind
dispersed them; the stone grew dark again, but, like tamed creatures, they
returned; they began, imperceptibly, to grow lighter, and by one of those
continuous crescendos, such as, in music, at the end of an overture, carry
a single note to the extreme fortissimo, making it pass rapidly through
all the intermediate stages, I saw it attain to that fixed, unalterable
gold of fine days, on which the sharply cut shadows of the wrought iron of
the balustrade were outlined in black like a capricious vegetation, with a
fineness in the delineation of their smallest details which seemed to
indicate a deliberate application, an artist’s satisfaction, and with so
much relief, so velvety a bloom in the restfulness of their sombre and
happy mass that in truth those large and leafy shadows which lay reflected
on that lake of sunshine seemed aware that they were pledges of happiness
and peace of mind.
Brief, fading ivy, climbing, fugitive flora, the most colourless, the most
depressing, to many minds, of all that creep on walls or decorate windows;
to me the dearest of them all, from the day when it appeared upon our
balcony, like the very shadow of the presence of Gilberte, who was perhaps
already in the Champs-Elysées, and as soon as I arrived there would greet
me with: “Let’s begin at once. You are on my side.” Frail, swept away by a
breath, but at the same time in harmony, not with the season, with the
hour; a promise of that immediate pleasure which the day will deny or
fulfil, and thereby of the one paramount immediate pleasure, the pleasure
of loving and of being loved; more soft, more warm upon tie stone than
even moss is; alive, a ray of sunshine sufficing for its birth, and for
the birth of joy, even in the heart of winter.
And on those days when all other vegetation had disappeared, when the fine
jerkins of green leather which covered the trunks of the old trees were
hidden beneath the snow; after the snow had ceased to fall, but when the
sky was still too much overcast for me to hope that Gilberte would venture
out, then suddenly–inspiring my mother to say: “Look, it’s quite fine
now; I think you might perhaps try going to the Champs-Elysées after
all."–On the mantle of snow that swathed the balcony, the sun had
appeared and was stitching seams of gold, with embroidered patches of dark
shadow. That day we found no one there, or else a solitary girl, on the
point of departure, who assured me that Gilberte was not coming. The
chairs, deserted by the imposing but uninspiring company of governesses,
stood empty. Only, near the grass, was sitting a lady of uncertain age who
came in all weathers, dressed always in an identical style, splendid and
sombre, to make whose acquaintance I would have, at that period,
sacrificed, had it lain in my power, all the greatest opportunities in my
life to come. For Gilberte went up every day to speak to her; she used to
ask Gilberte for news of her “dearest mother” and it struck me that, if I
had known her, I should have been for Gilberte some one wholly different,
some one who knew people in her parents’ world. While her grandchildren
played together at a little distance, she would sit and read the Débats,
which she called “My old Débats!” as, with an aristocratic familiarity,
she would say, speaking of the police-sergeant or the woman who let the
chairs, “My old friend the police-sergeant,” or “The chair-keeper and I,
who are old friends.”
Françoise found it too cold to stand about, so we walked to the Pont de la
Concorde to see the Seine frozen over, on to which everyone, even
children, walked fearlessly, as though upon an enormous whale, stranded,
defenceless, and about to be cut up. We returned to the Champs-Elysées; I
was growing sick with misery between the motionless wooden horses and the
white lawn, caught in a net of black paths from which the snow had been
cleared, while the statue that surmounted it held in its hand a long
pendent icicle which seemed to explain its gesture. The old lady herself,
having folded up her Débats, asked a passing nursemaid the time,
thanking her with “How very good of you!” then begged the road-sweeper to
tell her grandchildren to come, as she felt cold, adding “A thousand
thanks. I am sorry to give you so much trouble!” Suddenly the sky was rent
in two: between the punch-and-judy and the horses, against the opening
horizon, I had just seen, like a miraculous sign, Mademoiselle’s blue
feather. And now Gilberte was running at full speed towards me, sparkling
and rosy beneath a cap trimmed with fur, enlivened by the cold, by being
late, by her anxiety for a game; shortly before she reached me, she
slipped on a piece of ice and, either to regain her balance, or because it
appeared to her graceful, or else pretending that she was on skates, it
was with outstretched arms that she smilingly advanced, as though to
embrace me. “Bravo! bravo! that’s splendid; ’topping,’ I should say, like
you–’sporting,’ I suppose I ought to say, only I’m a hundred-and-one, a
woman of the old school,” exclaimed the lady, uttering, on behalf of the
voiceless Champs-Elysées, their thanks to Gilberte for having come,
without letting herself be frightened away by the weather. “You are like
me, faithful at all costs to our old Champs-Elysées; we are two brave
souls!  You wouldn’t believe me, I dare say, if I told you that I love
them, even like this. This snow (I know, you’ll laugh at me), it makes me
think of ermine!” And the old lady began to laugh herself.
The first of these days–to which the snow, a symbol of the powers that
were able to deprive me of the sight of Gilberte, imparted the sadness of
a day of separation, almost the aspect of a day of departure, because it
changed the outward form and almost forbade the use of the customary scene
of our only encounters, now altered, covered, as it were, in
dust-sheets–that day, none the less, marked a stage in the progress of my
love, for it was, in a sense, the first sorrow that she was to share with
me. There were only our two selves of our little company, and to be thus
alone with her was not merely like a beginning of intimacy, but also on
her part–as though she had come there solely to please me, and in such
weather–it seemed to me as touching as if, on one of those days on which
she had been invited to a party, she had given it up in order to come to
me in the Champs-Elysées; I acquired more confidence in the vitality, in
the future of a friendship which could remain so much alive amid the
torpor, the solitude, the decay of our surroundings; and while she dropped
pellets of snow down my neck, I smiled lovingly at what seemed to me at
once a predilection that she shewed for me in thus tolerating me as her
travelling companion in this new, this wintry land, and a sort of loyalty
to me which she preserved through evil times. Presently, one after
another, like shyly bopping sparrows, her friends arrived, black against
the snow. We got ready to play and, since this day which had begun so
sadly was destined to end in joy, as I went up, before the game started,
to the friend with the sharp voice whom I had heard, that first day,
calling Gilberte by name, she said to me: “No, no, I’m sure you’d much
rather be in Gilberte’s camp; besides, look, she’s signalling to you.” She
was in fact summoning me to cross the snowy lawn to her camp, to ’take the
field,’ which the sun, by casting over it a rosy gleam, the metallic
lustre of old and worn brocades, had turned into a Field of the Cloth of
Gold.
This day, which I had begun with so many misgivings, was, as it happened,
one of the few on which I was not unduly wretched.
For, although I no longer thought, now, of anything save not to let a
single day pass without seeing Gilberte (so much so that once, when my
grandmother had not come home by dinner-time, I could not resist the
instinctive reflection that, if she had been run over in the street and
killed, I should not for some time be allowed to play in the
Champs-Elysées; when one is in love one has no love left for anyone), yet
those moments which I spent in her company, for which I had waited with so
much impatience all night and morning, for which I had quivered with
excitement, to which I would have sacrificed everything else in the world,
were by no means happy moments; well did I know it, for they were the only
moments in my life on which I concentrated a scrupulous, undistracted
attention, and yet I could not discover in them one atom of pleasure. All
the time that I was away from Gilberte, I wanted to see her, because,
having incessantly sought to form a mental picture of her, I was unable,
in the end, to do so, and did not know exactly to what my love
corresponded.  Besides, she had never yet told me that she loved me. Far
from it, she had often boasted that she knew other little boys whom she
preferred to myself, that I was a good companion, with whom she was always
willing to play, although I was too absent-minded, not attentive enough to
the game. Moreover, she had often shewn signs of apparent coldness towards
me, which might have shaken my faith that I was for her a creature
different from the rest, had that faith been founded upon a love that
Gilberte had felt for me, and not, as was the case, upon the love that I
felt for her, which strengthened its resistance to the assaults of doubt
by making it depend entirely upon the manner in which I was obliged, by an
internal compulsion, to think of Gilberte. But my feelings with regard to
her I had never yet ventured to express to her in words. Of course, on
every page of my exercise-books, I wrote out, in endless repetition, her
name and address, but at the sight of those vague lines which I might
trace, without her having to think, on that account, of me, I felt
discouraged, because they spoke to me, not of Gilberte, who would never so
much as see them, but of my own desire, which they seemed to shew me in
its true colours, as something purely personal, unreal, tedious and
ineffective. The most important thing was that we should see each other,
Gilberte and I, and should have an opportunity of making a mutual
confession of our love which, until then, would not officially (so to
speak) have begun. Doubtless the various reasons which made me so
impatient to see her would have appeared less urgent to a grown man. As
life goes on, we acquire such adroitness in the culture of our pleasures,
that we content ourselves with that which we derive from thinking of a
woman, as I was thinking of Gilberte, without troubling ourselves to
ascertain whether the image corresponds to the reality,–and with the
pleasure of loving her, without needing to be sure, also, that she loves
us; or again that we renounce the pleasure of confessing our passion for
her, so as to preserve and enhance the passion that she has for us, like
those Japanese gardeners who, to obtain one perfect blossom, will
sacrifice the rest. But at the period when I was in love with Gilberte, I
still believed that Love did really exist, apart from ourselves; that,
allowing us, at the most, to surmount the obstacles in our way, it offered
us its blessings in an order in which we were not free to make the least
alteration; it seemed to me that if I had, on my own initiative,
substituted for the sweetness of a confession a pretence of indifference,
I should not only have been depriving myself of one of the joys of which I
had most often dreamed, I should have been fabricating, of my own free
will, a love that was artificial and without value, that bore no relation
to the truth, whose mysterious and foreordained ways I should thus have
been declining to follow.
But when I arrived at the Champs-Elysées,–and, as at first sight it
appeared, was in a position to confront my love, so as to make it undergo
the necessary modifications, with its living and independent cause–as
soon as I was in the presence of that Gilberte Swann on the sight of whom
I had counted to revive the images that my tired memory had lost and could
not find again, of that Gilberte Swann with whom I had been playing the
day before, and whom I had just been prompted to greet, and then to
recognise, by a blind instinct like that which, when we are walking, sets
one foot before the other, without giving us time to think what we are
doing, then at once it became as though she and the little girl who had
inspired my dreams had been two different people. If, for instance, I had
retained in my memory overnight two fiery eyes above plump and rosy
cheeks, Gilberte’s face would now offer me (and with emphasis) something
that I distinctly had not remembered, a certain sharpening and
prolongation of the nose which, instantaneously associating itself with
certain others of her features, assumed the importance of those
characteristics which, in natural history, are used to define a species,
and transformed her into a little girl of the kind that have sharpened
profiles.  While I was making myself ready to take advantage of this long
expected moment, and to surrender myself to the impression of Gilberte
which I had prepared beforehand but could no longer find in my head, to an
extent which would enable me, during the long hours which I must spend
alone, to be certain that it was indeed herself whom I had in mind, that
it was indeed my love for her that I was gradually making grow, as a book
grows when one is writing it, she threw me a ball; and, like the idealist
philosopher whose body takes account of the external world in the reality
of which his intellect declines to believe, the same self which had made
me salute her before I had identified her now urged me to catch the ball
that she tossed to me (as though she had been a companion, with whom I had
come to play, and not a sister-soul with whom my soul had come to be
limited), made me, out of politeness, until the time came when she had to
I go, address a thousand polite and trivial remarks to her, and so
prevented me both from keeping a silence in which I might at last have
laid my hand upon the indispensable, escaped idea, and from uttering the
words which might have made that definite progress in the course of our
love on which I was always obliged to count only for the following
afternoon. There was, however, an occasional development. One day, we had
gone with Gilberte to the stall of our own special vendor, who was always
particularly nice to us, since it was to her that M. Swann used to send
for his gingerbread, of which, for reasons of health (he suffered from a
racial eczema, and from the constipation of the prophets), he consumed a
great quantity,–Gilberte pointed out to me with a laugh two little boys
who were like the little artist and the little naturalist in the
children’s storybooks. For one of them would not have a red stick of rock
because he preferred the purple, while the other, with tears in his eyes,
refused a plum which his nurse was buying for him, because, as he finally
explained in passionate tones: “I want the other plum; it’s got a worm in
it!” I purchased two ha’penny marbles. With admiring eyes I saw, luminous
and imprisoned in a bowl by themselves, the agate marbles which seemed
precious to me because they were as fair and smiling as little girls, and
because they cost five-pence each. Gilberte, who was given a great deal
more pocket money than I ever had, asked me which I thought the prettiest.
They were as transparent, as liquid-seeming as life itself. I would not
have had her sacrifice a single one of them. I should have liked her to be
able to buy them, to liberate them all. Still, I pointed out one that had
the same colour as her eyes. Gilberte took it, turned it about until it
shone with a ray of gold, fondled it, paid its ransom, but at once handed
me her captive, saying: “Take it; it is for you, I give it to you, keep it
to remind yourself of me.”
Another time, being still obsessed by the desire to hear Berma in classic
drama, I had asked her whether she had not a copy of a pamphlet in which
Bergotte spoke of Racine, and which was now out of print. She had told me
to let her know the exact title of it, and that evening I had sent her a
little telegram, writing on its envelope the name, Gilberte Swann, which I
had so often, traced in my exercise-books.  Next day she brought me in a
parcel tied with pink bows and sealed with white wax, the pamphlet, a copy
of which she had managed to find. “You see, it is what you asked me for,"
she said, taking from her muff the telegram that I had sent her.  But in
the address on the pneumatic message–which, only yesterday, was nothing,
was merely a ’little blue’ that I had written, and, after a messenger had
delivered it to Gilberte’s porter and a servant had taken it to her in her
room, had become a thing without value or distinction, one of the ’little
blues’ that she had received in the course of the day–I had difficulty in
recognising the futile, straggling lines of my own handwriting beneath the
circles stamped on it at the post-office, the inscriptions added in pencil
by a postman, signs of effectual realisation, seals of the external world,
violet bands symbolical of life itself, which for the first time came to
espouse, to maintain, to raise, to rejoice my dream.
And there was another day on which she said to me: “You know, you may call
me ’Gilberte’; in any case, I’m going to call you by your first name. It’s
too silly not to.” Yet she continued for a while to address me by the more
formal ’vous,’ and, when I drew her attention to this, smiled, and
composing, constructing a phrase like those that are put into the
grammar-books of foreign languages with no other object than to teach us
to make use of a new word, ended it with my Christian name. And when I
recalled, later, what I had felt at the time, I could distinguish the
impression of having been held, for a moment, in her mouth, myself, naked,
without, any longer, any of the social qualifications which belonged
equally to her other companions and, when she used my surname, to my
parents, accessories of which her lips–by the effort that she made, a
little after her father’s manner, to articulate the words to which she
wished to give a special value–had the air of stripping, of divesting me,
as one peels the skin from a fruit of which one is going to put only the
pulp into one’s mouth, while her glance, adapting itself to the same new
degree of intimacy as her speech, fell on me also more directly, not
without testifying to the consciousness, the pleasure, even the gratitude
that it felt, accompanying itself with a smile.
But at that actual moment, I was not able to appreciate the worth of these
new pleasures. They were given, not by the little girl whom I loved, to me
who loved her, but by the other, her with whom I used to play, to my other
self, who possessed neither the memory of the true Gilberte, nor the fixed
heart which alone could have known the value of a happiness for which it
alone had longed. Even after I had returned home I did not taste them,
since, every day, the necessity which made me hope that on the morrow I
should arrive at the clear, calm, happy contemplation of Gilberte, that
she would at last confess her love for me, explaining to me the reasons by
which she had been obliged, hitherto, to conceal it, that same necessity
forced me to regard the past as of no account, to look ahead of me only,
to consider the little advantages that she had given me not in themselves
and as if they were self-sufficient, but like fresh rungs of the ladder on
which I might set my feet, which were going to allow me to advance a step
further and finally to attain the happiness which I had not yet
encountered.
If, at times, she shewed me these marks of her affection, she troubled me
also by seeming not to be pleased to see me, and this happened often on
the very days on which I had most counted for the realisation of my hopes.
I was sure that Gilberte was coming to the Champs-Elysées, and I felt an
elation which seemed merely the anticipation of a great happiness
when–going into the drawing-room in the morning to kiss Mamma, who was
already dressed to go out, the coils of her black hair elaborately built
up, and her beautiful hands, plump and white, fragrant still with soap–I
had been apprised, by seeing a column of dust standing by itself in the
air above the piano, and by hearing a barrel-organ playing, beneath the
window, En revenant de la revue, that the winter had received, until
nightfall, an unexpected, radiant visit from a day of spring. While we sat
at luncheon, by opening her window, the lady opposite had sent packing, in
the twinkling of an eye, from beside my chair–to sweep in a single stride
over the whole width of our dining-room–a sunbeam which had lain down
there for its midday rest and returned to continue it there a moment
later.  At school, during the one o’clock lesson, the sun made me sick
with impatience and boredom as it let fall a golden stream that crept to
the edge of my desk, like an invitation to the feast at which I could not
myself arrive before three o’clock, until the moment when Françoise came
to fetch me at the school-gate, and we made our way towards the
Champs-Elysées through streets decorated with sunlight, dense with people,
over which the balconies, detached by the sun and made vaporous, seemed to
float in front of the houses like clouds of gold. Alas! in the
Champs-Elysées I found no Gilberte; she had not yet arrived. Motionless,
on the lawn nurtured by the invisible sun which, here and there, kindled
to a flame the point of a blade of grass, while the pigeons that had
alighted upon it had the appearance of ancient sculptures which the
gardener’s pick had heaved to the surface of a hallowed soil, I stood with
my eyes fixed on the horizon, expecting at every moment to see appear the
form of Gilberte following that of her governess, behind the statue that
seemed to be holding out the child, which it had in its arms, and which
glistened in the stream of light, to receive benediction from the sun. The
old lady who read the Débats was sitting on her chair, in her invariable
place, and had just accosted a park-keeper, with a friendly wave of her
hands towards him as she exclaimed “What a lovely day!” And when the
chair-woman came up to collect her penny, with an infinity of smirks and
affectations she folded the ticket away inside her glove, as though it had
been a posy of flowers, for which she had sought, in gratitude to the
donor, the most becoming place upon her person. When she had found it, she
performed a circular movement with her neck, straightened her boa, and
fastened upon the collector, as she shewed her the end of yellow paper
that stuck out over her bare wrist, the bewitching smile with which a
woman says to a young man, pointing to her bosom: “You see, I’m wearing
your roses!”
I dragged Françoise, on the way towards Gilberte, as far as the Arc de
Triomphe; we did not meet her, and I was returning towards the lawn
convinced, now, that she was not coming, when, in front of the wooden
horses, the little girl with the sharp voice flung herself upon me:
“Quick, quick, Gilberte’s been here a quarter of an hour. She’s just
going. We’ve been waiting for you, to make up a prisoner’s base.”
While I had been going up the Avenue des Champs-Elysées, Gilberte had
arrived by the Rue Boissy-d’Anglas, Mademoiselle having taken advantage of
the fine weather to go on some errand of her own; and M. Swann was coming
to fetch his daughter. And so it was my fault; I ought not to have strayed
from the lawn; for one never knew for certain from what direction Gilberte
would appear, whether she would be early or late, and this perpetual
tension succeeded in making more impressive not only the Champs-Elysées in
their entirety, and the whole span of the afternoon, like a vast expanse
of space and time, on every point and at every moment of which it was
possible that the form of Gilberte might appear, but also that form
itself, since behind its appearance I felt that there lay concealed the
reason for which it had shot its arrow into my heart at four o’clock
instead of at half-past two; crowned with a smart hat, for paying calls,
instead of the plain cap, for games; in front of the Ambassadeurs and not
between the two puppet-shows; I divined one of those occupations in which
I might not follow Gilberte, occupations that forced her to go out or to
stay at home, I was in contact with the mystery of her unknown life.  It
was this mystery, too, which troubled me when, running at the sharp-voiced
girl’s bidding, so as to begin our game without more delay, I saw
Gilberte, so quick and informal with us, make a ceremonious bow to the old
lady with the Débats (who acknowledged it with “What a lovely sun!
You’d think there was a fire burning.”) speaking to her with a shy smile,
with an air of constraint which called to my mind the other little girl
that Gilberte must be when at home with her parents, or with friends of
her parents, paying visits, in all the rest, that escaped me, of her
existence. But of that existence no one gave me so strong an impression as
did M. Swann, who came a little later to fetch his daughter. That was
because he and Mme.  Swann–inasmuch as their daughter lived with them, as
her lessons, her games, her friendships depended upon them–contained for
me, like Gilberte, perhaps even more than Gilberte, as befitted subjects
that had an all-powerful control over her in whom it must have had its
source, an undefined, an inaccessible quality of melancholy charm.
Everything that concerned them was on my part the object of so constant a
preoccupation that the days on which, as on this day, M. Swann (whom I had
seen so often, long ago, without his having aroused my curiosity, when he
was still on good terms with my parents) came for Gilberte to the
Champs-Elysées, once the pulsations to which my heart had been excited by
the appearance of his grey hat and hooded cape had subsided, the sight of
him still impressed me as might that of an historic personage, upon whom
one had just been studying a series of books, and the smallest details of
whose life one learned with enthusiasm. His relations with the Comte de
Paris, which, when I heard them discussed at Combray, seemed to me
unimportant, became now in my eyes something marvellous, as if no one else
had ever known the House of Orleans; they set him in vivid detachment
against the vulgar background of pedestrians of different classes, who
encumbered that particular path in the Champs-Elysées, in the midst of
whom I admired his condescending to figure without claiming any special
deference, which as it happened none of them dreamed of paying him, so
profound was the incognito in which he was wrapped.
He responded politely to the salutations of Gilberte’s companions, even to
mine, for all that he was no longer on good terms with my family, but
without appearing to know who I was. (This reminded me that he had
constantly seen me in the country; a memory which I had retained, but kept
out of sight, because, since I had seen Gilberte again, Swann had become
to me pre-eminently her father, and no longer the Combray Swann; as the
ideas which, nowadays, I made his name connote were different from the
ideas in the system of which it was formerly comprised, which I utilised
not at all now when I had occasion to think of him, he had become a new,
another person; still I attached him by an artificial thread, secondary
and transversal, to our former guest; and as nothing had any longer any
value for me save in the extent to which my love might profit by it, it
was with a spasm of shame and of regret at not being able to erase them
from my memory that I recaptured the years in which, in the eyes of this
same Swann who was at this moment before me in the Champs-Elysées, and to
whom, fortunately, Gilberte had perhaps not mentioned my name, I had so
often, in the evenings, made myself ridiculous by sending to ask Mamma to
come upstairs to my room to say good-night to me, while she was drinking
coffee with him and my father and my grandparents at the table in the
garden.) He told Gilberte that she might play one game; he could wait for
a quarter of an hour; and, sitting down, just like anyone else, on an iron
chair, paid for his ticket with that hand which Philippe VII had so often
held in his own, while we began our game upon the lawn, scattering the
pigeons, whose beautiful, iridescent bodies (shaped like hearts and,
surely, the lilacs of the feathered kingdom) took refuge as in so many
sanctuaries, one on the great basin of stone, on which its beak, as it
disappeared below the rim, conferred the part, assigned the purpose of
offering to the bird in abundance the fruit or grain at which it appeared
to be pecking, another on the head of the statue, which it seemed to crown
with one of those enamelled objects whose polychrome varies in certain
classical works the monotony of the stone, and with an attribute which,
when the goddess bears it, entitles her to a particular epithet and makes
of her, as a different Christian name makes of a mortal, a fresh divinity.
On one of these sunny days which had not realised my hopes, I had not the
courage to conceal my disappointment from Gilberte.
“I had ever so many things to ask you,” I said to her; “I thought that
to-day was going to mean so much in our friendship. And no sooner have you
come than you go away! Try to come early to-morrow, so that I can talk to
you.”
Her face lighted up and she jumped for joy as she answered: “Tomorrow, you
may make up your mind, my dear friend, I sha’n’t come!
“First of all I’ve a big luncheon-party; then in the afternoon I am going
to a friend’s house to see King Theodosius arrive from her windows; won’t
that be splendid?–and then, next day, I’m going to Michel Strogoff, and
after that it will soon be Christmas, and the New Year holidays! Perhaps
they’ll take me south, to the Riviera; won’t that be nice? Though I should
miss the Christmas-tree here; anyhow, if I do stay in Paris, I sha’n’t be
coming here, because I shall be out paying calls with Mamma.
Good-bye–there’s Papa calling me.”
I returned home with Françoise through streets that were still gay with
sunshine, as on the evening of a holiday when the merriment is over. I
could scarcely drag my legs along.
“I’m not surprised;” said Françoise, “it’s not the right weather for the
time of year; it’s much too warm. Oh dear, oh dear, to think of all the
poor sick people there must be everywhere; you would think that up there,
too, everything’s got out of order.”
I repeated to myself, stifling my sobs, the words in which Gilberte had
given utterance to her joy at the prospect of not coming back, for a long
time, to the Champs-Elysées. But already the charm with which, by the mere
act of thinking, my mind was filled as soon as it thought of her, the
privileged position, unique even if it were painful, in which I was
inevitably placed in relation to Gilberte by the contraction of a scar in
my mind, had begun to add to that very mark of her indifference something
romantic, and in the midst of my tears my lips would shape themselves in a
smile which was indeed the timid outline of a kiss. And when the time came
for the postman I said to myself, that evening as on every other: “I am
going to have a letter from Gilberte, she is going to tell me, at last,
that she has never ceased to love me, and to explain to me the mysterious
reason by which she has been forced to conceal her love from me until now,
to put on the appearance of being able to be happy without seeing me; the
reason for which she has assumed the form of the other Gilberte, who is
simply a companion.”
Every evening I would beguile myself into imagining this letter, believing
that I was actually reading it, reciting each of its sentences in turn.
Suddenly I would stop, in alarm. I had realised that, if I was to receive
a letter from Gilberte, it could not, in any case, be this letter, since
it was I myself who had just composed it. And from that moment I would
strive to keep my thoughts clear of the words which I should have liked
her to write to me, from fear lest, by first selecting them myself, I
should be excluding just those identical words,–the dearest, the most
desired–from the field of possible events. Even if, by an almost
impossible coincidence, it had been precisely the letter of my invention
that Gilberte had addressed to me of her own accord, recognising my own
work in it I should not have had the impression that I was receiving
something that had not originated in myself, something real, something
new, a happiness external to my mind, independent of my will, a gift
indeed from love.
While I waited I read over again a page which, although it had not been
written to me by Gilberte, came to me, none the less, from her, that page
by Bergotte upon the beauty of the old myths from which Racine drew his
inspiration, which (with the agate marble) I always kept within reach.  I
was touched by my friend’s kindness in having procured the book for me;
and as everyone is obliged to find some reason for his passion, so much so
that he is glad to find in the creature whom he loves qualities which (he
has learned by reading or in conversation) are worthy to excite a man’s
love, that he assimilates them by imitation and makes out of them fresh
reasons for his love, even although these qualities be diametrically
opposed to those for which his love would have sought, so long as it was
spontaneous–as Swann, before my day, had sought to establish the
aesthetic basis of Odette’s beauty–I, who had at first loved Gilberte, in
Combray days, on account of all the unknown element in her life into which
I would fain have plunged headlong, have undergone reincarnation,
discarding my own separate existence as a thing that no longer mattered, I
thought now, as of an inestimable advantage, that of this, my own, my too
familiar, my contemptible existence Gilberte might one day become the
humble servant, the kindly, the comforting collaborator, who in the
evenings, helping me in my work, would collate for me the texts of rare
pamphlets. As for Bergotte, that infinitely wise, almost divine old man,
because of whom I had first, before I had even seen her, loved Gilberte,
now it was for Gilberte’s sake, chiefly, that I loved him. With as much
pleasure as the pages that he had written about Racine, I studied the
wrapper, folded under great seals of white wax and tied with billows of
pink ribbon, in which she had brought those pages to me. I kissed the
agate marble, which was the better part of my love’s heart, the part that
was not frivolous but faithful, and, for all that it was adorned with the
mysterious charm of Gilberte’s life, dwelt close beside me, inhabited my
chamber, shared my bed. But the beauty of that stone, and the beauty also
of those pages of Bergotte which I was glad to associate with the idea of
my love for Gilberte, as if, in the moments when my love seemed no longer
to have any existence, they gave it a kind of consistency, were, I
perceived, anterior to that love, which they in no way resembled; their
elements had been determined by the writer’s talent, or by geological
laws, before ever Gilberte had known me, nothing in book or stone would
have been different if Gilberte had not loved me, and there was nothing,
consequently, that authorised me to read in them a message of happiness.
And while my love, incessantly waiting for the morrow to bring a
confession of Gilberte’s love for me, destroyed, unravelled every evening,
the ill-done work of the day, in some shadowed part of my being was an
unknown weaver who would not leave where they lay the severed threads, but
collected and rearranged them, without any thought of pleasing me, or of
toiling for my advantage, in the different order which she gave to all her
handiwork.  Without any special interest in my love, not beginning by
deciding that I was loved, she placed, side by side, those of Gilberte’s
actions that had seemed to me inexplicable and her faults which I had
excused. Then, one with another, they took on a meaning. It seemed to tell
me, this new arrangement, that when I saw Gilberte, instead of coming to
me in the Champs-Elysées, going to a party, or on errands with her
governess, when I saw her prepared for an absence that would extend over
the New Year holidays, I was wrong in thinking, in saying: “It is because
she is frivolous,” or “easily lead.” For she would have ceased to be
either if she had loved me, and if she had been forced to obey it would
have been with the same despair in her heart that I felt on the days when
I did not see her. It shewed me further, this new arrangement, that I
ought, after all, to know what it was to love, since I loved Gilberte; it
drew my attention to the constant anxiety that I had to ’shew off’ before
her, by reason of which I tried to persuade my mother to get for Françoise
a waterproof coat and a hat with a blue feather, or, better still, to stop
sending with me to the Champs-Elysées an attendant with whom I blushed to
be seen (to all of which my mother replied that I was not fair to
Françoise, that she was an excellent woman and devoted to us all) and also
that sole, exclusive need to see Gilberte, the result of which was that,
months in advance, I could think of nothing but how to find out at what
date she would be leaving Paris and where she was going, feeling that the
most attractive country in the world would be but a place of exile if she
were not to be there, and asking only to be allowed to stay for ever in
Paris, so long as I might see her in the Champs-Elysées; and it had little
difficulty in making me see that neither my anxiety nor my need could be
justified by anything in Gilberte’s conduct. She, on the contrary, was
genuinely fond of her governess, without troubling herself over what I
might choose to think about it. It seemed quite natural to her not to come
to the Champs-Elysées if she had to go shopping with Mademoiselle,
delightful if she had to go out somewhere with her mother. And even
supposing that she would ever have allowed me to spend my holidays in the
same place as herself, when it came to choosing that place she considered
her parents’ wishes, a thousand different amusements of which she had been
told, and not at all that it should be the place to which my family were
proposing to send me. When she assured me (as sometimes happened) that she
liked me less than some other of her friends, less than she had liked me
the day before, because by my clumsiness I had made her side lose a game,
I would beg her pardon, I would beg her to tell me what I must do in order
that she should begin again to like me as much as, or more than the rest;
I hoped to hear her say that that was already my position; I besought her;
as though she had been able to modify her affection for me as she or I
chose, to give me pleasure, merely by the words that she would utter, as
my good or bad conduct should deserve. Was I, then, not yet aware that
what I felt, myself, for her, depended neither upon her actions nor upon
my desires?
It shewed me finally, the new arrangement planned by my unseen weaver,
that, if we find ourselves hoping that the actions of a person who has
hitherto caused us anxiety may prove not to have been sincere, they shed
in their wake a light which our hopes are powerless to extinguish, a light
to which, rather than to our hopes, we must put the question, what will be
that person’s actions on the morrow.
These new counsels, my love listened and heard them; they persuaded it
that the morrow would not be different from all the days that had gone
before; that Gilberte’s feeling for me, too long established now to be
capable of alteration, was indifference; that hi my friendship with
Gilberte, it was I alone who loved. “That is true,” my love responded,
“there is nothing more to be made of that friendship. It will not alter
now.” And so the very next day (unless I were to wait for a public
holiday, if there was one approaching, some anniversary, the New Year,
perhaps, one of those days which are not like other days, on which time
starts afresh, casting aside the heritage of the past, declining its
legacy of sorrows) I would appeal to Gilberte to terminate our old and to
join me in laying the foundations of a new friendship.
Continue...

This full text of Swann’s Way (Vol. 1 of “Remembrance of Things Past”)
by Marcel Proust, translated from the French by C. K. Scott
Moncrieff (1922), is in the public domain. Thanks to Project Gutenberg for
bringing books to the digital world in the form of electronic texts.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Also see ">Swann’s Way I.

Page last updated on February 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
