




I had always, within reach, a plan of Paris, which, because I could see
drawn on it the street in which M. and Mme. Swann lived, seemed to me to
contain a secret treasure. And to please myself, as well as by a sort of
chivalrous loyalty, in any connection or with no relevance at all, I would
repeat the name of that street until my father, not being, like my mother
and grandmother, in the secret of my love, would ask: “But why are you
always talking about that street? There’s nothing wonderful about it. It
is an admirable street to live in because it’s only a few minutes’ walk
from the Bois, but there are a dozen other streets just the same.”
I made every effort to introduce the name of Swann into my conversation
with my parents; in my own mind, of course, I never ceased to murmur it;
but I needed also to hear its exquisite sound, and to make myself play
that chord, the voiceless rendering of which did not suffice me. Moreover,
that name of Swann, with which I had for so long been familiar, was to me
now (as happens at times to people suffering from aphasia, in the case of
the most ordinary words) the name of something new. It was for ever
present in my mind, which could not, however, grow accustomed to it. I
analysed it, I spelt it; its orthography came to me as a surprise.  And
with its familiarity it had simultaneously lost its innocence. The
pleasure that I derived from the sound of it I felt to be so guilty, that
it seemed to me as though the others must read my thoughts, and would
change the conversation if I endeavoured to guide it in that direction. I
fell back upon subjects which still brought me into touch with Gilberte, I
eternally repeated the same words, and it was no use my knowing that they
were but words–words uttered in her absence, which she could not hear,
words without virtue in themselves, repeating what were, indeed, facts,
but powerless to modify them–for still it seemed to me that by dint of
handling, of stirring in this way everything that had reference to
Gilberte, I might perhaps make emerge from it something that would bring
me happiness. I told my parents again that Gilberte was very fond of her
governess, as if the statement, when repeated for the hundredth time,
would at last have the effect of making Gilberte suddenly burst into the
room, come to live with us for ever. I had already sung the praises of the
old lady who read the Débats (I had hinted to my parents that she must
at least be an Ambassador’s widow, if not actually a Highness) and I
continued to descant on her beauty, her splendour, her nobility, until the
day on which I mentioned that, by what I had heard Gilberte call her, she
appeared to be a Mme. Blatin.
“Oh, now I know whom you mean,” cried my mother, while I felt myself grow
red all over with shame. “On guard! on guard!–as your grandfather says.
And so it’s she that you think so wonderful? Why, she’s perfectly
horrible, and always has been. She’s the widow of a bailiff. You can’t
remember, when you were little, all the trouble I used to have to avoid
her at your gymnastic lessons, where she was always trying to get hold of
me–I didn’t know the woman, of course–to tell me that you were ’much too
nice-looking for a boy.’ She has always had an insane desire to get to
know people, and she must be quite insane, as I have always thought, if
she really does know Mme. Swann. For even if she does come of very common
people, I have never heard anything said against her character. But she
must always be forcing herself upon strangers. She is, really, a horrible
woman, frightfully vulgar, and besides, she is always creating awkward
situations.”
As for Swann, in my attempts to resemble him, I spent the whole time, when
I was at table, in drawing my finger along my nose and in rubbing my eyes.
My father would exclaim: “The child’s a perfect idiot, he’s becoming quite
impossible.” More than all else I should have liked to be as bald as
Swann. He appeared to me to be a creature so extraordinary that I found it
impossible to believe that people whom I knew and often saw knew him also,
and that in the course of the day anyone might run against him. And once
my mother, while she was telling us, as she did every evening at dinner,
where she had been and what she had done that afternoon, merely by the
words: “By the way, guess whom I saw at the Trois Quartiers–at the
umbrella counter–Swann!” caused to burst open in the midst of her
narrative (an arid desert to me) a mystic blossom. What a melancholy
satisfaction to learn that, that very afternoon, threading through the
crowd his supernatural form, Swann had gone to buy an umbrella.  Among the
events of the day, great and small, but all equally unimportant, that one
alone aroused in me those peculiar vibrations by which my love for
Gilberte was invariably stirred. My father complained that I took no
interest in anything, because I did not listen while he was speaking of
the political developments that might follow the visit of King
Theo-dosius, at that moment in France as the nation’s guest and (it was
hinted) ally. And yet how intensely interested I was to know whether Swann
had been wearing his hooded cape!
“Did you speak to him?” I asked.
“Why, of course I did,” answered my mother, who always seemed afraid lest,
were she to admit that we were not on the warmest of terms with Swann,
people would seek to reconcile us more than she cared for, in view of the
existence of Mme. Swann, whom she did not wish to know. “It was he who
came up and spoke to me. I hadn’t seen him.”
“Then you haven’t quarrelled?”
“Quarrelled? What on earth made you think that we had quarrelled?” she
briskly parried, as though I had cast doubt on the fiction of her friendly
relations with Swann, and was planning an attempt to ’bring them
together.’
“He might be cross with you for never asking him here.”
“One isn’t obliged to ask everyone to one’s house, you know; has he ever
asked me to his? I don’t know his wife.”
“But he used often to come, at Combray.”
“I should think he did! He used to come at Combray, and now, in Paris, he
has something better to do, and so have I. But I can promise you, we
didn’t look in the least like people who had quarrelled. We were kept
waiting there for some time, while they brought him his parcel. He asked
after you; he told me you had been playing with his daughter–” my mother
went on, amazing me with the portentous revelation of my own existence in
Swann’s mind; far more than that, of my existence in so complete, so
material a form that when I stood before him, trembling with love, in the
Champs-Elysées, he had known my name, and who my mother was, and had been
able to blend with my quality as his daughter’s playmate certain facts
with regard to my grandparents and their connections, the place in which
we lived, certain details of our past life, all of which I myself perhaps
did not know. But my mother did not seem to have noticed anything
particularly attractive in that counter at the Trois Quartiers where she
had represented to Swann, at the moment in which he caught sight of her, a
definite person with whom he had sufficient memories in common to impel
him to come up to her and to speak.
Nor did either she or my father seem to find any occasion now to mention
Swann’s family, the grandparents of Gilberte, nor to use the title of
stockbroker, topics than which nothing else gave me so keen a pleasure.
My imagination had isolated and consecrated in the social Paris a certain
family, just as it had set apart in the structural Paris a certain house,
on whose porch it had fashioned sculptures and made its windows precious.
But these ornaments I alone had eyes to see. Just as my father and mother
looked upon the house in which Swann lived as one that closely resembled
the other houses built at the same period in the neighbourhood of the
Bois, so Swann’s family seemed to them to be in the same category as many
other families of stockbrokers. Their judgment was more or less favourable
according to the extent to which the family in question shared in merits
that were common to the rest of the universe, and there was about it
nothing that they could call unique. What, on the other hand, they did
appreciate in the Swanns they found in equal, if not in greater measure
elsewhere.  And so, after admitting that the house was in a good position,
they would go on to speak of some other house that was in a better, but
had nothing to do with Gilberte, or of financiers on a larger scale than
her grandfather had been; and if they had appeared, for a moment, to be of
my opinion, that was a mistake which was very soon corrected. For in order
to distinguish in all Gilberte’s surroundings an indefinable quality
analogous, in the scale of emotions, to what in the scale of colours is
called infra-red, a supplementary sense of perception was required, with
which love, for the time being, had endowed me; and this my parents
lacked.
On the days when Gilberte had warned me that she would not be coming to
the Champs-Elysées, I would try to arrange my walks so that I should be
brought into some kind of contact with her. Sometimes I would lead
Françoise on a pilgrimage to the house in which the Swanns lived, making
her repeat to me unendingly all that she had learned from the governess
with regard to Mme. Swann. “It seems, she puts great faith in medals. She
would never think of starting on a journey if she had heard an owl hoot,
or the death-watch in the wall, or if she had seen a cat at midnight, or
if the furniture had creaked. Oh yes! she’s a most religious lady, she
is!” I was so madly in love with Gilberte that if, on our way, I caught
sight of their old butler taking the dog out, my emotion would bring me to
a standstill, I would fasten on his white whiskers eyes that melted with
passion. And Françoise would rouse me with: “What’s wrong with you now,
child?” and we would continue on our way until we reached their gate,
where a porter, different from every other porter in the world, and
saturated, even to the braid on his livery, with the same melancholy charm
that I had felt to be latent in the name of Gilberte, looked at me as
though he knew that I was one of those whose natural unworthiness would
for ever prevent them from penetrating into the mysteries of the life
inside, which it was his duty to guard, and over which the ground-floor
windows appeared conscious of being protectingly closed, with far less
resemblance, between the nobly sweeping arches of their muslin curtains,
to any other windows in the world than to Gilberte’s glancing eyes. On
other days we would go along the boulevards, and I would post myself at
the corner of the Rue Duphot; I had heard that Swann was often to be seen
passing there, on his way to the dentist’s; and my imagination so far
differentiated Gilberte’s father from the rest of humanity, his presence
in the midst of a crowd of real people introduced among them so miraculous
an element, that even before we reached the Madeleine I would be trembling
with emotion at the thought that I was approaching a street from which
that supernatural apparition might at any moment burst upon me unawares.
But most often of all, on days when I was not to see Gilberte, as I had
heard that Mme. Swann walked almost every day along the Allée des Acacias,
round the big lake, and in the Allée de la Reine Marguerite, I would guide
Françoise in the direction of the Bois de Boulogne. It was to me like one
of those zoological gardens in which one sees assembled together a variety
of flora, and contrasted effects in landscape; where from a hill one
passes to a grotto, a meadow, rocks, a stream, a trench, another hill, a
marsh, but knows that they are there only to enable the hippopotamus,
zebra, crocodile, rabbit, bear and heron to disport themselves in a
natural or a picturesque setting; this, the Bois, equally complex, uniting
a multitude of little worlds, distinct and separate–placing a stage set
with red trees, American oaks, like an experimental forest in Virginia,
next to a fir-wood by the edge of the lake, or to a forest grove from
which would suddenly emerge, in her lissom covering of furs, with the
large, appealing eyes of a dumb animal, a hastening walker–was the Garden
of Woman; and like the myrtle-alley in the Aeneid, planted for their
delight with trees of one kind only, the Allée des Acacias was thronged by
the famous Beauties of the day. As, from a long way off, the sight of the
jutting crag from which it dives into the pool thrills with joy the
children who know that they are going to behold the seal, long before I
reached the acacia-alley, their fragrance, scattered abroad, would make me
feel that I was approaching the incomparable presence of a vegetable
personality, strong and tender; then, as I drew near, the sight of their
topmost branches, their lightly tossing foliage, in its easy grace, its
coquettish outline, its delicate fabric, over which hundreds of flowers
were laid, like winged and throbbing colonies of precious insects; and
finally their name itself, feminine, indolent and seductive, made my heart
beat, but with a social longing, like those waltzes which remind us only
of the names of the fair dancers, called aloud as they entered the
ball-room. I had been told that I should see in the alley certain women of
fashion, who, in spite of their not all having husbands, were constantly
mentioned in conjunction with Mme. Swann, but most often by their
professional names;–their new names, when they had any, being but a sort
of incognito, a veil which those who would speak of them were careful to
draw aside, so as to make themselves understood. Thinking that Beauty–in
the order of feminine elegance–was governed by occult laws into the
knowledge of which they had been initiated, and that they had the power to
realise it, I accepted before seeing them, like the truth of a coming
revelation, the appearance of their clothes, of their carriages and
horses, of a thousand details among which I placed my faith as in an inner
soul which gave the cohesion of a work of art to that ephemeral and
changing pageant. But it was Mme. Swann whom I wished to see, and I waited
for her to go past, as deeply moved as though she were Gilberte, whose
parents, saturated, like everything in her environment, with her own
special charm, excited in me as keen a passion as she did herself, indeed
a still more painful disturbance (since their point of contact with her
was that intimate, that internal part of her life which was hidden from
me), and furthermore, for I very soon learned, as we shall see in due
course, that they did not like my playing with her, that feeling of
veneration which we always have for those who hold, and exercise without
restraint, the power to do us an injury.
I assigned the first place, in the order of aesthetic merit and of social
grandeur, to simplicity, when I saw Mme. Swann on foot, in a ’polonaise’
of plain cloth, a little toque on her head trimmed with a pheasant’s wing,
a bunch of violets in her bosom, hastening along the Allée des Acacias as
if it had been merely the shortest way back to her own house, and
acknowledging with a rapid glance the courtesy of the gentlemen in
carriages, who, recognising her figure at a distance, were raising their
hats to her and saying to one another that there was never anyone so well
turned out as she. But instead of simplicity it was to ostentation that I
must assign the first place if, after I had compelled Françoise, who could
hold out no longer, and complained that her legs were ’giving’ beneath
her, to stroll up and down with me for another hour, I saw at length,
emerging from the Porte Dauphine, figuring for me a royal dignity, the
passage of a sovereign, an impression such as no real Queen has ever since
been able to give me, because my notion of their power has been less
vague, and more founded upon experience–borne along by the flight of a
pair of fiery horses, slender and shapely as one sees them in the drawings
of Constantin Guys, carrying on its box an enormous coachman, furred like
a cossack, and by his side a diminutive groom, like Toby, “the late
Beaudenord’s tiger,” I saw–or rather I felt its outlines engraved upon my
heart by a clean and killing stab–a matchless victoria, built rather
high, and hinting, through the extreme modernity of its appointments, at
the forms of an earlier day, deep down in which lay negligently back Mme.
Swann, her hair, now quite pale with one grey lock, girt with a narrow
band of flowers, usually violets, from which floated down long veils, a
lilac parasol in her hand, on her lips an ambiguous smile in which I read
only the benign condescension of Majesty, though it was pre-eminently the
enticing smile of the courtesan, which she graciously bestowed upon the
men who bowed to her. That smile was, in reality, saying to one: “Oh yes,
I do remember, quite well; it was wonderful!” to another: “How I should
have loved to! We were unfortunate!”, to a third: “Yes, if you like! I
must just keep in the line for a minute, then as soon as I can I will
break away.” When strangers passed she still allowed to linger about her
lips a lazy smile, as though she expected or remembered some friend, which
made them say: “What a lovely woman!”. And for certain men only she had a
sour, strained, shy, cold smile which meant: “Yes, you old goat, I know
that you’ve got a tongue like a viper, that you can’t keep quiet for a
moment. But do you suppose that I care what you say?” Coquelin passed,
talking, in a group of listening friends, and with a sweeping wave of his
hand bade a theatrical good day to the people in the carriages. But I
thought only of Mme. Swann, and pretended to have not yet seen her, for I
knew that, when she reached the pigeon-shooting ground, she would tell her
coachman to ’break away’ and to stop the carriage, so that she might come
back on foot. And on days when I felt that I had the courage to pass close
by her I would drag Françoise off in that direction; until the moment came
when I saw Mme. Swann, letting trail behind her the long train of her
lilac skirt, dressed, as the populace imagine queens to be dressed, in
rich attire such as no other woman might wear, lowering her eyes now and
then to study the handle of her parasol, paying scant attention to the
passers-by, as though the important thing for her, her one object in being
there, was to take exercise, without thinking that she was seen, and that
every head was turned towards her. Sometimes, however, when she had looked
back to call her dog to her, she would cast, almost imperceptibly, a
sweeping glance round about.
Those even who did not know her were warned by something exceptional,
something beyond the normal in her–or perhaps by a telepathic suggestion
such as would move an ignorant audience to a frenzy of applause when Berma
was ’sublime’–that she must be some one well-known. They would ask one
another, “Who is she?”, or sometimes would interrogate a passing stranger,
or would make a mental note of how she was dressed so as to fix her
identity, later, in the mind of a friend better informed than themselves,
who would at once enlighten them. Another pair, half-stopping in their
walk, would exchange:
“You know who that is? Mme. Swann! That conveys nothing to you?  Odette de
Crécy, then?”
“Odette de Crécy! Why, I thought as much. Those great, sad eyes...  But I
say, you know, she can’t be as young as she was once, eh? I remember, I
had her on the day that MacMahon went.”
“I shouldn’t remind her of it, if I were you. She is now Mme. Swann, the
wife of a gentleman in the Jockey Club, a friend of the Prince of Wales.
Apart from that, though, she is wonderful still.”
“Oh, but you ought to have known her then; Gad, she was lovely! She lived
in a very odd little house with a lot of Chinese stuff. I remember, we
were bothered all the time by the newsboys, shouting outside; in the end
she made me get up and go.”
Without listening to these memories, I could feel all about her the
indistinct murmur of fame. My heart leaped with impatience when I thought
that a few seconds must still elapse before all these people, among whom I
was dismayed not to find a certain mulatto banker who (or so I felt) had a
contempt for me, were to see the unknown youth, to whom they had not, so
far, been paying the slightest attention, salute (without knowing her, it
was true, but I thought that I had sufficient authority since my parents
knew her husband and I was her daughter’s playmate) this woman whose
reputation for beauty, for misconduct, and for elegance was universal.
But I was now close to Mme. Swann; I pulled off my hat with so lavish, so
prolonged a gesture that she could not repress a smile. People laughed. As
for her, she had never seen me with Gilberte, she did not know my name,
but I was for her–like one of the keepers in the Bois, like the boatman,
or the ducks on the lake, to which she threw scraps of bread–one of the
minor personages, familiar, nameless, as devoid of individual character as
a stage-hand in a theatre, of her daily walks abroad.
On certain days when I had missed her in the Allée des Acacias I would be
so fortunate as to meet her in the Allée de la Reine Marguerite, where
women went who wished to be alone, or to appear to be wishing to be alone;
she would not be alone for long, being soon overtaken by some man or
other, often in a grey ’tile’ hat, whom I did not know, and who would talk
to her for some time, while their two carriages crawled behind.
Continue...

This full text of Swann’s Way (Vol. 1 of “Remembrance of Things Past”)
by Marcel Proust, translated from the French by C. K. Scott
Moncrieff (1922), is in the public domain. Thanks to Project Gutenberg for
bringing books to the digital world in the form of electronic texts.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Also see ">Swann’s Way I.

Page last updated on February 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
