




[155] IN the middle of the sixteenth century, when the spirit of
the Renaissance was everywhere, and people had begun to look
back with distaste on the works of the middle age, the old Gothic
manner had still one chance more, in borrowing something from
the rival which was about to supplant it.  In this way there was
produced, chiefly in France, a new and peculiar phase of taste
with qualities and a charm of its own, blending the somewhat
attenuated grace of Italian ornament with the general outlines of
Northern design.  It created the Chateau de Gaillon, as you may
still see it in the delicate engravings of Israel Silvestre–a Gothic
donjon veiled faintly by a surface of dainty Italian traceries–
Chenonceaux, Blois, Chambord, and the church of Brou.  In
painting, there came from Italy workmen like Maitre Roux and
the masters of the school of Fontainebleau, to have their later
Italian voluptuousness attempered by the naive and silvery
qualities of the native style; and it was characteristic of these
painters that they were most successful in painting on glass, an
art so [156] essentially medieval.  Taking it up where the middle
age had left it, they found their whole work among the last
subtleties of colour and line; and keeping within the true limits of
their material, they got quite a new order of effects from it, and
felt their way to refinements on colour never dreamed of by those
older workmen, the glass-painters of Chartres or Le Mans.  What
is called the Renaissance in France is thus not so much the
introduction of a wholly new taste ready-made from Italy, but
rather the finest and subtlest phase of the middle age itself, its last
fleeting splendour and temperate Saint Martin’s summer.  In
poetry, the Gothic spirit in France had produced a thousand
songs; so in the Renaissance, French poetry too did but borrow
something to blend with a native growth, and the poems of
Ronsard, with their ingenuity, their delicately figured surfaces,
their slightness, their fanciful combinations of rhyme, are the
correlative of the traceries of the house of Jacques Coeur at
Bourges, or the Maison de Justice at Rouen.
There was indeed	something in the native French taste naturally
akin to that Italian finesse.  The characteristic of French work had
always been a certain nicety, a remarkable daintiness of hand,
une nettete remarquable d’execution.  In the paintings of
Francois Clouet, for example, or rather of the Clouets–for there
was a whole family of them–painters remarkable for [157] their
resistance to Italian influences, there is a silveriness of colour and
a clearness of expression which distinguish them very definitely
from their Flemish neighbours, Hemling or the Van Eycks.  And
this nicety is not less characteristic of old French poetry.  A light,
aerial delicacy, a simple elegance–une nettete remarquable
d’execution: these are essential characteristics alike of Villon’s
poetry, and of the Hours of Anne of Brittany.  They are
characteristic too of a hundred French Gothic carvings and
traceries.  Alike in the old Gothic cathedrals, and in their
counterpart, the old Gothic chansons de geste, the rough and
ponderous mass becomes, as if by passing for a moment into
happier conditions, or through a more gracious stratum of air,
graceful and refined, like the carved ferneries on the granite
church at Folgoat, or the lines which describe the fair priestly
hands of Archbishop Turpin, in the song of Roland; although
below both alike there is a fund of mere Gothic strength, or
heaviness.*
Now Villon’s songs and Clouet’s painting are like these.  It is the
higher touch making itself felt here and there, betraying itself,
like nobler blood in a lower stock, by a fine line or gesture or
expression, the turn of a wrist, the tapering of a finger.  In
Ronsard’s time that rougher [158] element seemed likely to
predominate.  No one can turn over the pages of Rabelais without
feeling how much need there was of softening, of castigation.  To
effect this softening is the object of the revolution in poetry
which is connected with Ronsard’s name.  Casting about for the
means of thus refining upon and saving the character of French
literature, he accepted that influx of Renaissance taste, which,
leaving the buildings, the language, the art, the poetry of France,
at bottom, what they were, old French Gothic still, gilds their
surfaces with a strange, delightful, foreign aspect passing over all
that Northern land, in itself neither deeper nor more permanent
than a chance effect of light.  He reinforces, he doubles the
French daintiness by Italian finesse.  Thereupon, nearly all the
force and all the seriousness of French work disappear; only the
elegance, the aerial touch, the perfect manner remain.  But this
elegance, this manner, this daintiness of execution are
consummate, and have an unmistakable aesthetic value.
So the old French chanson, which, like the old northern Gothic
ornament, though it sometimes refined itself into a sort of weird
elegance, was often, in its essence, something rude and formless,
became in the hands of Ronsard a Pindaric ode.  He gave it
structure, a sustained system, strophe and antistrophe, and taught
it a changefulness and variety of metre which keep the curiosity
always excited, so that the very aspect of it, as it [159] lies
written on the page, carries the eye lightly onwards, and of which
this is a good instance:–
That is not by Ronsard, but by Remy Belleau, for Ronsard soon
came to have a school.  Six other poets threw in their lot with him
in his literary revolution,–this Remy Belleau, Antoine de Baif,
Pontus de Tyard, Etienne Jodelle, Jean Daurat, and lastly Joachim
du Bellay; and with that strange love of emblems which is
characteristic of the time, which covered all the works of Francis
the First with the salamander, and all the works of Henry the
Second with the double crescent, and all the works of Anne of
Brittany with the knotted cord, they called themselves the Pleiad;
seven in all, although, as happens with the celestial Pleiad, if you
scrutinise this constellation of poets more carefully you may find
there a great number of minor stars.
The first note of this literary revolution was [160] struck by
Joachim du Bellay in a little tract written at the early age of
twenty-four, which coming to us through three centuries seems of
yesterday, so full is it of those delicate critical distinctions which
are sometimes supposed peculiar to modern writers.  The piece
has for its title La Deffense et Illustration de la langue
Francoyse; and its problem is how to illustrate or ennoble the
French language, to give it lustre.
We are accustomed to speak of the varied critical and creative
movement of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries as the
Renaissance, and because we have a single name for it we may
sometimes fancy that there was more unity in the thing itself than
there really was.  Even the Reformation, that other great
movement of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, had far less
unity, far less of combined action, than is at first sight supposed;
and the Renaissance was infinitely less united, less conscious of
combined action, than the Reformation.  But if anywhere the
Renaissance became conscious, as a German philosopher might
say, if ever it was understood as a systematic movement by those
who took part in it, it is in this little book of Joachim du Bellay’s,
which it is impossible to read without feeling the excitement, the
animation, of change, of discovery.  “It is a remarkable fact,"
says M. Sainte-Beuve, “and an inversion of what is true of other
languages, that, in French, prose has always had the precedence
over poetry.”  Du Bellay’s prose [161] is perfectly transparent,
flexible, and chaste.  In many ways it is a more characteristic
example of the culture of the Pleiad than any of its verse; and
those who love the whole movement of which the Pleiad is a
part, for a weird foreign grace in it, and may be looking about for
a true specimen of it, cannot have a better than Joachim du Bellay
and this little treatise of his.
Du Bellay’s object is to adjust the existing French culture to the
rediscovered classical culture; and in discussing this problem,
and developing the theories of the Pleiad, he has lighted upon
many principles of permanent truth and applicability.  There were
some who despaired of the French language altogether, who
thought it naturally incapable of the fulness and elegance of
Greek and Latin–cette elegance et copie qui est en la langue
Greque et Romaine–that science could be adequately discussed,
and poetry nobly written, only in the dead languages.  “Those
who speak thus,” says Du Bellay,  “make me think of the relics
which one may only see through a little pane of glass, and must
not touch with one’s hands.  That is what these people do with all
branches of culture, which they keep shut up in Greek and Latin
books, not permitting one to see them otherwise, or transport
them out of dead words into those which are alive, and wing their
way daily through the mouths of men.”  “Languages,” he says
again, “are not born like plants and trees, some naturally feeble
and sickly, [162] others healthy and strong and apter to bear the
weight of men’s conceptions, but all their virtue is generated in
the world of choice and men’s freewill concerning them.
Therefore, I cannot blame too strongly the rashness of some of
our countrymen, who being anything rather than Greeks or
Latins, depreciate and reject with more than stoical disdain
everything written in French; nor can I express my surprise at the
odd opinion of some learned men who think that our vulgar
tongue is wholly incapable of erudition and good literature.”
It was an age of translations.  Du Bellay himself translated two
books of the Aeneid, and other poetry, old and new, and there
were some who thought that the translation of the classical
literature was the true means of ennobling the French language:–
strangers are ever favourites with us–nous favorisons toujours les
etrangers.  Du Bellay moderates their expectations.  “I do not
believe that one can learn the right use of them"–he is speaking
of figures and ornament in language–"from translations, because
it is impossible to reproduce them with the same grace with
which the original author used them.  For each language has I
know not what peculiarity of its own; and if you force yourself to
express the naturalness (le naif) of this in another language,
observing the law of translation,–not to expatiate beyond the
limits of the author himself, your words will be constrained,
[163] cold and ungraceful.”  Then he fixes the test of all good
translation:–"To prove this, read me Demosthenes and Homer in
Latin, Cicero and Virgil in French, and see whether they produce
in you the same affections which you experience in reading those
authors in the original.”
In this effort to ennoble the French language, to give it grace,
number, perfection, and as painters do to their pictures, that last,
so desirable, touch–cette derniere main que nous desirons-what
Du Bellay is really pleading for is his mother-tongue, the
language, that is, in which one will have the utmost degree of
what is moving and passionate.  He recognised of what force the
music and dignity of languages are, how they enter into the
inmost part of things; and in pleading for the cultivation of the
French language, he is pleading for no merely scholastic interest,
but for freedom, impulse, reality, not in literature only, but in
daily communion of speech.  After all, it was impossible to have
this impulse in Greek and Latin, dead languages shut up in books
as in reliquaries–peris et mises en reliquaires de livres.  By aid
of this starveling stock–pauvre plante et vergette–of the French
language, he must speak delicately, movingly, if he is ever to
speak so at all: that, or none, must be for him the medium of what
he calls, in one of his great phrases, le discours fatal des choses
mondaines–that discourse about affairs which decides men’s
fates.  And it is his patriotism [164] not to despair of it; he sees it
already perfect in all elegance and beauty of words–parfait en
toute elegance et venuste de paroles.
Du Bellay was born in the disastrous year 1525, the year of the
battle of Pavia, and the captivity of Francis the First.  His parents
died early, and to him, as the younger son, his mother’s little
estate, ce petit Lire, the beloved place of his birth, descended.  He
was brought up by a brother only a little older than himself; and
left to themselves, the two boys passed their lives in day-dreams
of military glory.  Their education was neglected; “The time of
my youth,” says Du Bellay, “was lost, like the flower which no
shower waters, and no hand cultivates.”  He was just twenty
years old when the elder brother died, leaving Joachim to be the
guardian of his child.  It was with regret, with a shrinking sense
of incapacity, that he took upon him the burden of this
responsibility.  Hitherto he had looked forward to the profession
of a soldier, hereditary in his family.  But at this time a sickness
attacked him which brought him cruel sufferings, and seemed
likely to be mortal.  It was then for the first time that he read the
Greek and Latin poets.  These studies came too late to make him
what he so much desired to be, a trifler in Greek and Latin verse,
like so many others of his time now forgotten; instead, they made
him a lover of his own homely native tongue, that poor starveling
stock of the French [165] language.  It was through this fortunate
short-coming in his education that he became national and
modern; and he learned afterwards to look back on that wild
garden of his youth with only a half regret.  A certain Cardinal du
Bellay was the successful member of the family, a man often
employed in high official business.  To him the thoughts of
Joachim turned when it became necessary to choose a profession,
and in 1552 he accompanied the Cardinal to Rome.  He remained
there nearly five years, burdened with the weight of affairs, and
languishing with home-sickness.  Yet it was under these
circumstances that his genius yielded its best fruits.  From Rome,
so full of pleasurable sensation for men of an imaginative
temperament such as his, with all the curiosities of the
Renaissance still fresh in it, his thoughts went back painfully,
longingly, to the country of the Loire, with its wide expanse of
waving corn, its homely pointed roofs of grey slate, and its far-
off scent of the sea.  He reached home at last, but only to die
there, quite suddenly, one wintry day, at the early age of thirty-
five.
Much of Du Bellay’s poetry illustrates rather the age and school
to which he belonged than his own temper and genius.  As with
the writings of Ronsard and the other poets of the Pleiad, its
interest depends not so much on the impress of individual genius
upon it, as on the [166] circumstance that it was once poetry a la
mode, that it is part of the manner of a time–a time which made
much of manner, and carried it to a high degree of perfection.  It
is one of the decorations of an age which threw a large part of its
energy into the work of decoration.  We feel a pensive pleasure in
gazing on these faded adornments, and observing how a group of
actual men and women pleased themselves long ago.  Ronsard’s
poems are a kind of epitome of his age.  Of one side of that age, it
is true, of the strenuous, the progressive, the serious movement,
which was then going on, there is little; but of the catholic side,
the losing side, the forlorn hope, hardly a figure is absent.  The
Queen of Scots, at whose desire Ronsard published his odes,
reading him in her northern prison, felt that he was bringing back
to her the true flavour of her early days in the court of Catherine
at the Louvre, with its exotic Italian gaieties.  Those who disliked
that poetry, disliked it because they found that age itself
distasteful.  The poetry of Malherbe came, with its sustained style
and weighty sentiment, but with nothing that set people singing;
and the lovers of such poetry saw in the poetry of the Pleiad only
the latest trumpery of the middle age.  But the time arrived when
the school of Malherbe also had had its day; and the
Romanticists, who in their eagerness for excitement, for strange
music and imagery, went back to the works of the middle age,
accepted the Pleiad too [167] with the rest; and in that new
middle age which their genius has evoked, the poetry of the
Pleiad has found its place.  At first, with Malherbe, you may
think it, like the architecture, the whole mode of life, the very
dresses of that time, fantastic, faded, rococo.  But if you look
long enough to understand it, to conceive its sentiment, you will
find that those wanton lines have a spirit guiding their caprices.
For there is style there; one temper has shaped the whole; and
everything that has style, that has been done as no other man or
age could have done it, as it could never, for all our trying, be
done again, has its true value and interest.  Let us dwell upon it
for a moment, and try to gather from it that special flower, ce
fleur particulier, which Ronsard himself tells us every garden
has.
It is poetry not for the people, but for a confined circle, for
courtiers, great lords and erudite persons, people who desire to be
humoured, to gratify a certain refined voluptuousness they have
in them.  Ronsard loves, or dreams that he loves, a rare and
peculiar type of beauty, la petite pucelle Angevine, with golden
hair and dark eyes.  But he has the ambition not only of being a
courtier and a lover, but a great scholar also; he is anxious about
orthography, about the letter e Grecque, the true spelling of Latin
names in French writing, and the restoration of the letter i to its
primitive liberty–del’ i voyelle en sa premiere liberte.  His poetry
is full of quaint, [168] remote learning.  He is just a little
pedantic, true always to his own express judgment, that to be
natural is not enough for one who in poetry desires to produce
work worthy of immortality.  And therewithal a certain number
of Greek words, which charmed Ronsard and his circle by their
gaiety and daintiness, and a certain air of foreign elegance about
them, crept into the French language; as there were other strange
words which the poets of the Pleiad forged for themselves, and
which had only an ephemeral existence.
With this was united the desire to taste a more exquisite and
various music than that of the older French verse, or of the
classical poets.  The music of the measured, scanned verse of
Latin and Greek poetry is one thing; the music of the rhymed,
unscanned verse of Villon and the old French poets, la poesie
chantee, is another.  To combine these two kinds of music in a
new school of French poetry, to make verse which should scan
and rhyme as well, to search out and harmonise the measure of
every syllable, and unite it to the swift, flitting, swallow-like
motion of rhyme, to penetrate their poetry with a double music–
this was the ambition of the Pleiad.  They are insatiable of music,
they cannot have enough of it; they desire a music of greater
compass perhaps than words can possibly yield, to drain out the
last drops of sweetness which a certain note or accent contains.
[169] It was Goudimel, the serious and protestant Goudimel, who
set Ronsard’s songs to music; but except in this eagerness for
music the poets of the Pleiad seem never quite in earnest.  The
old Greek and Roman mythology, which the great Italians had
found a motive so weighty and severe, becomes with them a mere
toy.  That “Lord of terrible aspect,” Amor, has become Love the
boy, or the babe.  They are full of fine railleries; they delight in
diminutives, ondelette, fontelette, doucelette, Cassandrette.
Their loves are only half real, a vain effort to prolong the
imaginative loves of the middle age beyond their natural lifetime.
They write love-poems for hire.  Like that party of people who
tell the tales in Boccaccio’s Decameron, they form a circle which
in an age of great troubles, losses, anxieties, can amuse itself with
art, poetry, intrigue.  But they amuse themselves with wonderful
elegance.  And sometimes their gaiety becomes satiric, for, as
they play, real passions insinuate themselves, and at least the
reality of death.  Their dejection at the thought of leaving this fair
abode of our common daylight–le beau sejour du commun jour–
is expressed by them with almost wearisome reiteration.  But
with this sentiment too they are able to trifle.  The imagery of
death serves for delicate ornament, and they weave into the airy
nothingness of their verses their trite reflections on the vanity
[170] of life.  Just so the grotesque details of the charnel-house
nest themselves, together with birds and flowers and the fancies
of the pagan mythology, in the traceries of the architecture of that
time, which wantons in its graceful arabesques with the images of
old age and death.
Ronsard became deaf at sixteen; and it was this circumstance
which finally determined him to be a man of letters instead of a
diplomatist, significantly, one might fancy, of a certain premature
agedness, and of the tranquil, temperate sweetness appropriate to
that, in the school of poetry which he founded.  Its charm is that
of a thing not vigorous or original, but full of the grace which
comes of long study and reiterated refinements, and many steps
repeated, and many angles worn down, with an exquisite
faintness, une fadeur exquise, a certain tenuity and caducity, as
for those who can bear nothing vehement or strong; for princes
weary of love, like Francis the First, or of pleasure, like Henry
the Third, or of action, like Henry the Fourth.  Its merits are those
of the old,–grace and finish, perfect in minute detail.  For these
people are a little jaded, and have a constant desire for a subdued
and delicate excitement, to warm their creeping fancy a little.
They love a constant change of rhyme in poetry, and in their
houses that strange, fantastic interweaving of thin, reed-like lines,
which are a kind of rhetoric in architecture.
[171] But the poetry of the Pleiad is true not only to the
physiognomy of its age, but also to its country–ce pays du
Vendomois–the names and scenery of which so often recur in it:-
-the great Loire, with its long spaces of white sand; the little river
Loir; the heathy, upland country, with its scattered pools of water
and waste road-sides, and retired manors, with their crazy old
feudal defences half fallen into decay; La Beauce, where the vast
rolling fields seem to anticipate the great western sea itself.  It is
full of the traits of that country.  We see Du Bellay and Ronsard
gardening, or hunting with their dogs, or watch the pastimes of a
rainy day; and with all this is connected a domesticity, a
homeliness and simple goodness, by which the Northern country
gains upon the South.  They have the love of the aged for
warmth, and understand the poetry of winter; for they are not far
from the Atlantic, and the west wind which comes up from it,
turning the poplars white, spares not this new Italy in France.  So
the fireside often appears, with the pleasures of the frosty season,
about the vast emblazoned chimneys of the time, and with a
bonhomie as of little children, or old people.
It is in Du Bellay’s Olive, a collection of sonnets in praise of a
half-imaginary lady, Sonnetz a la louange d’Olive, that these
characteristics are most abundant.  Here is a perfectly crystallised
example:–
[172]
That he is thus a characteristic specimen of the poetical taste of
that age, is indeed Du Bellay’s chief interest.  But if his work is
to have the highest sort of interest, if it is to do something more
than satisfy curiosity, if it is to have an aesthetic as distinct from
an historical value, it is not enough for a poet to have been the
true child of his age, to have conformed to its aesthetic
conditions, and by so conforming to have charmed and stimulated
that age; it is necessary that there should be perceptible in his
work something individual, inventive, unique, the impress there
of the writer’s own temper and personality.  This impress M.
Sainte-Beuve thought he found in the Antiquites de Rome, and
the Regrets, which he ranks as what has been called poesie
intime, that intensely modern sort of poetry in which the writer
has for his aim the portraiture of his own most intimate moods,
and [173] to take the reader into his confidence.  That age had
other instances of this intimacy of sentiment: Montaigne’s Essays
are full of it, the carvings of the church of Brou are full of it.  M.
Sainte-Beuve has perhaps exaggerated the influence of this
quality in Du Bellay’s Regrets; but the very name of the book has
a touch of Rousseau about it, and reminds one of a whole
generation of self-pitying poets in modern times.  It was in the
atmosphere of Rome, to him so strange and mournful, that these
pale flowers grew up.  For that journey to Italy, which he
deplored as the greatest misfortune of his life, put him in full
possession of his talent, and brought out all its originality.  And
in effect you do find intimacy, intimite, here.  The trouble of his
life is analysed, and the sentiment of it conveyed directly to our
minds; not a great sorrow or passion, but only the sense of loss in
passing days, the ennui of a dreamer who must plunge into the
world’s affairs, the opposition between actual life and the ideal, a
longing for rest, nostalgia, home-sickness–that pre-eminently
childish, but so suggestive sorrow, as significant of the final
regret of all human creatures for the familiar earth and limited
sky.
The feeling for landscape is often described as a modern one; still
more so is that for antiquity, the sentiment of ruins.  Du Bellay
has this sentiment.  The duration of the hard, sharp outlines of
things is a grief to him, and passing his wearisome [174] days
among the ruins of ancient Rome, he is consoled by the thought
that all must one day end, by the sentiment of the grandeur of
nothingness–la grandeur du rien.  With a strange touch of far-off
mysticism, he thinks that the great whole–le grand tout–into
which all other things pass and lose themselves, ought itself
sometimes to perish and pass away.  Nothing less can relieve his
weariness.  From the stately aspects of Rome his thoughts went
back continually to France, to the smoking chimneys of his little
village, the longer twilight of the North, the soft climate of
Anjou–La douceur Angevine; yet not so much to the real France,
we may be sure, with its dark streets and roofs of rough-hewn
slate, as to that other country, with slenderer towers, and more
winding rivers, and trees like flowers, and with softer sunshine on
more gracefully-proportioned fields and ways, which the fancy of
the exile, and the pilgrim, and of the schoolboy far from home,
and of those kept at home unwillingly, everywhere builds up
before or behind them.
He came home at last, through the Grisons, by slow journeys;
and there, in the cooler air of his own country, under its skies of
milkier blue, the sweetest flower of his genius sprang up.  There
have been poets whose whole fame has rested on one poem, as
Gray’s on the Elegy in a Country Churchyard, or Ronsard’s, as
many critics have thought, on the eighteen lines of [175] one
famous ode.  Du Bellay has almost been the poet of one poem;
and this one poem of his is an Italian product transplanted into
that green country of Anjou; out of the Latin verses of Andrea
Navagero, into French.  But it is a composition in which the
matter is almost nothing, and the form almost everything; and the
form of the poem as it stands, written in old French, is all Du
Bellay’s own.  It is a song which the winnowers are supposed to
sing as they winnow the corn, and they invoke the winds to lie
lightly on the grain.
[176]
That has, in the highest degree, the qualities, the value, of the
whole Pleiad school of poetry, of the whole phase of taste from
which that school derives–a certain silvery grace of fancy, nearly
all the pleasure of which is in the surprise at the happy and
dexterous way in which a thing slight in itself is handled.  The
sweetness of it is by no means to be got at by crushing, as you
crush wild herbs to get at their perfume.  One seems to hear the
measured motion of the fans, with a child’s pleasure on coming
across the incident for the first time, in one of those great barns of
Du Bellay’s own country, La Beauce, the granary of France.  A
sudden light transfigures some trivial thing, a weather-vane, a
wind-mill, a winnowing fan, the dust in the barn door.  A
moment–and the thing has vanished, because it was pure effect;
but it leaves a relish behind it, a longing that the accident may
happen again.
1872.
157. *The purely artistic aspects of this subject have been
interpreted, in a work of great taste and learning, by Mrs.  Mark
Pattison:–The Renaissance of Art in France.
175. *A graceful translation of this and some other poems of the
Pleiad may be found in Ballads and Lyrics of Old France, by Mr.
Andrew Lang.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext of Walter Horatio Pater’s
“The Renaissance: Studies in Art and Poetry” (Dedication: To C.L.S, February 1873.)Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
