


There is to be a wedding this morning at the corner house in the
terrace.  The pastry-cook’s people have been there half-a-dozen
times already; all day yesterday there was a great stir and bustle,
and they were up this morning as soon as it was light.  Miss Emma
Fielding is going to be married to young Mr. Harvey.
Heaven alone can tell in what bright colours this marriage is
painted upon the mind of the little housemaid at number six, who
has hardly slept a wink all night with thinking of it, and now
stands on the unswept door-steps leaning upon her broom, and
looking wistfully towards the enchanted house.  Nothing short of
omniscience can divine what visions of the baker, or the green-
grocer, or the smart and most insinuating butterman, are flitting
across her mind - what thoughts of how she would dress on such an
occasion, if she were a lady - of how she would dress, if she were
only a bride - of how cook would dress, being bridesmaid,
conjointly with her sister ’in place’ at Fulham, and how the
clergyman, deeming them so many ladies, would be quite humbled and
respectful.  What day-dreams of hope and happiness - of life being
one perpetual holiday, with no master and no mistress to grant or
withhold it - of every Sunday being a Sunday out - of pure freedom
as to curls and ringlets, and no obligation to hide fine heads of
hair in caps - what pictures of happiness, vast and immense to her,
but utterly ridiculous to us, bewilder the brain of the little
housemaid at number six, all called into existence by the wedding
at the corner!
We smile at such things, and so we should, though perhaps for a
better reason than commonly presents itself.  It should be pleasant
to us to know that there are notions of happiness so moderate and
limited, since upon those who entertain them, happiness and
lightness of heart are very easily bestowed.
But the little housemaid is awakened from her reverie, for forth
from the door of the magical corner house there runs towards her,
all fluttering in smart new dress and streaming ribands, her friend
Jane Adams, who comes all out of breath to redeem a solemn promise
of taking her in, under cover of the confusion, to see the
breakfast table spread forth in state, and - sight of sights! - her
young mistress ready dressed for church.
And there, in good truth, when they have stolen up-stairs on tip-
toe and edged themselves in at the chamber-door - there is Miss
Emma ’looking like the sweetest picter,’ in a white chip bonnet and
orange flowers, and all other elegancies becoming a bride, (with
the make, shape, and quality of every article of which the girl is
perfectly familiar in one moment, and never forgets to her dying
day) - and there is Miss Emma’s mamma in tears, and Miss Emma’s
papa comforting her, and saying how that of course she has been
long looking forward to this, and how happy she ought to be - and
there too is Miss Emma’s sister with her arms round her neck, and
the other bridesmaid all smiles and tears, quieting the children,
who would cry more but that they are so finely dressed, and yet sob
for fear sister Emma should be taken away - and it is all so
affecting, that the two servant-girls cry more than anybody; and
Jane Adams, sitting down upon the stairs, when they have crept
away, declares that her legs tremble so that she don’t know what to
do, and that she will say for Miss Emma, that she never had a hasty
word from her, and that she does hope and pray she may be happy.
But Jane soon comes round again, and then surely there never was
anything like the breakfast table, glittering with plate and china,
and set out with flowers and sweets, and long-necked bottles, in
the most sumptuous and dazzling manner.  In the centre, too, is the
mighty charm, the cake, glistening with frosted sugar, and
garnished beautifully.  They agree that there ought to be a little
Cupid under one of the barley-sugar temples, or at least two hearts
and an arrow; but, with this exception, there is nothing to wish
for, and a table could not be handsomer.  As they arrive at this
conclusion, who should come in but Mr. John! to whom Jane says that
its only Anne from number six; and John says HE knows, for he’s
often winked his eye down the area, which causes Anne to blush and
look confused.  She is going away, indeed; when Mr. John will have
it that she must drink a glass of wine, and he says never mind it’s
being early in the morning, it won’t hurt her:  so they shut the
door and pour out the wine; and Anne drinking lane’s health, and
adding, ’and here’s wishing you yours, Mr. John,’ drinks it in a
great many sips, - Mr. John all the time making jokes appropriate
to the occasion.  At last Mr. John, who has waxed bolder by
degrees, pleads the usage at weddings, and claims the privilege of
a kiss, which he obtains after a great scuffle; and footsteps being
now heard on the stairs, they disperse suddenly.
By this time a carriage has driven up to convey the bride to
church, and Anne of number six prolonging the process of ’cleaning
her door,’ has the satisfaction of beholding the bride and
bridesmaids, and the papa and mamma, hurry into the same and drive
rapidly off.  Nor is this all, for soon other carriages begin to
arrive with a posse of company all beautifully dressed, at whom she
could stand and gaze for ever; but having something else to do, is
compelled to take one last long look and shut the street-door.
And now the company have gone down to breakfast, and tears have
given place to smiles, for all the corks are out of the long-necked
bottles, and their contents are disappearing rapidly.  Miss Emma’s
papa is at the top of the table; Miss Emma’s mamma at the bottom;
and beside the latter are Miss Emma herself and her husband, -
admitted on all hands to be the handsomest and most interesting
young couple ever known.  All down both sides of the table, too,
are various young ladies, beautiful to see, and various young
gentlemen who seem to think so; and there, in a post of honour, is
an unmarried aunt of Miss Emma’s, reported to possess unheard-of
riches, and to have expressed vast testamentary intentions
respecting her favourite niece and new nephew.  This lady has been
very liberal and generous already, as the jewels worn by the bride
abundantly testify, but that is nothing to what she means to do, or
even to what she has done, for she put herself in close
communication with the dressmaker three months ago, and prepared a
wardrobe (with some articles worked by her own hands) fit for a
Princess.  People may call her an old maid, and so she may be, but
she is neither cross nor ugly for all that; on the contrary, she is
very cheerful and pleasant-looking, and very kind and tender-
hearted:  which is no matter of surprise except to those who yield
to popular prejudices without thinking why, and will never grow
wiser and never know better.
Of all the company though, none are more pleasant to behold or
better pleased with themselves than two young children, who, in
honour of the day, have seats among the guests.  Of these, one is a
little fellow of six or eight years old, brother to the bride, -
and the other a girl of the same age, or something younger, whom he
calls ’his wife.’  The real bride and bridegroom are not more
devoted than they:  he all love and attention, and she all blushes
and fondness, toying with a little bouquet which he gave her this
morning, and placing the scattered rose-leaves in her bosom with
nature’s own coquettishness.  They have dreamt of each other in
their quiet dreams, these children, and their little hearts have
been nearly broken when the absent one has been dispraised in jest.
When will there come in after-life a passion so earnest, generous,
and true as theirs; what, even in its gentlest realities, can have
the grace and charm that hover round such fairy lovers!
By this time the merriment and happiness of the feast have gained
their height; certain ominous looks begin to be exchanged between
the bridesmaids, and somehow it gets whispered about that the
carriage which is to take the young couple into the country has
arrived.  Such members of the party as are most disposed to prolong
its enjoyments, affect to consider this a false alarm, but it turns
out too true, being speedily confirmed, first by the retirement of
the bride and a select file of intimates who are to prepare her for
the journey, and secondly by the withdrawal of the ladies
generally.  To this there ensues a particularly awkward pause, in
which everybody essays to be facetious, and nobody succeeds; at
length the bridegroom makes a mysterious disappearance in obedience
to some equally mysterious signal; and the table is deserted.
Now, for at least six weeks last past it has been solemnly devised
and settled that the young couple should go away in secret; but
they no sooner appear without the door than the drawing-room
windows are blocked up with ladies waving their handkerchiefs and
kissing their hands, and the dining-room panes with gentlemen’s
faces beaming farewell in every queer variety of its expression.
The hall and steps are crowded with servants in white favours,
mixed up with particular friends and relations who have darted out
to say good-bye; and foremost in the group are the tiny lovers arm
in arm, thinking, with fluttering hearts, what happiness it would
be to dash away together in that gallant coach, and never part
again.
The bride has barely time for one hurried glance at her old home,
when the steps rattle, the door slams, the horses clatter on the
pavement, and they have left it far away.
A knot of women servants still remain clustered in the hall,
whispering among themselves, and there of course is Anne from
number six, who has made another escape on some plea or other, and
been an admiring witness of the departure.  There are two points on
which Anne expatiates over and over again, without the smallest
appearance of fatigue or intending to leave off; one is, that she
’never see in all her life such a - oh such a angel of a gentleman
as Mr. Harvey’ - and the other, that she ’can’t tell how it is, but
it don’t seem a bit like a work-a-day, or a Sunday neither - it’s
all so unsettled and unregular.’
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
