


There is an old-fashioned weather-glass representing a house with
two doorways, in one of which is the figure of a gentleman, in the
other the figure of a lady.  When the weather is to be fine the
lady comes out and the gentleman goes in; when wet, the gentleman
comes out and the lady goes in.  They never seek each other’s
society, are never elevated and depressed by the same cause, and
have nothing in common.  They are the model of a cool couple,
except that there is something of politeness and consideration
about the behaviour of the gentleman in the weather-glass, in
which, neither of the cool couple can be said to participate.
The cool couple are seldom alone together, and when they are,
nothing can exceed their apathy and dulness:  the gentleman being
for the most part drowsy, and the lady silent.  If they enter into
conversation, it is usually of an ironical or recriminatory nature.
Thus, when the gentleman has indulged in a very long yawn and
settled himself more snugly in his easy-chair, the lady will
perhaps remark, ’Well, I am sure, Charles!  I hope you’re
comfortable.’  To which the gentleman replies, ’Oh yes, he’s quite
comfortable quite.’  ’There are not many married men, I hope,’
returns the lady, ’who seek comfort in such selfish gratifications
as you do.’  ’Nor many wives who seek comfort in such selfish
gratifications as YOU do, I hope,’ retorts the gentleman.  ’Whose
fault is that?’ demands the lady.  The gentleman becoming more
sleepy, returns no answer.  ’Whose fault is that?’ the lady
repeats.  The gentleman still returning no answer, she goes on to
say that she believes there never was in all this world anybody so
attached to her home, so thoroughly domestic, so unwilling to seek
a moment’s gratification or pleasure beyond her own fireside as
she.  God knows that before she was married she never thought or
dreamt of such a thing; and she remembers that her poor papa used
to say again and again, almost every day of his life, ’Oh, my dear
Louisa, if you only marry a man who understands you, and takes the
trouble to consider your happiness and accommodate himself a very
little to your disposition, what a treasure he will find in you!’
She supposes her papa knew what her disposition was - he had known
her long enough - he ought to have been acquainted with it, but
what can she do?  If her home is always dull and lonely, and her
husband is always absent and finds no pleasure in her society, she
is naturally sometimes driven (seldom enough, she is sure) to seek
a little recreation elsewhere; she is not expected to pine and mope
to death, she hopes.  ’Then come, Louisa,’ says the gentleman,
waking up as suddenly as he fell asleep, ’stop at home this
evening, and so will I.’  ’I should be sorry to suppose, Charles,
that you took a pleasure in aggravating me,’ replies the lady; ’but
you know as well as I do that I am particularly engaged to Mrs.
Mortimer, and that it would be an act of the grossest rudeness and
ill-breeding, after accepting a seat in her box and preventing her
from inviting anybody else, not to go.’  ’Ah! there it is!’ says
the gentleman, shrugging his shoulders, ’I knew that perfectly
well.  I knew you couldn’t devote an evening to your own home.  Now
all I have to say, Louisa, is this - recollect that I was quite
willing to stay at home, and that it’s no fault of MINE we are not
oftener together.’
With that the gentleman goes away to keep an old appointment at his
club, and the lady hurries off to dress for Mrs. Mortimer’s; and
neither thinks of the other until by some odd chance they find
themselves alone again.
But it must not be supposed that the cool couple are habitually a
quarrelsome one.  Quite the contrary.  These differences are only
occasions for a little self-excuse, - nothing more.  In general
they are as easy and careless, and dispute as seldom, as any common
acquaintances may; for it is neither worth their while to put each
other out of the way, nor to ruffle themselves.
When they meet in society, the cool couple are the best-bred people
in existence.  The lady is seated in a corner among a little knot
of lady friends, one of whom exclaims, ’Why, I vow and declare
there is your husband, my dear!’  ’Whose? - mine?’ she says,
carelessly.  ’Ay, yours, and coming this way too.’  ’How very odd!’
says the lady, in a languid tone, ’I thought he had been at Dover.’
The gentleman coming up, and speaking to all the other ladies and
nodding slightly to his wife, it turns out that he has been at
Dover, and has just now returned.  ’What a strange creature you
are!’ cries his wife; ’and what on earth brought you here, I
wonder?’  ’I came to look after you, OF COURSE,’ rejoins her
husband.  This is so pleasant a jest that the lady is mightily
amused, as are all the other ladies similarly situated who are
within hearing; and while they are enjoying it to the full, the
gentleman nods again, turns upon his heel, and saunters away.
There are times, however, when his company is not so agreeable,
though equally unexpected; such as when the lady has invited one or
two particular friends to tea and scandal, and he happens to come
home in the very midst of their diversion.  It is a hundred chances
to one that he remains in the house half an hour, but the lady is
rather disturbed by the intrusion, notwithstanding, and reasons
within herself, - ’I am sure I never interfere with him, and why
should he interfere with me?  It can scarcely be accidental; it
never happens that I have a particular reason for not wishing him
to come home, but he always comes.  It’s very provoking and
tiresome; and I am sure when he leaves me so much alone for his own
pleasure, the least he could do would be to do as much for mine.’
Observing what passes in her mind, the gentleman, who has come home
for his own accommodation, makes a merit of it with himself;
arrives at the conclusion that it is the very last place in which
he can hope to be comfortable; and determines, as he takes up his
hat and cane, never to be so virtuous again.
Thus a great many cool couples go on until they are cold couples,
and the grave has closed over their folly and indifference.  Loss
of name, station, character, life itself, has ensued from causes as
slight as these, before now; and when gossips tell such tales, and
aggravate their deformities, they elevate their hands and eyebrows,
and call each other to witness what a cool couple Mr. and Mrs. So-
and-so always were, even in the best of times.
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
