


There cannot be a better practical illustration of the wise saw and
ancient instance, that there may be too much of a good thing, than
is presented by a loving couple.  Undoubtedly it is meet and proper
that two persons joined together in holy matrimony should be
loving, and unquestionably it is pleasant to know and see that they
are so; but there is a time for all things, and the couple who
happen to be always in a loving state before company, are well-nigh
intolerable.
And in taking up this position we would have it distinctly
understood that we do not seek alone the sympathy of bachelors, in
whose objection to loving couples we recognise interested motives
and personal considerations.  We grant that to that unfortunate
class of society there may be something very irritating,
tantalising, and provoking, in being compelled to witness those
gentle endearments and chaste interchanges which to loving couples
are quite the ordinary business of life.  But while we recognise
the natural character of the prejudice to which these unhappy men
are subject, we can neither receive their biassed evidence, nor
address ourself to their inflamed and angered minds.  Dispassionate
experience is our only guide; and in these moral essays we seek no
less to reform hymeneal offenders than to hold out a timely warning
to all rising couples, and even to those who have not yet set forth
upon their pilgrimage towards the matrimonial market.
Let all couples, present or to come, therefore profit by the
example of Mr. and Mrs. Leaver, themselves a loving couple in the
first degree.
Mr. and Mrs. Leaver are pronounced by Mrs. Starling, a widow lady
who lost her husband when she was young, and lost herself about the
same-time - for by her own count she has never since grown five
years older - to be a perfect model of wedded felicity.  ’You would
suppose,’ says the romantic lady, ’that they were lovers only just
now engaged.  Never was such happiness!  They are so tender, so
affectionate, so attached to each other, so enamoured, that
positively nothing can be more charming!’
’Augusta, my soul,’ says Mr. Leaver.  ’Augustus, my life,’ replies
Mrs. Leaver.  ’Sing some little ballad, darling,’ quoth Mr. Leaver.
’I couldn’t, indeed, dearest,’ returns Mrs. Leaver.  ’Do, my dove,’
says Mr. Leaver.  ’I couldn’t possibly, my love,’ replies Mrs.
Leaver; ’and it’s very naughty of you to ask me.’  ’Naughty,
darling!’ cries Mr. Leaver.  ’Yes, very naughty, and very cruel,’
returns Mrs. Leaver, ’for you know I have a sore throat, and that
to sing would give me great pain.  You’re a monster, and I hate
you.  Go away!’  Mrs. Leaver has said ’go away,’ because Mr. Leaver
has tapped her under the chin:  Mr. Leaver not doing as he is bid,
but on the contrary, sitting down beside her, Mrs. Leaver slaps Mr.
Leaver; and Mr. Leaver in return slaps Mrs. Leaver, and it being
now time for all persons present to look the other way, they look
the other way, and hear a still small sound as of kissing, at which
Mrs. Starling is thoroughly enraptured, and whispers her neighbour
that if all married couples were like that, what a heaven this
earth would be!
The loving couple are at home when this occurs, and maybe only
three or four friends are present, but, unaccustomed to reserve
upon this interesting point, they are pretty much the same abroad.
Indeed upon some occasions, such as a pic-nic or a water-party,
their lovingness is even more developed, as we had an opportunity
last summer of observing in person.
There was a great water-party made up to go to Twickenham and dine,
and afterwards dance in an empty villa by the river-side, hired
expressly for the purpose.  Mr. and Mrs. Leaver were of the
company; and it was our fortune to have a seat in the same boat,
which was an eight-oared galley, manned by amateurs, with a blue
striped awning of the same pattern as their Guernsey shirts, and a
dingy red flag of the same shade as the whiskers of the stroke oar.
A coxswain being appointed, and all other matters adjusted, the
eight gentlemen threw themselves into strong paroxysms, and pulled
up with the tide, stimulated by the compassionate remarks of the
ladies, who one and all exclaimed, that it seemed an immense
exertion - as indeed it did.  At first we raced the other boat,
which came alongside in gallant style; but this being found an
unpleasant amusement, as giving rise to a great quantity of
splashing, and rendering the cold pies and other viands very moist,
it was unanimously voted down, and we were suffered to shoot a-
head, while the second boat followed ingloriously in our wake.
It was at this time that we first recognised Mr. Leaver.  There
were two firemen-watermen in the boat, lying by until somebody was
exhausted; and one of them, who had taken upon himself the
direction of affairs, was heard to cry in a gruff voice, ’Pull
away, number two - give it her, number two - take a longer reach,
number two - now, number two, sir, think you’re winning a boat.’
The greater part of the company had no doubt begun to wonder which
of the striped Guernseys it might be that stood in need of such
encouragement, when a stifled shriek from Mrs. Leaver confirmed the
doubtful and informed the ignorant; and Mr. Leaver, still further
disguised in a straw hat and no neckcloth, was observed to be in a
fearful perspiration, and failing visibly.  Nor was the general
consternation diminished at this instant by the same gentleman (in
the performance of an accidental aquatic feat, termed ’catching a
crab’) plunging suddenly backward, and displaying nothing of
himself to the company, but two violently struggling legs.  Mrs.
Leaver shrieked again several times, and cried piteously - ’Is he
dead?  Tell me the worst.  Is he dead?’
Now, a moment’s reflection might have convinced the loving wife,
that unless her husband were endowed with some most surprising
powers of muscular action, he never could be dead while he kicked
so hard; but still Mrs. Leaver cried, ’Is he dead? is he dead?’ and
still everybody else cried - ’No, no, no,’ until such time as Mr.
Leaver was replaced in a sitting posture, and his oar (which had
been going through all kinds of wrong-headed performances on its
own account) was once more put in his hand, by the exertions of the
two firemen-watermen.  Mr. Leaver then exclaimed, ’Augustus, my
child, come to me;’ and Mr. Leaver said, ’Augusta, my love, compose
yourself, I am not injured.’  But Mrs. Leaver cried again more
piteously than before, ’Augustus, my child, come to me;’ and now
the company generally, who seemed to be apprehensive that if Mr.
Leaver remained where he was, he might contribute more than his
proper share towards the drowning of the party, disinterestedly
took part with Mrs. Leaver, and said he really ought to go, and
that he was not strong enough for such violent exercise, and ought
never to have undertaken it.  Reluctantly, Mr. Leaver went, and
laid himself down at Mrs. Leaver’s feet, and Mrs. Leaver stooping
over him, said, ’Oh Augustus, how could you terrify me so?’ and Mr.
Leaver said, ’Augusta, my sweet, I never meant to terrify you;’ and
Mrs. Leaver said, ’You are faint, my dear;’ and Mr. Leaver said, ’I
am rather so, my love;’ and they were very loving indeed under Mrs.
Leaver’s veil, until at length Mr. Leaver came forth again, and
pleasantly asked if he had not heard something said about bottled
stout and sandwiches.
Mrs. Starling, who was one of the party, was perfectly delighted
with this scene, and frequently murmured half-aside, ’What a loving
couple you are!’ or ’How delightful it is to see man and wife so
happy together!’  To us she was quite poetical, (for we are a kind
of cousins,) observing that hearts beating in unison like that made
life a paradise of sweets; and that when kindred creatures were
drawn together by sympathies so fine and delicate, what more than
mortal happiness did not our souls partake!  To all this we
answered ’Certainly,’ or ’Very true,’ or merely sighed, as the case
might be.  At every new act of the loving couple, the widow’s
admiration broke out afresh; and when Mrs. Leaver would not permit
Mr. Leaver to keep his hat off, lest the sun should strike to his
head, and give him a brain fever, Mrs. Starling actually shed
tears, and said it reminded her of Adam and Eve.
The loving couple were thus loving all the way to Twickenham, but
when we arrived there (by which time the amateur crew looked very
thirsty and vicious) they were more playful than ever, for Mrs.
Leaver threw stones at Mr. Leaver, and Mr. Leaver ran after Mrs.
Leaver on the grass, in a most innocent and enchanting manner.  At
dinner, too, Mr. Leaver WOULD steal Mrs. Leaver’s tongue, and Mrs.
Leaver WOULD retaliate upon Mr. Leaver’s fowl; and when Mrs. Leaver
was going to take some lobster salad, Mr. Leaver wouldn’t let her
have any, saying that it made her ill, and she was always sorry for
it afterwards, which afforded Mrs. Leaver an opportunity of
pretending to be cross, and showing many other prettinesses.  But
this was merely the smiling surface of their loves, not the mighty
depths of the stream, down to which the company, to say the truth,
dived rather unexpectedly, from the following accident.  It chanced
that Mr. Leaver took upon himself to propose the bachelors who had
first originated the notion of that entertainment, in doing which,
he affected to regret that he was no longer of their body himself,
and pretended grievously to lament his fallen state.  This Mrs.
Leaver’s feelings could not brook, even in jest, and consequently,
exclaiming aloud, ’He loves me not, he loves me not!’ she fell in a
very pitiable state into the arms of Mrs. Starling, and, directly
becoming insensible, was conveyed by that lady and her husband into
another room.  Presently Mr. Leaver came running back to know if
there was a medical gentleman in company, and as there was, (in
what company is there not?) both Mr. Leaver and the medical
gentleman hurried away together.
The medical gentleman was the first who returned, and among his
intimate friends he was observed to laugh and wink, and look as
unmedical as might be; but when Mr. Leaver came back he was very
solemn, and in answer to all inquiries, shook his head, and
remarked that Augusta was far too sensitive to be trifled with - an
opinion which the widow subsequently confirmed.  Finding that she
was in no imminent peril, however, the rest of the party betook
themselves to dancing on the green, and very merry and happy they
were, and a vast quantity of flirtation there was; the last
circumstance being no doubt attributable, partly to the fineness of
the weather, and partly to the locality, which is well known to be
favourable to all harmless recreations.
In the bustle of the scene, Mr. and Mrs. Leaver stole down to the
boat, and disposed themselves under the awning, Mrs. Leaver
reclining her head upon Mr. Leaver’s shoulder, and Mr. Leaver
grasping her hand with great fervour, and looking in her face from
time to time with a melancholy and sympathetic aspect.  The widow
sat apart, feigning to be occupied with a book, but stealthily
observing them from behind her fan; and the two firemen-watermen,
smoking their pipes on the bank hard by, nudged each other, and
grinned in enjoyment of the joke.  Very few of the party missed the
loving couple; and the few who did, heartily congratulated each
other on their disappearance.
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
