


One would suppose that two people who are to pass their whole lives
together, and must necessarily be very often alone with each other,
could find little pleasure in mutual contradiction; and yet what is
more common than a contradictory couple?
The contradictory couple agree in nothing but contradiction.  They
return home from Mrs. Bluebottle’s dinner-party, each in an
opposite corner of the coach, and do not exchange a syllable until
they have been seated for at least twenty minutes by the fireside
at home, when the gentleman, raising his eyes from the stove, all
at once breaks silence:
’What a very extraordinary thing it is,’ says he, ’that you WILL
contradict, Charlotte!’  ’I contradict!’ cries the lady, ’but
that’s just like you.’  ’What’s like me?’ says the gentleman
sharply.  ’Saying that I contradict you,’ replies the lady.  ’Do
you mean to say that you do NOT contradict me?’ retorts the
gentleman; ’do you mean to say that you have not been contradicting
me the whole of this day?’  ’Do you mean to tell me now, that you
have not?  I mean to tell you nothing of the kind,’ replies the
lady quietly; ’when you are wrong, of course I shall contradict
you.’
During this dialogue the gentleman has been taking his brandy-and-
water on one side of the fire, and the lady, with her dressing-case
on the table, has been curling her hair on the other.  She now lets
down her back hair, and proceeds to brush it; preserving at the
same time an air of conscious rectitude and suffering virtue, which
is intended to exasperate the gentleman - and does so.
’I do believe,’ he says, taking the spoon out of his glass, and
tossing it on the table, ’that of all the obstinate, positive,
wrong-headed creatures that were ever born, you are the most so,
Charlotte.’  ’Certainly, certainly, have it your own way, pray.
You see how much I contradict you,’ rejoins the lady.  ’Of course,
you didn’t contradict me at dinner-time - oh no, not you!’ says the
gentleman.  ’Yes, I did,’ says the lady.  ’Oh, you did,’ cries the
gentleman ’you admit that?’  ’If you call that contradiction, I
do,’ the lady answers; ’and I say again, Edward, that when I know
you are wrong, I will contradict you.  I am not your slave.’  ’Not
my slave!’ repeats the gentleman bitterly; ’and you still mean to
say that in the Blackburns’ new house there are not more than
fourteen doors, including the door of the wine-cellar!’  ’I mean to
say,’ retorts the lady, beating time with her hair-brush on the
palm of her hand, ’that in that house there are fourteen doors and
no more.’  ’Well then - ’ cries the gentleman, rising in despair,
and pacing the room with rapid strides.  ’By G-, this is enough to
destroy a man’s intellect, and drive him mad!’
By and by the gentleman comes-to a little, and passing his hand
gloomily across his forehead, reseats himself in his former chair.
There is a long silence, and this time the lady begins.  ’I
appealed to Mr. Jenkins, who sat next to me on the sofa in the
drawing-room during tea - ’  ’Morgan, you mean,’ interrupts the
gentleman.  ’I do not mean anything of the kind,’ answers the lady.
’Now, by all that is aggravating and impossible to bear,’ cries the
gentleman, clenching his hands and looking upwards in agony, ’she
is going to insist upon it that Morgan is Jenkins!’  ’Do you take
me for a perfect fool?’ exclaims the lady; ’do you suppose I don’t
know the one from the other?  Do you suppose I don’t know that the
man in the blue coat was Mr. Jenkins?’  ’Jenkins in a blue coat!’
cries the gentleman with a groan; ’Jenkins in a blue coat! a man
who would suffer death rather than wear anything but brown!’  ’Do
you dare to charge me with telling an untruth?’ demands the lady,
bursting into tears.  ’I charge you, ma’am,’ retorts the gentleman,
starting up, ’with being a monster of contradiction, a monster of
aggravation, a - a - a - Jenkins in a blue coat! - what have I done
that I should be doomed to hear such statements!’
Expressing himself with great scorn and anguish, the gentleman
takes up his candle and stalks off to bed, where feigning to be
fast asleep when the lady comes up-stairs drowned in tears,
murmuring lamentations over her hard fate and indistinct intentions
of consulting her brothers, he undergoes the secret torture of
hearing her exclaim between whiles, ’I know there are only fourteen
doors in the house, I know it was Mr. Jenkins, I know he had a blue
coat on, and I would say it as positively as I do now, if they were
the last words I had to speak!’
If the contradictory couple are blessed with children, they are not
the less contradictory on that account.  Master James and Miss
Charlotte present themselves after dinner, and being in perfect
good humour, and finding their parents in the same amiable state,
augur from these appearances half a glass of wine a-piece and other
extraordinary indulgences.  But unfortunately Master James, growing
talkative upon such prospects, asks his mamma how tall Mrs. Parsons
is, and whether she is not six feet high; to which his mamma
replies, ’Yes, she should think she was, for Mrs. Parsons is a very
tall lady indeed; quite a giantess.’  ’For Heaven’s sake,
Charlotte,’ cries her husband, ’do not tell the child such
preposterous nonsense.  Six feet high!’  ’Well,’ replies the lady,
’surely I may be permitted to have an opinion; my opinion is, that
she is six feet high - at least six feet.’  ’Now you know,
Charlotte,’ retorts the gentleman sternly, ’that that is NOT your
opinion - that you have no such idea - and that you only say this
for the sake of contradiction.’  ’You are exceedingly polite,’ his
wife replies; ’to be wrong about such a paltry question as
anybody’s height, would be no great crime; but I say again, that I
believe Mrs. Parsons to be six feet - more than six feet; nay, I
believe you know her to be full six feet, and only say she is not,
because I say she is.’  This taunt disposes the gentleman to become
violent, but he cheeks himself, and is content to mutter, in a
haughty tone, ’Six feet - ha! ha!  Mrs. Parsons six feet!’ and the
lady answers, ’Yes, six feet.  I am sure I am glad you are amused,
and I’ll say it again - six feet.’  Thus the subject gradually
drops off, and the contradiction begins to be forgotten, when
Master James, with some undefined notion of making himself
agreeable, and putting things to rights again, unfortunately asks
his mamma what the moon’s made of; which gives her occasion to say
that he had better not ask her, for she is always wrong and never
can be right; that he only exposes her to contradiction by asking
any question of her; and that he had better ask his papa, who is
infallible, and never can be wrong.  Papa, smarting under this
attack, gives a terrible pull at the bell, and says, that if the
conversation is to proceed in this way, the children had better be
removed.  Removed they are, after a few tears and many struggles;
and Pa having looked at Ma sideways for a minute or two, with a
baleful eye, draws his pocket-handkerchief over his face, and
composes himself for his after-dinner nap.
The friends of the contradictory couple often deplore their
frequent disputes, though they rather make light of them at the
same time:  observing, that there is no doubt they are very much
attached to each other, and that they never quarrel except about
trifles.  But neither the friends of the contradictory couple, nor
the contradictory couple themselves, reflect, that as the most
stupendous objects in nature are but vast collections of minute
particles, so the slightest and least considered trifles make up
the sum of human happiness or misery.
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
