


The plausible couple have many titles.  They are ’a delightful
couple,’ an ’affectionate couple,’ ’a most agreeable couple, ’a
good-hearted couple,’ and ’the best-natured couple in existence.’
The truth is, that the plausible couple are people of the world;
and either the way of pleasing the world has grown much easier than
it was in the days of the old man and his ass, or the old man was
but a bad hand at it, and knew very little of the trade.
’But is it really possible to please the world!’ says some doubting
reader.  It is indeed.  Nay, it is not only very possible, but very
easy.  The ways are crooked, and sometimes foul and low.  What
then?  A man need but crawl upon his hands and knees, know when to
close his eyes and when his ears, when to stoop and when to stand
upright; and if by the world is meant that atom of it in which he
moves himself, he shall please it, never fear.
Now, it will be readily seen, that if a plausible man or woman have
an easy means of pleasing the world by an adaptation of self to all
its twistings and twinings, a plausible man AND woman, or, in other
words, a plausible couple, playing into each other’s hands, and
acting in concert, have a manifest advantage.  Hence it is that
plausible couples scarcely ever fail of success on a pretty large
scale; and hence it is that if the reader, laying down this
unwieldy volume at the next full stop, will have the goodness to
review his or her circle of acquaintance, and to search
particularly for some man and wife with a large connexion and a
good name, not easily referable to their abilities or their wealth,
he or she (that is, the male or female reader) will certainly find
that gentleman or lady, on a very short reflection, to be a
plausible couple.
The plausible couple are the most ecstatic people living:  the most
sensitive people - to merit - on the face of the earth.  Nothing
clever or virtuous escapes them.  They have microscopic eyes for
such endowments, and can find them anywhere.  The plausible couple
never fawn - oh no!  They don’t even scruple to tell their friends
of their faults.  One is too generous, another too candid; a third
has a tendency to think all people like himself, and to regard
mankind as a company of angels; a fourth is kind-hearted to a
fault.  ’We never flatter, my dear Mrs. Jackson,’ say the plausible
couple; ’we speak our minds.  Neither you nor Mr. Jackson have
faults enough.  It may sound strangely, but it is true.  You have
not faults enough.  You know our way, - we must speak out, and
always do.  Quarrel with us for saying so, if you will; but we
repeat it, - you have not faults enough!’
The plausible couple are no less plausible to each other than to
third parties.  They are always loving and harmonious.  The
plausible gentleman calls his wife ’darling,’ and the plausible
lady addresses him as ’dearest.’  If it be Mr. and Mrs. Bobtail
Widger, Mrs. Widger is ’Lavinia, darling,’ and Mr. Widger is
’Bobtail, dearest.’  Speaking of each other, they observe the same
tender form.  Mrs. Widger relates what ’Bobtail’ said, and Mr.
Widger recounts what ’darling’ thought and did.
If you sit next to the plausible lady at a dinner-table, she takes
the earliest opportunity of expressing her belief that you are
acquainted with the Clickits; she is sure she has heard the
Clickits speak of you - she must not tell you in what terms, or you
will take her for a flatterer.  You admit a knowledge of the
Clickits; the plausible lady immediately launches out in their
praise.  She quite loves the Clickits.  Were there ever such true-
hearted, hospitable, excellent people - such a gentle, interesting
little woman as Mrs. Clickit, or such a frank, unaffected creature
as Mr. Clickit? were there ever two people, in short, so little
spoiled by the world as they are?  ’As who, darling?’ cries Mr.
Widger, from the opposite side of the table.  ’The Clickits,
dearest,’ replies Mrs. Widger.  ’Indeed you are right, darling,’
Mr. Widger rejoins; ’the Clickits are a very high-minded, worthy,
estimable couple.’  Mrs. Widger remarking that Bobtail always grows
quite eloquent upon this subject, Mr. Widger admits that he feels
very strongly whenever such people as the Clickits and some other
friends of his (here he glances at the host and hostess) are
mentioned; for they are an honour to human nature, and do one good
to think of.  ’YOU know the Clickits, Mrs. Jackson?’ he says,
addressing the lady of the house.  ’No, indeed; we have not that
pleasure,’ she replies.  ’You astonish me!’ exclaims Mr. Widger:
’not know the Clickits! why, you are the very people of all others
who ought to be their bosom friends.  You are kindred beings; you
are one and the same thing:- not know the Clickits!  Now WILL you
know the Clickits?  Will you make a point of knowing them?  Will
you meet them in a friendly way at our house one evening, and be
acquainted with them?’  Mrs. Jackson will be quite delighted;
nothing would give her more pleasure.  ’Then, Lavinia, my darling,’
says Mr. Widger, ’mind you don’t lose sight of that; now, pray take
care that Mr. and Mrs. Jackson know the Clickits without loss of
time.  Such people ought not to be strangers to each other.’  Mrs.
Widger books both families as the centre of attraction for her next
party; and Mr. Widger, going on to expatiate upon the virtues of
the Clickits, adds to their other moral qualities, that they keep
one of the neatest phaetons in town, and have two thousand a year.
As the plausible couple never laud the merits of any absent person,
without dexterously contriving that their praises shall reflect
upon somebody who is present, so they never depreciate anything or
anybody, without turning their depreciation to the same account.
Their friend, Mr. Slummery, say they, is unquestionably a clever
painter, and would no doubt be very popular, and sell his pictures
at a very high price, if that cruel Mr. Fithers had not forestalled
him in his department of art, and made it thoroughly and completely
his own; - Fithers, it is to be observed, being present and within
hearing, and Slummery elsewhere.  Is Mrs. Tabblewick really as
beautiful as people say?  Why, there indeed you ask them a very
puzzling question, because there is no doubt that she is a very
charming woman, and they have long known her intimately.  She is no
doubt beautiful, very beautiful; they once thought her the most
beautiful woman ever seen; still if you press them for an honest
answer, they are bound to say that this was before they had ever
seen our lovely friend on the sofa, (the sofa is hard by, and our
lovely friend can’t help hearing the whispers in which this is
said;) since that time, perhaps, they have been hardly fair judges;
Mrs. Tabblewick is no doubt extremely handsome, - very like our
friend, in fact, in the form of the features, - but in point of
expression, and soul, and figure, and air altogether - oh dear!
But while the plausible couple depreciate, they are still careful
to preserve their character for amiability and kind feeling; indeed
the depreciation itself is often made to grow out of their
excessive sympathy and good will.  The plausible lady calls on a
lady who dotes upon her children, and is sitting with a little girl
upon her knee, enraptured by her artless replies, and protesting
that there is nothing she delights in so much as conversing with
these fairies; when the other lady inquires if she has seen young
Mrs. Finching lately, and whether the baby has turned out a finer
one than it promised to be.  ’Oh dear!’ cries the plausible lady,
’you cannot think how often Bobtail and I have talked about poor
Mrs. Finching - she is such a dear soul, and was so anxious that
the baby should be a fine child - and very naturally, because she
was very much here at one time, and there is, you know, a natural
emulation among mothers - that it is impossible to tell you how
much we have felt for her.’  ’Is it weak or plain, or what?’
inquires the other.  ’Weak or plain, my love,’ returns the
plausible lady, ’it’s a fright - a perfect little fright; you never
saw such a miserable creature in all your days.  Positively you
must not let her see one of these beautiful dears again, or you’ll
break her heart, you will indeed. - Heaven bless this child, see
how she is looking in my face! can you conceive anything prettier
than that?  If poor Mrs. Finching could only hope - but that’s
impossible - and the gifts of Providence, you know - What DID I do
with my pocket-handkerchief!’
What prompts the mother, who dotes upon her children, to comment to
her lord that evening on the plausible lady’s engaging qualities
and feeling heart, and what is it that procures Mr. and Mrs.
Bobtail Widger an immediate invitation to dinner?
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
