


Mrs. Merrywinkle’s maiden name was Chopper.  She was the only child
of Mr. and Mrs. Chopper.  Her father died when she was, as the
play-books express it, ’yet an infant;’ and so old Mrs. Chopper,
when her daughter married, made the house of her son-in-law her
home from that time henceforth, and set up her staff of rest with
Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle.
Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle are a couple who coddle themselves; and
the venerable Mrs. Chopper is an aider and abettor in the same.
Mr. Merrywinkle is a rather lean and long-necked gentleman, middle-
aged and middle-sized, and usually troubled with a cold in the
head.  Mrs. Merrywinkle is a delicate-looking lady, with very light
hair, and is exceedingly subject to the same unpleasant disorder.
The venerable Mrs. Chopper - who is strictly entitled to the
appellation, her daughter not being very young, otherwise than by
courtesy, at the time of her marriage, which was some years ago -
is a mysterious old lady who lurks behind a pair of spectacles, and
is afflicted with a chronic disease, respecting which she has taken
a vast deal of medical advice, and referred to a vast number of
medical books, without meeting any definition of symptoms that at
all suits her, or enables her to say, ’That’s my complaint.’
Indeed, the absence of authentic information upon the subject of
this complaint would seem to be Mrs. Chopper’s greatest ill, as in
all other respects she is an uncommonly hale and hearty
gentlewoman.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Chopper wear an extraordinary quantity of
flannel, and have a habit of putting their feet in hot water to an
unnatural extent.  They likewise indulge in chamomile tea and such-
like compounds, and rub themselves on the slightest provocation
with camphorated spirits and other lotions applicable to mumps,
sore-throat, rheumatism, or lumbago.
Mr. Merrywinkle’s leaving home to go to business on a damp or wet
morning is a very elaborate affair.  He puts on wash-leather socks
over his stockings, and India-rubber shoes above his boots, and
wears under his waistcoat a cuirass of hare-skin.  Besides these
precautions, he winds a thick shawl round his throat, and blocks up
his mouth with a large silk handkerchief.  Thus accoutred, and
furnished besides with a great-coat and umbrella, he braves the
dangers of the streets; travelling in severe weather at a gentle
trot, the better to preserve the circulation, and bringing his
mouth to the surface to take breath, but very seldom, and with the
utmost caution.  His office-door opened, he shoots past his clerk
at the same pace, and diving into his own private room, closes the
door, examines the window-fastenings, and gradually unrobes
himself:  hanging his pocket-handkerchief on the fender to air, and
determining to write to the newspapers about the fog, which, he
says, ’has really got to that pitch that it is quite unbearable.’
In this last opinion Mrs. Merrywinkle and her respected mother
fully concur; for though not present, their thoughts and tongues
are occupied with the same subject, which is their constant theme
all day.  If anybody happens to call, Mrs. Merrywinkle opines that
they must assuredly be mad, and her first salutation is, ’Why, what
in the name of goodness can bring you out in such weather?  You
know you MUST catch your death.’  This assurance is corroborated by
Mrs. Chopper, who adds, in further confirmation, a dismal legend
concerning an individual of her acquaintance who, making a call
under precisely parallel circumstances, and being then in the best
health and spirits, expired in forty-eight hours afterwards, of a
complication of inflammatory disorders.  The visitor, rendered not
altogether comfortable perhaps by this and other precedents,
inquires very affectionately after Mr. Merrywinkle, but by so doing
brings about no change of the subject; for Mr. Merrywinkle’s name
is inseparably connected with his complaints, and his complaints
are inseparably connected with Mrs. Merrywinkle’s; and when these
are done with, Mrs. Chopper, who has been biding her time, cuts in
with the chronic disorder - a subject upon which the amiable old
lady never leaves off speaking until she is left alone, and very
often not then.
But Mr. Merrywinkle comes home to dinner.  He is received by Mrs.
Merrywinkle and Mrs. Chopper, who, on his remarking that he thinks
his feet are damp, turn pale as ashes and drag him up-stairs,
imploring him to have them rubbed directly with a dry coarse towel.
Rubbed they are, one by Mrs. Merrywinkle and one by Mrs. Chopper,
until the friction causes Mr. Merrywinkle to make horrible faces,
and look as if he had been smelling very powerful onions; when they
desist, and the patient, provided for his better security with
thick worsted stockings and list slippers, is borne down-stairs to
dinner.  Now, the dinner is always a good one, the appetites of the
diners being delicate, and requiring a little of what Mrs.
Merrywinkle calls ’tittivation;’ the secret of which is understood
to lie in good cookery and tasteful spices, and which process is so
successfully performed in the present instance, that both Mr. and
Mrs. Merrywinkle eat a remarkably good dinner, and even the
afflicted Mrs. Chopper wields her knife and fork with much of the
spirit and elasticity of youth.  But Mr. Merrywinkle, in his desire
to gratify his appetite, is not unmindful of his health, for he has
a bottle of carbonate of soda with which to qualify his porter, and
a little pair of scales in which to weigh it out.  Neither in his
anxiety to take care of his body is he unmindful of the welfare of
his immortal part, as he always prays that for what he is going to
receive he may be made truly thankful; and in order that he may be
as thankful as possible, eats and drinks to the utmost.
Either from eating and drinking so much, or from being the victim
of this constitutional infirmity, among others, Mr. Merrywinkle,
after two or three glasses of wine, falls fast asleep; and he has
scarcely closed his eyes, when Mrs. Merrywinkle and Mrs. Chopper
fall asleep likewise.  It is on awakening at tea-time that their
most alarming symptoms prevail; for then Mr. Merrywinkle feels as
if his temples were tightly bound round with the chain of the
street-door, and Mrs. Merrywinkle as if she had made a hearty
dinner of half-hundredweights, and Mrs. Chopper as if cold water
were running down her back, and oyster-knives with sharp points
were plunging of their own accord into her ribs.  Symptoms like
these are enough to make people peevish, and no wonder that they
remain so until supper-time, doing little more than doze and
complain, unless Mr. Merrywinkle calls out very loudly to a servant
’to keep that draught out,’ or rushes into the passage to flourish
his fist in the countenance of the twopenny-postman, for daring to
give such a knock as he had just performed at the door of a private
gentleman with nerves.
Supper, coming after dinner, should consist of some gentle
provocative; and therefore the tittivating art is again in
requisition, and again - done honour to by Mr. and Mrs.
Merrywinkle, still comforted and abetted by Mrs. Chopper.  After
supper, it is ten to one but the last-named old lady becomes worse,
and is led off to bed with the chronic complaint in full vigour.
Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle, having administered to her a warm
cordial, which is something of the strongest, then repair to their
own room, where Mr. Merrywinkle, with his legs and feet in hot
water, superintends the mulling of some wine which he is to drink
at the very moment he plunges into bed, while Mrs. Merrywinkle, in
garments whose nature is unknown to and unimagined by all but
married men, takes four small pills with a spasmodic look between
each, and finally comes to something hot and fragrant out of
another little saucepan, which serves as her composing-draught for
the night.
There is another kind of couple who coddle themselves, and who do
so at a cheaper rate and on more spare diet, because they are
niggardly and parsimonious; for which reason they are kind enough
to coddle their visitors too.  It is unnecessary to describe them,
for our readers may rest assured of the accuracy of these general
principles:- that all couples who coddle themselves are selfish and
slothful, - that they charge upon every wind that blows, every rain
that falls, and every vapour that hangs in the air, the evils which
arise from their own imprudence or the gloom which is engendered in
their own tempers, - and that all men and women, in couples or
otherwise, who fall into exclusive habits of self-indulgence, and
forget their natural sympathy and close connexion with everybody
and everything in the world around them, not only neglect the first
duty of life, but, by a happy retributive justice, deprive
themselves of its truest and best enjoyment.
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
