


The formal couple are the most prim, cold, immovable, and
unsatisfactory people on the face of the earth.  Their faces,
voices, dress, house, furniture, walk, and manner, are all the
essence of formality, unrelieved by one redeeming touch of
frankness, heartiness, or nature.
Everything with the formal couple resolves itself into a matter of
form.  They don’t call upon you on your account, but their own; not
to see how you are, but to show how they are:  it is not a ceremony
to do honour to you, but to themselves, - not due to your position,
but to theirs.  If one of a friend’s children die, the formal
couple are as sure and punctual in sending to the house as the
undertaker; if a friend’s family be increased, the monthly nurse is
not more attentive than they.  The formal couple, in fact, joyfully
seize all occasions of testifying their good-breeding and precise
observance of the little usages of society; and for you, who are
the means to this end, they care as much as a man does for the
tailor who has enabled him to cut a figure, or a woman for the
milliner who has assisted her to a conquest.
Having an extensive connexion among that kind of people who make
acquaintances and eschew friends, the formal gentleman attends from
time to time a great many funerals, to which he is formally
invited, and to which he formally goes, as returning a call for the
last time.  Here his deportment is of the most faultless
description; he knows the exact pitch of voice it is proper to
assume, the sombre look he ought to wear, the melancholy tread
which should be his gait for the day.  He is perfectly acquainted
with all the dreary courtesies to be observed in a mourning-coach;
knows when to sigh, and when to hide his nose in the white
handkerchief; and looks into the grave and shakes his head when the
ceremony is concluded, with the sad formality of a mute.
’What kind of funeral was it?’ says the formal lady, when he
returns home.  ’Oh!’ replies the formal gentleman, ’there never was
such a gross and disgusting impropriety; there were no feathers.’
’No feathers!’ cries the lady, as if on wings of black feathers
dead people fly to Heaven, and, lacking them, they must of
necessity go elsewhere.  Her husband shakes his head; and further
adds, that they had seed-cake instead of plum-cake, and that it was
all white wine.  ’All white wine!’ exclaims his wife.  ’Nothing but
sherry and madeira,’ says the husband.  ’What! no port?’  ’Not a
drop.’  No port, no plums, and no feathers!  ’You will recollect,
my dear,’ says the formal lady, in a voice of stately reproof,
’that when we first met this poor man who is now dead and gone, and
he took that very strange course of addressing me at dinner without
being previously introduced, I ventured to express my opinion that
the family were quite ignorant of etiquette, and very imperfectly
acquainted with the decencies of life.  You have now had a good
opportunity of judging for yourself, and all I have to say is, that
I trust you will never go to a funeral THERE again.’  ’My dear,’
replies the formal gentleman, ’I never will.’  So the informal
deceased is cut in his grave; and the formal couple, when they tell
the story of the funeral, shake their heads, and wonder what some
people’s feelings ARE made of, and what their notions of propriety
CAN be!
If the formal couple have a family (which they sometimes have),
they are not children, but little, pale, sour, sharp-nosed men and
women; and so exquisitely brought up, that they might be very old
dwarfs for anything that appeareth to the contrary.  Indeed, they
are so acquainted with forms and conventionalities, and conduct
themselves with such strict decorum, that to see the little girl
break a looking-glass in some wild outbreak, or the little boy kick
his parents, would be to any visitor an unspeakable relief and
consolation.
The formal couple are always sticklers for what is rigidly proper,
and have a great readiness in detecting hidden impropriety of
speech or thought, which by less scrupulous people would be wholly
unsuspected.  Thus, if they pay a visit to the theatre, they sit
all night in a perfect agony lest anything improper or immoral
should proceed from the stage; and if anything should happen to be
said which admits of a double construction, they never fail to take
it up directly, and to express by their looks the great outrage
which their feelings have sustained.  Perhaps this is their chief
reason for absenting themselves almost entirely from places of
public amusement.  They go sometimes to the Exhibition of the Royal
Academy; - but that is often more shocking than the stage itself,
and the formal lady thinks that it really is high time Mr. Etty was
prosecuted and made a public example of.
We made one at a christening party not long since, where there were
amongst the guests a formal couple, who suffered the acutest
torture from certain jokes, incidental to such an occasion, cut -
and very likely dried also - by one of the godfathers; a red-faced
elderly gentleman, who, being highly popular with the rest of the
company, had it all his own way, and was in great spirits.  It was
at supper-time that this gentleman came out in full force.  We -
being of a grave and quiet demeanour - had been chosen to escort
the formal lady down-stairs, and, sitting beside her, had a
favourable opportunity of observing her emotions.
We have a shrewd suspicion that, in the very beginning, and in the
first blush - literally the first blush - of the matter, the formal
lady had not felt quite certain whether the being present at such a
ceremony, and encouraging, as it were, the public exhibition of a
baby, was not an act involving some degree of indelicacy and
impropriety; but certain we are that when that baby’s health was
drunk, and allusions were made, by a grey-headed gentleman
proposing it, to the time when he had dandled in his arms the young
Christian’s mother, - certain we are that then the formal lady took
the alarm, and recoiled from the old gentleman as from a hoary
profligate.  Still she bore it; she fanned herself with an
indignant air, but still she bore it.  A comic song was sung,
involving a confession from some imaginary gentleman that he had
kissed a female, and yet the formal lady bore it.  But when at
last, the health of the godfather before-mentioned being drunk, the
godfather rose to return thanks, and in the course of his
observations darkly hinted at babies yet unborn, and even
contemplated the possibility of the subject of that festival having
brothers and sisters, the formal lady could endure no more, but,
bowing slightly round, and sweeping haughtily past the offender,
left the room in tears, under the protection of the formal
gentleman.
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
