


They are grandfather and grandmother to a dozen grown people and
have great-grandchildren besides; their bodies are bent, their hair
is grey, their step tottering and infirm.  Is this the lightsome
pair whose wedding was so merry, and have the young couple indeed
grown old so soon!
It seems but yesterday - and yet what a host of cares and griefs
are crowded into the intervening time which, reckoned by them,
lengthens out into a century!  How many new associations have
wreathed themselves about their hearts since then!  The old time is
gone, and a new time has come for others - not for them.  They are
but the rusting link that feebly joins the two, and is silently
loosening its hold and dropping asunder.
It seems but yesterday - and yet three of their children have sunk
into the grave, and the tree that shades it has grown quite old.
One was an infant - they wept for him; the next a girl, a slight
young thing too delicate for earth - her loss was hard indeed to
bear.  The third, a man.  That was the worst of all, but even that
grief is softened now.
It seems but yesterday - and yet how the gay and laughing faces of
that bright morning have changed and vanished from above ground!
Faint likenesses of some remain about them yet, but they are very
faint and scarcely to be traced.  The rest are only seen in dreams,
and even they are unlike what they were, in eyes so old and dim.
One or two dresses from the bridal wardrobe are yet preserved.
They are of a quaint and antique fashion, and seldom seen except in
pictures.  White has turned yellow, and brighter hues have faded.
Do you wonder, child?  The wrinkled face was once as smooth as
yours, the eyes as bright, the shrivelled skin as fair and
delicate.  It is the work of hands that have been dust these many
years.
Where are the fairy lovers of that happy day whose annual return
comes upon the old man and his wife, like the echo of some village
bell which has long been silent?  Let yonder peevish bachelor,
racked by rheumatic pains, and quarrelling with the world, let him
answer to the question.  He recollects something of a favourite
playmate; her name was Lucy - so they tell him.  He is not sure
whether she was married, or went abroad, or died.  It is a long
while ago, and he don’t remember.
Is nothing as it used to be; does no one feel, or think, or act, as
in days of yore?  Yes.  There is an aged woman who once lived
servant with the old lady’s father, and is sheltered in an alms-
house not far off.  She is still attached to the family, and loves
them all; she nursed the children in her lap, and tended in their
sickness those who are no more.  Her old mistress has still
something of youth in her eyes; the young ladies are like what she
was but not quite so handsome, nor are the gentlemen as stately as
Mr. Harvey used to be.  She has seen a great deal of trouble; her
husband and her son died long ago; but she has got over that, and
is happy now - quite happy.
If ever her attachment to her old protectors were disturbed by
fresher cares and hopes, it has long since resumed its former
current.  It has filled the void in the poor creature’s heart, and
replaced the love of kindred.  Death has not left her alone, and
this, with a roof above her head, and a warm hearth to sit by,
makes her cheerful and contented.  Does she remember the marriage
of great-grandmamma?  Ay, that she does, as well - as if it was
only yesterday.  You wouldn’t think it to look at her now, and
perhaps she ought not to say so of herself, but she was as smart a
young girl then as you’d wish to see.  She recollects she took a
friend of hers up-stairs to see Miss Emma dressed for church; her
name was - ah! she forgets the name, but she remembers that she was
a very pretty girl, and that she married not long afterwards, and
lived - it has quite passed out of her mind where she lived, but
she knows she had a bad husband who used her ill, and that she died
in Lambeth work-house.  Dear, dear, in Lambeth workhouse!
And the old couple - have they no comfort or enjoyment of
existence?  See them among their grandchildren and great-
grandchildren; how garrulous they are, how they compare one with
another, and insist on likenesses which no one else can see; how
gently the old lady lectures the girls on points of breeding and
decorum, and points the moral by anecdotes of herself in her young
days - how the old gentleman chuckles over boyish feats and roguish
tricks, and tells long stories of a ’barring-out’ achieved at the
school he went to:  which was very wrong, he tells the boys, and
never to be imitated of course, but which he cannot help letting
them know was very pleasant too - especially when he kissed the
master’s niece.  This last, however, is a point on which the old
lady is very tender, for she considers it a shocking and indelicate
thing to talk about, and always says so whenever it is mentioned,
never failing to observe that he ought to be very penitent for
having been so sinful.  So the old gentleman gets no further, and
what the schoolmaster’s niece said afterwards (which he is always
going to tell) is lost to posterity.
The old gentleman is eighty years old, to-day - ’Eighty years old,
Crofts, and never had a headache,’ he tells the barber who shaves
him (the barber being a young fellow, and very subject to that
complaint).  ’That’s a great age, Crofts,’ says the old gentleman.
’I don’t think it’s sich a wery great age, Sir,’ replied the
barber.  ’Crofts,’ rejoins the old gentleman, ’you’re talking
nonsense to me.  Eighty not a great age?’  ’It’s a wery great age,
Sir, for a gentleman to be as healthy and active as you are,’
returns the barber; ’but my grandfather, Sir, he was ninety-four.’
’You don’t mean that, Crofts?’ says the old gentleman.  ’I do
indeed, Sir,’ retorts the barber, ’and as wiggerous as Julius
Caesar, my grandfather was.’  The old gentleman muses a little
time, and then says, ’What did he die of, Crofts?’  ’He died
accidentally, Sir,’ returns the barber; ’he didn’t mean to do it.
He always would go a running about the streets - walking never
satisfied HIS spirit - and he run against a post and died of a hurt
in his chest.’  The old gentleman says no more until the shaving is
concluded, and then he gives Crofts half-a-crown to drink his
health.  He is a little doubtful of the barber’s veracity
afterwards, and telling the anecdote to the old lady, affects to
make very light of it - though to be sure (he adds) there was old
Parr, and in some parts of England, ninety-five or so is a common
age, quite a common age.
This morning the old couple are cheerful but serious, recalling old
times as well as they can remember them, and dwelling upon many
passages in their past lives which the day brings to mind.  The old
lady reads aloud, in a tremulous voice, out of a great Bible, and
the old gentleman with his hand to his ear, listens with profound
respect.  When the book is closed, they sit silent for a short
space, and afterwards resume their conversation, with a reference
perhaps to their dead children, as a subject not unsuited to that
they have just left.  By degrees they are led to consider which of
those who survive are the most like those dearly-remembered
objects, and so they fall into a less solemn strain, and become
cheerful again.
How many people in all, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and one
or two intimate friends of the family, dine together to-day at the
eldest son’s to congratulate the old couple, and wish them many
happy returns, is a calculation beyond our powers; but this we
know, that the old couple no sooner present themselves, very
sprucely and carefully attired, than there is a violent shouting
and rushing forward of the younger branches with all manner of
presents, such as pocket-books, pencil-cases, pen-wipers, watch-
papers, pin-cushions, sleeve-buckles, worked-slippers, watch-
guards, and even a nutmeg-grater:  the latter article being
presented by a very chubby and very little boy, who exhibits it in
great triumph as an extraordinary variety.  The old couple’s
emotion at these tokens of remembrance occasions quite a pathetic
scene, of which the chief ingredients are a vast quantity of
kissing and hugging, and repeated wipings of small eyes and noses
with small square pocket-handkerchiefs, which don’t come at all
easily out of small pockets.  Even the peevish bachelor is moved,
and he says, as he presents the old gentleman with a queer sort of
antique ring from his own finger, that he’ll be de’ed if he doesn’t
think he looks younger than he did ten years ago.
But the great time is after dinner, when the dessert and wine are
on the table, which is pushed back to make plenty of room, and they
are all gathered in a large circle round the fire, for it is then -
the glasses being filled, and everybody ready to drink the toast -
that two great-grandchildren rush out at a given signal, and
presently return, dragging in old Jane Adams leaning upon her
crutched stick, and trembling with age and pleasure.  Who so
popular as poor old Jane, nurse and story-teller in ordinary to two
generations; and who so happy as she, striving to bend her stiff
limbs into a curtsey, while tears of pleasure steal down her
withered cheeks!
The old couple sit side by side, and the old time seems like
yesterday indeed.  Looking back upon the path they have travelled,
its dust and ashes disappear; the flowers that withered long ago,
show brightly again upon its borders, and they grow young once more
in the youth of those about them.
Continue...

This complete text of the Sketches of Young Couples book by Charles Dickens is in the public domain.


At Amazon.com, you can order the book:
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers).


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Sketches of Young couples, with an Urgent Remonstrance to the Gentleman of England (Being Bachelors or Widowers)By Charles DickensAt Amazon
