




THEY TRIED TO ASSURE THE WORLD AN ERA
OF UNDISTURBED PEACE BY SUPPRESSING
ALL NEW IDEAS. THEY MADE THE
POLICE-SPY THE HIGHEST FUNCTIONARY
IN THE STATE AND SOON THE PRISONS
OF ALL COUNTRIES WERE FILLED WITH
THOSE WHO CLAIMED THAT PEOPLE
HAVE THE RIGHT TO GOVERN THEMSELVES
AS THEY SEE FIT
To undo the damage done by the great Napoleonic flood
was almost impossible. Age-old fences had been washed away.
The palaces of two score dynasties had been damaged to such
an extent that they had to be condemned as uninhabitable.
Other royal residences had been greatly enlarged at the expense
of less fortunate neighbours. Strange odds and ends
of revolutionary doctrine had been left behind by the receding
waters and could not be dislodged without danger to the entire
community. But the political engineers of the Congress did
the best they could and this is what they accomplished.
France had disturbed the peace of the world for so many
years that people had come to fear that country almost
instinctively. The Bourbons, through the mouth of Talleyrand,
had promised to be good, but the Hundred Days had taught
Europe what to expect should Napoleon manage to escape for
a second time. The Dutch Republic, therefore, was changed
into a Kingdom, and Belgium (which had not joined the Dutch
struggle for independence in the sixteenth century and since
then had been part of the Habsburg domains, firs t under Spanish
rule and thereafter under Austrian rule) was made part
of this new kingdom of the Netherlands. Nobody wanted this
union either in the Protestant North or in the Catholic South,
but no questions were asked. It seemed good for the peace
of Europe and that was the main consideration.
Poland had hoped for great things because a Pole, Prince
Adam Czartoryski, was one of the most intimate friends of
Tsar Alexander and had been his constant advisor during the
war and at the Congress of Vienna. But Poland was made a
semi-independent part of Russia with Alexander as her king.
This solution pleased no one and caused much bitter feeling
and three revolutions.
Denmark, which had remained a faithful ally of Napoleon
until the end, was severely punished. Seven years before, an
English fleet had sailed down the Kattegat and without a
declaration of war or any warning had bombarded Copenhagen
and had taken away the Danish fleet, lest it be of value to
Napoleon. The Congress of Vienna went one step further.
It took Norway (which since the union of Calmar of the year
1397 had been united with Denmark) away from Denmark
and gave it to Charles XIV of Sweden as a reward for his betrayal
of Napoleon, who had set him up in the king business.
This Swedish king, curiously enough, was a former French general
by the name of Bernadotte, who had come to Sweden as one
of Napolean’s{sic} adjutants, and had been invited to the throne of
that good country when the last of the rulers of the house of
Hollstein-Gottorp had died without leaving either son or
daughter. From 1815 until 1844 he ruled his adopted country
(the language of which he never learned) width great ability. He
was a clever man and enjoyed the respect of both his Swedish
and his Norwegian subjects, but he did not succeed in joining
two countries which nature and history had put asunder. The
dual Scandinavian state was never a success and in 1905,
Norway, in a most peaceful and orderly manner, set up as an
independent kingdom and the Swedes bade her “good speed"
and very wisely let her go her own way.
The Italians, who since the days of the Renaissance had
been at the mercy of a long series of invaders, also had put
great hopes in General Bonaparte. The Emperor Napoleon,
however, had grievously disappointed them. Instead of the
United Italy which the people wanted, they had been divided
into a number of little principalities, duchies, republics and
the Papal State, which (next to Naples) was the worst governed
and most miserable region of the entire peninsula. The
Congress of Vienna abolished a few of the Napoleonic republics
and in their place resurrected several old principalities
which were given to deserving members, both male and female,
of the Habsburg family.
The poor Spaniards, who had started the great nationalistic
revolt against Napoleon, and who had sacrificed the best blood
of the country for their king, were punished severely when the
Congress allowed His Majesty to return to his domains. This
vicious creature, known as Ferdinand VII, had spent the last
four years of his life as a prisoner of Napoleon. He had improved
his days by knitting garments for the statues of his
favourite patron saints. He celebrated his return by re-introducing
the Inquisition and the torture-chamber, both of which
had been abolished by the Revolution. He was a disgusting
person, despised as much by his subjects as by his four wives,
but the Holy Alliance maintained him upon his legitimate
throne and all efforts of the decent Spaniards to get rid of this
curse and make Spain a constitutional kingdom ended in
bloodshed and executions.
Portugal had been without a king since the year 1807 when
the royal family had fled to the colonies in Brazil. The country
had been used as a base of supply for the armies of
Wellington during the Peninsula war, which lasted from 1808
until 1814. After 1815 Portugal continued to be a sort of
British province until the house of Braganza returned to the
throne, leaving one of its members behind in Rio de Janeiro
as Emperor of Brazil, the only American Empire which lasted
for more than a few years, and which came to an end in 1889
when the country became a republic.
In the east, nothing was done to improve the terrible conditions
of both the Slavs and the Greeks who were still subjects
of the Sultan. In the year 1804 Black George, a Servian
swineherd, (the founder of the Karageorgevich dynasty) had
started a revolt against the Turks, but he had been defeated
by his enemies and had been murdered by one of his supposed
friends, the rival Servian leader, called Milosh Obrenovich,
(who became the founder of the Obrenovich dynasty) and the
Turks had continued to be the undisputed masters of the
Balkans.
The Greeks, who since the loss of their independence, two
thousand years before, had been subjects of the Macedonians,
the Romans, the Venetians and the Turks, had hoped that their
countryman, Capo d’Istria, a native of Corfu and together
with Czartoryski, the most intimate personal friends of
Alexander, would do something for them. But the Congress
of Vienna was not interested in Greeks, but was very much
interested in keeping all “legitimate” monarchs, Christian,
Moslem and otherwise, upon their respective thrones. Therefore
nothing was done.
The last, but perhaps the greatest blunder of the Congress
was the treatment of Germany. The Reformation and the
Thirty Years War had not only destroyed the prosperity of the
country, but had turned it into a hopeless political rubbish
heap, consisting of a couple of kingdoms, a few grand-duchies,
a large number of duchies and hundreds of margravates, principalities,
baronies, electorates, free cities and free villages,
ruled by the strangest assortment of potentates that was ever
seen off the comic opera stage. Frederick the Great had
changed this when he created a strong Prussia, but this state
had not survived him by many years.
Napoleon had blue-penciled the demand for independence
of most of these little countries, and only fifty-two out of a
total of more than three hundred had survived the year 1806.
During the years of the great struggle for independence, many
a young soldier had dreamed of a new Fatherland that should
be strong and united. But there can be no union without a
strong leadership, and who was to be this leader?
There were five kingdoms in the German speaking lands.
The rulers of two of these, Austria and Prussia, were kings by
the Grace of God. The rulers of three others, Bavaria, Saxony
and Wurtemberg, were kings by the Grace of Napoleon, and
as they had been the faithful henchmen of the Emperor, their
patriotic credit with the other Germans was therefore not very
good.
The Congress had established a new German Confederation,
a league of thirty-eight sovereign states, under the chairmanship
of the King of Austria, who was now known as the
Emperor of Austria. It was the sort of make-shift arrangement
which satisfied no one. It is true that a German Diet,
which met in the old coronation city of Frankfort. had been
created to discuss matters of “common policy and importance."
But in this Diet, thirty-eight delegates represented thirty-eight
different interests and as no decision could be taken without a
unanimous vote (a parliamentary rule which had in previous
centuries ruined the mighty kingdom of Poland), the famous
German Confederation became very soon the laughing stock
of Europe and the politics of the old Empire began to resemble
those of our Central American neighbours in the forties and
the fifties of the last century.
It was terribly humiliating to the people who had sacrificed
everything for a national ideal. But the Congress was not
interested in the private feelings of “subjects,” and the debate
was closed.
Did anybody object? Most assuredly. As soon as the first
feeling of hatred against Napoleon had quieted down–as soon
as the enthusiasm of the great war had subsided–as soon as
the people came to a full realisation of the crime that had been
committed in the name of “peace and stability” they began to
murmur. They even made threats of open revolt. But what
could they do? They were powerless. They were at the mercy
of the most pitiless and efficient police system the world had
ever seen.
The members of the Congress of Vienna honestly and sincerely
believed that “the Revolutionary Principle had led to
the criminal usurpation of the throne by the former emperor
Napoleon.” They felt that they were called upon to eradicate
the adherents of the so-called “French ideas” just as Philip II
had only followed the voice of his conscience when he burned
Protestants or hanged Moors. In the beginning of the sixteenth
century a man who did not believe in the divine right
of the Pope to rule his subjects as he saw fit was a “heretic"
and it was the duty of all loyal citizens to kill him. In the
beginning of the nineteenth century, on the continent of Europe,
a man who did not believe in the divine right of his king to
rule him as he or his Prime Minister saw fit, was a “heretic,” and
it was the duty of all loyal citizens to denounce him to the nearest
policeman and see that he got punished.
But the rulers of the year 1815 had learned efficiency in
the school of Napoleon and they performed their task much
better than it had been done in the year 1517. The period
between the year 1815 and the year 1860 was the great era of
the political spy. Spies were everywhere. They lived in palaces
and they were to be found in the lowest gin-shops. They
peeped through the key-holes of the ministerial cabinet and
they listened to the conversations of the people who were taking
the air on the benches of the Municipal Park. They guarded
the frontier so that no one might leave without a duly viseed
passport and they inspected all packages, that no books with
dangerous “French ideas” should enter the realm of their
Royal masters. They sat among the students in the lecture
hall and woe to the Professor who uttered a word against the
existing order of things. They followed the little boys and
girls on their way to church lest they play hookey.
In many of these tasks they were assisted by the clergy.
The church had suffered greatly during the days of the
revolution. The church property had been confiscated. Several
priests had been killed and the generation that had learned its
cathechism from Voltaire and Rousseau and the other French
philosophers had danced around the Altar of Reason when
the Committee of Public Safety had abolished the worship of
God in October of the year 1793. The priests had followed the
“emigres” into their long exile. Now they returned in the
wake of the allied armies and they set to work with a vengeance.
Even the Jesuits came back in 1814 and resumed their
former labours of educating the young. Their order had been
a little too successful in its fight against the enemies of the
church. It had established “provinces” in every part of the
world, to teach the natives the blessings of Christianity, but
soon it had developed into a regular trading company which
was for ever interfering with the civil authorities. During the
reign of the Marquis de Pombal, the great reforming minister
of Portugal, they had been driven out of the Portuguese lands
and in the year 1773 at the request of most of the Catholic
powers of Europe, the order had been suppressed by Pope
Clement XIV. Now they were back on the job, and preached
the principles of “obedience” and “love for the legitimate
dynasty” to children whose parents had hired shopwindows that
they might laugh at Marie Antoinette driving to the scaffold
which was to end her misery.
But in the Protestant countries like Prussia, things were
not a whit better. The great patriotic leaders of the year 1812,
the poets and the writers who had preached a holy war upon the
usurper, were now branded as dangerous “demagogues.” Their
houses were searched. Their letters were read. They were
obliged to report to the police at regular intervals and give an
account of themselves. The Prussian drill master was let loose
in all his fury upon the younger generation. When a party of
students celebrated the tercentenary of the Reformation with
noisy but harmless festivities on the old Wartburg, the Prussian
bureaucrats had visions of an imminent revolution. When
a theological student, more honest than intelligent, killed a
Russian government spy who was operating in Germany, the
universities were placed under police-supervision and professors
were jailed or dismissed without any form of trial.
Russia, of course, was even more absurd in these anti-
revolutionary activities. Alexander had recovered from his attack
of piety. He was gradually drifting toward melancholia. He
well knew his own limited abilities and understood how at
Vienna he had been the victim both of Metternich and the
Krudener woman. More and more he turned his back upon the
west and became a truly Russian ruler whose interests lay in
Constantinople, the old holy city that had been the first teacher
of the Slavs. The older he grew, the harder he worked and the
less he was able to accomplish. And while he sat in his study,
his ministers turned the whole of Russia into a land of military
barracks.
It is not a pretty picture. Perhaps I might have shortened
this description of the Great Reaction. But it is just as well
that you should have a thorough knowledge of this era. It was
not the first time that an attempt had been made to set the
clock of history back. The result was the usual one.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
