




AT THE END OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
EUROPE HEARD STRANGE REPORTS OF
SOMETHING WHICH HAD HAPPENED IN
THE WILDERNESS; OF THE NORTH AMERICAN
CONTINENT. THE DESCENDANTS
OF THE MEN WHO HAD PUNISHED KING
CHARLES FOR HIS INSISTENCE UPON HIS
“DIVINE RIGHTS” ADDED A NEW CHAPTER
TO THE OLD STORY OF THE STRUGGLE
FOR SELF-GOVERNMENT
FOR the sake of convenience, we ought to go back a
few centuries and repeat the early history of the great
struggle for colonial possessions.
As soon as a number of European nations had been
created upon the new basis of national or dynastic interests,
that is to say, during and immediately after the Thirty
Years War, their rulers, backed up by the capital of
their merchants and the ships of their trading companies,
continued the fight for more territory in Asia, Africa and America.
The Spaniards and the Portuguese had been exploring the
Indian Sea and the Pacific Ocean for more than a century ere
Holland and England appeared upon the stage. This proved
an advantage to the latter. The first rough work had already
been done. What is more, the earliest navigators had so often
made themselves unpopular with the Asiatic and American and
African natives that both the English and the Dutch were
welcomed as friends and deliverers. We cannot claim any
superior virtues for either of these two races. But they were
merchants before everything else. They never allowed religious
considerations to interfere with their practical common sense.
During their first relations with weaker races, all European
nations have behaved with shocking brutality. The English and
the Dutch, however, knew better where to draw the dine. Provided
they got their spices and their gold and silver and their taxes,
they were willing to let the native live as it best pleased him.
It was not very difficult for them therefore to establish
themselves in the richest parts of the world. But as soon as
this had been accomplished, they began to fight each other for
still further possessions. Strangely enough, the colonial wars
were never settled in the colonies themselves. They were decided
three thousand miles away by the navies of the contending
countries. It is one of the most interesting principles of ancient
and modern warfare (one of the few reliable laws of
history) that “the nation which commands the sea is also the
nation which commands the land.” So far this law has never
failed to work, but the modern airplane may have changed it.
In the eighteenth century, however, there were no flying machines
and it was the British navy which gained for England
her vast American and Indian and African colonies.
The series of naval wars between England and Holland in
the seventeenth century does not interest us here. It ended as
all such encounters between hopelessly ill-matched powers will
end. But the warfare between England and France (her other
rival) is of greater importance to us, for while the superior
British fleet in the end defeated the French navy, a great deal
of the preliminary fighting was done on our own American
continent. In this vast country, both France and England
claimed everything which had been discovered and a lot more
which the eye of no white man had ever seen. In 1497 Cabot
had landed in the northern part of America and twenty-seven
years later, Giovanni Verrazano had visited these coasts. Cabot
had flown the English flag. Verrazano had sailed under the
French flag. Hence both England and France proclaimed
themselves the owners of the entire continent.
During the seventeenth century, some ten small English
colonies had been founded between Maine and the Carolinas.
They were usually a haven of refuge for some particular sect
of English dissenters, such as the Puritans, who in the year
1620 went to New England, or the Quakers, who settled in
Pennsylvania in 1681. They were small frontier communities,
nestling close to the shores of the ocean, where people had
gathered to make a new home and begin life among happier
surroundings, far away from royal supervision and interference.
The French colonies, on the other hand, always remained
a possession of the crown. No Huguenots or Protestants were
allowed in these colonies for fear that they might contaminate
the Indians with their dangerous Protestant doctrines and
would perhaps interfere with the missionary work of the Jesuit
fathers. The English colonies, therefore, had been founded
upon a much healthier basis than their French neighbours and
rivals. They were an expression of the commercial energy of
the English middle classes, while the French settlements were
inhabited by people who had crossed the ocean as servants of the
king and who expected to return to Paris at the first possible chance.
Politically, however, the position of the English colonies
was far from satisfactory. The French had discovered the
mouth of the Saint Lawrence in the sixteenth century. From
the region of the Great Lakes they had worked their way southward,
had descended the Mississippi and had built several fortifications
along the Gulf of Mexico. After a century of exploration,
a line of sixty French forts cut off the English settlements
along the Atlantic seaboard from the interior.
The English land grants, made to the different colonial
companies had given them “all land from sea to sea.” This
sounded well on paper, but in practice, British territory
ended where the line of French fortifications began. To break
through this barrier was possible but it took both men and
money and caused a series of horrible border wars in which
both sides murdered their white neighbours, with the help of the
Indian tribes.
As long as the Stuarts had ruled England there had been
no danger of war with France. The Stuarts needed the Bourbons
in their attempt to establish an autocratic form of government
and to break the power of Parliament. But in 1689 the
last of the Stuarts had disappeared from British soil and Dutch
William, the great enemy of Louis XIV succeeded him. From
that time on, until the Treaty of Paris of 1763, France and
England fought for the possession of India and North America.
During these wars, as I have said before, the English navies
invariably beat the French. Cut off from her colonies, France
lost most of her possessions, and when peace was declared, the
entire North American continent had fallen into British hands
and the great work of exploration of Cartier, Champlain, La
Salle, Marquette and a score of others was lost to France.
Only a very small part of this vast domain was inhabited.
From Massachusetts in the north, where the Pilgrims (a sect
of Puritans who were very intolerant and who therefore had
found no happiness either in Anglican England or Calvinist
Holland) had landed in the year 1620, to the Carolinas and
Virginia (the tobacco-raising provinces which had been founded
entirely for the sake of profit), stretched a thin line of
sparsely populated territory. But the men who lived in this
new land of fresh air and high skies were very different from
their brethren of the mother country. In the wilderness they
had learned independence and self-reliance. They were the
sons of hardy and energetic ancestors. Lazy and timourous
people did not cross the ocean in those days. The American
colonists hated the restraint and the lack of breathing space
which had made their lives in the old country so very unhappy.
They meant to be their own masters. This the ruling classes
of England did not seem to understand. The government annoyed
the colonists and the colonists, who hated to be bothered
in this way, began to annoy the British government.
Bad feeling caused more bad feeling. It is not necessary
to repeat here in detail what actually happened and what might
have been avoided if the British king had been more intelligent
than George III or less given to drowsiness and indifference
than his minister, Lord North. The British colonists,
when they understood that peaceful arguments would not
settle the difficulties, took to arms. From being loyal subjects,
they turned rebels, who exposed themselves to the punishment
of death when they were captured by the German
soldiers, whom George hired to do his fighting after the pleasant
custom of that day, when Teutonic princes sold whole
regiments to the highest bidder.
The war between England and her American colonies
lasted seven years. During most of that time, the final success
of the rebels seemed very doubtful. A great number of
the people, especially in the cities, had remained loyal to their
king. They were in favour of a compromise, and would have
been willing to sue for peace. But the great figure of Washington
stood guard over the cause of the colonists.
Ably assisted by a handful of brave men, he used his steadfast
but badly equipped armies to weaken the forces of the king.
Time and again when defeat seemed unavoidable, his strategy
turned the tide of battle. Often his men were ill-fed. During
the winter they lacked shoes and coats and were forced to live
in unhealthy dug-outs. But their trust in their great leader
was absolute and they stuck it out until the final hour of victory.
But more interesting than the campaigns of Washington
or the diplomatic triumphs of Benjamin Franklin who was
in Europe getting money from the French government and
the Amsterdam bankers, was an event which occurred early in
the revolution. The representatives of the different colonies
had gathered in Philadelphia to discuss matters of common
importance. It was the first year of the Revolution. Most
of the big towns of the sea coast were still in the hands of the
British. Reinforcements from England were arriving by the
ship load. Only men who were deeply convinced of the righteousness
of their cause would have found the courage to take
the momentous decision of the months of June and July of
the year 1776.
In June, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia proposed a motion
to the Continental Congress that “these united colonies
are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states, that
they are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and
that all political connection between them and the state of
Great Britain is and ought to be, totally dissolved.”
The motion was seconded by John Adams of Massachusetts.
It was carried on July the second and on July fourth,
it was followed by an official Declaration of Independence,
which was the work of Thomas Jefferson, a serious and exceedingly
capable student of both politics and government and
destined to be one of the most famous of our American presidents.
When news of this event reached Europe, and was followed
by the final victory of the colonists and the adoption of
the famous Constitution of the year 1787 (the first of all written
constitutions) it caused great interest. The dynastic system
of the highly centralised states which had been developed
after the great religious wars of the seventeenth century had
reached the height of its power. Everywhere the palace of
the king had grown to enormous proportions, while the cities
of the royal realm were being surrounded by rapidly growing
acres of slums. The inhabitants of those slums were showing
signs of restlessness. They were quite helpless. But the
higher classes, the nobles and the professional men, they too
were beginning to have certain doubts about the economic and
political conditions under which they lived. The success of
the American colonists showed them that many things were
possible which had been held impossible only a short time
before.
According to the poet, the shot which opened the battle
of Lexington was “heard around the world.” That was a bit
of an exaggeration. The Chinese and the Japanese and the
Russians (not to speak of the Australians, who had just been
re-discovered by Captain Cook, whom they killed for his
trouble,) never heard of it at all. But it carried across the
Atlantic Ocean. It landed in the powder house of European
discontent and in France it caused an explosion which rocked
the entire continent from Petrograd to Madrid and buried the
representatives of the old statecraft and the old diplomacy
under several tons of democratic bricks.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
