




THE EXTRAORDINARY RISE OF A LITTLE
STATE IN A DREARY PART OF NORTHERN
GERMANY, CALLED PRUSSIA
THE history of Prussia is the history of a frontier district.
In the ninth century, Charlemagne had transferred the old
centre of civilisation from the Mediterranean to the wild regions
of northwestern Europe. His Frankish soldiers had pushed
the frontier of Europe further and further towards the east.
They had conquered many lands from the heathenish Slavs and
Lithuanians who were living in the plain between the Baltic
Sea and the Carpathian Mountains, and the Franks administered
those outlying districts just as the United States used
to administer her territories before they achieved the dignity
of statehood.
The frontier state of Brandenburg had been originally
founded by Charlemagne to defend his eastern possessions
against raids of the wild Saxon tribes. The Wends, a Slavic
tribe which inhabited that region, were subjugated during the
tenth century and their market-place, by the name of Brennabor,
became the centre of and gave its name to the new province
of Brandenburg.
During the eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, a succession of noble families exercised the functions of
imperial governor in this frontier state. Finally in the
fifteenth century, the House of Hohenzollern made its appear-
ance, and as Electors of Brandenburg, commenced to change a
sandy and forlorn frontier territory into one of the most efficient
empires of the modern world.
These Hohenzollerns, who have just been removed from
the historical stage by the combined forces of Europe and
America, came originally from southern Germany. They were
of very humble origin. In the twelfth century a certain Frederick
of Hohenzollern had made a lucky marriage and had been
appointed keeper of the castle of Nuremberg. His descendants
had used every chance and every opportunity to improve their
power and after several centuries of watchful grabbing, they
had been appointed to the dignity of Elector, the name given to
those sovereign princes who were supposed to elect the Emperors
of the old German Empire. During the Reformation,
they had taken the side of the Protestants and the early
seventeenth century found them among the most powerful of the
north German princes.
During the Thirty Years War, both Protestants and
Catholics had plundered Brandenburg and Prussia with equal
zeal. But under Frederick William, the Great Elector, the
damage was quickly repaired and by a wise and careful use of
all the economic and intellectual forces of the country, a state
was founded in which there was practically no waste.
Modern Prussia, a state in which the individual and his
wishes and aspirations have been entirely absorbed by the
interests of the community as a whole this Prussia dates back
to the father of Frederick the Great. Frederick William I was
a hard working, parsimonious Prussian sergeant, with a great
love for bar-room stories and strong Dutch tobacco, an intense
dislike of all frills and feathers, (especially if they were of
French origin,) and possessed of but one idea. That idea was
Duty. Severe with himself, he tolerated no weakness in his
subjects, whether they be generals or common soldiers. The
relation between himself and his son Frederick was never cordial,
to say the least. The boorish manners of the father offended
the finer spirit of the son. The son’s love for French
manners, literature, philosophy and music was rejected by the
father as a manifestation of sissy-ness. There followed a terrible
outbreak between these two strange temperaments. Frederick
tried to escape to England. He was caught and court-
martialed and forced to witness the decapitation of his best
friend who had tried to help him. Thereupon as part of his
punishment, the young prince was sent to a little fortress
somewhere in the provinces to be taught the details of his future
business of being a king. It proved a blessing in disguise.
When Frederick came to the throne in 1740, he knew how his
country was managed from the birth certificate of a pauper’s
son to the minutest detail of a complicated annual Budget.
As an author, especially in his book called the “Anti-
Macchiavelli,” Frederick had expressed his contempt for the
political creed of the ancient Florentine historian, who had
advised his princely pupils to lie and cheat whenever it was
necessary to do so for the benefit of their country. The ideal
ruler in Frederick’s volume was the first servant of his people,
the enlightened despot after the example of Louis XIV. In
practice, however, Frederick, while working for his people
twenty hours a day, tolerated no one to be near him as a
counsellor. His ministers were superior clerks. Prussia was his
private possession, to be treated according to his own wishes.
And nothing was allowed to interfere with the interest of the
state.
In the year 1740 the Emperor Charles VI, of Austria,
died. He had tried to make the position of his only daughter,
Maria Theresa, secure through a solemn treaty, written black
on white, upon a large piece of parchment. But no sooner had
the old emperor been deposited in the ancestral crypt of the
Habsburg family, than the armies of Frederick were marching
towards the Austrian frontier to occupy that part of Silesia for
which (together with almost everything else in central Europe)
Prussia clamored, on account of some ancient and very
doubtful rights of claim. In a number of wars, Frederick
conquered all of Silesia, and although he was often very near
defeat, he maintained himself in his newly acquired territories
against all Austrian counter-attacks.
Europe took due notice of this sudden appearance of a
very powerful new state. In the eighteenth century, the Germans
were a people who had been ruined by the great religious
wars and who were not held in high esteem by any one. Frederick,
by an effort as sudden and quite as terrific as that of
Peter of Russia, changed this attitude of contempt into one
of fear. The internal affairs of Prussia were arranged so
skillfully that the subjects had less reason for complaint than
elsewhere. The treasury showed an annual surplus instead of a
deficit. Torture was abolished. The judiciary system was
improved. Good roads and good schools and good universities,
together with a scrupulously honest administration, made the
people feel that whatever services were demanded of them,
they (to speak the vernacular) got their money’s worth.
After having been for several centuries the battle field of
the French and the Austrians and the Swedes and the Danes
and the Poles, Germany, encouraged by the example of Prussia,
began to regain self-confidence. And this was the work of
the little old man, with his hook-nose and his old uniforms covered
with snuff, who said very funny but very unpleasant things
about his neighbours, and who played the scandalous game of
eighteenth century diplomacy without any regard for the truth,
provided he could gain something by his lies. This in spite of
his book, “Anti-Macchiavelli.” In the year 1786 the end
came. His friends were all gone. Children he had never had.
He died alone, tended by a single servant and his faithful
dogs, whom he loved better than human beings because, as he
said, they were never ungrateful and remained true to their
friends.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
