




THE STORY OF THE MYSTERIOUS MOSCOVITE
EMPIRE WHICH SUDDENLY BURST UPON
THE GRAND POLITICAL STAGE OF EUROPE
IN the year 1492, as you know, Columbus discovered America.
Early in the year, a Tyrolese by the name of Schnups,
travelling as the head of a scientific expedition for the
Archbishop of Tyrol, and provided with the best letters
of introduction and excellent credit tried to reach the mythical
town of Moscow. He did not succeed. When he reached the
frontiers of this vast Moscovite state which was vaguely supposed
to exist in the extreme Eastern part of Europe, he was
firmly turned back. No foreigners were wanted. And
Schnups went to visit the heathen Turk in Constantinople, in
order that he might have something to report to his clerical
master when he came back from his explorations.
Sixty-one years later, Richard Chancellor, trying to discover
the North-eastern passage to the Indies, and blown by
an ill wind into the White Sea, reached the mouth of the Dwina
and found the Moscovite village of Kholmogory, a few hours
from the spot where in 1584 the town of Archangel was founded.
This time the foreign visitors were requested to come
to Moscow and show themselves to the Grand Duke. They
went and returned to England with the first commercial treaty
ever concluded between Russia and the western world. Other
nations soon followed and something became known of this
mysterious land.
Geographically, Russia is a vast plain. The Ural mountains
are low and form no barrier against invaders. The
rivers are broad but often shallow. It was an ideal territory for
nomads.
While the Roman Empire was founded, grew in power and
disappeared again, Slavic tribes, who had long since left their
homes in Central Asia, wandered aimlessly through the forests
and plains of the region between the Dniester and Dnieper
rivers. The Greeks had sometimes met these Slavs and a few
travellers of the third and fourth centuries mention them.
Otherwise they were as little known as were the Nevada Indians
in the year 1800.
Unfortunately for the peace of these primitive peoples, a
very convenient trade-route ran through their country. This
was the main road from northern Europe to Constantinople.
It followed the coast of the Baltic until the Neva was reached.
Then it crossed Lake Ladoga and went southward along the
Volkhov river. Then through Lake Ilmen and up the small
Lovat river. Then there was a short portage until the Dnieper
was reached. Then down the Dnieper into the Black Sea.
The Norsemen knew of this road at a very early date. In
the ninth century they began to settle in northern Russia, just
as other Norsemen were laying the foundation for independent
states in Germany and France. But in the year 862, three
Norsemen, brothers, crossed the Baltic and founded three small
dynasties. Of the three brothers, only one, Rurik, lived for a
number of years. He took possession of the territory of his
brothers, and twenty years after the arrival of this first
Norseman, a Slavic state had been established with Kiev as its
capital.
From Kiev to the Black Sea is a short distance. Soon the
existence of an organised Slavic State became known in
Constantinople. This meant a new field for the zealous
missionaries of the Christian faith. Byzantine monks followed the
Dnieper on their way northward and soon reached the heart of
Russia. They found the people worshipping strange gods
who were supposed to dwell in woods and rivers and in mountain
caves. They taught them the story of Jesus. There was
no competition from the side of Roman missionaries. These
good men were too busy educating the heathen Teutons to
bother about the distant Slavs. Hence Russia received its religion
and its alphabet and its first ideas of art and architecture
from the Byzantine monks and as the Byzantine empire (a
relic of the eastern Roman empire) had become very oriental
and had lost many of its European traits, the Russians suffered
in consequence.
Politically speaking these new states of the great Russian
plains did not fare well. It was the Norse habit to divide
every inheritance equally among all the sons. No sooner had
a small state been founded but it was broken up among eight
or nine heirs who in turn left their territory to an ever increasing
number of descendants. It was inevitable that these small
competing states should quarrel among themselves. Anarchy
was the order of the day. And when the red glow of the eastern
horizon told the people of the threatened invasion of a savage
Asiatic tribe, the little states were too weak and too divided
to render any sort of defence against this terrible enemy.
It was in the year 1224 that the first great Tartar invasion
took place and that the hordes of Jenghiz Khan, the conqueror
of China, Bokhara, Tashkent and Turkestan made their first
appearance in the west. The Slavic armies were beaten near
the Kalka river and Russia was at the mercy of the Mongolians.
Just as suddenly as they had come they disappeared.
Thirteen years later, in 1237, however, they returned. In less
than five years they conquered every part of the vast Russian
plains. Until the year 1380 when Dmitry Donskoi, Grand
Duke of Moscow, beat them on the plains of Kulikovo, the
Tartars were the masters of the Russian people.
All in all, it took the Russians two centuries to deliver
themselves from this yoke. For a yoke it was and a most
offensive and objectionable one. It turned the Slavic peasants
into miserable slaves. No Russian could hope to survive un-
less he was willing to creep before a dirty little yellow man who
sat in a tent somewhere in the heart of the steppes of southern
Russia and spat at him. It deprived the mass of the people of
all feeling of honour and independence. It made hunger and
misery and maltreatment and personal abuse the normal state
of human existence. Until at last the average Russian, were he
peasant or nobleman, went about his business like a neglected
dog who has been beaten so often that his spirit has been broken
and he dare not wag his tail without permission.
There was no escape. The horsemen of the Tartar Khan
were fast and merciless. The endless prairie did not give a
man a chance to cross into the safe territory of his neighbour.
He must keep quiet and bear what his yellow master decided
to inflict upon him or run the risk of death. Of course, Europe
might have interfered. But Europe was engaged upon business
of its own, fighting the quarrels between the Pope and
the emperor or suppressing this or that or the other heresy.
And so Europe left the Slav to his fate, and forced him to
work out his own salvation.
The final saviour of Russia was one of the many small states,
founded by the early Norse rulers. It was situated in the heart
of the Russian plain. Its capital, Moscow, was upon a steep
hill on the banks of the Moskwa river. This little principality,
by dint of pleasing the Tartar (when it was necessary to
please), and opposing him (when it was safe to do so), had,
during the middle of the fourteenth century made itself the
leader of a new national life. It must be remembered that the
Tartars were wholly deficient in constructive political ability.
They could only destroy. Their chief aim in conquering new
territories was to obtain revenue. To get this revenue in the
form of taxes, it was necessary to allow certain remnants of
the old political organization to continue. Hence there were
many little towns, surviving by the grace of the Great Khan,
that they might act as tax-gatherers and rob their neighbours
for the benefit of the Tartar treasury.
The state of Moscow, growing fat at the expense of the
surrounding territory, finally became strong enough to risk
open rebellion against its masters, the Tartars. It was successful
and its fame as the leader in the cause of Russian independence
made Moscow the natural centre for all those who
still believed in a better future for the Slavic race. In the year
1458, Constantinople was taken by the Turks. Ten years
later, under the rule of Ivan III, Moscow informed the
western world that the Slavic state laid claim to the worldly
and spiritual inheritance of the lost Byzantine Empire, and
such traditions of the Roman empire as had survived in
Constantinople. A generation afterwards, under Ivan the Terrible,
the grand dukes of Moscow were strong enough to adopt the
title of Caesar, or Tsar, and to demand recognition by the western
powers of Europe.
In the year 1598, with Feodor the First, the old Muscovite
dynasty, descendants of the original Norseman Rurik, came to
an end. For the next seven years, a Tartar half-breed, by the
name of Boris Godunow, reigned as Tsar. It was during
this period that the future destiny of the large masses of the
Russian people was decided. This Empire was rich in land
but very poor in money. There was no trade and there were
no factories. Its few cities were dirty villages. It was composed
of a strong central government and a vast number of
illiterate peasants. This government, a mixture of Slavic,
Norse, Byzantine and Tartar influences, recognised nothing
beyond the interest of the state. To defend this state, it
needed an army. To gather the taxes, which were necessary
to pay the soldiers, it needed civil servants. To pay these many
officials it needed land. In the vast wilderness on the east
and west there was a sufficient supply of this commodity. But
land without a few labourers to till the fields and tend the
cattle, has no value. Therefore the old nomadic peasants
were robbed of one privilege after the other, until finally, during
the first year of the sixteenth century, they were formally
made a part of the soil upon which they lived. The Russian
peasants ceased to be free men. They became serfs or slaves
and they remained serfs until the year 1861, when their fate
had become so terrible that they were beginning to die out.
In the seventeenth century, this new state with its growing
territory which was spreading quickly into Siberia, had become
a force with which the rest of Europe was obliged to
reckon. In 1618, after the death of Boris Godunow, the
Russian nobles had elected one of their own number to be
Tsar. He was Michael, the son of Feodor, of the Moscow family
of Romanow who lived in a little house just outside the
Kremlin.
In the year 1672 his great-grandson, Peter, the son of another
Feodor, was born. When the child was ten years old,
his step-sister Sophia took possession of the Russian throne.
The little boy was allowed to spend his days in the suburbs of
the national capital, where the foreigners lived. Surrounded
by Scotch barkeepers, Dutch traders, Swiss apothecaries, Italian
barbers, French dancing teachers and German school-masters,
the young prince obtained a first but rather extraordinary
impression of that far-away and mysterious Europe where
things were done differently.
When he was seventeen years old, he suddenly pushed
Sister Sophia from the throne. Peter himself became the ruler
of Russia. He was not contented with being the Tsar of a
semi-barbarous and half-Asiatic people. He must be the sovereign
head of a civilised nation. To change Russia overnight
from a Byzantine-Tartar state into a European empire was no
small undertaking. It needed strong hands and a capable
head. Peter possessed both. In the year 1698, the great
operation of grafting Modern Europe upon Ancient Russia was
performed. The patient did not die. But he never got over
the shock, as the events of the last five years have shown very
plainly.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
