




THE AGE OF THE GREAT RELIGIOUS
CONTROVERSIES
THE sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were the age of
religious controversy.
If you will notice you will find that almost everybody
around you is forever “talking economics” and discussing
wages and hours of labor and strikes in their relation to the
life of the community, for that is the main topic of interest
of our own time.
The poor little children of the year 1600 or 1650 fared
worse. They never heard anything but “religion.” Their
heads were filled with “predestination,” “transubstantition,"
“free will,” and a hundred other queer words, expressing
obscure points of “the true faith,” whether Catholic or
Protestant. According to the desire of their parents they were
baptised Catholics or Lutherans or Calvinists or Zwinglians
or Anabaptists. They learned their theology from the Augsburg
catechism, composed by Luther, or from the “institutes
of Christianity,” written by Calvin, or they mumbled the
Thirty-Nine Articles of Faith which were printed in the English
Book of Common Prayer, and they were told that these
alone represented the “True Faith.”
They heard of the wholesale theft of church property
perpetrated by King Henry VIII, the much-married monarch of
England, who made himself the supreme head of the English
church, and assumed the old papal rights of appointing bishops
and priests. They had a nightmare whenever some one
mentioned the Holy Inquisition, with its dungeons and its
many torture chambers, and they were treated to equally horrible
stories of how a mob of outraged Dutch Protestants had
got hold of a dozen defenceless old priests and hanged them
for the sheer pleasure of killing those who professed
a different faith. It was unfortunate that the two
contending parties were so equally matched. Otherwise
the struggle would have come to a quick solution.
Now it dragged on for eight generations, and
it grew so complicated that I can only tell you the most
important details, and must ask you to get the
rest from one of the many histories of the Reformation.
The great reform movement of the Protestants
had been followed by a thoroughgoing reform
within the bosom of the Church. Those popes who
had been merely amateur humanists and dealers in Roman
and Greek antiquities, disappeared from the scene and
their place was taken by serious men who spent twenty hours
a day administering those holy duties which had been placed
in their hands.
The long and rather disgraceful happiness of the monasteries
came to an end. Monks and nuns were forced to be up
at sunrise, to study the Church Fathers, to tend the sick and
console the dying. The Holy Inquisition watched day and
night that no dangerous doctrines should be spread by way of
the printing press. Here it is customary to mention poor
Galileo, who was locked up because he had been a little too
indiscreet in explaining the heavens with his funny little
telescope and had muttered certain opinions about the behaviour
of the planets which were entirely opposed to the official views
of the church. But in all fairness to the Pope, the clergy and
the Inquisition, it ought to be stated that the Protestants were
quite as much the enemies of science and medicine as the Catholics
and with equal manifestations of ignorance and intolerance
regarded the men who investigated things for themselves
as the most dangerous enemies of mankind.
And Calvin, the great French reformer and the tyrant
(both political and spiritual) of Geneva, not only assisted the
French authorities when they tried to hang Michael Servetus
(the Spanish theologian and physician who had become famous
as the assistant of Vesalius, the first great anatomist), but
when Servetus had managed to escape from his French jail and
had fled to Geneva, Calvin threw this brilliant man into prison
and after a prolonged trial, allowed him to be burned at the
stake on account of his heresies, totally indifferent to his fame
as a scientist.
And so it went. We have few reliable statistics upon the
subject, but on the whole, the Protestants tired of this game
long before the Catholics, and the greater part of honest men
and women who were burned and hanged and decapitated on
account of their religious beliefs fell as victims of the very
energetic but also very drastic church of Rome.
For tolerance (and please remember this when you grow
older), is of very recent origin and even the people of our own
so-called “modern world” are apt to be tolerant only upon such
matters as do not interest them very much. They are tolerant
towards a native of Africa, and do not care whether he becomes
a Buddhist or a Mohammedan, because neither Buddhism nor
Mohammedanism means anything to them. But when they
hear that their neighbour who was a Republican and believed
in a high protective tariff, has joined the Socialist party and
now wants to repeal all tariff laws, their tolerance ceases and
they use almost the same words as those employed by a kindly
Catholic (or Protestant) of the seventeenth century, who was
informed that his best friend whom he had always respected
and loved had fallen a victim to the terrible heresies of the
Protestant (or Catholic) church.
“Heresy” until a very short time ago was regarded as a
disease. Nowadays when we see a man neglecting the personal
cleanliness of his body and his home and exposing himself
and his children to the dangers of typhoid fever or another
preventable disease, we send for the board-of-health and the
health officer calls upon the police to aid him in removing this
person who is a danger to the safety of the entire community.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, a heretic, a man
or a woman who openly doubted the fundamental principles
upon which his Protestant or Catholic religion had been
founded, was considered a more terrible menace than a typhoid
carrier. Typhoid fever might (very likely would) destroy the
body. But heresy, according to them, would positively destroy
the immortal soul. It was therefore the duty of all good and
logical citizens to warn the police against the enemies of the
established order of things and those who failed to do so were
as culpable as a modern man who does not telephone to the
nearest doctor when he discovers that his fellow-tenants are
suffering from cholera or small-pox.
In the years to come you will hear a great deal about
preventive medicine. Preventive medicine simply means that our
doctors do not wait until their patients are sick, then step
forward and cure them. On the contrary, they study the patient
and the conditions under which he lives when he (the patient)
is perfectly well and they remove every possible cause of illness
by cleaning up rubbish, by teaching him what to eat and what
to avoid, and by giving him a few simple ideas of personal
hygiene. They go even further than that, and these good
doctors enter the schools and teach the children how to use
tooth-brushes and how to avoid catching colds.
The sixteenth century which regarded (as I have tried to
show you) bodily illness as much less important than sickness
which threatened the soul, organised a system of spiritual
preventive medicine. As soon as a child was old enough to spell
his first words, he was educated in the true (and the “only
true”) principles of the Faith. Indirectly this proved to be a
good thing for the general progress of the people of Europe.
The Protestant lands were soon dotted with schools. They
used a great deal of very valuable time to explain the Catechism,
but they gave instruction in other things besides theology.
They encouraged reading and they were responsible
for the great prosperity of the printing trade.
But the Catholics did not lag behind. They too devoted
much time and thought to education. The Church, in this matter,
found an invaluable friend and ally in the newly-founded
order of the Society of Jesus. The founder of this remarkable
organisation was a Spanish soldier who after a life of unholy
adventures had been converted and thereupon felt himself
bound to serve the church just as many former sinners, who
have been shown the errors of their way by the Salvation Army,
devote the remaining years of their lives to the task of aiding
and consoling those who are less fortunate.
The name of this Spaniard was Ignatius de Loyola. He
was born in the year before the discovery of America. He had
been wounded and lamed for life and while he was in the hospital
he had seen a vision of the Holy Virgin and her Son, who
bade him give up the wickedness of his former life. He decided
to go to the Holy Land and finish the task of the Crusades.
But a visit to Jerusalem had shown him the impossibility
of the task and he returned west to help in the warfare
upon the heresies of the Lutherans.
In the year 1534 he was studying in Paris at the Sorbonne.
Together with seven other students he founded a fraternity.
The eight men promised each other that they would lead holy
lives, that they would not strive after riches but after righteousness,
and would devote themselves, body and soul, to the service
of the Church. A few years later this small fraternity
had grown into a regular organisation and was recognised by
Pope Paul III as the Society of Jesus.
Loyola had been a military man. He believed in discipline,
and absolute obedience to the orders of the superior dignitaries
became one of the main causes for the enormous success of the
Jesuits. They specialised in education. They gave their
teachers a most thorough-going education before they allowed
them to talk to a single pupil. They lived with their students
and they entered into their games. They watched them with
tender care. And as a result they raised a new generation of
faithful Catholics who took their religious duties as seriously
as the people of the early Middle Ages.
The shrewd Jesuits, however, did not waste all their efforts
upon the education of the poor. They entered the palaces
of the mighty and became the private tutors of future emperors
and kings. And what this meant you will see for yourself
when I tell you about the Thirty Years War. But before
this terrible and final outbreak of religious fanaticism, a great
many other things had happened.
Charles V was dead. Germany and Austria had been left
to his brother Ferdinand. All his other possessions, Spain and
the Netherlands and the Indies and America had gone to his
son Philip. Philip was the son of Charles and a Portuguese
princess who had been first cousin to her own husband. The
children that are born of such a union are apt to be rather
queer. The son of Philip, the unfortunate Don Carlos, (murdered
afterwards with his own father’s consent,) was crazy.
Philip was not quite crazy, but his zeal for the Church bordered
closely upon religious insanity. He believed that Heaven had
appointed him as one of the saviours of mankind. Therefore,
whosoever was obstinate and refused to share his Majesty’s
views, proclaimed himself an enemy of the human race and
must be exterminated lest his example corrupt the souls of
his pious neighbours.
Spain, of course, was a very rich country. All the gold and
silver of the new world flowed into the Castilian and Aragonian
treasuries. But Spain suffered from a curious eco-
nomic disease. Her peasants were hard working men and
even harder working women. But the better classes maintained
a supreme contempt for any form of labour, outside of
employment in the army or navy or the civil service. As for
the Moors, who had been very industrious artisans, they had
been driven out of the country long before. As a result, Spain,
the treasure chest of the world, remained a poor country because
all her money had to be sent abroad in exchange for the
wheat and the other necessities of life which the Spaniards
neglected to raise for themselves.
Philip, ruler of the most powerful nation of the
sixteenth century, depended for his revenue upon the taxes
which were gathered in the busy commercial bee-hive of
the Netherlands. But these Flemings and Dutchmen were
devoted followers of the doctrines of Luther and Calvin
and they had cleansed their churches of all images and holy
paintings and they had informed the Pope that they no
longer regarded him as their shepherd but intended to follow
the dictates of their consciences and the commands of their
newly translated Bible.
This placed the king in a very difficult position. He could
not possibly tolerate the heresies of his Dutch subjects, but
he needed their money. If he allowed them to be Protestants
and took no measures to save their souls he was deficient in
his duty toward God. If he sent the Inquisition to the Netherlands
and burned his subjects at the stake, he would lose the
greater part of his income.
Being a man of uncertain will-power he hesitated a long
time. He tried kindness and sternness and promises and
threats. The Hollanders remained obstinate, and continued to
sing psalms and listen to the sermons of their Lutheran and
Calvinist preachers. Philip in his despair sent his “man of
iron,” the Duke of Alba, to bring these hardened sinners to
terms. Alba began by decapitating those leaders who had not
wisely left the country before his arrival. In the year 1572
(the same year that the French Protestant leaders were all
killed during the terrible night of Saint Bartholomew), he
attacked a number of Dutch cities and massacred the inhabitants
as an example for the others. The next year he laid siege
to the town of Leyden, the manufacturing center of Holland.
Meanwhile, the seven small provinces of the northern
Netherlands had formed a defensive union, the so-called union
of Utrecht, and had recognised William of Orange, a German
prince who had been the private secretary of the Emperor
Charles V, as the leader of their army and as commander of
their freebooting sailors, who were known as the Beggars of
the Sea. William, to save Leyden, cut the dykes, created a
shallow inland sea, and delivered the town with the help of a
strangely equipped navy consisting of scows and flat-bottomed
barges which were rowed and pushed and pulled through the
mud until they reached the city walls.
It was the first time that an army of the invincible Spanish
king had suffered such a humiliating defeat. It surprised the
world just as the Japanese victory of Mukden, in the Russian-
Japanese war, surprised our own generation. The Protestant
powers took fresh courage and Philip devised new means for
the purpose of conquering his rebellious subjects. He hired
a poor half-witted fanatic to go and murder William of
Orange. But the sight of their dead leader did not bring the
Seven Provinces to their knees. On the contrary it made them
furiously angry. In the year 1581, the Estates General (the
meeting of the representatives of the Seven Provinces) came
together at the Hague and most solemnly abjured their
“wicked king Philip” and themselves assumed the burden
of sovereignty which thus far had been invested in their
“King by the Grace of God.”
This is a very important event in the history of the great
struggle for political liberty. It was a step which reached
much further than the uprising of the nobles which ended with
the signing of the Magna Carta. These good burghers said
“Between a king and his subjects there is a silent understanding
that both sides shall perform certain services and shall
recognise certain definite duties. If either party fails to live
up to this contract, the other has the right to consider it ter-
minated.” The American subjects of King George III in
the year 1776 came to a similar conclusion. But they had three
thousand miles of ocean between themselves and their ruler
and the Estates General took their decision (which meant a
slow death in case of defeat) within hearing of the Spanish
guns and although in constant fear of an avenging Spanish
fleet.
The stories about a mysterious Spanish fleet that was to conquer
both Holland and England, when Protestant Queen
Elizabeth had succeeded Catholic “Bloody Mary” was an old
one. For years the sailors of the waterfront had talked
about it. In the eighties of the sixteenth century, the
rumour took a definite shape. According to pilots who had
been in Lisbon, all the Spanish and Portuguese wharves were
building ships. And in the southern Netherlands (in Belgium)
the Duke of Parma was collecting a large expeditionary
force to be carried from Ostend to London and Amsterdam
as soon as the fleet should arrive.
In the year 1586 the Great Armada set sail for the north.
But the harbours of the Flemish coast were blockaded by a
Dutch fleet and the Channel was guarded by the English, and
the Spaniards, accustomed to the quieter seas of the south, did
not know how to navigate in this squally and bleak northern
climate. What happened to the Armada once it was attacked
by ships and by storms I need not tell you. A few ships, by
sailing around Ireland, escaped to tell the terrible story of
defeat. The others perished and lie at the bottom of the North
Sea.
Turn about is fair play. The British nod the Dutch Prot-
estants now carried the war into the territory of the enemy.
Before the end of the century, Houtman, with the help of a
booklet written by Linschoten (a Hollander who had been in
the Portuguese service), had at last discovered the route to
the Indies. As a result the great Dutch East India Company
was founded and a systematic war upon the Portuguese and
Spanish colonies in Asia and Africa was begun in all seriousness.
It was during this early era of colonial conquest that a
curious lawsuit was fought out in the Dutch courts. Early in
the seventeenth century a Dutch Captain by the name of van
Heemskerk, a man who had made himself famous as the head
of an expedition which had tried to discover the North Eastern
Passage to the Indies and who had spent a winter on the frozen
shores of the island of Nova Zembla, had captured a Portuguese
ship in the straits of Malacca. You will remember that
the Pope had divided the world into two equal shares, one of
which had been given to the Spaniards and the other to the
Portuguese. The Portuguese quite naturally regarded the
water which surrounded their Indian islands as part of their
own property and since, for the moment, they were not at war
with the United Seven Netherlands, they claimed that the
captain of a private Dutch trading company had no right to
enter their private domain and steal their ships. And they
brought suit. The directors of the Dutch East India Company
hired a bright young lawyer, by the name of De Groot or
Grotius, to defend their case. He made the astonishing plea
that the ocean is free to all comers. Once outside the distance
which a cannon ball fired from the land can reach, the sea is
or (according to Grotius) ought to be, a free and open highway
to all the ships of all nations. It was the first time that this
startling doctrine had been publicly pronounced in a court
of law. It was opposed by all the other seafaring people. To
counteract the effect of Grotius’ famous plea for the “Mare
Liberum,” or “Open Sea,” John Selden, the Englishman,
wrote his famous treatise upon the “Mare Clausum” or “Closed
Sea” which treated of the natural right of a sovereign to regard
the seas which surrounded his country as belonging to his territory.
I mention this here because the question had not yet
been decided and during the last war caused all sorts of
difficulties and complications.
To return to the warfare between Spaniard and Hollander
and Englishman, before twenty years were over the most
valuable colonies of the Indies and the Cape of Good Hope and
Ceylon and those along the coast of China and even Japan were
in Protestant hands. In 1621 a West Indian Company was
founded which conquered Brazil and in North America built
a fortress called Nieuw Amsterdam at the mouth of the river
which Henry Hudson had discovered in the year 1609
These new colonies enriched both England and the Dutch
Republic to such an extent that they could hire foreign soldiers
to do their fighting on land while they devoted themselves
to commerce and trade. To them the Protestant revolt meant
independence and prosperity. But in many other parts of
Europe it meant a succession of horrors compared to which the
last war was a mild excursion of kindly Sunday-school boys.
The Thirty Years War which broke out in the year 1618
and which ended with the famous treaty of Westphalia in 1648
was the perfectly natural result of a century of ever increasing
religious hatred. It was, as I have said, a terrible war. Everybody
fought everybody else and the struggle ended only when
all parties had been thoroughly exhausted and could fight no
longer.
In less than a generation it turned many parts of central
Europe into a wilderness, where the hungry peasants fought
for the carcass of a dead horse with the even hungrier wolf.
Five-sixths of all the German towns and villages were destroyed.
The Palatinate, in western Germany, was plundered
twenty-eight times. And a population of eighteen million
people was reduced to four million.
The hostilities began almost as soon as Ferdinand II of
the House of Habsburg had been elected Emperor. He was
the product of a most careful Jesuit training and was a most
obedient and devout son of the Church. The vow which he had
made as a young man, that he would eradicate all sects and
all heresies from his domains, Ferdinand kept to the best of
his ability. Two days before his election, his chief opponent,
Frederick, the Protestant Elector of the Palatinate and a
son-in-law of James I of England, had been made King of
Bohemia, in direct violation of Ferdinand’s wishes.
At once the Habsburg armies marched into Bohemia. The
young king looked in vain for assistance against this formidable
enemy. The Dutch Republic was willing to help, but,
engaged in a desperate war of its own with the Spanish branch
of the Habsburgs, it could do little. The Stuarts in England
were more interested in strengthening their own absolute power
at home than spending money and men upon a forlorn adventure
in far away Bohemia. After a struggle of a few months,
the Elector of the Palatinate was driven away and his domains
were given to the Catholic house of Bavaria. This was the beginning
of the great war.
Then the Habsburg armies, under Tilly and Wallenstein,
fought their way through the Protestant part of Germany
until they had reached the shores of the Baltic. A Catholic
neighbour meant serious danger to the Protestant king of
Denmark. Christian IV tried to defend himself by attacking
his enemies before they had become too strong for him. The
Danish armies marched into Germany but were defeated.
Wallenstein followed up his victory with such energy and violence
that Denmark was forced to sue for peace. Only one
town of the Baltic then remained in the hands of the Protestants.
That was Stralsund.
There, in the early summer of the year 1630, landed King
Gustavus Adolphus of the house of Vasa, king of Sweden,
and famous as the man who had defended his country against
the Russians. A Protestant prince of unlimited ambition,
desirous of making Sweden the centre of a great Northern
Empire, Gustavus Adolphus was welcomed by the Protestant
princes of Europe as the saviour of the Lutheran cause. He
defeated Tilly, who had just successfully butchered the Protestant
inhabitants of Magdeburg. Then his troops began their
great march through the heart of Germany in an attempt to
reach the Habsburg possessions in Italy. Threatened in the
rear by the Catholics, Gustavus suddenly veered around and
defeated the main Habsburg army in the battle of Lutzen.
Unfortunately the Swedish king was killed when he strayed
away from his troops. But the Habsburg power had been
broken.
Ferdinand, who was a suspicious sort of person, at once
began to distrust his own servants. Wallenstein, his commander-
in-chief, was murdered at his instigation. When the
Catholic Bourbons, who ruled France and hated their Habsburg
rivals, heard of this, they joined the Protestant Swedes.
The armies of Louis XIII invaded the eastern part of Germany,
and Turenne and Conde added their fame to that of
Baner and Weimar, the Swedish generals, by murdering, pillaging
and burning Habsburg property. This brought great
fame and riches to the Swedes and caused the Danes to become
envious. The Protestant Danes thereupon declared war upon
the Protestant Swedes who were the allies of the Catholic
French, whose political leader, the Cardinal de Richelieu, had
just deprived the Huguenots (or French Protestants) of those
rights of public worship which the Edict of Nantes of the year
1598 had guaranteed them.
The war, after the habit of such encounters, did not decide
anything, when it came to an end with the treaty of Westphalia
in 1648. The Catholic powers remained Catholic and
the Protestant powers stayed faithful to the doctrines of
Luther and Calvin and Zwingli. The Swiss and Dutch Protestants
were recognised as independent republics. France
kept the cities of Metz and Toul and Verdun and a part of the
Alsace. The Holy Roman Empire continued to exist as a sort
of scare-crow state, without men, without money, without hope
and without courage.
The only good the Thirty Years War accomplished was a
negative one. It discouraged both Catholics and Protestants
from ever trying it again. Henceforth they left each other in
peace. This however did not mean that religious feeling and
theological hatred had been removed from this earth. On the
contrary. The quarrels between Catholic and Protestant
came to an end, but the disputes between the different Protestant
sects continued as bitterly as ever before. In Holland
a difference of opinion as to the true nature of predestination
(a very obscure point of theology, but exceedingly important
the eyes of your great-grandfather) caused a quarrel which
ended with the decapitation of John of Oldenbarneveldt, the
Dutch statesman, who had been responsible for the success of
the Republic during the first twenty years of its independence,
and who was the great organising genius of her Indian trading
company. In England, the feud led to civil war.
But before I tell you of this outbreak which led to the first
execution by process-of-law of a European king, I ought to
say something about the previous history of England. In this
book I am trying to give you only those events of the past
which can throw a light upon the conditions of the present
world. If I do not mention certain countries, the cause is not
to be found in any secret dislike on my part. I wish that I
could tell you what happened to Norway and Switzerland and
Serbia and China. But these lands exercised no great influence
upon the development of Europe in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. I therefore pass them by with a polite
and very respectful bow. England however is in a different
position. What the people of that small island have done during
the last five hundred years has shaped the course of history
in every corner of the world. Without a proper knowledge of
the background of English history, you cannot understand
what you read in the newspapers. And it is therefore necessary
that you know how England happened to develop a parliamentary
form of government while the rest of the European continent
was still ruled by absolute monarchs.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
