




THE LOVE OF NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE,
HOWEVER WAS TOO STRONG TO BE
DESTROYED IN THIS WAY. THE SOUTH
AMERICANS WERE THE FIRST TO REBEL
AGAINST THE REACTIONARY MEASURES
OF THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA, GREECE
AND BELGIUM AND SPAIN AND A LARGE
NUMBER OF OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE
EUROPEAN CONTINENT FOLLOWED SUIT
AND THE NINETEENTH CENTURY WAS
FILLED WITH THE RUMOUR OF MANY
WARS OF INDEPENDENCE
IT will serve no good purpose to say “if only the Congress
of Vienna had done such and such a thing instead of taking
such and such a course, the history of Europe in the nineteenth
century would have been different.” The Congress of Vienna
was a gathering of men who had just passed through a great
revolution and through twenty years of terrible and almost
continuous warfare. They came together for the purpose of
giving Europe that “peace and stability” which they thought
that the people needed and wanted. They were what we call
reactionaries. They sincerely believed in the inability of the
mass of the people to rule themselves. They re-arranged the
map of Europe in such a way as seemed to promise the greatest
possibility of a lasting success. They failed, but not through
any premeditated wickedness on their part. They were, for the
greater part, men of the old school who remembered the happier
days of their quiet youth and ardently wished a return of that
blessed period. They failed to recognise the strong hold which
many of the revolutionary principles had gained upon the people
of the European continent. That was a misfortune but
hardly a sin. But one of the things which the French Revolution
had taught not only Europe but America as well, was the
right of people to their own “nationality.”
Napoleon, who respected nothing and nobody, was utterly
ruthless in his dealing with national and patriotic aspirations.
But the early revolutionary generals had proclaimed the new
doctrine that “nationality was not a matter of political
frontiers or round skulls and broad noses, but a matter of the
heart and soul.” While they were teaching the French children
the greatness of the French nation, they encouraged Spaniards
and Hollanders and Italians to do the same thing. Soon
these people, who all shared Rousseau’s belief in the superior
virtues of Original Man, began to dig into their past and found,
buried beneath the ruins of the feudal system, the bones of the
mighty races of which they supposed themselves the feeble
descendants.
The first half of the nineteenth century was the era of the
great historical discoveries. Everywhere historians were busy
publishing mediaeval charters and early mediaeval chronicles
and in every country the result was a new pride in the old
fatherland. A great deal of this sentiment was based upon the
wrong interpretation of historical facts. But in practical politics,
it does not matter what is true, but everything depends
upon what the people believe to be true. And in most countries
both the kings and their subjects firmly believed in the glory
and fame of their ancestors.
The Congress of Vienna was not inclined to be sentimental.
Their Excellencies divided the map of Europe according to the
best interests of half a dozen dynasties and put “national
aspirations” upon the Index, or list of forbidden books, together
with all other dangerous “French doctrines.”
But history is no respecter of Congresses. For some reason
or other (it may be an historical law, which thus far has
escaped the attention of the scholars) “nations” seemed to be
necessary for the orderly development of human society and
the attempt to stem this tide was quite as unsuccessful as the
Metternichian effort to prevent people from thinking.
Curiously enough the first trouble began in a very distant
part of the world, in South America. The Spanish colonies
of that continent had been enjoying a period of relative independence
during the many years of the great Napoleonic wars.
They had even remained faithful to their king when he was
taken prisoner by the French Emperor and they had refused
to recognise Joseph Bonaparte, who had in the year 1808 been
made King of Spain by order of his brother.
Indeed, the only part of America to get very much upset
by the Revolution was the island of Haiti, the Espagnola of
Columbus’ first trip. Here in the year 1791 the French Convention,
in a sudden outburst of love and human brotherhood,
had bestowed upon their black brethren all the privileges hitherto
enjoyed by their white masters. Just as suddenly they had
repented of this step, but the attempt to undo the original
promise led to many years of terrible warfare between General
Leclerc, the brother-in-law of Napoleon, and Toussaint l’Ouverture,
the negro chieftain. In the year 1801, Toussaint was
asked to visit Leclerc and discuss terms of peace. He received
the solemn promise that he would not be molested. He trusted
his white adversaries, was put on board a ship and shortly
afterwards died in a French prison. But the negroes gained
their independence all the same and founded a Republic.
Incidentally they were of great help to the first great South
American patriot in his efforts to deliver his native country
from the Spanish yoke.
Simon Bolivar, a native of Caracas in Venezuela, born in
the year 1783, had been educated in Spain, had visited Paris
where he had seen the Revolutionary government at work, had
lived for a while in the United States and had returned to his
native land where the widespread discontent against Spain,
the mother country, was beginning to take a definite form.
In the year 1811, Venezuela declared its independence and
Bolivar became one of the revolutionary generals. Within
two months, the rebels were defeated and Bolivar fled.
For the next five years he was the leader of an apparently
lost cause. He sacrificed all his wealth and he would not have
been able to begin his final and successful expedition without
the support of the President of Haiti. Thereafter the revolt
spread all over South America and soon it appeared that Spain
was not able to suppress the rebellion unaided. She asked for
the support of the Holy Alliance.
This step greatly worried England. The British shippers
had succeeded the Dutch as the Common Carriers of the world
and they expected to reap heavy profits from a declaration of
independence on the part of all South America. They had
hopes that the United States o America would interfere but
the Senate had no such plans and in the House, too, there were
many voices which declared that Spain ought to be given a
free hand.
Just then, there was a change of ministers in England.
The Whigs went out and the Tories came in. George Canning
became secretary of State. He dropped a hint that England
would gladly back up the American government with all the
might of her fleet, if said government would declare its
disapproval of the plans of the Holy Alliance in regard to the
rebellious colonies of the southern continent. President Monroe
thereupon, on the 2nd of December of the year 1823, addressed
Congress and stated that: “America would consider
any attempt on the part of the allied powers to extend their
system to any portion of this western hemisphere as dangerous
to our peace and safety,” and gave warning that “the American
government would consider such action on the part of the
Holy Alliance as a manifestation of an unfriendly disposition
toward the United States.” Four weeks later, the text of the
“Monroe Doctrine” was printed in the English newspapers and
the members of the Holy Alliance were forced to make their
choice.
Metternich hesitated. Personally he would have been willing
to risk the displeasure of the United States (which had
allowed both its army and navy to fall into neglect since the end
of the Anglo-American war of the year 1812.) But Canning’s
threatening attitude and trouble on the continent forced him
to be careful. The expedition never took place and South
America and Mexico gained their independence.
As for the troubles on the continent of Europe, they were
coming fast and furious. The Holy Alliance had sent French
troops to Spain to act as guardians of the peace in the year
1820. Austrian troops had been used for a similar purpose in
Italy when the “Carbonari” (the secret society of the Charcoal
Burners) were making propaganda for a united Italy and had
caused a rebellion against the unspeakable Ferdinand of
Naples.
Bad news also came from Russia where the death of Alexander
had been the sign for a revolutionary outbreak in St.
Petersburg, a short but bloody upheaval, the so-called Dekaberist
revolt (because it took place in December,) which ended
with the hanging of a large number of good patriots who had
been disgusted by the reaction of Alexander’s last years and
had tried to give Russia a constitutional form of government.
But worse was to follow. Metternich had tried to assure
himself of the continued support of the European courts by a
series of conferences at Aix-la-Chapelle at Troppau at
Laibach and finally at Verona. The delegates from the
different powers duly travelled to these agreeable watering
places where the Austrian prime minister used to spend
his summers. They always promised to do their best
to suppress revolt but they were none too certain of their
success. The spirit of the people was beginning to be ugly and
especially in France the position of the king was by no means
satisfactory.
The real trouble however began in the Balkans, the gateway
to western Europe through which the invaders of that
continent had passed since the beginning of time. The first
outbreak was in Moldavia, the ancient Roman province of
Dacia which had been cut off from the Empire in the third
century. Since then, it had been a lost land, a sort of Atlantis,
where the people had continued to speak the old Roman tongue
and still called themselves Romans and their country Roumania.
Here in the year 1821, a young Greek, Prince Alexander
Ypsilanti, began a revolt against the Turks. He told his followers
that they could count upon the support of Russia. But
Metternich’s fast couriers were soon on their way to St Petersburg
and the Tsar, entirely persuaded by the Austrian arguments
in favor of “peace and stability,” refused to help. Ypsilanti
was forced to flee to Austria where he spent the next seven
years in prison.
In the same year, 1821, trouble began in Greece. Since
1815 a secret society of Greek patriots had been preparing
the way for a revolt. Suddenly they hoisted the flag of
independence in the Morea (the ancient Peloponnesus) and drove
the Turkish garrisons away. The Turks answered in the usual
fashion. They took the Greek Patriarch of Constantinople,
who was regarded as their Pope both by the Greeks and by
many Russians, and they hanged him on Easter Sunday of the
year 1821, together with a number of his bishops. The Greeks
came back with a massacre of all the Mohammedans in
Tripolitsa, the capital of the Morea and the Turks retaliated
by an attack upon the island of Chios, where they murdered
25,000 Christians and sold 45,000 others as slaves into Asia and
Egypt.
Then the Greeks appealed to the European courts, but
Metternich told them in so many words that they could “stew
in their own grease,” (I am not trying to make a pun, but I
am quoting His Serene Highness who informed the Tsar that
this “fire of revolt ought to burn itself out beyond the pale
of civilisation) and the frontiers were closed to those volunteers
who wished to go to the rescue of the patriotic Hellenes.
Their cause seemed lost. At the request of Turkey, an Egyptian
army was landed in the Morea and soon the Turkish flag
was again flying from the Acropolis, the ancient stronghold of
Athens. The Egyptian army then pacified the country “a la
Turque,” and Metternich followed the proceedings with quiet
interest, awaiting the day when this “attempt against the peace
of Europe” should be a thing of the past.
Once more it was England which upset his plans. The
greatest glory of England does not lie in her vast colonial
possessions, in her wealth or her navy, but in the quiet heroism
and independence of her average citizen. The Englishman
obeys the law because he knows that respect for the rights of
others marks the difference between a dog-kennel and civilised
society. But he does not recognize the right of others to interfere
with his freedom of thought. If his country does something
which he believes to be wrong, he gets up and says so
and the government which he attacks will respect him and will
give him full protection against the mob which to-day, as in
the time of Socrates, often loves to destroy those who surpass
it in courage or intelligence. There never has been a good
cause, however unpopular or however distant, which has not
counted a number of Englishmen among its staunchest adherents.
The mass of the English people are not different from
those in other lands. They stick to the business at hand and
have no time for unpractical “sporting ventures.” But they
rather admire their eccentric neighbour who drops everything
to go and fight for some obscure people in Asia or Africa and
when he has been killed they give him a fine public funeral and
hold him up to their children as an example of valor and chivalry.
Even the police spies of the Holy Alliance were powerless
against this national characteristic. In the year 1824, Lord
Byron, a rich young Englishman who wrote the poetry over
which all Europe wept, hoisted the sails of his yacht and started
south to help the Greeks. Three months later the news spread
through Europe that their hero lay dead in Missolonghi,
the last of the Greek strongholds. His lonely death
caught the imagination of the people. In all countries, societies
were formed to help the Greeks. Lafayette, the grand old
man of the American revolution, pleaded their cause in France.
The king of Bavaria sent hundreds of his officers. Money and
supplies poured in upon the starving men of Missolonghi.
In England, George Canning, who had defeated the plans
of the Holy Alliance in South America, was now prime minis-
ter. He saw his chance to checkmate Metternich for a second
time. The English and Russian fleets were already in the
Mediterranean. They were sent by governments which dared
no longer suppress the popular enthusiasm for the cause of the
Greek patriots. The French navy appeared because France,
since the end of the Crusades, had assumed the role of the
defender of the Christian faith in Mohammedan lands. On October
20 of the year 1827, the ships of the three nations attacked
the Turkish fleet in the bay of Navarino and destroyed it.
Rarely has the news of a battle been received with such general
rejoicing. The people of western Europe and Russia who
enjoyed no freedom at home consoled themselves by fighting
an imaginary war of liberty on behalf of the oppressed Greeks.
In the year 1829 they had their reward. Greece became an
independent nation and the policy of reaction and stability
suffered its second great defeat.
It would be absurd were I to try, in this short volume, to
give you a detailed account of the struggle for national
independence in all other countries. There are a large number of
excellent books devoted to such subjects. I have described the
struggle for the independence of Greece because it was the first
successful attack upon the bulwark of reaction which the Congress
of Vienna had erected to “maintain the stability of Europe."
That mighty fortress of suppression still held out and
Metternich continued to be in command. But the end was
near.
In France the Bourbons had established an almost unbearable
rule of police officials who were trying to undo the work
of the French revolution, with an absolute disregard of the
regulations and laws of civilised warfare. When Louis
XVIII died in the year 1824, the people had enjoyed nine
years of “peace” which had proved even more unhappy than
the ten years of war of the Empire. Louis was succeeded by
his brother, Charles X.
Louis had belonged to that famous Bourbon family which,
although it never learned anything, never forgot anything.
The recollection of that morning in the town of Hamm, when
news had reached him of the decapitation of his brother,
remained a constant warning of what might happen to those
kings who did not read the signs of the times aright. Charles,
on the other hand, who had managed to run up private debts of
fifty million francs before he was twenty years of age, knew
nothing, remembered nothing and firmly intended to learn
nothing. As soon as he had succeeded his brother, he established
a government “by priests, through priests and for
priests,” and while the Duke of Wellington, who made this remark,
cannot be called a violent liberal, Charles ruled in such
a way that he disgusted even that trusted friend of law and
order. When he tried to suppress the newspapers which dared
to criticise his government, and dismissed the Parliament because
it supported the Press, his days were numbered.
On the night of the 27th of July of the year 1830, a revolution
took place in Paris. On the 30th of the same month, the
king fled to the coast and set sail for England. In this way
the “famous farce of fifteen years” came to an end and the
Bourbons were at last removed from the throne of France.
They were too hopelessly incompetent. France then might
have returned to a Republican form of government, but such
a step would not have been tolerated by Metternich.
The situation was dangerous enough. The spark of rebellion
had leaped beyond the French frontier and had set fire to
another powder house filled with national grievances. The new
kingdom of the Netherlands had not been a success. The Belgian
and the Dutch people had nothing in common and their
king, William of Orange (the descendant of an uncle of William
the Silent), while a hard worker and a good business man,
was too much lacking in tact and pliability to keep the peace
among his uncongenial subjects. Besides, the horde of priests
which had descended upon France, had at once found its way
into Belgium and whatever Protestant William tried to do was
howled down by large crowds of excited citizens as a fresh attempt
upon the “freedom of the Catholic church.” On the 25th
of August there was a popular outbreak against the Dutch
authorities in Brussels. Two months later, the Belgians
declared themselves independent and elected Leopold of Coburg,
the uncle of Queen Victoria of England, to the throne.
That was an excellent solution of the difficulty. The two
countries, which never ought to have been united, parted their
ways and thereafter lived in peace and harmony and behaved
like decent neighbours.
News in those days when there were only a few short railroads,
travelled slowly, but when the success of the French
and the Belgian revolutionists became known in Poland there
was an immediate clash between the Poles and their Russian
rulers which led to a year of terrible warfare and ended with a
complete victory for the Russians who “established order along
the banks of the Vistula” in the well-known Russian fashion
Nicholas the first, who had succeeded his brother Alexander in
1825, firmly believed in the Divine Right of his own family,
and the thousands of Polish refugees who had found shelter
in western Europe bore witness to the fact that the principles
of the Holy Alliance were still more than a hollow phrase in
Holy Russia.
In Italy too there was a moment of unrest. Marie Louise
Duchess of Parma and wife of the former Emperor Napoleon,
whom she had deserted after the defeat of Waterloo, was
driven away from her country, and in the Papal state the
exasperated people tried to establish an independent Republic.
But the armies of Austria marched to Rome and soon every
thing was as of old. Metternich continued to reside at the Ball
Platz, the home of the foreign minister of the Habsburg
dynasty, the police spies returned to their job, and peace
reigned supreme. Eighteen more years were to pass before a
second and more successful attempt could be made to deliver
Europe from the terrible inheritance of the Vienna Congress.
Again it was France, the revolutionary weather-cock of
Europe, which gave the signal of revolt. Charles X had been
succeeded by Louis Philippe, the son of that famous Duke of
Orleans who had turned Jacobin, had voted for the death of his
cousin the king, and had played a role during the early days
of the revolution under the name of “Philippe Egalite” or
“Equality Philip.” Eventually he had been killed when
Robespierre tried to purge the nation of all “traitors,” (by
which name he indicated those people who did not share his own
views) and his son had been forced to run away from the
revolutionary army. Young Louis Philippe thereupon had
wandered far and wide. He had taught school in Switzerland
and had spent a couple of years exploring the unknown “far
west” of America. After the fall of Napoleon he had returned
to Paris. He was much more intelligent than his Bourbon
cousins. He was a simple man who went about in the public
parks with a red cotton umbrella under his arm, followed by a
brood of children like any good housefather. But France had
outgrown the king business and Louis did not know this until
the morning of the 24th of February, of the year 1848, when
a crowd stormed the Tuilleries and drove his Majesty away and
proclaimed the Republic.
When the news of this event reached Vienna, Metternich
expressed the casual opinion that this was only a repetition
of the year 1793 and that the Allies would once more be obliged
to march upon Paris and make an end to this very unseemly
democratic row. But two weeks later his own Austrian capital
was in open revolt. Metternich escaped from the mob through
the back door of his palace, and the Emperor Ferdinand was
forced to give his subjects a constitution which embodied most
of the revolutionary principles which his Prime Minister had
tried to suppress for the last thirty-three years.
This time all Europe felt the shock. Hungary declared itself
independent, and commenced a war against the Habsburgs
under the leadership of Louis Kossuth. The unequal
struggle lasted more than a year. It was finally suppressed by
the armies of Tsar Nicholas who marched across the Carpathian
mountains and made Hungary once more safe for autocracy.
The Habsburgs thereupon established extraordinary
court-martials and hanged the greater part of the Hungarian
patriots whom they had not been able to defeat in open battle.
As for Italy, the island of Sicily declared itself independent
from Naples and drove its Bourbon king away. In the Papal
states the prime minister, Rossi, was murdered and the Pope
was forced to flee. He returned the next year at the head of a
French army which remained in Rome to protect His Holiness
against his subjects until the year 1870. Then it was
called back to defend France against the Prussians, and
Rome became the capital of Italy. In the north, Milan and
Venice rose against their Austrian masters. They were supported
by king Albert of Sardinia, but a strong Austrian army
under old Radetzky marched into the valley of the Po, defeated
the Sardinians near Custozza and Novara and forced
Albert to abdicate in favour of his son, Victor Emanuel, who
a few years later was to be the first king of a united Italy.
In Germany the unrest of the year 1848 took the form of a
great national demonstration in favour of political unity and a
representative form of government. In Bavaria, the king who
had wasted his time and money upon an Irish lady who posed as
a Spanish dancer–(she was called Lola Montez and lies buried
in New York’s Potter’s Field)–was driven away by the enraged
students of the university. In Prussia, the king was
forced to stand with uncovered head before the coffins of those
who had been killed during the street fighting and to promise a
constitutional form of government. And in March of the year
1849, a German parliament, consisting of 550 delegates from
all parts of the country came together in Frankfort and proposed
that king Frederick William of Prussia should be the
Emperor of a United Germany.
Then, however, the tide began to turn. Incompetent Ferdinand
had abdicated in favour of his nephew Francis Joseph.
The well-drilled Austrian army had remained faithful to their
war-lord. The hangman was given plenty of work and the
Habsburgs, after the nature of that strangely cat-like family,
once more landed upon their feet and rapidly strengthened
their position as the masters of eastern and western Europe.
They played the game of politics very adroitly and used the
jealousies of the other German states to prevent the elevation
of the Prussian king to the Imperial dignity. Their long train-
ing in the art of suffering defeat had taught them the value of
patience. They knew how to wait. They bided their time
and while the liberals, utterly untrained in practical politics,
talked and talked and talked and got intoxicated by their own
fine speeches, the Austrians quietly gathered their forces, dismissed
the Parliament of Frankfort and re-established the old
and impossible German confederation which the Congress of
Vienna had wished upon an unsuspecting world.
But among the men who had attended this strange Parliament
of unpractical enthusiasts, there was a Prussian country
squire by the name of Bismarck, who had made good use of his
eyes and ears. He had a deep contempt for oratory. He knew
(what every man of action has always known) that nothing
is ever accomplished by talk. In his own way he was a sincere
patriot. He had been trained in the old school of diplomacy
and he could outlie his opponents just as he could outwalk
them and outdrink them and outride them.
Bismarck felt convinced that the loose confederation
of little states must be changed into a strong united country
if it would hold its own against the other European powers.
Brought up amidst feudal ideas of loyalty, he decided that
the house of Hohenzollern, of which he was the most faithful
servant, should rule the new state, rather than the incompetent
Habsburgs. For this purpose he must first get rid of the
Austrian influence, and he began to make the necessary
preparations for this painful operation.
Italy in the meantime had solved her own problem, and had
rid herself of her hated Austrian master. The unity of Italy
was the work of three men, Cavour, Mazzini and Garibaldi.
Of these three, Cavour, the civil-engineer with the short-sighted
eyes and the steel-rimmed glasses, played the part of the careful
political pilot. Mazzini, who had spent most of his days
in different European garrets, hiding from the Austrian police,
was the public agitator, while Garibaldi, with his band of red-
shirted rough-riders, appealed to the popular imagination.
Mazzini and Garibaldi were both believers in the Republican
form of government. Cavour, however, was a monarch-
ist, and the others who recognised his superior ability in such
matters of practical statecraft, accepted his decision and sacrificed
their own ambitions for the greater good of their beloved
Fatherland.
Cavour felt towards the House of Sardinia as Bismarck
did towards the Hohenzollern family. With infinite care and
great shrewdness he set to work to jockey the Sardinian King
into a position from which His Majesty would be able to assume
the leadership of the entire Italian people. The unsettled
political conditions in the rest of Europe greatly helped him in
his plans and no country contributed more to the independence
of Italy than her old and trusted (and often distrusted)
neighbour, France.
In that turbulent country, in November of the year 1852,
the Republic had come to a sudden but not unexpected end.
Napoleon III the son of Louis Bonaparte the former King of
Holland, and the small nephew of a great uncle, had re-
established an Empire and had made himself Emperor “by the
Grace of God and the Will of the People.”
This young man, who had been educated in Germany and
who mixed his French with harsh Teutonic gutturals (just
as the first Napoleon had always spoken the language of his
adopted country with a strong Italian accent) was trying very
hard to use the Napoleonic tradition for his own benefit. But
he had many enemies and did not feel very certain of his hold
upon his ready-made throne. He had gained the friendship
of Queen Victoria but this had not been a difficult task, as the
good Queen was not particularly brilliant and was very susceptible
to flattery. As for the other European sovereigns,
they treated the French Emperor with insulting haughtiness
and sat up nights devising new ways in which they could show
their upstart “Good Brother” how sincerely they despised him.
Napoleon was obliged to find a way in which he could break
this opposition, either through love or through fear. He well
knew the fascination which the word “glory” still held for his
subjects. Since he was forced to gamble for his throne he
decided to play the game of Empire for high stakes. He used
an attack of Russia upon Turkey as an excuse for bringing
about the Crimean war in which England and France combined
against the Tsar on behalf of the Sultan. It was a very
costly and exceedingly unprofitable enterprise. Neither
France nor England nor Russia reaped much glory.
But the Crimean war did one good thing. It gave Sardinia
a chance to volunteer on the winning side and when peace was
declared it gave Cavour the opportunity to lay claim to the
gratitude of both England and France.
Having made use of the international situation to get Sardinia
recognised as one of the more important powers of Europe,
the clever Italian then provoked a war between Sardinia
and Austria in June of the year 1859. He assured himself of
the support of Napoleon in exchange for the provinces of
Savoy and the city of Nice, which was really an Italian town.
The Franco-Italian armies defeated the Austrians at Magenta
and Solferino, and the former Austrian provinces and duchies
were united into a single Italian kingdom. Florence became
the capital of this new Italy until the year 1870 when the
French recalled their troops from Home to defend France
against the Germans. As soon as they were gone, the Italian
troops entered the eternal city and the House of Sardinia took
up its residence in the old Palace of the Quirinal which an
ancient Pope had built on the ruins of the baths of the Emperor
Constantine.
The Pope, however, moved across the river Tiber and hid
behind the walls of the Vatican, which had been the home of
many of his predecessors since their return from the exile of
Avignon in the year 1377. He protested loudly against this
high-handed theft of his domains and addressed letters of appeal
to those faithful Catholics who were inclined to sympathise
with him in his loss. Their number, however, was small,
and it has been steadily decreasing. For, once delivered from
the cares of state, the Pope was able to devote all his time to
questions of a spiritual nature. Standing high above the petty
quarrels of the European politicians, the Papacy assumed a new
dignity which proved of great benefit to the church and made
it an international power for social and religious progress
which has shown a much more intelligent appreciation of modern
economic problems than most Protestant sects.
In this way, the attempt of the Congress of Vienna to
settle the Italian question by making the peninsula an
Austrian province was at last undone.
The German problem however remained as yet unsolved.
It proved the most difficult of all. The failure of the revolution
of the year 1848 had led to the wholesale migration of the more
energetic and liberal elements among the German people.
These young fellows had moved to the United States of America,
to Brazil, to the new colonies in Asia and America. Their
work was continued in Germany but by a different sort of men.
In the new Diet which met at Frankfort, after the collapse
of the German Parliament and the failure of the Liberals to
establish a united country, the Kingdom of Prussia was represented
by that same Otto von Bismarck from whom we parted
a few pages ago. Bismarck by now had managed to gain the
complete confidence of the king of Prussia. That was all he
asked for. The opinion of the Prussian parliament or of the
Prussian people interested him not at all. With his own eyes
he had seen the defeat of the Liberals. He knew that he
would not be able to get rid of Austria without a war and he
began by strengthening the Prussian army. The Landtag, exasperated
at his high-handed methods, refused to give him the
necessary credits. Bismarck did not even bother to discuss
the matter. He went ahead and increased his army with the
help of funds which the Prussian house of Peers and the king
placed at his disposal. Then he looked for a national cause
which could be used for the purpose of creating a great wave
of patriotism among all the German people.
In the north of Germany there were the Duchies of Schleswig
and Holstein which ever since the middle ages had been a
source of trouble. Both countries were inhabited by a certain
number of Danes and a certain number of Germans, but although
they were governed by the King of Denmark, they
were not an integral part of the Danish State and this led to
endless difficulties. Heaven forbid that I should revive this
forgotten question which now seems settled by the acts of the
recent Congress of Versailles. But the Germans in Holstein
were very loud in their abuse of the Danes and the Danes in
Schleswig made a great ado of their Danishness, and all Europe
was discussing the problem and German Mannerchors
and Turnvereins listened to sentimental speeches about the
“lost brethren” and the different chancelleries were trying to
discover what it was all about, when Prussia mobilised her
armies to “save the lost provinces.” As Austria, the official
head of the German Confederation, could not allow Prussia
to act alone in such an important matter, the Habsburg troops
were mobilised too and the combined armies of the two great
powers crossed the Danish frontiers and after a very brave
resistance on the part of the Danes, occupied the two duchies.
The Danes appealed to Europe, but Europe was otherwise
engaged and the poor Danes were left to their fate.
Bismarck then prepared the scene for the second number
upon his Imperial programme. He used the division of the
spoils to pick a quarrel with Austria. The Habsburgs fell into
the trap. The new Prussian army, the creation of Bismarck and
his faithful generals, invaded Bohemia and in less than six
weeks, the last of the Austrian troops had been destroyed at
Koniggratz and Sadowa and the road to Vienna lay open. But
Bismarck did not want to go too far. He knew that he would
need a few friends in Europe. He offered the defeated
Habsburgs very decent terms of peace, provided they would
resign their chairmanship of the Confederation. He was less
merciful to many of the smaller German states who had taken
the side of the Austrians, and annexed them to Prussia. The
greater part of the northern states then formed a new organisation,
the so-called North German Confederacy, and victorious
Prussia assumed the unofficial leadership of the German
people.
Europe stood aghast at the rapidity with which the work of
consolidation had been done. England was quite indifferent
but France showed signs of disapproval. Napoleon’s hold
upon the French people was steadily diminishing. The Crimean
war had been costly and had accomplished nothing.
A second adventure in the year 1863, when a French army
had tried to force an Austrian Grand-Duke by the name of
Maximilian upon the Mexican people as their Emperor, had
come to a disastrous end as soon as the American Civil War had
been won by the North. For the Government at Washington
had forced the French to withdraw their troops and this had
given the Mexicans a chance to clear their country of the enemy
and shoot the unwelcome Emperor.
It was necessary to give the Napoleonic throne a new
coat of glory-paint. Within a few years the North German
Confederation would be a serious rival of France. Napoleon
decided that a war with Germany would be a good thing for his
dynasty. He looked for an excuse and Spain, the poor victim
of endless revolutions, gave him one.
Just then the Spanish throne happened to be vacant. It
had been offered to the Catholic branch of the house of Hohenzollern.
The French government had objected and the Hohenzollerns
had politely refused to accept the crown. But
Napoleon, who was showing signs of illness, was very much
under the influence of his beautiful wife, Eugenie de Montijo,
the daughter of a Spanish gentleman and the grand-daughter
of William Kirkpatrick, an American consul at Malaga, where
the grapes come from. Eugenie, although shrewd enough, was
as badly educated as most Spanish women of that day. She
was at the mercy of her spiritual advisers and these worthy
gentlemen felt no love for the Protestant King of Prussia. “Be
bold,” was the advice of the Empress to her husband, but she
omitted to add the second half of that famous Persian proverb
which admonishes the hero to “be bold but not too bold."
Napoleon, convinced of the strength of his army, addressed
himself to the king of Prussia and insisted that the king give
him assurances that “he would never permit another candidature
of a Hohenzollern prince to the Spanish crown.” As
the Hohenzollerns had just declined the honour, the demand
was superfluous, and Bismarck so informed the French government.
But Napoleon was not satisfied.
It was the year 1870 and King William was taking the
waters at Ems. There one day he was approached by the
French minister who tried to re-open the discussion. The king
answered very pleasantly that it was a fine day and that the
Spanish question was now closed and that nothing more
remained to be said upon the subject. As a matter of
routine, a report of this interview was telegraphed to
Bismarck, who handled all foreign affairs. Bismarck edited
the dispatch for the benefit of the Prussian and French
press. Many people have called him names for doing
this. Bismarck however could plead the excuse that the doctoring
of official news, since time immemorial, had been one
of the privileges of all civilised governments. When the “edited"
telegram was printed, the good people in Berlin felt that
their old and venerable king with his nice white whiskers had
been insulted by an arrogant little Frenchman and the equally
good people of Paris flew into a rage because their perfectly
courteous minister had been shown the door by a Royal Prussian
flunkey.
And so they both went to war and in less than two months,
Napoleon and the greater part of his army were prisoners of
the Germans. The Second Empire had come to an end and the
Third Republic was making ready to defend Paris against the
German invaders. Paris held out for five long months. Ten
days before the surrender of the city, in the nearby palace of
Versailles, built by that same King Louis XIV who had been
such a dangerous enemy to the Germans, the King of Prussia
was publicly proclaimed German Emperor and a loud booming
of guns told the hungry Parisians that a new German Empire
had taken the place of the old harmless Confederation of Teutonic
states and stateless.
In this rough way, the German question was finally settled.
By the end of the year 1871, fifty-six years after the memorable
gathering at Vienna, the work of the Congress had been entirely
undone. Metternich and Alexander and Talleyrand had tried
to give the people of Europe a lasting peace. The methods
they had employed had caused endless wars and revolutions and
the feeling of a common brotherhood of the eighteenth century
was followed by an era of exaggerated nationalism which has
not yet come to an end.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
