




HOW THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN THE “DIVINE
RIGHT” OF KINGS AND THE LESS DIVINE
BUT MORE REASONABLE “RIGHT OF
PARLIAMENT” ENDED DISASTROUSLY FOR
KING CHARLES II
CAESAR, the earliest explorer of north-western Europe, had
crossed the Channel in the year 55 B.C. and had conquered
England. During four centuries the country then remained
a Roman province. But when the Barbarians began to
threaten Rome, the garrisons were called back from the frontier
that they might defend the home country and Britannia
was left without a government and without protection.
As soon as this became known among the hungry Saxon
tribes of northern Germany, they sailed across the North Sea
and made themselves at home in the prosperous island. They
founded a number of independent Anglo-Saxon kingdoms
(so called after the original Angles or English and the Saxon
invaders) but these small states were for ever quarrelling with
each other and no King was strong enough to establish himself
as the head of a united country. For more than five hundred
years, Mercia and Northumbria and Wessex and Sussex
and Kent and East Anglia, or whatever their names, were
exposed to attacks from various Scandinavian pirates. Finally
in the eleventh century, England, together with Norway and
northern Germany became part of the large Danish Empire
of Canute the Great and the last vestiges of independence
disappeared.
The Danes, in the course of time, were driven away but no
sooner was England free, than it was conquered for the fourth
time. The new enemies were the descendants of another tribe
of Norsemen who early in the tenth century had invaded
France and had founded the Duchy of Normandy. William,
Duke of Normandy, who for a long time had looked across the
water with an envious eye, crossed the Channel in October
of the year 1066. At the battle of Hastings, on October the
fourteenth of that year, he destroyed the weak forces of Harold
of Wessex, the last of the Anglo-Saxon Kings and established
himself as King of England. But neither William nor his
successors of the House of Anjou and Plantagenet regarded
England as their true home. To them the island was merely a
part of their great inheritance on the continent–a sort of
colony inhabited by rather backward people upon whom they
forced their own language and civilisation. Gradually however
the “colony” of England gained upon the “Mother
country” of Normandy. At the same time the Kings of
France were trying desperately to get rid of the powerful Norman-
English neighbours who were in truth no more than disobedient
servants of the French crown. After a century of war
fare the French people, under the leadership of a young girl by
the name of Joan of Arc, drove the “foreigners” from their
soil. Joan herself, taken a prisoner at the battle of Compiegne
in the year 1430 and sold by her Burgundian captors to the
English soldiers, was burned as a witch. But the English
never gained foothold upon the continent and their Kings were
at last able to devote all their time to their British possessions.
As the feudal nobility of the island had been engaged in one of
those strange feuds which were as common in the middle ages
as measles and small-pox, and as the greater part of the old
landed proprietors had been killed during these so-called Wars
of the Roses, it was quite easy for the Kings to increase their
royal power. And by the end of the fifteenth century, England
was a strongly centralised country, ruled by Henry VII
of the House of Tudor, whose famous Court of Justice, the
“Star Chamber” of terrible memory, suppressed all attempts
on the part of the surviving nobles to regain their old influence
upon the government of the country with the utmost severity.
In the year 1509 Henry VII was succeeded by his son
Henry VIII, and from that moment on the history of England
gained a new importance for the country ceased to be a
mediaeval island and became a modern state.
Henry had no deep interest in religion. He gladly used a
private disagreement with the Pope about one of his many
divorces to declare himself independent of Rome and make
the church of England the first of those “nationalistic churches"
in which the worldly ruler also acts as the spiritual head of his
subjects. This peaceful reformation of 1034 not only gave
the house of Tudor the support of the English clergy, who
for a long time had been exposed to the violent attacks of many
Lutheran propagandists, but it also increased the Royal power
through the confiscation of the former possessions of the
monasteries. At the same time it made Henry popular with the
merchants and tradespeople, who as the proud and prosperous
inhabitants of an island which was separated from the rest of
Europe by a wide and deep channel, had a great dislike for
everything “foreign” and did not want an Italian bishop to rule
their honest British souls.
In 1517 Henry died. He left the throne to his small son,
aged ten. The guardians of the child, favoring the modern
Lutheran doctrines, did their best to help the cause of Protestantism.
But the boy died before he was sixteen, and was succeeded
by his sister Mary, the wife of Philip II of Spain, who
burned the bishops of the new “national church” and in other
ways followed the example of her royal Spanish husband
Fortunately she died, in the year 1558, and was succeeded
by Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn,
the second of his six wives, whom he had decapitated when she
no longer pleased him. Elizabeth, who had spent some time in
prison, and who had been released only at the request of the
Holy Roman Emperor, was a most cordial enemy of everything
Catholic and Spanish. She shared her father’s indifference
in the matter of religion but she inherited his ability as a
very shrewd judge of character, and spent the forty-five years
of her reign in strengthening the power of the dynasty and in
increasing the revenue and possessions of her merry islands.
In this she was most ably assisted by a number of men who
gathered around her throne and made the Elizabethan age a
period of such importance that you ought to study it in detail
in one of the special books of which I shall tell you in the
bibliography at the end of this volume.
Elizabeth, however, did not feel entirely safe upon her
throne. She had a rival and a very dangerous one. Mary,
of the house of Stuart, daughter of a French duchess and a
Scottish father, widow of king Francis II of France and
daughter-in-law of Catherine of Medici (who had organised
the murders of Saint Bartholomew’s night), was the mother of
a little boy who was afterwards to become the first Stuart king
of England. She was an ardent Catholic and a willing friend
to those who were the enemies of Elizabeth. Her own lack
of political ability and the violent methods which she employed
to punish her Calvinistic subjects, caused a revolution in Scotland
and forced Mary to take refuge on English territory. For
eighteen years she remained in England, plotting forever and
a day against the woman who had given her shelter and who
was at last obliged to follow the advice of her trusted councilors
“to cutte off the Scottish Queen’s heade.”
The head was duly “cutte off” in the year 1587 and caused
a war with Spain. But the combined navies of England and
Holland defeated Philip’s Invincible Armada, as we have already
seen, and the blow which had been meant to destroy the
power of the two great anti-Catholic leaders was turned into a
profitable business adventure.
For now at last, after many years of hesitation, the English
as well as the Dutch thought it their good right to invade
the Indies and America and avenge the ills which their Protes-
tent brethren had suffered at the hands of the Spaniards. The
English had been among the earliest successors of Columbus.
British ships, commanded by the Venetian pilot Giovanni Caboto
(or Cabot), had been the first to discover and explore the
northern American continent in 1496. Labrador and Newfoundland
were of little importance as a possible colony. But
the banks of Newfoundland offered a rich reward to the
English fishing fleet. A year later, in 1497, the same Cabot
had explored the coast of Florida.
Then had come the busy years of Henry VII and Henry
VIII when there had been no money for foreign explorations.
But under Elizabeth, with the country at peace and Mary
Stuart in prison, the sailors could leave their harbour without
fear for the fate of those whom they left behind. While Elizabeth
was still a child, Willoughby had ventured to sail past the
North Cape and one of his captains, Richard Chancellor, pushing
further eastward in his quest of a possible road to the Indies,
had reached Archangel, Russia, where he had established
diplomatic and commercial relations with the mysterious rulers
of this distant Muscovite Empire. During the first years of
Elizabeth’s rule this voyage had been followed up by many
others. Merchant adventurers, working for the benefit of a
“joint stock Company” had laid the foundations of trading
companies which in later centuries were to become colonies.
Half pirate, half diplomat, willing to stake everything on a
single lucky voyage, smugglers of everything that could be
loaded into the hold of a vessel, dealers in men and merchandise
with equal indifference to everything except their profit, the
sailors of Elizabeth had carried the English flag and the fame
of their Virgin Queen to the four corners of the Seven Seas.
Meanwhile William Shakespeare kept her Majesty amused at
home, and the best brains and the best wit of England co-operated
with the queen in her attempt to change the feudal inheritance
of Henry VIII into a modern national state.
In the year 1603 the old lady died at the age of seventy.
Her cousin, the great-grandson of her own grandfather Henry
VII and son of Mary Stuart, her rival and enemy, succeeded
her as James I. By the Grace of God, he found himself the
ruler of a country which had escaped the fate of its continental
rivals. While the European Protestants and Catholics were
killing each other in a hopeless attempt to break the power of
their adversaries and establish the exclusive rule of their own
particular creed, England was at peace and “reformed” at
leisure without going to the extremes of either Luther or
Loyola. It gave the island kingdom an enormous advantage in
the coming struggle for colonial possessions. It assured England
a leadership in international affairs which that country
has maintained until the present day. Not even the disastrous
adventure with the Stuarts was able to stop this normal development.
The Stuarts, who succeeded the Tudors, were “foreigners"
in England. They do not seem to have appreciated or understood
this fact. The native house of Tudor could steal a horse,
but the “foreign” Stuarts were not allowed to look at the
bridle without causing great popular disapproval. Old Queen
Bess had ruled her domains very much as she pleased. In
general however, she had always followed a policy which meant
money in the pocket of the honest (and otherwise) British
merchants. Hence the Queen had been always assured of the
wholehearted support of her grateful people. And small liberties
taken with some of the rights and prerogatives of Parliament
were gladly overlooked for the ulterior benefits which
were derived from her Majesty’s strong and successful foreign
policies.
Outwardly King James continued the same policy. But he
lacked that personal enthusiasm which had been so very typical
of his great predecessor. Foreign commerce continued to be
encouraged. The Catholics were not granted any liberties.
But when Spain smiled pleasantly upon England in an effort
to establish peaceful relations, James was seen to smile back.
The majority of the English people did not like this, but
James was their King and they kept quiet.
Soon there were other causes of friction. King James and
his son, Charles I, who succeeded him in the year 1625 both
firmly believed in the principle of their “divine right” to
administer their realm as they thought fit without consulting the
wishes of their subjects. The idea was not new. The Popes,
who in more than one way had been the successors of the
Roman Emperors (or rather of the Roman Imperial ideal of
a single and undivided state covering the entire known world),
had always regarded themselves and had been publicly recognised
as the “Vice-Regents of Christ upon Earth.” No one
questioned the right of God to rule the world as He saw fit.
As a natural result, few ventured to doubt the right of the
divine “Vice-Regent” to do the same thing and to demand the
obedience of the masses because he was the direct representative
of the Absolute Ruler of the Universe and responsible
only to Almighty God.
When the Lutheran Reformation proved successful, those
rights which formerly had been invested in the Papacy were
taken over by the many European sovereigns who became
Protestants. As head of their own national or dynastic
churches they insisted upon being “Christ’s Vice-Regents"
within the limit of their own territory. The people did not question
the right of their rulers to take such a step. They accepted
it, just as we in our own day accept the idea of a representative
system which to us seems the only reasonable and just
form of government. It is unfair therefore to state that either
Lutheranism or Calvinism caused the particular feeling of
irritation which greeted King-James’s oft and loudly repeated
assertion of his “Divine Right.” There must have been other
grounds for the genuine English disbelief in the Divine Right
of Kings.
The first positive denial of the “Divine Right” of sovereigns
had been heard in the Netherlands when the Estates General
abjured their lawful sovereign King Philip II of Spain, in the
year 1581. “The King,” so they said, “has broken his contract
and the King therefore is dismissed like any other unfaithful
servant.” Since then, this particular idea of a king’s
responsibilities towards his subjects had spread among many of the
nations who inhabited the shores of the North Sea. They were
in a very favourable position. They were rich. The poor people
in the heart of central Europe, at the mercy of their
Ruler’s body-guard, could not afford to discuss a problem
which would at once land them in the deepest dungeon of the
nearest castle. But the merchants of Holland and England
who possessed the capital necessary for the maintenance of
great armies and navies, who knew how to handle the almighty
weapon called “credit,” had no such fear. They were willing
to pit the “Divine Right” of their own good money against
the “Divine Right” of any Habsburg or Bourbon or Stuart.
They knew that their guilders and shillings could beat the
clumsy feudal armies which were the only weapons of the King.
They dared to act, where others were condemned to suffer
in silence or run the risk of the scaffold.
When the Stuarts began to annoy the people of England
with their claim that they had a right to do what they pleased
and never mind the responsibility, the English middle classes
used the House of Commons as their first line of defence
against this abuse of the Royal Power. The Crown refused to
give in and the King sent Parliament about its own business.
Eleven long years, Charles I ruled alone. He levied taxes
which most people regarded as illegal and he managed his
British kingdom as if it had been his own country estate. He
had capable assistants and we must say that he had the courage
of his convictions.
Unfortunately, instead of assuring himself of the support
of his faithful Scottish subjects, Charles became involved in
a quarrel with the Scotch Presbyterians. Much against his
will, but forced by his need for ready cash, Charles was at
last obliged to call Parliament together once more. It met in
April of 1640 and showed an ugly temper. It was dissolved
a few weeks later. A new Parliament convened in November.
This one was even less pliable than the first one. The members
understood that the question of “Government by Divine
Right” or “Government by Parliament” must be fought out
for good and all. They attacked the King in his chief councillors
and executed half a dozen of them. They announced that
they would not allow themselves to be dissolved without their
own approval. Finally on December 1, 1641, they presented
to the King a “Grand Remonstrance” which gave a detailed
account of the many grievances of the people against their Ruler.
Charles, hoping to derive some support for his own policy
in the country districts, left London in January of 1642. Each
side organised an army and prepared for open warfare between
the absolute power of the crown and the absolute power
of Parliament. During this struggle, the most powerful religious
element of England, called the Puritans, (they were
Anglicans who had tried to purify their doctrines to the most
absolute limits), came quickly to the front. The regiments of
“Godly men,” commanded by Oliver Cromwell, with their
iron discipline and their profound confidence in the holiness of
their aims, soon became the model for the entire army of the
opposition. Twice Charles was defeated. After the battle
of Naseby, in 1645, he fled to Scotland. The Scotch sold him
to the English.
There followed a period of intrigue and an uprising
of the Scotch Presbyterians against the English Puritan.
In August of the year 1648 after the three-days’ battle of
Preston Pans, Cromwell made an end to this second civil war,
and took Edinburgh. Meanwhile his soldiers, tired of further
talk and wasted hours of religious debate, had decided to act
on their own initiative. They removed from Parliament all
those who did not agree with their own Puritan views. Thereupon
the “Rump,” which was what was left of the old Parliament,
accused the King of high treason. The House of Lords
refused to sit as a tribunal. A special tribunal was appointed
and it condemned the King to death. On the 30th of January
of the year 1649, King Charles walked quietly out of a window
of White Hall onto the scaffold. That day, the Sovereign
People, acting through their chosen representatives, for the
first time executed a ruler who had failed to understand his own
position in the modern state.
The period which followed the death of Charles is usually
called after Oliver Cromwell. At first the unofficial Dictator
of England, he was officially made Lord Protector in the year
1653. He ruled five years. He used this period to continue
the policies of Elizabeth. Spain once more became the arch
enemy of England and war upon the Spaniard was made a national
and sacred issue.
The commerce of England and the interests of the traders
were placed before everything else, and the Protestant creed of
the strictest nature was rigourously maintained. In maintaining
England’s position abroad, Cromwell was successful. As a
social reformer, however, he failed very badly. The world is
made up of a number of people and they rarely think alike.
In the long run, this seems a very wise provision. A government
of and by and for one single part of the entire community
cannot possibly survive. The Puritans had been a great
force for good when they tried to correct the abuse of the
royal power. As the absolute Rulers of England they became
intolerable.
When Cromwell died in 1658, it was an easy matter for the
Stuarts to return to their old kingdom. Indeed, they were
welcomed as “deliverers” by the people who had found the
yoke of the meek Puritans quite as hard to bear as that of autocratic
King Charles. Provided the Stuarts were willing to forget
about the Divine Right of their late and lamented father
and were willing to recognise the superiority of Parliament, the
people promised that they would be loyal and faithful subjects.
Two generations tried to make a success of this new arrangement.
But the Stuarts apparently had not learned their
lesson and were unable to drop their bad habits. Charles II,
who came back in the year 1660, was an amiable but worthless
person. His indolence and his constitutional insistence upon
following the easiest course, together with his conspicuous success
as a liar, prevented an open outbreak between himself and
his people. By the act of Uniformity in 1662 he broke the
power of the Puritan clergy by banishing all dissenting clergymen
from their parishes. By the so-called Conventicle Act of
1664 he tried to prevent the Dissenters from attending religious
meetings by a threat of deportation to the West Indies. This
looked too much like the good old days of Divine Right. People
began to show the old and well-known signs of impatience,
and Parliament suddenly experienced difficulty in providing
the King with funds.
Since he could not get money from an unwilling Parliament,
Charles borrowed it secretly from his neighbour and cousin
King Louis of France. He betrayed his Protestant allies in
return for 200,000 pounds per year, and laughed at the poor
simpletons of Parliament.
Economic independence suddenly gave the King great faith
in his own strength. He had spent many years of exile among
his Catholic relations and he had a secret liking for their
religion. Perhaps he could bring England back to Rome! He
passed a Declaration of Indulgence which suspended the old
laws against the Catholics and Dissenters. This happened just
when Charles’ younger brother James was said to have become
a Catholic. All this looked suspicious to the man in the street
People began to fear some terrible Popish plot. A new spirit
of unrest entered the land. Most of the people wanted to prevent
another outbreak of civil war. To them Royal Oppression
and a Catholic King–yea, even Divine Right,–were
preferable to a new struggle between members of the same
race. Others however were less lenient. They were the much-
feared Dissenters, who invariably had the courage of their
convictions. They were led by several great noblemen who did
not want to see a return of the old days of absolute royal
power.
For almost ten years, these two great parties, the Whigs
(the middle class element, called by this derisive name be-
cause in the year 1640 a lot of Scottish Whiggamores or horse-
drovers headed by the Presbyterian clergy, had marched to
Edinburgh to oppose the King) and the Tories (an epithet
originally used against the Royalist Irish adherents but now
applied to the supporters of the King) opposed each other, but
neither wished to bring about a crisis. They allowed Charles to
die peacefully in his bed and permitted the Catholic James II
to succeed his brother in 1685. But when James, after threatening
the country with the terrible foreign invention of a “standing
army” (which was to be commanded by Catholic Frenchmen),
issued a second Declaration of Indulgence in 1688, and
ordered it to be read in all Anglican churches, he went just a
trifle beyond that line of sensible demarcation which can only be
transgressed by the most popular of rulers under very
exceptional circumstances. Seven bishops refused to comply
with the Royal Command. They were accused of “seditious
libel.” They were brought before a court. The jury which
pronounced the verdict of “not guilty” reaped a rich harvest
of popular approval.
At this unfortunate moment, James (who in a second marriage
had taken to wife Maria of the Catholic house of Modena-
Este) became the father of a son. This meant that the throne
was to go to a Catholic boy rather than to his older sisters,
Mary and Anne, who were Protestants. The man in the street
again grew suspicious. Maria of Modena was too old to have
children! It was all part of a plot! A strange baby had been
brought into the palace by some Jesuit priest that England
might have a Catholic monarch. And so on. It looked as if
another civil war would break out. Then seven well-known
men, both Whigs and Tories, wrote a letter asking the husband
of James’s oldest daughter Mary, William III the Stadtholder
or head of the Dutch Republic, to come to England and
deliver the country from its lawful but entirely undesirable
sovereign.
On the fifth of November of the year 1688, William landed
at Torbay. As he did not wish to make a martyr out of his
father-in-law, he helped him to escape safely to France. On
the 22nd of January of 1689 he summoned Parliament. On
the 13th of February of the same year he and his wife Mary
were proclaimed joint sovereigns of England and the country
was saved for the Protestant cause.
Parliament, having undertaken to be something more than
a mere advisory body to the King, made the best of its
opportunities. The old Petition of Rights of the year 1628 was
fished out of a forgotten nook of the archives. A second and
more drastic Bill of Rights demanded that the sovereign of
England should belong to the Anglican church. Furthermore
it stated that the king had no right to suspend the laws or
permit certain privileged citizens to disobey certain laws. It
stipulated that “without consent of Parliament no taxes could
be levied and no army could be maintained.” Thus in the year
1689 did England acquire an amount of liberty unknown in
any other country of Europe.
But it is not only on account of this great liberal measure
that the rule of William in England is still remembered. During
his lifetime, government by a “responsible” ministry first
developed. No king of course can rule alone. He needs a few
trusted advisors. The Tudors had their Great Council which
was composed of Nobles and Clergy. This body grew too
large. It was restricted to the small “Privy Council.” In the
course of time it became the custom of these councillors to meet
the king in a cabinet in the palace. Hence they were called
the “Cabinet Council.” After a short while they were known
as the “Cabinet.”
William, like most English sovereigns before him, had
chosen his advisors from among all parties. But with the increased
strength of Parliament, he had found it impossible to
direct the politics of the country with the help of the Tories
while the Whigs had a majority in the house of Commons.
Therefore the Tories had been dismissed and the Cabinet Council
had been composed entirely of Whigs. A few years later
when the Whigs lost their power in the House of Commons, the
king, for the sake of convenience, was obliged to look for his
support among the leading Tories. Until his death in 1702,
William was too busy fighting Louis of France to bother much
about the government of England. Practically all important
affairs had been left to his Cabinet Council. When William’s
sister-in-law, Anne, succeeded him in 1702 this condition of
affairs continued. When she died in 1714 (and unfortunately
not a single one of her seventeen children survived her) the
throne went to George I of the House of Hanover, the son of
Sophie, grand-daughter of James I.
This somewhat rustic monarch, who never learned a word
of English, was entirely lost in the complicated mazes of England’s
political arrangements. He left everything to his Cabinet
Council and kept away from their meetings, which bored
him as he did not understand a single sentence. In this way
the Cabinet got into the habit of ruling England and Scotland
(whose Parliament had been joined to that of England
in 1707) without bothering the King, who was apt to spend
a great deal of his time on the continent.
During the reign of George I and George II, a succession of
great Whigs (of whom one, Sir Robert Walpole, held office for
twenty-one years) formed the Cabinet Council of the King.
Their leader was finally recognised as the official leader not
only of the actual Cabinet but also of the majority party in
power in Parliament. The attempts of George III to take
matters into his own hands and not to leave the actual business
of government to his Cabinet were so disastrous that
they were never repeated. And from the earliest years of the
eighteenth century on, England enjoyed representative government,
with a responsible ministry which conducted the affairs
of the land.
To be quite true, this government did not represent all
classes of society. Less than one man in a dozen had the right
to vote. But it was the foundation for the modern representative
form of government. In a quiet and orderly fashion it
took the power away from the King and placed it in the hands
of an ever increasing number of popular representatives. It did
not bring the millenium to England, but it saved that country
from most of the revolutionary outbreaks which proved so
disastrous to the European continent in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
