




A CHAPTER WHICH OUGHT TO GIVE YOU A
GREAT DEAL OF POLITICAL INFORMATION
ABOUT THE LAST FIFTY YEARS, BUT
WHICH REALLY CONTAINS SEVERAL EXPLANATIONS
AND A FEW APOLOGIES
IF I had known how difficult it was to write a History of
the World, I should never have undertaken the task. Of course,
any one possessed of enough industry to lose himself for half
a dozen years in the musty stacks of a library, can compile a
ponderous tome which gives an account of the events in every
land during every century. But that was not the purpose of
the present book. The publishers wanted to print a history
that should have rhythm–a story which galloped rather than
walked. And now that I have almost finished I discover that
certain chapters gallop, that others wade slowly through the
dreary sands of long forgotten ages–that a few parts do not
make any progress at all, while still others indulge in a veritable
jazz of action and romance. I did not like this and I suggested
that we destroy the whole manuscript and begin once
more from the beginning. This, however, the publishers would
not allow.
As the next best solution of my difficulties, I took the type-
written pages to a number of charitable friends and asked them
to read what I had said, and give me the benefit of their advice.
The experience was rather disheartening. Each and every
man had his own prejudices and his own hobbies and preferences.
They all wanted to know why, where and how I dared
to omit their pet nation, their pet statesman, or even their most
beloved criminal. With some of them, Napoleon and Jenghiz
Khan were candidates for high honours. I explained that I
had tried very hard to be fair to Napoleon, but that in my
estimation he was greatly inferior to such men as George
Washington, Gustavus Wasa, Augustus, Hammurabi or
Lincoln, and a score of others all of whom were obliged to
content themselves with a few paragraphs, from sheer lack of
space. As for Jenghiz Khan, I only recognise his superior
ability in the field of wholesale murder and I did not intend to
give him any more publicity than I could help.
“This is very well as far as it goes,” said the next critic,
“but how about the Puritans? We are celebrating the tercentenary
of their arrival at Plymouth. They ought to have
more space.” My answer was that if I were writing a history
of America, the Puritans would get fully one half of the first
twelve chapters; that however this was a history of mankind
and that the event on Plymouth rock was not a matter of far-
reaching international importance until many centuries later;
that the United States had been founded by thirteen colonies
and not by a single one; that the most prominent leaders of the
first twenty years of our history had been from Virginia, from
Pennsylvania, and from the island of Nevis, rather than from
Massachusetts; and that therefore the Puritans ought to content
themselves with a page of print and a special map.
Next came the prehistoric specialist. Why in the name of
the great Tyrannosaur had I not devoted more space to the
wonderful race of Cro-Magnon men, who had developed such
a high stage of civilisation 10,000 years ago?
Indeed, and why not? The reason is simple. I do not take
as much stock in the perfection of these early races as some of
our most noted anthropologists seem to do. Rousseau and
the philosophers of the eighteenth century created the “noble
savage” who was supposed to have dwelt in a state of perfect
happiness during the beginning of time. Our modern scientists
have discarded the “noble savage,” so dearly beloved by
our grandfathers, and they have replaced him by the “splendid
savage” of the French Valleys who 35,000 years ago made an
end to the universal rule of the low-browed and low-living
brutes of the Neanderthal and other Germanic neighbourhoods.
They have shown us the elephants the Cro-Magnon painted
and the statues he carved and they have surrounded him with
much glory.
I do not mean to say that they are wrong. But I hold that
we know by far too little of this entire period to re-construct
that early west-European society with any degree (however
humble) of accuracy. And I would rather not state certain
things than run the risk of stating certain things that were not
so.
Then there were other critics, who accused me of direct
unfairness. Why did I leave out such countries as Ireland
and Bulgaria and Siam while I dragged in such other countries
as Holland and Iceland and Switzerland? My answer
was that I did not drag in any countries. They pushed themselves
in by main force of circumstances, and I simply could
not keep them out. And in order that my point may be understood,
let me state the basis upon which active membership to
this book of history was considered.
There was but one rule. “Did the country or the person
in question produce a new idea or perform an original act
without which the history of the entire human race would have
been different?” It was not a question of personal taste. It
was a matter of cool, almost mathematical judgment. No race
ever played a more picturesque role in history than the Mongolians,
and no race, from the point of view of achievement or
intelligent progress, was of less value to the rest of mankind.
The career of Tiglath-Pileser, the Assyrian, is full of
dramatic episodes. But as far as we are concerned, he might just
as well never have existed at all. In the same way, the history
of the Dutch Republic is not interesting because once upon a
time the sailors of de Ruyter went fishing in the river Thames,
but rather because of the fact that this small mud-bank along
the shores of the North Sea offered a hospitable asylum to all
sorts of strange people who had all sorts of queer ideas upon
all sorts of very unpopular subjects.
It is quite true that Athens or Florence, during the hey-day
of their glory, had only one tenth of the population of Kansas
City. But our present civilisation would be very different
had neither of these two little cities of the Mediterranean basin
existed. And the same (with due apologies to the good people
of Wyandotte County) can hardly be said of this busy metropolis
on the Missouri River.
And since I am being very personal, allow me to state one
other fact.
When we visit a doctor, we find out before hand whether
he is a surgeon or a diagnostician or a homeopath or a faith
healer, for we want to know from what angle he will look at
our complaint. We ought to be as careful in the choice of our
historians as we are in the selection of our physicians. We
think, “Oh well, history is history,” and let it go at that. But
the writer who was educated in a strictly Presbyterian household
somewhere in the backwoods of Scotland will look differ-
ently upon every question of human relationships from his
neighbour who as a child, was dragged to listen to the brilliant
exhortations of Robert Ingersoll, the enemy of all revealed
Devils. In due course of time, both men may forget their
early training and never again visit either church or lecture
hall. But the influence of these impressionable years stays
with them and they cannot escape showing it in whatever they
write or say or do.
In the preface to this book, I told you that I should not be
an infallible guide and now that we have almost reached the
end, I repeat the warning. I was born and educated in an
atmosphere of the old-fashioned liberalism which had followed
the discoveries of Darwin and the other pioneers of the nineteenth
century. As a child, I happened to spend most of my
waking hours with an uncle who was a great collector of the
books written by Montaigne, the great French essayist of the
sixteenth century. Because I was born in Rotterdam and
educated in the city of Gouda, I ran continually across
Erasmus and for some unknown reason this great exponent
of tolerance took hold of my intolerant self. Later I discovered
Anatole France and my first experience with the English
language came about through an accidental encounter with
Thackeray’s “Henry Esmond,” a story which made more impression
upon me than any other book in the English language.
If I had been born in a pleasant middle western city I probably
should have a certain affection for the hymns which I had
heard in my childhood. But my earliest recollection of music
goes back to the afternoon when my Mother took me to hear
nothing less than a Bach fugue. And the mathematical perfection
of the great Protestant master influenced me to such
an extent that I cannot hear the usual hymns of our prayer-
meetings without a feeling of intense agony and direct pain.
Again, if I had been born in Italy and had been warmed
by the sunshine of the happy valley of the Arno, I might love
many colourful and sunny pictures which now leave me indifferent
because I got my first artistic impressions in a country
where the rare sun beats down upon the rain-soaked land with
almost cruel brutality and throws everything into violent contrasts
of dark and light.
I state these few facts deliberately that you may know
the personal bias of the man who wrote this history and may
understand his point-of-view. The bibliography at the end of
this book, which represents all sorts of opinions and views, will
allow you to compare my ideas with those of other people.
And in this way, you will be able to reach your own final
conclusions with a greater degree of fairness than would
otherwise be possible.
After this short but necessary excursion, we return to the
history of the last fifty years. Many things happened during
this period but very little occurred which at the time seemed
to be of paramount importance. The majority of the greater
powers ceased to be mere political agencies and became large
business enterprises. They built railroads. They founded and
subsidized steam-ship lines to all parts of the world. They
connected their different possessions with telegraph wires.
And they steadily increased their holdings in other continents.
Every available bit of African or Asiatic territory was claimed
by one of the rival powers. France became a colonial nation
with interests in Algiers and Madagascar and Annam and
Tonkin (in eastern Asia). Germany claimed parts of southwest
and east Africa, built settlements in Kameroon on the
west coast of Africa and in New Guinea and many of the
islands of the Pacific, and used the murder of a few missionaries
as a welcome excuse to take the harbour of Kisochau on the
Yellow Sea in China. Italy tried her luck in Abyssinia, was
disastrously defeated by the soldiers of the Negus, and consoled
herself by occupying the Turkish possessions in Tripoli
in northern Africa. Russia, having occupied all of Siberia,
took Port Arthur away from China. Japan, having defeated
China in the war of 1895, occupied the island of Formosa and
in the year 1905 began to lay claim to the entire empire of
Corea. In the year 1883 England, the largest colonial empire
the world has ever seen, undertook to “protect” Egypt. She
performed this task most efficiently and to the great material
benefit of that much neglected country, which ever since the
opening of the Suez canal in 1868 had been threatened with a
foreign invasion. During the next thirty years she fought a
number of colonial wars in different parts of the world and in
1902 (after three years of bitter fighting) she conquered the
independent Boer republics of the Transvaal and the Orange
Free State. Meanwhile she had encouraged Cecil Rhodes to
lay the foundations for a great African state, which reached
from the Cape almost to the mouth of the Nile, and had faithfully
picked up such islands or provinces as had been left without
a European owner.
The shrewd king of Belgium, by name Leopold, used
the discoveries of Henry Stanley to found the Congo Free
State in the year 1885. Originally this gigantic tropical empire
was an “absolute monarchy.” But after many years of
scandalous mismanagement, it was annexed by the Belgian
people who made it a colony (in the year 1908) and abolished
the terrible abuses which had been tolerated by this very
unscrupulous Majesty, who cared nothing for the fate of the
natives as long as he got his ivory and rubber.
As for the United States, they had so much land that they
desired no further territory. But the terrible misrule of
Cuba, one of the last of the Spanish possessions in the western
hemisphere, practically forced the Washington government to
take action. After a short and rather uneventful war, the
Spaniards were driven out of Cuba and Puerto Rico and the
Philippines, and the two latter became colonies of the United
States.
This economic development of the world was perfectly
natural. The increasing number of factories in England and
France and Germany needed an ever increasing amount of raw
materials and the equally increasing number of European
workers needed an ever increasing amount of food. Everywhere
the cry was for more and for richer markets, for more
easily accessible coal mines and iron mines and rubber plantations
and oil-wells, for greater supplies of wheat and grain.
The purely political events of the European continent
dwindled to mere insignificance in the eyes of men who were
making plans for steamboat lines on Victoria Nyanza or
for railroads through the interior of Shantung. They knew
that many European questions still remained to be settled, but
they did not bother, and through sheer indifference and carelessness
they bestowed upon their descendants a terrible inheritance
of hate and misery. For untold centuries the south-eastern
corner of Europe had been the scene of rebellion and bloodshed.
During the seventies of the last century the people of
Serbia and Bulgaria and Montenegro and Roumania were once
more trying to gain their freedom and the Turks (with the
support of many of the western powers), were trying to prevent
this.
After a period of particularly atrocious massacres in Bulgaria
in the year 1876, the Russian people lost all patience.
The Government was forced to intervene just as President McKinley
was obliged to go to Cuba and stop the shooting-squads
of General Weyler in Havana. In April of the year 1877 the
Russian armies crossed the Danube, stormed the Shipka pass,
and after the capture of Plevna, marched southward until they
reached the gates of Constantinople. Turkey appealed for
help to England. There were many English people who denounced
their government when it took the side of the Sultan.
But Disraeli (who had just made Queen Victoria Empress of
India and who loved the picturesque Turks while he hated the
Russians who were brutally cruel to the Jewish people within
their frontiers) decided to interfere. Russia was forced to
conclude the peace of San Stefano (1878) and the question of
the Balkans was left to a Congress which convened at Berlin
in June and July of the same year.
This famous conference was entirely dominated by the personality
of Disraeli. Even Bismarck feared the clever old
man with his well-oiled curly hair and his supreme arrogance,
tempered by a cynical sense of humor and a marvellous gift
for flattery. At Berlin the British prime-minister carefully
watched over the fate of his friends the Turks. Montenegro,
Serbia and Roumania were recognised as independent kingdoms.
The principality of Bulgaria was given a semi-independent
status under Prince Alexander of Battenberg, a
nephew of Tsar Alexander II. But none of those countries
were given the chance to develop their powers and their resources
as they would have been able to do, had England been
less anxious about the fate of the Sultan, whose domains were
necessary to the safety of the British Empire as a bulwark
against further Russian aggression.
To make matters worse, the congress allowed Austria to
take Bosnia and Herzegovina away from the Turks to be
“administered” as part of the Habsburg domains. It is true
that Austria made an excellent job of it. The neglected provinces
were as well managed as the best of the British colonies,
and that is saying a great deal. But they were inhabited by
many Serbians. In older days they had been part of the great
Serbian empire of Stephan Dushan, who early in the fourteenth
century had defended western Europe against the invasions
of the Turks and whose capital of Uskub had been a
centre of civilisation one hundred and fifty years before Columbus
discovered the new lands of the west. The Serbians remem-
bered their ancient glory as who would not? They resented
the presence of the Austrians in two provinces, which, so they
felt, were theirs by every right of tradition.
And it was in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, that the
archduke Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne, was murdered
on June 28 of the year 1914. The assassin was a Serbian
student who had acted from purely patriotic motives.
But the blame for this terrible catastrophe which was the
immediate, though not the only cause of the Great World War
did not lie with the half-crazy Serbian boy or his Austrian
victim. It must be traced back to the days of the famous
Berlin Conference when Europe was too busy building a material
civilisation to care about the aspirations and the dreams
of a forgotten race in a dreary corner of the old Balkan
peninsula.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
