




AS SOON AS NAPOLEON HAD BEEN SENT TO
ST. HELENA THE RULERS WHO SO OFTEN
HAD BEEN DEFEATED BY THE HATED
“CORSICAN” MET AT VIENNA AND TRIED
TO UNDO THE MANY CHANGES THAT HAD
BEEN BROUGHT ABOUT BY THE FRENCH
REVOLUTION
THE Imperial Highnesses, the Royal Highnesses, their
Graces the Dukes, the Ministers Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary,
together with the plain Excellencies and their army
of secretaries, servants and hangers-on, whose labours had
been so rudely interrupted by the sudden return of the terrible
Corsican (now sweltering under the hot sun of St. Helena)
went back to their jobs. The victory was duly celebrated with
dinners, garden parties and balls at which the new and very
shocking “waltz” was danced to the great scandal of the ladies
and gentlemen who remembered the minuet of the old Regime.
For almost a generation they had lived in retirement. At
last the danger was over. They were very eloquent upon the
subject of the terrible hardships which they had suffered.
And they expected to be recompensed for every penny they
had lost at the hands of the unspeakable Jacobins who had
dared to kill their anointed king, who had abolished wigs and
who had discarded the short trousers of the court of Versailles
for the ragged pantaloons of the Parisian slums.
You may think it absurd that I should mention such a
detail. But, if you please, the Congress of Vienna was one
long succession of such absurdities and for many months the
question of “short trousers vs. long trousers” interested the
delegates more than the future settlement of the Saxon or
Spanish problems. His Majesty the King of Prussia went so
far as to order a pair of short ones, that he might give public
evidence of his contempt for everything revolutionary.
Another German potentate, not to be outdone in this noble
hatred for the revolution, decreed that all taxes which his subjects
had paid to the French usurper should be paid a second
time to the legitimate ruler who had loved his people from afar
while they were at the mercy of the Corsican ogre. And so on.
From one blunder to another, until one gasps and exclaims
“but why in the name of High Heaven did not the people
object?” Why not indeed? Because the people were utterly
exhausted, were desperate, did not care what happened or how
or where or by whom they were ruled, provided there was
peace. They were sick and tired of war and revolution and
reform.
In the eighties of the previous century they had all danced
around the tree of liberty. Princes had embraced their cooks
and Duchesses had danced the Carmagnole with their lackeys
in the honest belief that the Millennium of Equality and
Fraternity had at last dawned upon this wicked world. Instead of
the Millennium they had been visited by the Revolutionary
commissary who had lodged a dozen dirty soldiers in their parlor
and had stolen the family plate when he returned to Paris to
report to his government upon the enthusiasm with which the
“liberated country” had received the Constitution, which the
French people had presented to their good neighbours.
When they had heard how the last outbreak of revolutionary
disorder in Paris had been suppressed by a young officer, called
Bonaparte, or Buonaparte, who had turned his guns upon the
mob, they gave a sigh of relief. A little less liberty, fraternity
and equality seemed a very desirable thing. But ere long, the
young officer called Buonaparte or Bonaparte became one of
the three consuls of the French Republic, then sole consul and
finally Emperor. As he was much more efficient than any
ruler that had ever been seen before, his hand pressed heavily
upon his poor subjects. He showed them no mercy. He impressed
their sons into his armies, he married their daughters
to his generals and he took their pictures and their statues to
enrich his own museums. He turned the whole of Europe
into an armed camp and killed almost an entire generation of
men.
Now he was gone, and the people (except a few professional
military men) had but one wish. They wanted to be let alone.
For awhile they had been allowed to rule themselves, to vote
for mayors and aldermen and judges. The system had been a
terrible failure. The new rulers had been inexperienced and
extravagant. From sheer despair the people turned to the
representative men of the old Regime. “You rule us,” they
said, “as you used to do. Tell us what we owe you for taxes
and leave us alone. We are busy repairing the damage of the
age of liberty.”
The men who stage-managed the famous congress certainly
did their best to satisfy this longing for rest and quiet.
The Holy Alliance, the main result of the Congress, made the
policeman the most important dignitary of the State and held
out the most terrible punishment to those who dared criticise a
single official act.
Europe had peace, but it was the peace of the cemetery.
The three most important men at Vienna were the Emperor
Alexander of Russia, Metternich, who represented the
interests of the Austrian house of Habsburg, and Talleyrand,
the erstwhile bishop of Autun, who had managed to live
through the different changes in the French government by
the sheer force of his cunning and his intelligence and who
now travelled to the Austrian capital to save for his country
whatever could be saved from the Napoleonic ruin. Like the
gay young man of the limerick, who never knew when he was
slighted, this unbidden guest came to the party and ate just as
heartily as if he had been really invited. Indeed, before long,
he was sitting at the head of the table entertaining everybody
with his amusing stories and gaining the company’s good will
by the charm of his manner.
Before he had been in Vienna twenty-four hours he knew
that the allies were divided into two hostile camps. On the
one side were Russia, who wanted to take Poland, and Prussia,
who wanted to annex Saxony; and on the other side were
Austria and England, who were trying to prevent this grab
because it was against their own interest that either Prussia or
Russia should be able to dominate Europe. Talleyrand played
the two sides against each other with great skill and it was due
to his efforts that the French people were not made to suffer
for the ten years of oppression which Europe had endured at
the hands of the Imperial officials. He argued that the French
people had been given no choice in the matter. Napoleon had
forced them to act at his bidding. But Napoleon was gone and
Louis XVIII was on the throne. “Give him a chance,” Talleyrand
pleaded. And the Allies, glad to see a legitimate king
upon the throne of a revolutionary country, obligingly yielded
and the Bourbons were given their chance, of which they
made such use that they were driven out after fifteen years.
The second man of the triumvirate of Vienna was Metternich,
the Austrian prime minister, the leader of the foreign
policy of the house of Habsburg. Wenzel Lothar, Prince of
Metternich-Winneburg, was exactly what the name suggests.
He was a Grand Seigneur, a very handsome gentleman with
very fine manners, immensely rich, and very able, but the
product of a society which lived a thousand miles away from
the sweating multitudes who worked and slaved in the cities
and on the farms. As a young man, Metternich had been
studying at the University of Strassburg when the French
Revolution broke out. Strassburg, the city which gave birth
to the Marseillaise, had been a centre of Jacobin activities.
Metternich remembered that his pleasant social life had been
sadly interrupted, that a lot of incompetent citizens had suddenly
been called forth to perform tasks for which they were
not fit, that the mob had celebrated the dawn of the new liberty
by the murder of perfectly innocent persons. He had failed to
see the honest enthusiasm of the masses, the ray of hope in the
eyes of women and children who carried bread and water to
the ragged troops of the Convention, marching through the
city on their way to the front and a glorious death for the
French Fatherland.
The whole thing had filled the young Austrian with disgust.
It was uncivilised. If there were any fighting to be done it
must be done by dashing young men in lovely uniforms, charging
across the green fields on well-groomed horses. But to
turn an entire country into an evil-smelling armed camp where
tramps were overnight promoted to be generals, that was both
wicked and senseless. “See what came of all your fine ideas,"
he would say to the French diplomats whom he met at a quiet
little dinner given by one of the innumerable Austrian grand-
dukes. “You wanted liberty, equality and fraternity and you
got Napoleon. How much better it would have been if you
had been contented with the existing order of things.” And
he would explain his system of “stability.” He would advocate
a return to the normalcy of the good old days before the
war, when everybody was happy and nobody talked nonsense
about “everybody being as good as everybody else.” In this
attitude he was entirely sincere and as he was an able man of
great strength of will and a tremendous power of persuasion,
he was one of the most dangerous enemies of the Revolutionary
ideas. He did not die until the year 1859, and he therefore
lived long enough to see the complete failure of all his policies
when they were swept aside by the revolution of the year 1848.
He then found himself the most hated man of Europe and
more than once ran the risk of being lynched by angry crowds
of outraged citizens. But until the very last, he remained steadfast
in his belief that he had done the right thing.
He had always been convinced that people preferred peace
to liberty and he had tried to give them what was best for them.
And in all fairness, it ought to be said that his efforts to
establish universal peace were fairly successful. The great powers
did not fly at each other’s throat for almost forty years, indeed
not until the Crimean war between Russia and England,
France and Italy and Turkey, in the year 1854. That means
a record for the European continent.
The third hero of this waltzing congress was the Emperor
Alexander. He had been brought up at the court of his grand-
mother, the famous Catherine the Great. Between the lessons
of this shrewd old woman, who taught him to regard the glory
of Russia as the most important thing in life, and those of his
private tutor, a Swiss admirer of Voltaire and Rousseau, who
filled his mind with a general love of humanity, the boy grew
up to be a strange mixture of a selfish tyrant and a sentimental
revolutionist. He had suffered great indignities during the
life of his crazy father, Paul I. He had been obliged to wit-
ness the wholesale slaughter of the Napoleonic battle-fields.
Then the tide had turned. His armies had won the day for the
Allies. Russia had become the saviour of Europe and the Tsar
of this mighty people was acclaimed as a half-god who would
cure the world of its many ills.
But Alexander was not very clever. He did not know
men and women as Talleyrand and Metternich knew them.
He did not understand the strange game of diplomacy. He
was vain (who would not be under the circumstances?) and
loved to hear the applause of the multitude and soon he had
become the main “attraction” of the Congress while Metternich
and Talleyrand and Castlereagh (the very able British
representative) sat around a table and drank a bottle of Tokay
and decided what was actually going to be done. They needed
Russia and therefore they were very polite to Alexander, but
the less he had personally to do with the actual work of the
Congress, the better they were pleased. They even encouraged
his plans for a Holy Alliance that he might be fully occupied
while they were engaged upon the work at hand.
Alexander was a sociable person who liked to go to parties
and meet people. Upon such occasions he was happy and gay
but there was a very different element in his character. He
tried to forget something which he could not forget. On the
night of the 23rd of March of the year 1801 he had been sitting
in a room of the St. Michael Palace in Petersburg, waiting for
the news of his father’s abdication. But Paul had refused to
sign the document which the drunken officers had placed before
him on the table, and in their rage they had put a scarf
around his neck and had strangled him to death. Then they
had gone downstairs to tell Alexander that he was Emperor of
all the Russian lands.
The memory of this terrible night stayed with the Tsar
who was a very sensitive person. He had been educated in
the school of the great French philosophers who did not believe
in God but in Human Reason. But Reason alone could
not satisfy the Emperor in his predicament. He began to
hear voices and see things. He tried to find a way by which
he could square himself with his conscience. He became very
pious and began to take an interest in mysticism, that strange
love of the mysterious and the unknown which is as old as the
temples of Thebes and Babylon.
The tremendous emotion of the great revolutionary era
had influenced the character of the people of that day in a
strange way. Men and women who had lived through twenty
years of anxiety and fear were no longer quite normal. They
jumped whenever the door-bell rang. It might mean the news
of the “death on the field of honour” of an only son. The
phrases about “brotherly love” and “liberty” of the Revolution
were hollow words in the ears of sorely stricken peasants.
They clung to anything that might give them a new hold on
the terrible problems of life. In their grief and misery they
were easily imposed upon by a large number of imposters
who posed as prophets and preached a strange new doctrine
which they dug out of the more obscure passages of the Book
of Revelations.
In the year 1814, Alexander, who had already consulted a
large number of wonder-doctors, heard of a new seeress who
was foretelling the coming doom of the world and was exhorting
people to repent ere it be too late. The Baroness von
Krudener, the lady in question, was a Russian woman of uncertain
age and similar reputation who had been the wife of a
Russian diplomat in the days of the Emperor Paul. She had
squandered her husband’s money and had disgraced him by
her strange love affairs. She had lived a very dissolute life
until her nerves had given way and for a while she was not in
her right mind. Then she had been converted by the sight of
the sudden death of a friend. Thereafter she despised all
gaiety. She confessed her former sins to her shoemaker, a
pious Moravian brother, a follower of the old reformer John
Huss, who had been burned for his heresies by the Council of
Constance in the year 1415.
The next ten years the Baroness spent in Germany making
a specialty of the “conversion” of kings and princes. To convince
Alexander, the Saviour of Europe, of the error of his
ways was the greatest ambition of her life. And as Alexander,
in his misery, was willing to listen to anybody who brought him
a ray of hope, the interview was easily arranged. On the evening
of the fourth of June of the year 1815, she was admitted
to the tent of the Emperor. She found him reading his Bible.
We do not know what she said to Alexander, but when she
left him three hours later, he was bathed in tears, and vowed
that “at last his soul had found peace.” From that day on the
Baroness was his faithful companion and his spiritual adviser.
She followed him to Paris and then to Vienna and the time
which Alexander did not spend dancing he spent at the
Krudener prayer-meetings.
You may ask why I tell you this story in such great detail?
Are not the social changes of the nineteenth century of greater
importance than the career of an ill-balanced woman who had
better be forgotten? Of course they are, but there exist any
number of books which will tell you of these other things with
great accuracy and in great detail. I want you to learn something
more from this history than a mere succession of facts.
I want you to approach all historical events in a frame of mind
that will take nothing for granted. Don’t be satisfied with
the mere statement that “such and such a thing happened then
and there.” Try to discover the hidden motives behind every
action and then you will understand the world around you
much better and you will have a greater chance to help others,
which (when all is said and done) is the only truly satisfactory
way of living.
I do not want you to think of the Holy Alliance as a piece
of paper which was signed in the year 1815 and lies dead and
forgotten somewhere in the archives of state. It may be forgotten
but it is by no means dead. The Holy Alliance was
directly responsible for the promulgation of the Monroe
Doctrine, and the Monroe Doctrine of America for the Americans
has a very distinct bearing upon your own life. That is
the reason why I want you to know exactly how this document
happened to come into existence and what the real motives were
underlying this outward manifestation of piety and Christian
devotion to duty.
The Holy Alliance was the joint labour of an unfortunate
man who had suffered a terrible mental shock and who was
trying to pacify his much-disturbed soul, and of an ambitious
woman who after a wasted life had lost her beauty and her
attraction and who satisfied her vanity and her desire for
notoriety by assuming the role of self-appointed Messiah of a
new and strange creed. I am not giving away any secrets
when I tell you these details. Such sober minded people as
Castlereagh, Metternich and Talleyrand fully understood
the limited abilities of the sentimental Baroness. It would have
been easy for Metternich to send her back to her German
estates. A few lines to the almighty commander of the imperial
police and the thing was done.
But France and England and Austria depended upon the
good-will of Russia. They could not afford to offend Alexander.
And they tolerated the silly old Baroness because they
had to. And while they regarded the Holy Alliance as utter
rubbish and not worth the paper upon which it was written,
they listened patiently to the Tsar when he read them the first
rough draft of this attempt to create the Brotherhood of Men
upon a basis of the Holy Scriptures. For this is what the
Holy Alliance tried to do, and the signers of the document
solemnly declared that they would “in the administration of
their respective states and in their political relations with every
other government take for their sole guide the precepts of that
Holy Religion, namely the precepts of Justice, Christian
Charity and Peace, which far from being applicable only to
private concerns must have an immediate influence on the
councils of princes, and must guide all their steps as being the
only means of consolidating human institutions and remedying
their imperfections.” They then proceeded to promise each
other that they would remain united “by the bonds of a true
and indissoluble fraternity, and considering each other as
fellow-countrymen, they would on all occasions and in all places
lend each other aid and assistance.” And more words to the
same effect.
Eventually the Holy Alliance was signed by the Emperor
of Austria, who did not understand a word of it. It was signed
by the Bourbons who needed the friendship of Napoleon’s old
enemies. It was signed by the King of Prussia, who hoped to
gain Alexander for his plans for a “greater Prussia,” and by
all the little nations of Europe who were at the mercy of Russia.
England never signed, because Castlereagh thought the
whole thing buncombe. The Pope did not sign because he
resented this interference in his business by a Greek-Orthodox
and a Protestant. And the Sultan did not sign because he
never heard of it.
The general mass of the European people, however, soon
were forced to take notice. Behind the hollow phrases of the
Holy Alliance stood the armies of the Quintuple Alliance
which Metternich had created among the great powers. These
armies meant business. They let it be known that the peace
of Europe must not be disturbed by the so-called liberals who
were in reality nothing but disguised Jacobins, and hoped for
a return of the revolutionary days. The enthusiasm for the
great wars of liberation of the years 1812, 1818, 1814 and
1815 had begun to wear off. It had been followed by a sincere
belief in the coming of a happier day. The soldiers who had
borne the brunt of the battle wanted peace and they said so.
But they did not want the sort of peace which the Holy
Alliance and the Council of the European powers had now
bestowed upon them. They cried that they had been betrayed.
But they were careful lest they be heard by a secret-police spy.
The reaction was victorious. It was a reaction caused by men
who sincerely believed that their methods were necessary for
the good of humanity. But it was just as hard to bear as if
their intentions had been less kind. And it caused a great deal
of unnecessary suffering and greatly retarded the orderly
progress of political development.
Continue...

This complete e-book of The Story of Mankind by Hendrik van Loon (Professor of the Social Sciences in Antioch College) is in the public domain.

This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on November 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Story of MankindBy Hendrik van LoonAt Amazon
