


RHYTHM AND METRE
  “Rhythm is the recurrence of stress at intervals; metre is the
  regular, or measured, recurrence of stress."
    M. H. SHACKFORD, A First Book of Poetics
  “Metres being manifestly sections of rhythm."
    ARISTOTLE, Poetics, 4. (Butcher’s translation)
  “Thoughts that voluntary move
  Harmonious numbers."
    MILTON
1. The Nature of Rhythm
And why must the words begin to dance? The answer is to be perceived in
the very nature of Rhythm, that old name for the ceaseless pulsing or
“flowing” of all living things. So deep indeed lies the instinct for
rhythm in our consciousness that we impute it even to inanimate objects.
We hear the ticking of the clock as tíck-tock, tíck-tock, or else
tick-tóck, tick-tóck, although psychologists assure us that the clock’s
wheels are moving with indifferent, mechanical precision, and that it is
simply our own focusing of attention upon alternate beats which creates
the impression of rhythm. We hear a rhythm in the wheels of the train, and
in the purring of the motor-engine, knowing all the while that it
is we who impose or make-up the rhythm, in our human instinct for
organizing the units of attention. We cannot help it, as long as our own
pulses beat. No two persons catch quite the same rhythm in the sounds of
the animate and inanimate world, because no two persons have absolutely
identical pulse-beats, identical powers of attention, an identical
psycho-physical organism. We all perceive that there is a rhythm in a
racing crew, in a perfectly timed stroke of golf, in a fisherman’s fly-
casting, in a violinist’s bow, in a close-hauled sailboat fighting with
the wind. But we appropriate and organize these objective impressions in
subtly different ways.
When, for instance, we listen to poetry read aloud, or when we read it
aloud ourselves, some of us are instinctive “timers,"
[Footnote: See W. M. Patterson, The Rhythm of Prose. Columbia University
Press, 1916.]
paying primary attention to the spaced or measured intervals of time,
although in so doing we are not wholly regardless of those points of
“stress” which help to make the time-intervals plainer. Others of us are
natural “stressers,” in that we pay primary attention to the “weight” of
words,–the relative loudness or pitch, by which their meaning or
importance is indicated,–and it is only secondarily that we think of
these weighted or “stressed” words as separated from one another by
approximately equal intervals of time. Standing on the rocks at Gloucester
after an easterly storm, a typical “timer” might be chiefly conscious of
the steady sequence of the waves, the measured intervals between
their summits; while the typical stresser, although subconsciously aware
of the steady iteration of the giant rollers, might watch primarily their
foaming crests, and listen chiefly to their crashing thunder. The point to
be remembered is this: that neither the “timing” instinct nor the
“stressing” instinct excludes the other, although in most individuals one
or the other predominates. Musicians, for instance, are apt to be
noticeable “timers,” while many scholars who deal habitually with words in
their varied shifts of meaning, are professionally inclined to be
“stressers.”
2. The Measurement of Rhythm
Let us apply these facts to some of the more simple of the vexed questions
of prosody, No one disputes the universality of the rhythmizing impulse;
the quarrel begins as soon as any prosodist attempts to dogmatize about
the nature and measurement of those flowing time-intervals whose
arrangement we call rhythm. No one disputes, again, that the only arbiter
in matters of prosody is the trained ear, and not the eye. Infinitely
deceptive is the printed page of verse when regarded by the eye. Verse may
be made to look like prose and prose to look like verse. Capital letters,
lines, rhymes, phrases and paragraphs may be so cunningly or
conventionally arranged by the printer as to disguise the real nature of
the rhythmical and metrical pattern. When in doubt, close your eyes!
We agree, then, that in all spoken language–and this is as true of prose
as it is of verse–there are time-intervals more or less clearly marked,
and that the ear is the final judge as to the nature of these intervals.
But can the ear really measure the intervals with any approximation to
certainty, so that prosodists, for instance, can agree that a given poem
is written in a definite metre? In one sense “yes.” No one doubts that the
Odyssey is written in “dactylic hexameters,” i.e., in lines made up of
six “feet,” each one of which is normally composed of a long syllable plus
two short syllables, or of an acceptable equivalent for that particular
combination. But when we are taught in school that Longfellow’s
Evangeline is also written in “dactylic hexameters,” trouble begins for
the few inquisitive, since it is certain that if you close your eyes and
listen carefully to a dozen lines of Homer’s Greek, and then to a
dozen lines of Longfellow’s English, each written in so-called
“hexameters,” you are listening to two very different arrangements of
time-intervals, so different, in fact, that the two poems are really not
in the same “measure” or “metre” at all. For the Greek poet was, as a
metrist, thinking primarily of quantity, of the relative “timing” of his
syllables, and the American of the relative “stress” of his syllables.
[Footnote: “Musically speaking–because the musical terms are exact and
not ambiguous–true dactyls are in 2-4 time and the verse of Evangelineis in 3-8 time.” T. D. Goodell, Nation, October 12, 1911.]
That illustration is drearily hackneyed, no doubt, but it has a double
value. It is perfectly clear; and furthermore, it serves to remind us of
the instinctive differences between different persons and different races
as regards the ways of arranging time-intervals so as to create the
rhythms of verse. The individual’s standard of measurement–his poetic
foot-rule, so to speak–is very elastic,–"made of rubber” indeed, as the
experiments of many psychological laboratories have demonstrated beyond a
question. Furthermore, the composers of poetry build it out of very
elastic units. They are simply putting syllables of words together into a
rhythmical design, and these “airy syllables,” in themselves mere symbols
of ideas and feelings, cannot be weighed by any absolutely correct
sound-scales. They cannot be measured in time by any absolutely accurate
watch-dial, or exactly estimated in their meaning, whether that be literal
or figurative, by any dictionary of words and phrases. But this is only
saying that the syllables which make up the units of verse, whether the
units be called “foot” or “line” or “phrase,” are not dead, mechanical
things, but live things, moving rhythmically, entering thereby into the
pulsing, chiming life of the real world, and taking on more fullness of
life and beauty in elastic movement, in ordered but infinitely flexible
design, than they ever could possess as independent particles.
3. Conflict and Compromise
And everywhere in the arrangement of syllables into the patterns of rhythm
and metre we find conflict and compromise, the surrender of some values of
sound or sense for the sake of a greater unity. To revert to
considerations dealt with in an earlier chapter, we touch here upon the
old antinomy–or it may be, harmony–between “form” and “significance,"
between the “outside” and the “inside” of the work of art. For words,
surely, have one kind of value as pure sound, as “cadences” made up of
stresses, slides, pauses, and even of silences when the expected syllable
is artfully withheld. It is this sound-value, for instance, which you
perceive as you listen to a beautifully recited poem in Russian, a
language of which you know not a single word; and you may experience a
modification of the same pleasure in closing your mind wholly to the
“sense” of a richly musical passage in Swinburne, and delighting your ear
by its mere beauty of tone. But words have also that other value as
meaning, and we are aware how these meaning values shift with the stress
and turns of thought, so that a given word has a greater or less weight in
different sentences or even in different clauses of the same sentence.
“Meaning" values, like sound values, are never precisely fixed in a
mechanical and universally agreed-upon scale, they are relative, not
absolute. Sometimes meaning and sound conflict with one another, and one
must be sacrificed in part, as when the normal accent of a word
refuses to coincide with the verse-accent demanded by a certain measure,
so that we “wrench” the accent a trifle, or make it “hover” over two
syllables without really alighting upon either. And it is significant that
lovers of poetry have always found pleasure in such compromises.
[Footnote: Compare the passage about Chopin’s piano-playing, quoted from
Alden in the Notes and Illustrations for this chapter.]
They enjoy minor departures from and returns to the normal, the expected
measure of both sound and sense, just as a man likes to sail a boat as
closely into the wind as he conveniently can, making his actual course a
compromise between the line as laid by the compass, and the actual facts
of wind and tide and the behavior of his particular boat. It is thus that
the sailor “makes it,” triumphantly! And the poet “makes it” likewise, out
of deep, strong-running tides of rhythmic impulse, out of arbitrary words
and rebellious moods, out of
  “Thoughts hardly to be packed
  Into a narrow act,
  Fancies that broke through language and escaped,”
until he compels rhythm and syllables to move concordantly, and blend into
that larger living whole–the dancing, singing crowd of sounds and
meanings which make up a poem.
4. The Rhythms of Prose
Just here it may be of help to us to turn away for a moment from verse
rhythm, and to consider what Dryden called “the other harmony” of prose.
For no one doubts that prose has rhythm, as well as verse. Vast and
learned treatises have been written on the prose rhythms of the Greeks and
Romans, and Saintsbury’s History of English Prose Rhythm is a monumental
collection of wonderful prose passages in English, with the scansion of
“long” and “short” syllables and of “feet” marked after a fashion that
seems to please no one but the author. But in truth the task of inventing
an adequate system for notating the rhythm of prose, and securing a
working agreement among prosodists as to a proper terminology, is almost
insuperable. Those of us who sat in our youth at the feet of German
masters were taught that the distinction between verse and prose was
simple: verse was, as the Greeks had called it, “bound speech” and prose
was “loosened speech.” But a large proportion of the poetry published in
the last ten years is “free verse,” which is assuredly of a “loosened"
rather than a “bound” pattern.
Apparently the old fence between prose and verse has been broken down. Or,
if one conceives of indubitable prose and indubitable verse as forming two
intersecting circles, there is a neutral zone,
[Illustration:   Prose  /  Neutral Zone  /  Verse]
which some would call “prose poetry” and some “free verse,” and which,
according to the experiments of Dr. Patterson
[Footnote: The Rhythm of Prose, already cited.]
may be appropriated as “prose experience” or “verse experience” according
to the rhythmic instinct of each individual. Indeed Mr. T. S. Omond has
admitted that “the very same words, with the very same natural stresses,
may be prose or verse according as we treat them. The difference is in
ourselves, in the mental rhythm to which we unconsciously adjust the
words."
[Footnote: Quoted in B. M. Alden, “The Mental Side of Metrical Form,"
Modern Language Review, July, 1914.]
Many familiar sentences from the English Bible or Prayer-Book, such as the
words from the Te Deum, “We, therefore, pray thee, help thy servants,
whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood,” have a rhythm which may
be felt as prose or verse, according to the mental habit or mood or
rhythmizing impulse of the hearer.
Nevertheless it remains true in general that the rhythms of prose are more
constantly varied, broken and intricate than the rhythms of verse. They
are characterized, according to the interesting experiments of Dr.
Patterson, by syncopated time,
[Footnote: “For a ’timer’ the definition of prose as distinguished from
verse experience depends upon a predominance of syncopation over
coincidence in the coordination of the accented syllables of the text with
the measuring pulses.” Rhythm of Prose, p. 22.]
whereas in normal verse there is a fairly clean-cut coincidence between
the pulses of the hearer and the strokes of the rhythm. Every one seems to
agree that there is a certain danger in mixing these infinitely subtle and
“syncopated” tunes of prose with the easily recognized tunes of verse.
There is, unquestionably, a natural “iambic” roll in English prose, due to
the predominant alternation of stressed and unstressed syllables in our
native tongue, but when Dickens–to cite what John Wesley would call “an
eminent sinner” in this respect–inserts in his emotional prose line after
line of five-stress “iambic” verse, we feel instinctively that the
presence of the blank verse impairs the true harmony of the prose.
[Footnote:  Observe, in the “Notes and Illustrations” for this chapter,
the frequency of the blank-verse lines in Robert G. Ingersoll’s “Address
over a Little Boy’s Grave."]
Delicate writers of English prose usually avoid this coincidence of
pattern with the more familiar patterns of verse, but it is impossible to
avoid it wholly, and some of the most beautiful cadences of English prose
might, if detached from their context, be scanned for a few syllables as
perfect verse. The free verse of Whitman, Henley and Matthew Arnold is
full of these embedded fragments of recognized “tunes of verse,” mingled
with the unidentifiable tunes of prose. There has seldom been a more
curious example of accidental coincidence than in this sentence from a
prosaic textbook on “The Parallelogram of Forces”: “And hence no force,
however great, can draw a cord, however fine, into a horizontal line which
shall be absolutely straight.” This is precisely the “four-stressed
iambic” metre of In Memoriam, and it even preserves the peculiar rhyme
order of the In Memoriam stanza:
  “And hence no force, however great,
    Can draw a cord, however fine,
    Into a horizontal line
  Which shall be absolutely straight.”
We shall consider more closely, in the section on Free Verse in the
following chapter, this question of the coincidence and variation of
pattern as certain types of loosened verse pass in and out of the zone
which is commonly recognized as pure prose. But it is highly important
here to remember another fact, which professional psychologists in their
laboratory experiments with the notation of verse and prose have
frequently forgotten, namely, the existence of a type of ornamented prose,
which has had a marked historical influence upon the development of
English style. This ornamented prose, elaborated by Greek and Roman
rhetoricians, and constantly apparent in the pages of Cicero, heightened
its rhythm by various devices of alliteration, assonance, tone-color,
cadence, phrase and period. Greek oratory even employed rhyme in highly
colored passages, precisely as Miss Amy Lowell uses rhyme in her
polyphonic or “many-voiced” prose. Medieval Latin took over all of these
devices from Classical Latin, and in its varied oratorical, liturgical and
epistolary forms it strove to imitate the various modes of cursus("running”) and clausula ("cadence”) which had characterized the rhythms
of Isocrates and Cicero.
[Footnote: A. C. Clark, Prose Rhythm in English. Oxford, 1913.
Morris W. Croll, “The Cadence of English Oratorical Prose,” Studies in
Philology. January, 1919.
Oliver W. Elton, “English Prose Numbers,” in Essays and Studies by
members of the English Association, 4th Series. Oxford, 1913.]
From the Medieval Latin Missal and Breviary these devices of prose rhythm,
particularly those affecting the end of sentences, were taken over into
the Collects and other parts of the liturgy of the English Prayer-Book.
They had a constant influence upon the rhythms employed by the translators
of the English Bible, and through the Bible the cadences of this ancient
ornamented prose have passed over into the familiar but intricate
harmonies of our “heightened” modern prose.
While this whole matter is too technical to be dealt with adequately here,
it may serve at least to remind the reader that an appreciation of English
prose rhythms, as they have been actually employed for many centuries,
requires a sensitiveness to the rhetorical position of phrases and
clauses, and to “the use of sonorous words in the places of rhetorical
emphasis, which cannot be indicated by the bare symbols of prosody."
[Footnote: New York Nation, February 27, 1913.]
For that sonority and cadence and balance which constitute a harmonious
prose sentence cannot be adequately felt by a possibly illiterate
scientist in his laboratory for acoustics; the “literary" value of words,
in all strongly emotional prose, is inextricably mingled with the bare
sound values: it is thought-units that must be delicately “balanced” as
well as stresses and slides and final clauses; it is the elevation of
ideas, the nobility and beauty of feeling, as discerned by the trained
literary sense, which makes the final difference between enduring prose
harmonies and the mere tinkling of the “musical glasses."
[Footnote: This point is suggestively discussed by C. E. Andrews,
The Writing and Reading of Verse, chap. 5. New York, 1918.]
The student of verse may very profitably continue to exercise himself with
the rhythms of prose. He should learn to share the unwearied enthusiasm of
Professor Saintsbury for the splendid cadences of our sixteenth-century
English, for the florid decorative period of Thomas Browne and Jeremy
Taylor, for the eloquent “prose poetry” of De Quincey and Ruskin and
Charles Kingsley, and for the strangely subtle effects wrought by Pater
and Stevenson. But he must not imagine that any laboratory system of
tapping syncopated time, or any painstaking marking of macrons (-) breves
(u) and caesuras (||) will give him full initiation into the mysteries of
prose cadences which have been built, not merely out of stressed and
unstressed syllables, but out of the passionate intellectual life of many
generations of men. He may learn to feel that life as it pulsates in
words, but no one has thus far devised an adequate scheme for its
notation.
5. Quantity, Stress and Syllable
The notation of verse, however, while certainly not a wholly simple
matter, is far easier. It is practicable to indicate by conventional
printer’s devices the general rhythmical and metrical scheme of a poem,
and to indicate the more obvious, at least, of its incidental variations
from the expected pattern. It remains as true of verse as it is of prose
that the “literary" values of words–their connotations or emotional
overtones–are too subtle to be indicated by any marks invented by a
printer; but the alternation or succession of long or short syllables, of
stressed or unstressed syllables, the nature of particular feet
and lines and stanzas, the order and interlacing of rhymes, and even the
devices of tone-color, are sufficiently external elements of verse to
allow easy methods of indication.
When you and I first began to study Virgil and Horace, for instance, we
were taught that the Roman poets, imitating the Greeks, built heir verses
upon the principle of Quantity. The metrical unit was the foot, made up
of long and short syllables in various combinations, two short syllables
being equivalent to one long one. The feet most commonly used were the
Iambus [short-long], the Anapest [short-short-long], the Trochee
[long-short], the Dactyl [long-short-short], and the Spondee [long-long].
Then we were instructed that a “verse” or line consisting of one foot was
called a monometer, of two feet, a dimeter, of three, a trimeter, of four,
a tetrameter, of five, a pentameter, of six, a hexameter. This looked like
a fairly easy game, and before long we were marking the quantities in the
first line of the Aeneid, as other school-children had done ever since the
time of St. Augustine:
 Arma vi¦rumque ca¦no  Tro¦jae qui ¦ primus ab¦oris.
Or perhaps it was Horace’s
 Maece¦nas, atavis ¦¦ edite reg¦ibus.
We were told, of course, that it was not all quite as simple as this: that
there were frequent metrical variations, such as trochees changing places
with dactyls, and anapests with iambi; that feet could be inverted, so
that a trochaic line might begin with an iambus, an anapestic line with a
dactyl, or vice versa; that syllables might be omitted at the beginning
or the end or even in the middle of a line, and that this “cutting-off"
was called catalexis; that syllables might even be added at the
beginning or end of certain lines and that these syllables were called
hypermetric; and that we must be very watchful about pauses,
particularly about a somewhat mysterious chief pause, liable to occur
about the middle of a line, called a caesura. But the magic password to
admit us to this unknown world of Greek and Roman prosody was after all
the word Quantity.
If a few of us were bold enough to ask the main difference between this
Roman system of versification and the system which governed modern English
poetry–even such rude playground verse as
  “Eeny, meeny, miny, mo,
  Catch a nigger by the toe"–
we were promptly told by the teacher that the difference was a very plain
one, namely, that English, like all the Germanic languages, obeyed in its
verse the principles of Stress. Instead of looking for “long” and
“short” syllables, we had merely to look for “stressed” and “unstressed"
syllables. It was a matter, not of quantity, but of accent; and if we
remembered this fact, there was no harm but rather a great convenience, in
retaining the technical names of classical versification. Only we must be
careful that by “iambus,” in English poetry, we meant an unstressed
syllable, rather than a short syllable followed by a long one. And so with
“trochee,” “dactyl,” “anapest” and the rest; if we knew that accent and
not quantity was what we really had in mind, it was proper enough to speak
of Paradise Lost as written in “iambic pentameter,” and Evangeline in
“dactylic hexameter,” etc. The trick was to count stresses and not
syllables, for was not Coleridge’s Christabel written in a metre which
varied its syllables anywhere from four to twelve for the line, yet
maintained its music by regularity of stress?
Nothing could be plainer than all this. Yet some of us discovered when we
went to college and listened to instructors who grew strangely excited
over prosody, that it was not all as easy as this distinction between
Quantity and Stress would seem to indicate. For we were now told that
the Greek and Roman habits of daily speech in prose had something to do
with their instinctive choice of verse-rhythms: that at the very time when
the Greek heroic hexameters were being composed, there was a natural
dactylic roll in spoken prose; that Roman daily speech had a stronger
stress than Greek, so that Horace, in imitating Greek lyric measures, had
stubborn natural word-accents to reconcile with his quantitative measures;
that the Roman poets, who had originally allowed normal word-accent and
verse-pulse to coincide for the most part, came gradually to enjoy a
certain clash between them, keeping all the while the quantitative
principle dominant; so that when Virgil and Horace read their verses
aloud, and word-accent and verse-pulse fell upon different syllables, the
verse-pulse yielded slightly to the word-accent, thus adding something of
the charm of conversational prose to the normal time-values of the rhythm.
In a word, we were now taught–if I may quote from a personal letter of a
distinguished American Latinist–that “the almost universal belief that
Latin verse is a matter of quantity only is a mistake. Word-accent was not
lost in Latin verse.”
And then, as if this undermining of our schoolboy faith in pure Quantity
were not enough, came the surprising information that the Romans had kept,
perhaps from the beginning of their poetizing, a popular type of accented
verse, as seen in the rude chant of the Roman legionaries,
 Mílle Fráncos mílle sémel Sármatás occídimús.
[Footnote: See C. M. Lewis, Foreign Sources of Modern English
Versification. Halle, 1898.]
Certainly those sun-burnt “doughboys” were not bothering themselves
about trochees and iambi and such toys of cultivated “literary” persons;
they were amusing themselves on the march by inventing words to fit the
“goose-step.” Their
 Unus homo mille mille mille decollavimus
which Professor Courthope scans as trochaic verse,
[Footnote: History of English Poetry, vol. 1, p. 73.]
seems to me nothing but “stress” verse, like
 “Hay-foot, straw-foot, belly full of bean-soup–Hep–Hep!”
Popular accentual verse persisted, then, while the more cultivated Roman
public acquired and then gradually lost, in the course of centuries, its
ear for the quantitative rhythms which originally had been copied from the
Greeks.
Furthermore, according to our ingenious college teachers, there was still
a third principle of versification to be reckoned with, not depending on
Quantity or Stress, but merely Syllabic, or syllable-counting. This was
immemorially old, it seemed, and it had reappeared mysteriously in Europe
in the Dark Ages.
Dr. Lewis cites from a Latin manuscript poem of the ninth century:
[Footnote: Foreign Sources, etc., p. 3.]
  “Beatissimus namque Dionysius ¦ Athenis quondam episcopus,
  Quem Sanctus Clemens direxit in Galliam ¦ propter praedicandi
    gratiam,” etc.
“Each verse contains 21 syllables, with a caesura after the 12th. No
further regularity, either metrical or rhythmical, can be perceived.
Such a verse could probably not have been written except for music."
Church-music, apparently, was also a factor in the development of
versification,–particularly that “Gregorian" style which demanded neither
quantitative nor accentual rhythm, but simply a fair count of syllables in
the libretto, note matching syllable exactly. But when the great medieval
Latin hymns, like Dies ire, were written, the Syllabic principle of
versification, like the Quantitative principle, dropped out of sight,
and we witness once more the emergence of the Stress or accentual system,
heavily ornamented with rhymes.
[Footnote: See the quotation from Taylor’s Classical Heritage of the
Middle Ages printed in the “Notes and Illustrations” for this chapter.]
Yet the Syllabic method reappears once more, we were told, in French
prosody, and thus affects the verse of Chaucer and of subsequent English
poetry, and it still may be studied, isolated as far as may be from
considerations of quantity and stress, in certain English songs written
for music, where syllable carefully matches note. The “long metre"
(8 syllables), “short metre” (6 syllables) and “common metre"
(7 syllables, 6 syllables) of the hymn books is a convenient
illustration of thinking of metre in terms of syllables alone.
6. The Appeal to the Ear
At this point, perhaps, having set forth the three theories of Quantity,
Stress and Syllable, our instructors were sensible enough to make an
appeal to the ear. Reminding us that stress was the controlling principle
in Germanic poetry,–although not denying that considerations of quantity
and number of syllables might have something to do with the effect,–they
read aloud to us some Old English verse. Perhaps it was that Song of the
Battle of Brunanburh which Tennyson has so skilfully rendered into modern
English words while preserving the Old English metre. And here, though the
Anglo-Saxon words were certainly uncouth, we caught the chief stresses
without difficulty, usually four beats to the line. If the instructor,
while these rude strokes of rhythm were still pounding in our ears,
followed the Old English with a dozen lines of Chaucer, we could all
perceive the presence of a newer, smoother, more highly elaborated
verse-music, where the number of syllables had been cunningly
reckoned, and the verse-accent seemed always to fall upon a syllable long
and strong enough to bear the weight easily, and the rhymes rippled like a
brook. Whether we called the metre of the Prologue rhymed couplets of
iambic pentameter, or rhymed couplets of ten-syllabled, five-stressed
verse, the music, at least, was clear enough. And so was the music of the
“blank” or unrhymed five-stress lines of Marlowe and Shakspere and Milton,
and as we listened it was easy to believe that “stress” and “quantity” and
“syllable,” all playing together like a chime of bells, are concordant and
not quarrelsome elements in the harmony of modern English verse. Only, to
be richly concordant, each must be prepared to yield a little if need be,
to the other!
I have taken too many pages, perhaps, in thus sketching the rudimentary
education of a college student in the elements of rhythm and metre, and in
showing how the theoretical difficulties of the subject–which are
admittedly great–often disappear as soon as one resolves to let the ear
decide. A satisfied ear may soothe a dissatisfied mind. I have quoted from
a letter of an American scholar about quantity being the “controlling"
element of cultivated Roman verse, and I now quote from a personal letter
of an American poet, emphasizing the necessity of “reading poetry as it
was meant to be read”: “My point is not that English verse has no
quantity, but that the controlling element is not quantity but accent. The
lack of fixed syllabic quantity is just what I emphasize. This lack
makes definite beat impossible: or at least it makes it absurd to
attempt to scan English verse by feet. The proportion of ’irregularities’
and ’exceptions’ becomes painful to the student and embarrassing to the
professor. He is put to fearful straits to explain his prosody and make it
fit the verse. And when he has done all this, the student, if he has a
good ear, forthwith forgets it all, and reads the verse as it was meant to
be read, as a succession of musical bars (without pitch, of course), in
which the accent marks the rhythm, and pauses and rests often take the
place of missing syllables. To this ingenuous student I hold out my hand
and cast in my lot with him. He is the man for whom English poetry is
written.”
It may be objected, of course, that the phrase “reading poetry as it was
meant to be read” really begs the question. For English poets have often
amused themselves by composing purely quantitative verse, which they wish
us to read as quantitative. The result may be as artificial as the
painfully composed Latin quantitative verse of English schoolboys, but the
thing can be done. Tennyson’s experiments in quantity are well known, and
should be carefully studied. He was proud of his hexameter:
  “High winds roaring above me, dark leaves falling about me,”
and of his pentameter:
  “All men alike hate slops, particularly gruel.”
Here the English long and short syllables–as far as “long” and “short"
can be definitely distinguished in English–correspond precisely to the
rules of Roman prosody. The present Laureate, Robert Bridges, whose
investigations in English and Roman prosody have been incessant, has
recently published a book of experiments in writing English quantitative
hexameters.
[Footnote: Ibant Obscuri. New York, Oxford University Press, 1917.]
Here are half a dozen lines:
  “Midway of all this tract, with secular arms an immense elm
  Reareth a crowd of branches, aneath whose lofty protection
  Vain dreams thickly nestle, clinging unto the foliage on high:
  And many strange creatures of monstrous form and features
  Stable about th’ entrance, Centaur and Scylla’s abortion,
  And hundred-handed Briareus, and Lerna’s wild beast....”
These are lines interesting to the scholar, but they are somehow
“non-English” in their rhythm–not in accordance with “the genius of the
language,” as we vaguely but very sensibly say. Neither did the stressed
“dactylic” hexameters of Longfellow, written though they were by a skilful
versifier, quite conform to “the nature of the language.”
7. The Analogy with Music
One other attempt to explain the difficulties of English rhythm and metre
must at least be mentioned here, namely the “musical” theory of the
American poet and musician, Sidney Lanier. In his Science of English
Verse, an acute and very suggestive book, he threw over the whole theory
of stress–or at least, retained it as a mere element of assistance, as in
music, to the marking of time, maintaining that the only necessary element
in rhythm is equal time-intervals, corresponding to bars of music.
According to Lanier, the structure of English blank verse, for instance,
is not an alternation of unstressed with stressed syllables, but a series
of bars of 3/8 time, thus:
[Illustration: Five bars of 3/8 time, each with a short and a long note.]
Thomson, Dabney and other prosodists have followed Lanier’s general
theory, without always agreeing with him as to whether blank verse is
written in 3/8 or 2/4 time. Alden, in a competent summary of these various
musical theories as to the basis of English verse,
[Footnote: Introduction to Poetry, pp. 190-93. See also Alden’s English
Verse, Part 3. “The Time-Element in English Verse."]
quotes with approval Mr. T. S. Omond’s words: “Musical notes are almost
pure symbols. In theory at least, and no doubt substantially in practice,
they can be divided with mathematical accuracy–into fractions of 1/2,
1/4, 1/8, 1/16, etc.–and the ideal of music is absolute accordance with
time. Verse has other methods and another ideal. Its words are concrete
things, not readily carved to such exact pattern.... The perfection of
music lies in absolute accordance with time, that of verse is continual
slight departures from time. This is why no musical representations of
verse ever seem satisfactory. They assume regularity where none exists.”
8. Prosody and Enjoyment
It must be expected then, that there will be different preferences in
choosing a nomenclature for modern English metres, based upon the
differences in the individual physical organism of various metrists, and
upon the strictness of their adherence to the significance of stress,
quantity and number of syllables in the actual forms of verse. Adherents
of musical theories in the interpretation of verse may prefer to speak of
“duple time” instead of iambic-trochaic metres, and of “triple” time for
anapests and dactyls. Natural “stressers” may prefer to call iambic and
anapestic units “rising” feet, to indicate the ascent of stress as one
passes from the weaker to the stronger syllables; and similarly, to call
trochaic and dactylic units “falling” feet, to indicate the descent or
decline of stress as the weaker syllable or syllables succeed the
stronger. Or, combining these two modes of nomenclature, one may
legitimately speak of iambic feet as “duple rising,”
  “And never lifted up a single stone";
trochaic as “duple falling,”
  “Here they are, my fifty perfect poems";
anapestic as “triple rising,”
  “But he lived with a lot of wild mates, and they never would let him be
good";
and dactylic as “triple falling";
  “Cannon to right of them, cannon to left of them.”
If a line is felt as “metrical,” i.e. divided into approximately equal
time-intervals, the particular label employed to indicate the nature of
the metre is unimportant. It may be left to the choice of each student of
metre, provided he uses his terms consistently. The use of the traditional
terminology “iambic,” “trochaic,” etc., is convenient, and is open to no
objection if one is careful to make clear the sense in which he employs
such ambiguous terms.
It should also be added, as a means of reconciling the apparently warring
claims of stress and quantity in English poetry, that recent
investigations in recording through delicate instruments the actual
time-intervals used by different persons in reading aloud the same lines
of poetry, prove what has long been suspected, namely, the close
affiliation of quantity with stress.
[Footnote: “Syllabic Quantity in English Verse,” by Ada F. Snell, Pub. Of
Mod, Lang. Ass., September, 1918.]
Miss Snell’s experiments show that the foot in English verse is made up of
syllables 90 per cent of which are, in the stressed position, longer than
those in the unstressed. The average relation of short to long syllables,
is, in spite of a good deal of variation among the individual readers,
almost precisely as 2 to 4–which has always been the accepted ratio for
the relation of short to long syllables in Greek and Roman verse. If one
examines English words in a dictionary, the quantities of the syllables
are certainly not “fixed” as they are in Greek and Latin, but the moment
one begins to read a passage of English poetry aloud, and becomes
conscious of its underlying type of rhythm, he fits elastic units of
“feet” into the steadily flowing or pulsing intervals of time.
The “foot” becomes, as it were, a rubber link in a moving bicycle chain.
The revolutions of the chain mark the rhythm; and the stressed or
unstressed or lightly stressed syllables in each “link” or foot,
accommodate themselves, by almost unperceived expansion and contraction,
to the rhythmic beat of the passage as a whole.
Nor should it be forgotten that the “sense” of words, their
meaning-weight, their rhetorical value in certain phrases, constantly
affects the theoretical number of stresses belonging to a given line. In
blank verse, for instance, the theoretical five chief stresses are often
but three or four in actual practice, lighter stresses taking their place
in order to avoid a pounding monotony, and conversely, as in Milton’s
famous line,
  “Rocks, caves, lakes, dens, bogs, fens, and shades of death,”
the rhetorical significance of the monosyllables compels an overloading of
stresses which heightens the desired poetic effect. Corson’s Primer of
English Verse and Mayor’s English Metres give numerous examples from
the blank verse of Milton and Tennyson to illustrate the constant
substitution and shifting of stresses in order to secure variety of music
and suggestive adaptations of sound to sense. It is well known that
Shakspere’s blank verse, as he developed in command of his artistic
resources, shows fewer “end-stopped” lines and more “run-on” lines, with
an increasing proportion of light and weak endings. But the same principle
applies to every type of English rhythm. As soon as the dominant
beat–which is commonly, but not always, apparent in the opening measures
of the poem–once asserts itself, the poet’s mastery of technique is
revealed through his skill in satisfying the ear with a verbal music which
is never absolutely identical in its time-intervals, its stresses or its
pitch, with the fixed, wooden pattern of the rhythm he is using.
For the human voice utters syllables which vary their duration, stress and
pitch with each reader. Photographs of voice-waves, as printed by Verrier,
Scripture, and many other laboratory workers, show how great is the
difference between individuals in the intervals covered by the upward and
downward slides or “inflections” which indicate doubt or affirmation. And
these “rising” and “falling” and “circumflex” and “suspended” inflections,
which make up what is called “pitch-accent,” are constantly varied, like
the duration and stress of syllables, by the emotions evoked in reading.
Words, phrases, lines and stanzas become colored with emotional overtones
due to the feeling of the instant. Poetry read aloud as something sensuous
and passionate cannot possibly conform exactly to a set mechanical pattern
of rhythm and metre. Yet the hand-woven Oriental rug, though lacking the
geometrical accuracy of a rug made by machinery, reveals a more vital and
intimate beauty of design and execution. Many well-known poets–Tennyson
being perhaps the most familiar example–have read aloud their own verses
with a peculiar chanting sing-song which seemed to over-emphasize the
fundamental rhythm. But who shall correct them? And who is entitled to say
that a line like Swinburne’s
  “Full-sailed, wide-winged, poised softly forever asway”
is irregular according to the foot-rule of traditional prosody, when it is
probable, as Mr. C. E. Russell maintains, that Swinburne was here
composing in purely musical and not prosodical rhythm?
[Footnote: “Swinburne and Music,” by Charles E. Russell, North American
Review, November, 1907. See the quotation in the “Notes and
Illustrations” for this chapter.]
Is it not true, furthermore, as some metrical sceptics like to remind us,
that if we once admit the principle of substitution and equivalence, of
hypermetrical and truncated syllables, of pauses taking the place of
syllables, we can very often make one metre seem very much like another?
The question of calling a given group of lines “iambic” or “trochaic,” for
instance, can be made quite arbitrary, depending upon where you begin to
count syllables. “Iambic” with initial truncation or “trochaic” with final
truncation? Tweedle-dum or tweedle-dee? Do you count waves from crest to
crest or from hollow to hollow? When you count the links in a bicycle
chain, do you begin with the slender middle of each link or with one of
the swelling ends? So is it with this “iambic” and “trochaic” matter.
Professor Alden, in a suggestive pamphlet,
[Footnote: “The Mental Side of Metrical Form,” already cited.]
confesses that these contrasting concepts of rising and falling metre are
nothing more than concepts, alterable at will.
But while the experts in prosody continue to differ and to dogmatize, the
lover of poetry should remember that versification is far older than the
science of prosody, and that the enjoyment of verse is, for millions of
human beings, as unaffected by theories of metrics as the stars are
unaffected by the theories of astronomers. It is a satisfaction to the
mind to know that the stars in their courses are amenable to law, even
though one be so poor a mathematician as to be incapable of grasping and
stating the law. The mathematics of music and of poetry, while heightening
the intellectual pleasure of those capable of comprehending it, is
admittedly too difficult for the mass of men. But no lover of poetry
should refuse to go as far in theorizing as his ear will carry him. He
will find that his susceptibility to the pulsations of various types of
rhythm, and his delight in the intricacies of metrical device, will be
heightened by the mental effort of attention and analysis. The danger is
that the lover of poetry, wearied by the quarrels of prosodists, and
forgetting the necessity of patience, compromise and freedom from
dogmatism, will lose his curiosity about the infinite variety of metrical
effects. But it is this very curiosity which makes his ear finer, even if
his theories may be wrong. Hundreds of metricists admire and envy
Professor Saintsbury’s ear for prose and verse rhythms while
disagreeing wholly with his dogmatic theories of the “foot,” and his
system of notation. There are sure to be some days and hours when the
reader of poetry will find himself bored and tired with the effort of
attention to the technique of verse. Then he can stop analysing, close his
eyes, and drift out to sea upon the uncomprehended music.
  “The stars of midnight shall be dear
   To her; and she shall lean her ear
   In many a secret place
   Where rivulets dance their wayward round,
   And beauty born of murmuring sound
   Shall pass into her face.”
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
