


I add here some suggestions to teachers who may wish to use this book in
the classroom. In connection with each chapter I have indicated the more
important discussions of the special topic. There is also some additional
illustrative material, and I have indicated a few hints for classroom
exercises, following methods which have proved helpful in my own
experience as a teacher.
I have tried to keep in mind the needs of two kinds of college courses in
poetry. One of them is the general introductory course, which usually
begins with the lyric rather than with the epic or the drama, and which
utilizes some such collection as the Golden Treasury or the Oxford Book
of English Verse. Any such collection of standard verse, or any of the
anthologies of recent poetry, like those selected by Miss Jessie B.
Rittenhouse or Mr. W. S. Braithwaite, should be constantly in use in the
classroom as furnishing concrete illustration of the principles discussed
in books like mine.
The other kind of course which I have had in mind is the one dealing with
the works of a single poet. Spenser, Milton, Wordsworth, Tennyson,
Browning, are among the poets most frequently chosen for this sort of
study. I have found it an advantage to carry on the discussion of the
general principles of poetic imagination and expression in connection with
the close textual study of the complete work of any one poet. It is hoped
that this book may prove helpful for such a purpose.
This chapter aims to present, in as simple a form as possible, some of the
fundamental questions in aesthetic theory as far as they bear upon the
study of poetry. James Sully’s article on “Aesthetics” in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, and Sidney Colvin’s article on “The Fine
Arts,” afford a good preliminary survey of the field. K. Gordon’s
Aesthetics, E. D. Puffer’s Psychology of Beauty, Santayana’s Sense of
Beauty, Raymond’s Genesis of Art Form, and Arthur Symons’s Seven
Arts, are stimulating books. Bosanquet’s Three Lectures on Aesthetic is
commended to those advanced students who have not time to read his
voluminous History of Aesthetic, just as Lane Cooper’s translation of
Aristotle on the Art of Poetry may be read profitably before taking up
the more elaborate discussions in Butcher’s Aristotle’s Theory of Poetry
and Fine Art. In the same way, Spingarn’s Creative Criticism is a good
preparation for Croce’s monumental Aesthetics. The student should
certainly make some acquaintance with Lessing’s Laokoon, and he will
find Babbitt’s New Laokoon a brilliant and trenchant survey of the old
questions.
It may be, however, that the teacher will prefer to pass rapidly over the
ground covered in this chapter, rather than to run the risk of confusing
his students with problems admittedly difficult. In that case the
classroom discussions may begin with chapter II. I have found, however,
that the new horizons which are opened to many students in connection with
the topics touched upon in chapter I more than make up for some temporary
bewilderment.
The need here is to look at an old subject with fresh eyes. Teachers who
are fond of music or painting or sculpture can invent many illustrations
following the hint given in the Orpheus and Eurydice passage in the text.
Among recent books, Fairchild’s Making of Poetry and Max Eastman’s
Enjoyment of Poetry are particularly to be commended for their
unconventional point of view. See also Fairchild’s pamphlet on Teaching
of Poetry in the High School, and John Erskine’s paper on “The Teaching
of Poetry” (Columbia University Quarterly, December, 1915). Alfred
Hayes’s “Relation of Music to Poetry” (Atlantic, January, 1914) is
pertinent to this chapter. But the student should certainly familiarize
himself with Theodore Watts-Dunton’s famous article on “Poetry” in
the Encyclopaedia Britannica, now reprinted with additions in his
Renascence of Wonder. He should also read A. C. Bradley’s chapter on
“Poetry for its Own Sake” in the Oxford Lectures on Poetry, Neilson’s
Essentials of Poetry, Stedman’s Nature and Elements of Poetry, as well
as the classic “Defences” of Poetry by Philip Sidney, Shelley, Leigh Hunt
and George E. Woodberry. For advanced students, R. P. Cowl’s Theory of
Poetry in England is a useful summary of critical opinions covering
almost every aspect of the art of poetry, as it has been understood by
successive generations of Englishmen.
This chapter, like the first, will be difficult for some students. They
may profitably read, in connection with it, Professor Winchester’s chapter
on “Imagination” in his Literary Criticism, Neilson’s discussion of
“Imagination” in his Essentials of Poetry, the first four chapters of
Fairchild, chapters 4, 13, 14, and 15 of Coleridge’s Biographia
Literaria, and Wordsworth’s Preface to his volume of Poems of 1815. See
also Stedman’s chapter on “Imagination” in his Nature and Elements of
Poetry.
Under section 2, some readers may be interested in Sir William Rowan
Hamilton’s account of his famous discovery of the quaternion analysis, one
of the greatest of all discoveries in pure mathematics:
  “Quaternions started into life, or light, full grown,
  on Monday, the 16th of October, 1843, as I was walking
  with Lady Hamilton to Dublin, and came up to
  Brougham Bridge, which my boys have since called the
  Quaternion Bridge. That is to say, I then and there
  felt the galvanic circuit of thought close, and the sparks
  which fell from it were the fundamental equations between
  i, j, k; exactly such as I have used them ever since.
  I pulled out on the spot a pocket-book, which still exists,
  and made an entry on which, at the very moment, I felt
  that it might be worth my while to expend the labor of
  at least ten (or it might be fifteen) years to come. But
  then it is fair to say that this was because I felt a problem  to have been at that moment solved–an intellectual
  want relieved–which had haunted me for at least
  ifteen years before. Less than an hour elapsed before I
  had asked and obtained leave of the Council of the
  Royal Irish Academy, of which Society I was, at that
  time, the President–to read at the next General Meeting  a Paper on Quaternions; which I accordingly did, on
  November 13, 1843.”
The following quotation from Lascelles-Abercrombie’s study of Thomas Hardy
presents in brief compass the essential problem dealt with in this
chapter. It is closely written, and should be read more than once.
  “Man’s intercourse with the world is necessarily formative. His
  experience of things outside his consciousness is in the manner of a
  chemistry, wherein some energy of his nature is mated with the energy
  brought in on his nerves from externals, the two combining into
  something which exists only in, or perhaps we should say closely around,
  man’s consciousness. Thus what man knows of the world is what has been
  formed by the mixture of his own nature with the streaming in of the
  external world. This formative energy of his, reducing the in-coming
  world into some constant manner of appearance which may be appreciable
  by consciousness, is most conveniently to be described, it seems, as an
  unaltering imaginative desire: desire which accepts as its material, and
  fashions itself forth upon, the many random powers sent by the world to
  invade man’s mind. That there is this formative energy in man may easily
  be seen by thinking of certain dreams; those dreams, namely, in which
  some disturbance outside the sleeping brain (such as a sound of knocking
  or a bodily discomfort) is completely formed into vivid trains of
  imagery, and in that form only is presented to the dreamer’s
  consciousness. This, however, merely shows the presence of the active
  desire to shape sensation into what consciousness can accept; the dream
  is like an experiment done in the isolation of a laboratory; there are
  so many conflicting factors when we are awake that the events of sleep
  must only serve as a symbol or diagram of the intercourse of mind with
  that which is not mind–intercourse which only takes place in a region
  where the outward radiations of man’s nature combine with the
  irradiations of the world. Perception itself is a formative act; and all
  the construction of sensation into some orderly, coherent idea of the
  world is a further activity of the central imaginative desire. Art is
  created, and art is enjoyed, because in it man may himself completely
  express and exercise those inmost desires which in ordinary experience
  are by no means to be completely expressed. Life has at last been
  perfectly formed and measured to man’s requirements; and in art man
  knows himself truly the master of his existence. It is this sense of
  mastery which gives man that raised and delighted consciousness of self
  which art provokes.”
I regret that Professor Lowes’s brilliant discussion of “Poetic Diction"
in his Convention and Revolt did not appear until after this chapter was
written. There are stimulating remarks on Diction in Fairchild and
Eastman, in Raleigh’s Wordsworth, in L. A. Sherman’s Analytics of
Literature, chapter 6, in Raymond’s Poetry as a Representative Art, and
in Hudson Maxim’s Science of Poetry. Coleridge’s description of
Wordsworth’s theory of poetic diction in the Biographia Literaria is
famous. Walt Whitman’s An American Primer, first published in the
Atlantic for April, 1904, is a highly interesting contribution to the
subject.
No theoretical discussion, however, can supply the place of a close study,
word by word, of poems in the classroom. It is advisable, I think, to
follow such analyses of the diction of Milton, Keats and Tennyson by a
scrutiny of the diction employed by contemporary poets like Edgar Lee
Masters and Carl Sandburg.
The following passages in prose and verse, printed without the authors’
names, are suggested as an exercise in the study of diction:
1. “The falls were in plain view about a mile off, but very distinct,
   and no roar–hardly a murmur. The river tumbling green and white, far
   below me; the dark, high banks, the plentiful umbrage, many bronze
   cedars, in shadow; and tempering and arching all the immense
   materiality, a clear sky overhead, with a few white clouds, limpid,
   spiritual, silent. Brief, and as quiet as brief, that picture–a
   remembrance always afterward.”
2. “If there be fluids, as we know there are, which, conscious of a
   coming wind, or rain, or frost, will shrink and strive to hide
   themselves in their glass arteries; may not that subtle liquor of the
   blood perceive, by properties within itself, that hands are raised to
   waste and spill it; and in the veins of men run cold and dull as his
   did, in that hour!”
3. “On a flat road runs the well-train’d runner,
   He is lean and sinewy with muscular legs,
   He is thinly clothed, he leans forward as he runs,
   With lightly closed fists and arms partially rais’d.”
4. “The feverish heaven with a stitch in the side,
          Of lightning.”
5. “Out of blue into black is the scheme of the skies, and their dews are
   the wine of the bloodshed of things.”
6. “Dry clash’d his harness in the icy caves
   And barren chasms, and all to left and right
   The bare black cliff clang’d round him, as he based
   His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
   Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels.”
7. “As for the grass, it grew as scant as hair
    In leprosy; their dry blades pricked the mud
    Which underneath looked kneaded up with blood.
  One stiff blind horse, his every bone a-stare,
  Stood stupefied, however he came there:
    Thrust out past service from the devil’s stud.”
8. “For the main criminal I have no hope
   Except in such a suddenness of fate.
   I stood at Naples once, a night so dark
   I could have scarce conjectured there was earth
   Anywhere, sky or sea or world at all:
   But the night’s black was burst through by a
     blaze–
   Thunder struck blow on blow, earth groaned and
     bore,
   Through her whole length of mountain visible:
   There lay the city thick and plain with spires,
   And, like a ghost disshrouded, white the sea.
   So may the truth be flashed out by one blow,
   And Guido see, one instant, and be saved.”
A fresh and clear discussion of the principles governing Rhythm and
Metre may be found in C. E. Andrews’s Writing and Reading of Verse.
The well-known books by Alden, Corson, Gummere, Lewis, Mayor, Omond,
Raymond and Saintsbury are indicated in the Bibliography. Note also
the bibliographies given by Alden and Patterson.
I have emphasized in this chapter the desirability of compromise in some
hotly contested disputes over terminology and methods of metrical
notation. Perhaps I have gone farther in this direction than some teachers
will wish to go. But all classroom discussion should be accompanied by
oral reading of verse, by the teacher and if possible by pupils, and the
moment oral interpretations begin, it will be evident that “a satisfied
ear” is more important than an exact agreement upon methods of notation.
I venture to add here, for their suggestiveness, a few passages about
Rhythm and Metre, and finally, as an exercise in the study of the
prevalence of the “iambic roll” in sentimental oratory, an address by
Robert G. Ingersoll.
1. “Suppose that we figure the nervous current which corresponds to
consciousness as proceeding, like so many other currents of nature, in
waves–then we do receive a new apprehension, if not an explanation, of
the strange power over us of successive strokes.... Whatever things occupy
our attention–events, objects, tones, combinations of tones, emotions,
pictures, images, ideas–our consciousness of them will be heightened by
the rhythm as though it consisted of waves.”
    EASTMAN, The Enjoyment of Poetry, p. 93.
2. “Rhythm of pulse is the regular alternation of units made up of beat
and pause; rhythm in verse is a measured or standardized arrangement of
sound relations. The difference between rhythm of pulse and rhythm in
verse is that the one is known through touch, the other through hearing;
as rhythm, they are essentially the same kind of thing. Viewed generally
and externally, then, verse is language that is beaten into measured
rhythm, or that has some type of uniform or standard rhythmical
arrangement.”
    FAIRCHILD, The Making of Poetry, p. 117.
3. “A Syllable is a body of sound brought out with an independent, single,
and unbroken breath (Sievers). This syllable may be long or short,
according to the time it fills; compare the syllables in merrily with
the syllables in corkscrew. Further, a syllable may be heavy or
light (also called accented or unaccented) according as it receives
more or less force or stress of tone: compare the two syllables of
treamer. Lastly, a syllable may have increased or diminished height-of
tone,–pitch: cf. the so-called ’rising inflection’ at the end of a
question. Now, in spoken language, there are infinite degrees of length,
of stress, of pitch....
“It is a well-known property of human speech that it keeps up a ceaseless
change between accented and unaccented syllables. A long succession of
accented syllables becomes unbearably monotonous; a long succession of
unaccented syllables is, in effect, impossible. Now when the ear detects
at regular intervals a recurrence of accented syllables, varying with
unaccented, it perceives Rhythm. Measured intervals of time are the
basis of all verse, and their regularity marks off poetry from prose; so
that Time is thus the chief element in Poetry, as it is in Music and in
Dancing. From the idea of measuring these time-intervals, we derive the
name Metre; Rhythm means pretty much the same thing,–’a flowing,’ an
even, measured motion. This rhythm is found everywhere in nature: the beat
of the heart, the ebb and flow of the sea, the alternation of day and
night. Rhythm is not artificial, not an invention; it lies at the heart of
things, and in rhythm the noblest emotions find their noblest expression."
    GUMMERE, Handbook of Poetics, p. 133.
4. “It was said of Chopin that in playing his waltzes his left hand kept
absolutely perfect time, while his right hand constantly varied the rhythm
of the melody, according to what musicians call tempo rubato,’stolen’ or
distorted time. Whether this is true in fact, or even physically possible,
has been doubted; but it represents a perfectly familiar possibility of
the mind. Two streams of sound pass constantly through the inner ear of
one who understands or appreciates the rhythm of our verse: one, never
actually found in the real sounds which are uttered, is the absolute
rhythm, its equal time-intervals moving on in infinitely perfect
progression; the other, represented by the actual movement of the verse,
is constantly shifting by quickening, retarding, strengthening or
weakening its sounds, yet always hovers along the line of the perfect
rhythm, and bids the ear refer to that perfect rhythm the succession of
its pulsations."
    ALDEN, An Introduction to Poetry, p. 188.
5. “Many lines in Swinburne cannot be scanned at all except by the Lanier
method, which reduces so-called feet to their purely musical equivalents
of time bars. What, for instance, can be made by the formerly accepted
systems of prosody of such hexameters as
  ’Full-sailed, wide-winged, poised softly forever asway?’
The usual explanation of this line is that Mr. Swinburne, carelessly,
inadvertently, or for some occult purpose, interjected one line of five
feet among his hexameters and the scansion usually followed is by
arrangement into a pentameter, thus:
  ’Full-sailed | wide-winged | poised softly | forever |  asway,’
the first two feet being held to be spondees, and the third and fourth
amphibrachs. It has also been proposed to make the third foot a spondee or
an iambus, and the remaining feet anapaests, thus:
  ’Full-sailed | wide-winged | poised soft- | ly forev- | er asway.’
“The confusion of these ideas is enough to mark them as unscientific and
worthless, to say nothing of the severe reflection they cast on the poet’s
workmanship. We have not so known Mr. Swinburne, for, if there be anything
he has taught us about himself it is his strenuous and sometimes absurd
particularity about immaculate form. He would never overlook a line of
five feet in a poem of hexameters. But–as will, I think, appear later and
conclusively–the line is really of six feet, and is not iambic, trochaic,
anapaestic, the spurious spondaic that some writers have tried to
manufacture for English verse, or anything else recognized in Coleridge’s
immortal stanza, or in text-books. It simply cannot be scanned by
classical rules; it cannot be weighed justly, and its full meaning
extracted, by any of the ’trip-time’ or ’march-time’ expedients of other
investigators. It is purely music; and when read by the method of music
appears perfectly designed and luminous with significance. Only a poet
that was at heart a composer could have made such a phrase, based
upon such intimate knowledge of music’s rhythmical laws."
    C. E. RUSSELL, “Swinburne and Music” North American Review,
November, 1907.
6. Dr. Henry Osborn Taylor has kindly allowed me to quote this passage
from his Classical Heritage of the Middle Ages, pp. 246, 247:
“Classic metres expressed measured feelings. Hexameters had given voice to
many emotions beautifully, with unfailing modulation of calm or storm.
They had never revealed the infinite heart of God, or told the yearning of
the soul responding; nor were they ever to be the instrument of these
supreme disclosures in Christian times. Such unmeasured feelings could not
be held within the controlled harmonies of the hexameter nor within
sapphic or alcaic or Pindaric strophes. These antique forms of poetry
definitely expressed their contents, although sometimes suggesting further
unspoken feeling, which is so noticeable with Virgil. But characteristic
Christian poetry, like the Latin mediaeval hymn, was not to express its
meaning as definitely or contain its significance. Mediaeval hymns are
childlike, having often a narrow clearness in their literal sense; and
they may be childlike, too, in their expressed symbolism. Their
significance reaches far beyond their utterance; they suggest, they echo,
and they listen; around them rolls the voice of God, the infinitude of
His love and wrath, heaven’s chorus and hell’s agonies; dies irae, dies
illa–that line says little, but mountains of wrath press on it, from
which the soul shall not escape.
“Christian emotion quivers differently from any movement of the spirit in
classic measures. The new quiver, the new shudder, the utter terror, and
the utter love appear in mediaeval rhymed accentual poetry:
  Desidero te millies,
  Mê Jesu; quando venies?
  Me laetum quando facies,
  Ut vultu tuo saties?
  Quo dolore
  Quo moerore
  Deprimuntur miseri,
  Qui abyssis
  Pro commissis
  Submergentur inferi.
  Recordare, Jesu pie,
  Quod sum causa tuae viae;
  Ne me perdas ilia die.
       *       *       *       *       *
  Lacrymosa dies illa
  Qua resurget ex fa villa,
  Judicandus homo reus;
  Huic ergo parce, Deus!
    Pie Jesu, Domine,
    Dona eis requiem.
“Let any one feel the emotion of these verses and then turn to some piece
of classic poetry, a passage from Homer or Virgil, an elegiac couplet or a
strophe from Sappho or Pindar or Catullus, and he will realize the
difference, and the impossibility of setting the emotion of a mediaeval
hymn in a classic metre.”
7. ’Friends: I know how vain it is to gild a grief with words, and yet I
wish to take from every grave its fear. Here in this world, where life and
death are equal things, all should be brave enough to meet what all the
dead have met. The future has been filled with fear, stained and polluted
by the heartless past. From the wondrous tree of life the buds and
blossoms fall with ripened fruit, and in the common bed of earth, the
patriarchs and babes sleep side by side.
“Why should we fear that which will come to all that is?
“We cannot tell, we do not know, which is the greater blessing–life or
death. We do not know whether the grave is the end of this life, or the
door of another, or whether the night here is not somewhere else at dawn.
Neither can we tell which is the more fortunate–the child dying in its
mother’s arms, before its lips have learned to form a word, or he who
journeys all the length of life’s uneven road, painfully taking the last
slow steps with staff and crutch.
“Every cradle asks us, ’Whence?’ and every coffin, ’Whither?’ The poor
barbarian, weeping above his dead, can answer these questions as
intelligently as the robed priest of the most authentic creed. The tearful
ignorance of the one is just as consoling as the learned and unmeaning
words of the other. No man, standing where the horizon of a life has
touched a grave, has any right to prophesy a future filled with pain and
tears. It may be that death gives all there is of worth to life. If those
we press and strain against our hearts could never die, perhaps that love
would wither from the earth. Maybe this common fate treads from out the
paths between our hearts the weeds of selfishness and hate, and I had
rather live and love where death is king, than have eternal life where
love is not. Another life is naught, unless we know and love again the
ones who love us here.
“They who stand with aching hearts around this little grave need have no
fear. The larger and the nobler faith in all that is and is to be tells us
that death, even at its worst, is only perfect rest. We know that through
the common wants of life–the needs and duties of each hour–their griefs
will lessen day by day, until at last this grave will be to them a place
of rest and peace–almost of joy. There is for them this consolation. The
dead do not suffer. And if they live again, their lives will surely be as
good as ours. We have no fear. We are all children of the same mother, and
the same fate awaits us all.
“We, too, have our religion, and it is this: Help for the living, hope for
the dead.”
    ROBERT G. INGERSOLL, “Address over a Little Boy’s Grave.”
I have not attempted in this chapter to give elaborate illustrations of
the varieties of rhyme and stanza in English poetry. Full illustrations
will be found in Alden’s English Verse. A clear statement of the
fundamental principles involved is given in W. H. Carruth’s Verse
Writing.
Free verse is suggestively discussed by Lowes, Convention and Revolt,
chapters 6 and 7, and by Andrews, Writing and Reading of Verse, chapters
5 and 19. Miss Amy Lowell has written fully about it in the Prefaces to
Sword Blades and Poppy Seed and Can Grande’s Castle, in the final
chapter of Tendencies in Modern American Poetry, in the Prefaces to
Some Imagist Poets, and in the North American Review for January,
1917. Mr. Braithwaite’s annual Anthologies of American Verse give a full
bibliography of special articles upon this topic.
An interesting classroom test of the difference between prose rhythm and
verse rhythm with strongly marked metre and rhyme may be found in
comparing Emerson’s original prose draft of his “Two Rivers,” as found in
volume 9 of his Journal, with three of the stanzas of the finished poem:
“Thy voice is sweet, Musketaquid, and repeats the music of the ram, but
sweeter is the silent stream which flows even through thee, as thou
through the land.
“Thou art shut in thy banks, but the stream I love flows in thy water, and
flows through rocks and through the air and through rays of light as well,
and through darkness, and through men and women.
“I hear and see the inundation and the eternal spending of the stream in
winter and in summer, in men and animals, in passion and thought. Happy
are they who can hear it.”
  “Thy summer voice, Musketaquit,
    Repeats the music of the rain;
  But sweeter rivers pulsing flit
    Through thee, as thou through Concord plain.
  “Thou in thy narrow banks are pent;
    The stream I love unbounded goes
  Through flood and sea and firmament;
    Through light, through life, it forward flows.
  “I see the inundation sweet,
    I hear the spending of the stream
  Through years, through men, through nature fleet,
    Through love and thought, through power and dream.”
I also suggest for classroom discussion the following brief passages from
recent verse, printed without the authors’ names:
1. “The milkman never argues; he works alone and no one speaks to him;
the city is asleep when he is on his job; he puts a bottle on six hundred
porches and calls it a day’s work; he climbs two hundred wooden stairways;
two horses are company for him; he never argues.”
2. “Sometimes I have nervous moments–
   there is a girl who looks at me strangely
   as much as to say,
   You are a young man,
   and I am a young woman,
   and what are you going to do about it?
   And I look at her as much as to say,
   I am going to keep the teacher’s desk
     between us, my dear,
   as long as I can.”
3. “I hold her hands and press her to my breast.
“I try to fill my arms with her loveliness, to plunder her sweet smile
with kisses, to drink her dark glances with my eyes.
“Ah, but where is it? Who can strain the blue from the sky?
“I try to grasp the beauty; it eludes me, leaving only the body in my
hands.
“Baffled and weary, I came back. How can the body touch the flower which
only the spirit may touch?”
4. “Child, I smelt the flowers,
   The golden flowers ... hiding in crowds like fairies at my feet,
   And as I smelt them the endless smile of the infinite broke over me,
     and I knew that they and you and I were one.
   They and you and I, the cowherds and the cows, the jewels and the
     potter’s wheel, the mothers and the light in baby’s eyes.
   For the sempstress when she takes one stitch may make nine unnecessary;
   And the smooth and shining stone that rolls and rolls like the great
     river may gain no moss,
   And it is extraordinary what a lot you can do with a platitude when you
     dress it up in Blank Prose.
   Child, I smelt the flowers.”
Recent criticism has been rich in its discussions of the lyric. John
Drinkwater’s little volume on The Lyric is suggestive. See also C. E.
Whitmore’s article in the Pub. Mod. Lang. Ass., December, 1918. Rhys’s
Lyric Poetry, Schelling’s English Lyric, Reed’s English Lyrical
Poetry cover the whole field of the historical English lyric. A few books
on special periods are indicated in the “Notes” to chapter ix.
An appreciation of the lyric mood can be helped greatly by adequate oral
reading in the classroom. For teachers who need suggestions as to oral
interpretation, Professor Walter Barnes’s edition of Palgrave’s Golden
Treasury (Row, Petersen & Co., Chicago) is to be commended.
The student’s ability to analyse a lyric poem should be tested by frequent
written exercises. The method of criticism may be worked out by the
individual teacher, but I have found it useful to ask students to test a
poem by some or all of the following questions:
(a) What kind of experience, thought or emotion furnishes the basis for
this lyric? What kind or degree of sensitiveness to the facts of nature?
What sort of inner mood or passion? Is the “motive” of this lyric purely
personal? If not, what other relationships or associations are involved?
(b) What sort of imaginative transformation of the material furnished by
the senses? What kind of imagery? Is it true poetry or only verse?
(c) What degree of technical mastery of lyric structure? Subordination of
material to unity of “tone”? What devices of rhythm or sound to heighten
the intended effect? Noticeable words or phrases? Does the author’s power
of artistic expression keep pace with his feeling and imagination?
For a discussion of narrative verse in general, see Gummere’s Poeticsand Oldest English Epic, Hart’s Epic and Ballad, Council’s Study of
Poetry, and Matthew Arnold’s essay “On Translating Homer.”
For the further study of ballads, note G. L. Kittredge’s one volume
edition of Child’s English and Scottish Popular Ballads, Gummere’s
Popular Ballad, G. H. Stempel’s Book of Ballads, J. A. Lomax’s Cowboy
Songs and other Frontier Ballads, and Hart’s summary of Child’s views in
Pub. Mod. Lang. Ass., vol. 21, 1906. The Oxford Book of English Verse,
Nos. 367-389, gives excellent specimens.
All handbooks on Poetics discuss the Ode. Gosse’s English Odes and
William Sharp’s Great Odes are good collections.
For the sonnet, note Corson’s chapter in his Primer of English Verse,
and the Introduction to Miss Lockwood’s collection. There are other
well-known collections by Leigh Hunt, Hall Caine and William Sharp.
Special articles on the sonnet are noted in Poole’s Index.
The dramatic monologue is well discussed by Claude Howard, The Dramatic
Monologue, and by S. S. Curry, The Dramatic Monologue in Tennyson and
Browning.
The various periods of English lyric poetry are covered, as has been
already noted, by the general treatises of Rhys, Reed and Schelling. Old
English lyrics are well translated by Cook and Tinker, and by Pancoast and
Spaeth. W. P. Ker’s English Literature; Mediaeval is excellent, as is C.
S. Baldwin’s English Mediaeval Literature. John Erskine’s Elizabethan
Lyric is a valuable study. Schelling’s introduction to his Selections
from the Elizabethan Lyric should also be noted, as well as his similar
book on the Seventeenth-Century Lyric. Bernbaum’s English Poets of the
Eighteenth Century is a careful selection, with a scholarly introduction.
Studies of the English poetry of the Romantic period are very numerous:
Oliver Elton’s Survey of English Literature, 1780-1830, is one of the
best. Courthope’s History of English Poetry and Saintsbury’s History of
Criticism are full of material bearing upon the questions discussed in
this chapter.
Professor Legouis’s account of the change in atmosphere as one passes from
Old English to Old French poetry is so delightful that I refrain from
spoiling it by a translation:
“En quittant Beowulf ou la Bataille de Maldon pour le Roland, on a
l’impression de sortir d’un lieu sombre pour entrer dans la lumière. Cette
impression vous vient de tous les côtés à la fois, des lieux décrits, des
sujets, de la manière de raconter, de l’esprit qui anime, de
l’intelligence qui ordonne, mais, d’une façon encore plus immédiate et
plus diffuse, de la différence des deux langues. On reconnaît sans doute
généralement à nos vieux écrivains ce mérite d’être clairs, mais on est
trop habitué à ne voir dans ce don que ce qui découle des tendances
analytiques et des aptitudes logiques de leurs esprit. Aussi plusieurs
critiques, quelques-uns français, ont-ils fait de cet attribut une manière
de prétexte pour leur assigner en partage la prose et pour leur retirer
la faculté poétique. Il n’en est pas ainsi. Cette clarté n’est pas
purement abstraite. Elle est une véritable lumière qui rayonne même des
voyelles et dans laquelle les meilleurs vers des trouvères–les seuls qui
comptent–sont baignés. Comment dire l’éblouissement des yeux longtemps
retenus dans la pénombre du Codex Exoniensis et devant qui passent
soudain avec leurs brillantes syllables ’Halte-Clerc,’ l’épée d’Olivier,
’Joyeuse’ celle de Charlemagne, ’Monjoie’ l’étendard des Francs? Avant
toute description on est saisi comme par un brusque lever de soleil. Il
est tels vers de nos vieilles romances d’où la lumière ruisselle sans
même qu’on ait besoin de prendre garde à leur sens:
  “’Bele Erembors a la fenestre au jor
  Sor ses genolz tient paile de color,’
[Footnote: “Fair Erembor at her window in daylight
    Holds a coloured silk stuff on her knees."]
ou bien
  “’Bele Yolanz en chambre coie
  Sor ses genolz pailes desploie
  Coust un fil d’or, l’autre de soie...."
[Footnote: “Fair Yoland in her quiet bower
    Unfolds silk stuffs on her knees
    Sewing now a thread of gold, now one of silk."]
C’est plus que de la lumière qui s’échappe de ces mots,
c’est de la couleur et de la plus riche."
[Footnote: Emile Legouis, Défense de la Poésie Française, p. 44.]
While this chapter does not attempt to comment upon the work of living
American authors, except as illustrating certain general tendencies of the
lyric, I think that teachers of poetry should avail themselves of the
present interest in contemporary verse. Students of a carefully chosen
volume of selections, like the Oxford Book, should be competent to pass
some judgment upon strictly contemporary poetry, and I have found them
keenly interested in criticizing the work that is appearing, month by
month, in the magazines. The temperament and taste of the individual
teacher must determine the relative amount of attention that can be given
to our generation, as compared with the many generations of the past.
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
