


THE PRESENT STATUS OF THE LYRIC
  “And the same may be said of lust and anger and all the other
  affections, of desire and pain and pleasure which are held to be
  inseparable from every action–in all of them poetry feeds and waters
  the passions instead of withering and starving them; she lets them rule
  instead of ruling them as they ought to be ruled, with a view to the
  happiness and virtue of mankind."
    PLATO’S Republic, Book 10
  “A man has no right to say to his own generation, turning quite away
  from it, ’Be damned!’ It is the whole Past and the whole Future, this
  same cotton-spinning, dollar-hunting, canting and shrieking, very
  wretched generation of ours."
    CARLYLE to EMERSON, August 29, 1842
Let us turn finally to some phases of the contemporary lyric. We shall not
attempt the hazardous, not to say impossible venture of assessing the
artistic value of living poets. “Poets are not to be ranked like
collegians in a class list,” wrote the wise John Morley long ago.
Certainly they cannot be ranked until their work is finished. Nor is it
possible within the limits of this chapter to attempt, upon a smaller
scale, anything like the task which has been performed so interestingly by
books like Miss Lowell’s Tendencies in Modern American Poetry, Mr.
Untermeyer’s New Era in American Poetry, Miss Wilkinson’s New Voices,
and Mr. Lowes’s Convention and Revolt. I wish rather to remind the
reader, first, of the long-standing case against the lyric, a case
which has been under trial in the court of critical opinion from Plato’s
day to our own; and then to indicate, even more briefly, the lines of
defence. It will be clear, as we proceed, that contemporary verse in
America and England is illustrating certain general tendencies which not
only sharpen the point of the old attack, but also hearten the spirit of
the defenders of lyric poetry.
1. Plato’s Moralistic Objection
Nothing could be more timely, as a contribution to a critical battle which
is just now being waged,
[Footnote: See the Introduction and the closing chapter of Stuart P.
Sherman’s Contemporary Literature. Holt, 1917.]
than the passage from Plato’s Republic which furnishes the motto for the
present chapter. It expresses one of those eternal verities which each
generation must face as best it may: “Poetry feeds and waters the passions
instead of withering and starving them; she lets them rule instead of
ruling them.” “Did we not imply,” asks the Athenian Stranger in Plato’s
Laws, “that the poets are not always quite capable of knowing what is
good or evil?” “There is also,” says Socrates in the Phoedrus, “a third
kind of madness, which is the possession of the Muses; this enters into a
delicate and virgin soul, and there inspiring frenzy, awakens lyric and
all other members.” This Platonic notion of lyric “inspiration” and
“possession” permeates the immortal passage of the Ion:
  “For all good poets, epic as well as lyric, compose their beautiful
  poems not as works of art, but because they are inspired and possessed.
  And as the Corybantian revellers when they dance are not in their right
  mind, so the lyric poets are not in their right mind when they are
  composing their beautiful strains: but when falling under the power of
  music and metre they are inspired and possessed; like Bacchic maidens
  who draw milk and honey from the rivers, when they are under the
  influence of Dionysus, but not when they are in their right mind. And
  the soul of the lyric poet does the same, as they themselves tell us;
  for they tell us that they gather their strains from honied fountains
  out of the gardens and dells of the Muses; thither, like the bees, they
  wing their way. And this is true. For the poet is a light and winged and
  holy thing, and there is no invention in him until he has been inspired
  and is out of his senses, and the mind is no longer in him: when he has
  not attained to this state, he is powerless and is to utter his oracles.
  Many are the noble words in which poets speak of actions like your own
  Words about Homer; but they do not speak of them by any rules of art:
  only when they make that to which the Muse impels them are their
  inventions inspired; and then one of them will make dithyrambs, another
  hymns of praise, another choral strains, another epic or iambic
  verses–and he who is good at one is not good at any other kind of
  verse: for not by art does the poet sing, but by power divine. Had he
  learned by rules of art, he would have known how to speak not of one
  theme only, but of all; and therefore God takes away the minds of poets,
  and uses them as his ministers, as he also uses diviners and holy
  prophets, in order that we who hear them may know that they speak not of
  themselves who utter these priceless words in a state of
  unconsciousness, but that God is the speaker, and that through them he
  is conversing with us."
[Footnote: Plato’s Ion, Jowett’s translation.]
The other Platonic notion about poetry being “imitation” colors the
well-known section of the third book of the Republic, which warns
against the influence of certain effeminate types of lyric harmony:
  “I answered: Of the harmonies I know nothing, but I want to have one
  warlike, which will sound the word or note which a brave man utters in
  the hour of danger and stern resolve, or when his cause is failing and
  he is going to wounds or death or is overtaken by some other evil, and
  at every such crisis meets fortune with calmness and endurance; and
  another which may be used by him in times of peace and freedom of
  action, when there is no pressure of necessity–expressive of entreaty
  or persuasion, of prayer to God, or instruction of man, or again, of
  willingness to listen to persuasion or entreaty and advice; and which
  represents him when he has accomplished his aim, not carried away by
  success, but acting moderately and wisely, and acquiescing in the event.
  These two harmonies I ask you to leave; the strain of necessity and the
  strain of freedom, the strain of the unfortunate and the strain of the
  fortunate, the strain of courage, and the strain of temperance; these,
  I say, leave.”
So runs the famous argument for “the natural rhythms of a manly life,” and
conversely, the contention that “the absence of grace and rhythm and
harmony is closely allied to an evil character.” While it is true that the
basis for this argument has been modified by our abandonment of the Greek
aesthetic theories of “inspiration” and “imitation,” Plato’s moralistic
objection to lyric effeminacy and lyric naturalism is widely shared by
many of our contemporaries. They do not find the “New Poetry,” lovely as
it often is, altogether “manly.” They find on the contrary that some of it
is what Plato calls “dissolute,” i.e. dissolving or relaxing the fibres of
the will, like certain Russian dance-music. I asked an American composer
the other day: “Is there anything at all in the old distinction between
secular and sacred music?” “Certainly,” he replied; “secular music
excites, sacred music exalts.” If this distinction is sound, it is plain
that much of the New Poetry aims at excitement of the senses for its
own sake–or in Plato’s words, at “letting them rule, instead of ruling
them as they ought to be ruled.” Or, to use the severe words of a
contemporary critic: “They bid us be all eye, no mind; all sense, no
thought; all chance, all confusion, no order, no organization, no fabric
of the reason.”
However widely we may be inclined to differ with such moralistic judgments
as these, it remains true that plenty of idealists hold them, and it is
the idealists, rather than the followers of the senses, who have kept the
love of poetry alive in our modern world.
2. A Rationalistic Objection
But the Philistines, as well as the Platonists, have an indictment to
bring against modern verse, and particularly against the lyric. They find
it useless and out of date. Macaulay’s essay on Milton (1825) is one of
the classic expressions of “Caledonian” rationalism:
  “We think that as civilization advances, poetry almost necessarily
  declines.... Language, the machine of the poet, is best fitted for his
  purpose in its rudest state. Nations, like individuals, first perceive
  and then abstract. They advance from particular images to general terms.
  Hence the vocabulary of an enlightened society is philosophical, that of
  a half-civilized people is poetical....  In proportion as men know more
  and think more, they look less at individuals, and more at classes. They
  therefore make better theories and worse poems.... In an enlightened age
  there will be much intelligence, much science, much philosophy,
  abundance of just classification and subtle analysis, abundance of wit
  and eloquence, abundance of verses and even of good ones, but little
  poetry.” In the essay on Dryden (1828) Macaulay renews the charge:
  “Poetry requires not an examining but a believing freedom of mind.... As
  knowledge is extended and as the reason develops itself, the imitative
  arts decay.”
Even Macaulay, however, is a less pungent and amusing advocate of
rationalism than Thomas Love Peacock in The Four Ages of Poetry.
[Footnote: Reprinted in A. S. Cook’s edition of Shelley’s Defense of
Poetry. Boston, 1891.]
A few sentences must suffice:
  “A poet in our times is a semi-barbarian in a civilized community. He
  lives in the days that are past. His ideas, thoughts, feelings,
  associations, are all with barbarous manners, obsolete customs, and
  exploded superstitions. The march of his intellect is like that of a
  crab, backward.... The highest inspirations of poetry are resolvable
  into three ingredients: the rant of unregulated passion, the whining of
  exaggerated feeling, and the cant of factitious sentiment; and can
  therefore serve only to ripen a splendid lunatic like Alexander, a
  puling driveler like Werter, or a morbid dreamer like Wordsworth. It can
  never make a philosopher, nor a statesman, nor in any class of life a
  useful or rational man. It cannot claim the slightest share in any one
  of the comforts and utilities of life, of which we have witnessed so
  many and so rapid advances.... We may easily conceive that the day is
  not distant when the degraded state of every species of poetry will be
  as generally recognized as that of dramatic poetry has long been; and
  this not from any decrease either of intellectual power or intellectual
  acquisition, but because intellectual power and intellectual acquisition
  have turned themselves into other and better channels, and have
  abandoned the cultivation and the fate of poetry to the degenerate fry
  of modern rimesters, and their Olympic judges, the magazine critics, who
  continue to debate and promulgate oracles about poetry as if it were
  still what it was in the Homeric age, the all-in-all of intellectual
  progression, and as if there were no such things in existence as
  mathematicians, historians, politicians, and political economists, who
  have built into the upper air of intelligence a pyramid, from the summit
  of which they see the modern Parnassus far beneath them, and knowing how
  small a place it occupies in the comprehensiveness of their prospect,
  smile at the little ambition and the circumscribed perceptions with
  which the drivelers and mountebanks upon it are contending for the
  poetical palm and the critical chair.”
No one really knows whether Peacock was wholly serious in this diatribe,
but inasmuch as it produced Shelley’s Defense of Poetry “as an
antidote"–as Shelley said–we should be grateful for it. Both Peacock and
Macaulay wrote nearly a century ago, but their statements as to the
uselessness of poetry, as compared with the value of intellectual exertion
in other fields, is wholly in the spirit of twentieth-century rationalism.
Few readers of this book may hold that doctrine, but they will meet it on
every side; and they will need all they can remember of Sidney and Shelley
and George Woodberry “as an antidote.”
3. An Aesthetic Objection
In Aristotle’s well-known definition of Tragedy in the fifth section of
the Poetics, there is one clause, and perhaps only one, which has been
accepted without debate. “A Tragedy, then, is an artistic imitation of an
action that is serious, complete in itself, and of an adequate
magnitude.” Does a lyric possess “an adequate magnitude?” As the
embodiment of a single aspect of feeling, and therefore necessarily brief,
the lyric certainly lacks “mass.” As an object for aesthetic
contemplation, is the average lyric too small to afford the highest and
most permanent pleasure? “A long poem,” remarks A. C. Bradley in his
Oxford Lectures on Poetry,
[Footnote: London, 1909. The passage cited is from the chapter on “The
Long Poem in the Age of Wordsworth."]
“requires imaginative powers superfluous in a short one, and it would be
easy to show that it admits of strictly poetic effects of the highest
value which the mere brevity of a short one excludes.” Surely the lyric,
like the short story, cannot see life steadily and whole. It reflects, as
we have seen, a single situation or desire. “Short swallow-flights of
song"; piping “as the linnet sings"; have not the lyric poets themselves
confessed this inherent shortcoming of their art in a thousand similes?
Does not a book of lyrics often seem like a plantation of carefully tended
little trees, rather than a forest? The most ardent collector of
butterflies is aware that he is hunting only butterflies and not big game.
Mr. John Gould Fletcher’s Japanese Prints is a collection of the
daintiest lyric fragments, lovely as a butterfly’s wing. But do such
lyrics lack “adequate magnitude”?
It seems to the present writer that this old objection is a real one, and
that it is illustrated afresh by contemporary poetry, but that it is not
so much an argument against the lyric as such, as it is an explanation of
the ineffectiveness of certain lyric poems. This defect is not primarily
that they lack “magnitude,” but rather that they lack an adequate basis in
our emotional adjustment to the fact or situation upon which they turn.
The reader is not prepared for the effect which they convey. The art of
the drama was defined by the younger Dumas as the art of preparation. Now
the lyrics which are most effective in primarily dramatic compositions,
let us say the songs in “Pippa Passes” or Ariel’s songs in The Tempest,
are those where the train of emotional association or contrast has been
carefully laid and is waiting to be touched off. So it is with the
markedly lyrical passages in narrative verse–say the close of “Sohrab and
Rustum.” When a French actress sings the “Marseillaise” to a theatre
audience in war-time, or Sir Harry Lauder, dressed in kilts, sings
to a Scottish-born audience about “the bonny purple heather,” or a
marching regiment strikes up “Dixie,” the actual song is only the release
of a mood already stimulated. But when one comes upon an isolated lyric
printed as a “filler” at the bottom of a magazine page, there is no train
of emotional association whatever. There is no lyric mood waiting to
respond to a “lyric cry.” To overcome this obstacle, Walter Page and other
magazine editors, a score of years ago, made the experiment of printing
all the verse together, instead of scattering it according to the
exigencies of the “make-up.” Miss Monroe’s Poetry, Contemporary Verse,
and the other periodicals devoted exclusively to poetry, easily avoid this
handicap of intruding prose. One turns their pages as he turns leaves of
music until he finds some composition in accordance with his mood of the
moment. The long poem or the drama creates an undertone of feeling
in which the lyrical mood may easily come to its own, based and reinforced
as it is by the larger poetical structure. The isolated magazine lyric, on
the other hand, is like one swallow trying to make a summer. Even the
lyrics collected in anthologies are often “mutually repellent particles,"
requiring through their very brevity and lack of relation with one
another, a perpetual re-focussing of the attention, a constant re-creation
of lyric atmosphere. These conditions have been emphasized, during the
last decade, by that very variety of technical experimentation, that
increased range and individualism of lyric effort, which have renewed the
interest in American poetry.
4. Subjectivity as a Curse
I have often thought of a conversation with Samuel Asbury, a dozen years
ago, about a friend of ours, a young Southern poet of distinct promise,
who had just died. Like many Southern verse-writers of his generation, he
had lived and written under the inspiration of Poe. Asbury surprised me by
the almost bitter remark that Poe’s influence had been a blight upon the
younger Southern poets, inasmuch as it had tended to over-subjectivity, to
morbid sensibility, and to a pre-occupation with purely personal emotions.
He argued, as he has since done so courageously in his Texas Nativist,
[Footnote: Published by the author at College Station, Texas.]
that more objective forms of poetry, particularly epic and dramatic
handling of local and historic American material, was far healthier stuff
for a poet to work with.
This objection to the lyric as an encourager of subjective excitement, of
egoistic introspection, like the other objections already stated, is one
of old standing. Goethe remarked that the subjectivity of the smaller
poets was of no significance, but that they were interested in nothing
really objective. But though this indictment of over-individualism has
often been drawn, our own times are a fresh proof of its validity. If the
revelation of personality unites men, the stress upon mere individuality
separates them, and there are countless poets of the day who glory in
their eccentric individualism without remembering that it is only through
a richly developed personality that poetry gains any universal values.
“Nothing in literature is so perishable as eccentricity, with regard to
which each generation has its own requirements and its own standard of
taste; and the critic who urges contemporary poets to make their work as
individual as possible is deliberately inviting them to build their
structures on sand instead of rock."
[Footnote: Edmond Holmes, What is Poetry, p. 68.]
Every reader of contemporary poetry is aware that along with its
exhilarating freshness and force there has been a display of singularity
and of silly nudity both of body and mind. Too intimate confidences have
been betrayed in the lyric confessional. It is a fine thing to see a
Varsity eight take their dip in the river at the end of an afternoon’s
spin. Those boys strip well. But there are middle-aged poets who strip
very badly. Nature never intended them to play the role of Narcissus.
Dickens wrote great novels in a room so hung with mirrors that he could
watch himself in the act of composition. But that is not the best sort of
writing-room for lyric poets, particularly in a decade when acute
self-consciousness, race-consciousness and even coterie-consciousness are
exploited for commercial purposes, and the “lutanists of October” are duly
photographed at their desks.
5. Mere Technique
There is one other count in the old indictment of the lyric which is sure
to be emphasized whenever any generation, like our own, shows a new
technical curiosity about lyric forms. It is this: that mere technique
will “carry” a lyric, even though thought, passion and imagination be
lacking. This charge will inevitably be made from time to time, and not
merely by the persons who naturally tend to stress the content-value of
poetry as compared with its form-value. It was Stedman, who was peculiarly
susceptible to the charm of varied lyric form, who remarked of some of
Poe’s lyrics, “The libretto (i.e. the sense) is nothing, the score is all
in all.” And it must be admitted that the “libretto” of “Ulalume,” for
instance, is nearly or quite meaningless to many lovers of poetry who
value the “score” very highly. In a period marked by enthusiasm for new
experiments in versification, new feats of technique, the borderland
between real conquests of novel territory and sheer nonsense verse
becomes very hazy. The Spectra hoax, perpetrated so cleverly in 1916 by
Mr. Ficke and Mr. Witter Bynner, fooled many of the elect.
[Footnote: See Untermeyer’s New Era, etc., pp. 320-23.]
I have never believed that Emerson meant to decry Poe when he referred to
him as “the jingle-man.” Emerson’s memory for names was faulty, and he was
trying to indicate the author of the
  “tintinnabulation of the bells.”
That Poe was a prestidigitator with verse, and may be regarded solely with
a view to his professional expertness, is surely no ground for disparaging
him as a poet. But it is the kind of penalty which extraordinary technical
expertness has to pay in all the arts. Many persons remember Paganini only
as the violinist who could play upon a single string. Every ’amplificolor
imperii“–every widener of the bounds of the empire of poetry, like
Vachel Lindsay with his experiments in chanted verse, Robert Frost with
his subtle renderings of the cadences of actual speech, Miss Amy Lowell
with her doctrine of “curves” and “returns” and polyphony–runs the risk
of being regarded for a while as a technician and nothing more. Ultimately
a finer balance is struck between the claims of form and content: the
ideas of a poet, his total vision of life, his contribution to the thought
as well as to the craftsmanship of his generation, are thrown into the
scale. Victor Hugo is now seen to be something far other than the mere
amazing lyric virtuoso of the Odes et Ballades of 1826. Walt Whitman
ultimately gets judged as Walt Whitman, and not merely as the inventor
of a new type of free verse in 1855. A rough justice is done at last, no
doubt, but for a long time the cleverest and most original manipulators of
words and tunes are likely to be judged by their virtuosity alone.
6. The Lines of Defence
The objections to lyric poetry which have just been rehearsed are of
varying degrees of validity. They have been mentioned here because they
still affect, more or less, the judgment of the general public as it
endeavors to estimate the value of the contemporary lyric. I have little
confidence in the taste of professed admirers of poetry who can find no
pleasure in contemporary verse, and still less confidence in the taste of
our contemporaries whose delight in the “new era” has made them deaf to
the great poetic voices of the past. I am sorry for the traditionalist who
cannot enjoy Robert Frost and Edwin Arlington Robinson and Edgar Lee
Masters and Carl Sandburg. He is, in my opinion, in a parlous state. But
the state of the young rebel who cannot enjoy “Lycidas” and “The Progress
of Poesy” and the “Ode to Dejection” is worse than parlous. It is
hopeless.
It is not for him, therefore, that these final paragraphs are written, but
rather for those lovers of poetry who recognize that it transcends all
purely moralistic and utilitarian, as it does all historical and technical
considerations,–that it lifts the reader into a serene air where beauty
and truth abide, while the perplexed generations of men appear and
disappear. Sidney and Campion and Daniel pleaded its cause for the
Elizabethans, Coleridge and Wordsworth and Shelley defended it against the
Georgian Philistines, Carlyle, Newman and Arnold championed it through
every era of Victorian materialism. In the twentieth century, critics like
Mackail and A. C. Bradley and Rhys, poets like Newbolt and Drinkwater and
Masefield–to say nothing of living poets and critics among our own
countrymen–have spoken out for poetry with a knowledge, a sympathy and an
eloquence unsurpassed in any previous epoch. The direct “Defence of
Poetry” may safely be left to such men as these.
I have chosen, rather, the line of indirect vindication of poetry, and
particularly of the lyric, which has been attempted in this book. We have
seen that the same laws are perpetually at work in poetry as in all the
other arts; that we have to do with the transmission of a certain kind of
feeling through a certain medium; that the imagination remoulds the
material proffered by the senses, and brings into order the confused and
broken thoughts of the mind, until it presents the eternal aspect of
things through words that dance to music. We have seen that the study of
poetry leads us back to the psychic life of primitive races, to the
origins of language and of society, and to the underlying spirit of
institutions and nationalities, so that even a fragment of surviving lyric
verse may be recognized as a part of those unifying and dividing
forces that make up the life of the world. We have found poetry,
furthermore, to be the great personal mode of literary expression, a
revelation of noble personality as well as base, and that this personal
mode of expression has continued to hold its own in the modern world. The
folk-epic is gone, the art-epic has been outstripped by prose fiction, and
the drama needs a theatre. But the lyric needs only a poet, who can
compose in any of its myriad forms. No one who knows contemporary
literature will deny that the lyric is now interpreting the finer spirit
of science, the drift of social progress, and above all, the instincts of
personal emotion. Through it to-day, as never before in the history of
civilization, the heart of a man can reach the heart of mankind. It is
inconceivable that the lyric will not grow still more significant
with time, freighted more and more deeply with thought and passion and
touched with a richer and more magical beauty. Some appreciation of it, no
matter how inadequate, should be a part of the spiritual possessions of
every civilized man.’
  “Die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen;
   Dein Sinn ist zu, dein Herz ist todt!
   Auf! bade, Schüler, unverdrossen
   Die ird’sche Brust im Morgenrothl”
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
