


THE POET’S IMAGINATION
  “The essence of poetry is invention; such invention as, by producing
  something unexpected, surprises and delights."
    SAMUEL JOHNSON
  “The singers do not beget, only the Poet begets."
    WALT WHITMAN
We must not at the outset insist too strongly upon the radical
distinction between “the poet"–as we have called him for
convenience–and other men. The common sense of mankind asserts that this
distinction exists, yet it also asserts that all children are poets after
a certain fashion, and that the vast majority of adult persons are, at
some moment or other, susceptible to poetic feeling. A small girl, the
other day, spoke of a telegraph wire as “that message-vine.” Her father
and mother smiled at this naive renaming of the world of fact. It was a
child’s instinctive “poetizing” imagination, but the father and mother,
while no longer capable, perhaps, of such daring verbal magic, were
conscious that they had too often played with the world of fact, and, for
the instant at least, remoulded it into something nearer the heart’s
desire. That is to say, they could still feel “poetically,” though their
wonderful chance of making up new names for everything had gone as soon as
the gates were shut upon the Paradise of childhood.
All readers of poetry agree that it originates somehow in feeling, and
that if it be true poetry, it stimulates feeling in the hearer. And all
readers agree likewise that feeling is transmitted from the maker of
poetry to the enjoyer of poetry by means of the imagination. But the
moment we pass beyond these accepted truisms, difficulties begin.
1. Feeling and Imagination
What is feeling, and exactly how is it bound up with the imagination? The
psychology of feeling remains obscure, even after the labors of
generations of specialists; and it is obvious that the general theories
about the nature of imagination have shifted greatly, even within the
memory of living men. Nevertheless there are some facts, in this
constantly contested territory, which now seem indisputable. One of them,
and of peculiar significance to students of poetry, is this: in the stream
of objects immediately present to consciousness there are no images of
feeling itself.
[Footnote: This point has been elaborated with great care in Professor A.
H. R. Fairchild’s Making of Poetry. Putnam’s, 1912.]
“If I am asked to call up an image of a rose, of a tree, of a cloud, or of
a skylark, I can readily do it; but if I am asked to feel loneliness or
sorrow, to feel hatred or jealousy, or to feel joy on the return of
spring, I cannot readily do it. And the reason why I cannot do it is
because I can call up no image of any one of these feelings. For
everything I come to know through my senses, for everything in connection
with what I do or feel I can call up some kind of mental image; but for no
kind of feeling itself can I ever possibly have a direct image. The only
effective way of arousing any particular feeling that is more than mere
bodily feeling is to call up the images that are naturally connected with
that feeling."
[Footnote: Fairchild, pp. 24, 25.]
If then, “the raw material of poetry,” as Professor Fairchild insists,
is “the mental image,” we must try to see how these images are presented
to the mind of the poet and in turn communicated to us. Instead of
asserting, as our grandfathers did, that the imagination is a “faculty"
of the mind, like “judgment,” or accepting the theory of our fathers that
imagination “is the whole mind thrown into the process of imagining,” the
present generation has been taught by psychologists like Charcot, James
and Ribot that we are chiefly concerned with “imaginations,” that is, a
series of visual, auditory, motor or tactile images flooding in upon the
mind, and that it is safer to talk about these “imaginations” than about
“the Imagination.” Literary critics will continue to use this last
expression–as we are doing in the present chapter–because it is too
convenient to be given up. But they mean by it something fairly definite:
namely, the images swarming in the stream of consciousness, and their
integration into wholes that satisfy the human desire for beauty. It is
in its ultimate aim rather than in its immediate processes that the
“artistic” imagination differs from the inventor’s or scientist’s or
philosopher’s imagination. We no longer assert, as did Stopford Brooke
some forty years ago, that “the highest scientific intellect is a joke
compared with the power displayed by a Shakespeare, a Homer, a Dante.” We
are inclined rather to believe that in its highest exercise of power the
scientific mind is attempting much the same feat as the highest type of
poetic mind, and that in both cases it is a feat of imaginative energy.
2. Creative and Artistic Imagination
The reader who has hitherto allowed himself to think of a poet as a sort
of freak of nature, abnormal in the very constitution of his mind, and
achieving his results by methods so obscure that “inspiration” is our
helpless name for indicating them, cannot do better than master such a
book as Ribot’s Essay on the Creative Imagination.
[Footnote: Th. Ribot, Essai sur l’Imagination créatrice. Paris, 1900.
English translation by Open Court Co., Chicago, 1906.]
This famous psychologist, starting with the conception that the raw
material for the creative imagination is images, and that its basis lies
in a motor impulse, examines first the emotional factor involved in every
act of the creative imagination. Then he passes to the unconscious factor,
the involuntary “coming” of the idea, that “moment of genius,” as Buffon
called it, which often marks the end of an unconscious elaboration of the
idea or the beginning of conscious elaboration.
[Footnote: See the quotation from Sir William Rowan Hamilton, the
mathematician, in the “Notes and Illustrations” for this chapter.]
Ribot points out that certain organic changes, as in blood circulation–
the familiar rush of blood to the head–accompany imaginative activity.
Then he discusses the inventor’s and artist’s “fixed idea,” their “will
that it shall be so,” “the motor tendency of images engendering the
ideal.” Ribot’s distinction between the animal’s revival of images and the
true creative combination of images in the mental life of children and of
primitive man bears directly upon poetry, but even more suggestive to us
is his diagram of the successive stages by which inventions come into
being. There are two types of this process, and three stages of each: (A)
the “idea,” the “discovery” or invention, and then the verification or
application; or else (B) the unconscious preparation, followed
by the “idea” or “inspiration,” and then by the “development” or
construction. Whether a man is inventing a safety-pin or a sonnet, the
series of imaginative processes seems to be much the same. There is of
course a typical difference between the “plastic” imagination, dealing
with clear images, objective relations, and seen at its best in the arts
of form like sculpture and architecture, and that “diffluent” imagination
which prefers vaguely outlined images, which is markedly subjective and
emotional, and of which modern music like Debussy’s is a good example. But
whatever may be the specific type of imagination involved, we find alike
in inventor, scientist and artist the same general sequence of “germ,
incubation, flowering and completion,” and the same fundamental motor
impulse as the driving power.
Holding in mind these general characteristics of the creative imagination,
as traced by Ribot, let us now test our conception of the distinctively
artistic imagination. Countless are the attempts to define or describe it,
and it would be unwise for the student, at this point, to rest satisfied
with any single formulation of its functions. But it may be helpful to
quote a paragraph from Hartley B. Alexander’s brilliant and subtle book,
Poetry and the Individual:
[Footnote: Putnam’s, 1906.]
  “The energy of the mind or of the soul–for it welds all psychical
  activities–which is the agent of our world-winnings and the
  procreator of our growing life, we term imagination. It is
  distinguished from perception by its relative freedom from the
  dictation of sense; it is distinguished from memory by its power to
  acquire–memory only retains; it is distinguished from emotion in
  being a force rather than a motive; from the understanding in being
  an assimilator rather than the mere weigher of what is set before it;
  from the will, because the will is but the wielder of the reins–the
  will is but the charioteer, the imagination is the Pharaoh in
  command. It is distinguished from all these, yet it includes them
  all, for it is the full functioning of the whole mind and in the
  total activity drives all mental faculties to its one supreme
  end–the widening of the world wherein we dwell. Through beauty the
  world grows, and it is the business of the imagination to create the
  beautiful. The imagination synthesises, humanises, personalises,
  illumines reality with the soul’s most intimate moods, and so exalts
  with spiritual understandings.”
The value of such a description, presented without any context, will vary
with the training of the individual reader, but its quickening power will
be recognized even by those who are incapable of grasping all the
intellectual distinctions involved.
3. Poetic Imagination in Particular
We are now ready, after this consideration of the creative and artistic
imagination, to look more closely at some of the qualities of the poetic
imagination in particular. The specific formal features of that
imagination lie, as we have seen, in its use of verbal imagery, and in the
combination of verbal images into rhythmical patterns. But are there not
functions of the poet’s mind preceding the formation of verbal images? The
psychology of language is still unsettled, and whether a man can think
without the use of words is often doubted. But a painter can certainly
“think” in terms of color, as an architect or mathematician can “think” in
terms of form and space, or a musician in terms of sound, without
employing verbal symbols at all. And are there not characteristic
activities of the poetic imagination which antedate the fixation and
expression of images in words? Apparently there are.
The reader will find, in the “Notes and Illustrations” for this chapter, a
quotation from Mr. Lascelles-Abercrombie, in which he refers to the
“region where the outward radiations of man’s nature combine with the
irradiations of the world.” That is to say, the inward-sweeping stream of
consciousness is instantly met by an outward-moving activity of the brain
which recognizes relationships between the objects proffered to the senses
and the personality itself. The “I” projects itself into these objects,
claims them, appropriates them as a part of its own nature. Professor
Fairchild, who calls this self-projecting process by the somewhat
ambiguous name of “personalizing,” rightly insists, I believe, that poets
make a more distinctive use of this activity than other men. He quotes
some of the classic confidences of poets themselves: Keats’s “If a sparrow
come before my window I take part in its existence and pick about the
gravel"; and Goethe on the sheep pictured by the artist Roos, “I always
feel uneasy when I look at these beasts. Their state, so limited, dull,
gaping, and dreaming, excites in me such sympathy that I fear I shall
become a sheep, and almost think the artist must have been one.” I can
match this Goethe story with the prayer of little Larry H., son of an
eminent Harvard biologist. Larry, at the age of six, was taken by his
mother to the top of a Vermont hill-pasture, where, for the first time in
his life, he saw a herd of cows and was thrilled by their glorious bigness
and nearness and novelty. When he said his prayers that night, he was
enough of a poet to change his usual formula into this:
  “Jesus, tender Shepherd, hear me,
  Bless thy little cow to-night"–
Larry being the cow.
  “There was a child went forth every day,”
records Walt Whitman,
  “And the first object he look’d upon that object
  he became.”
Professor Fairchild quotes these lines from Whitman, and a few of the many
passages of the same purport from Coleridge and Wordsworth. They are all
summed up in Coleridge’s heart-broken
  “Oh, Lady, we receive but what we give,
  And in our life alone does Nature live.”
This “animism,” or identifying imagination, by means of which the child or
the primitive man or the poet transfers his own life into the unorganic or
organic world, is one of the oldest and surest indications of poetic
faculty, and as far as we can see, it is antecedent to the use of verbal
images or symbols.
Another characteristic of the poetic temperament, allied with the
preceding, likewise seems to belong in the region where words are not as
yet emerging above the threshold of consciousness. I mean the strange
feeling, witnessed to by many poets, of the fluidity, fusibility,
transparency–the infinitely changing and interchangeable aspects–of the
world as it appears to the senses. It is evident that poets are not
looking–at least when in this mood–at our “logical” world of hard, clear
fact and law. They are gazing rather at what Whitman called “the eternal
float of solution,” the “flowing of all things” of the Greeks, the
“river within the river” of Emerson. This tendency is peculiarly marked,
of course, in artists possessing the “diffluent" type of imagination, and
Romantic poets and critics have had much to say about it. The imagination,
said Wordsworth, “recoils from everything but the plastic, the pliant, the
indefinite."
[Footnote: Preface to 1815 edition of his Poems.]
“Shakespeare, too,” says Carlye,
[Footnote: Essay on Goethe’s Works.]
“does not look at a thing, but into it, through it; so that he
constructively comprehends it, can take it asunder and put it together
again; the thing melts as it were, into light under his eye, and anew
creates itself before him. That is to say, he is a Poet. For Goethe, as
for Shakespeare, the world lies all translucent, all fusible we might
call it, encircled with Wonder; the Natural in reality the Supernatural,
for to the seer’s eyes both become one.”
In his essay on Tieck Carlyle remarks again upon this characteristic of
the mind of the typical poet: “He is no mere observer and compiler;
rendering back to us, with additions or subtractions, the Beauty which
existing things have of themselves presented to him; but a true Maker, to
whom the actual and external is but the excitement for ideal creations
representing and ennobling its effects.”
Coleridge’s formula is briefer still; the imagination “dissolves,
diffuses, dissipates, in order to re-create."
[Footnote: Biographia Literaria.]
Such passages help us to understand the mystical moments which many poets
have recorded, in which their feeling of “diffusion” has led them to doubt
the existence of the external world. Wordsworth grasping “at a wall or
tree to recall myself from this abyss of idealism to the reality,” and
Tennyson’s “weird seizures” which he transferred from his own experience
to his imaginary Prince in The Princess, are familiar examples of this
type of mysticism. But the sense of the infinite fusibility and change in
the objective world is deeper than that revealed in any one type of
diffluent imagination. It is a profound characteristic of the poetic
mind as such. Yet it should be remembered that the philosopher and
the scientist likewise assert that ours is a vital, ever-flowing,
onward-urging world, in the process of “becoming” rather than merely
“being.” “We are far from the noon of man” sang Tennyson, in a
late-Victorian and evolutionary version of St. John’s “It doth not
yet appear what we shall be.” “The primary imagination,” asserted
Coleridge, “is a repetition in the finite mind of the eternal act of
creation in the infinite I am."
[Footnote: Biographia Literaria, chap. 13.]
Here, evidently, unless the “God-intoxicated” Coleridge is talking
nonsense, we are in the presence of powers that do not need as yet any use
of verbal symbols.
4. Verbal Images
The plasticity of the world as it appears to the mind of the poet is
clearly evidenced by the swarm of images which present themselves to the
poet’s consciousness. In the re-presentation of these pictures to us the
poet is forced, of course, to use verbal images. The precise point at
which he becomes conscious of employing words no doubt varies with the
individual, and depends upon the relative balance of auditory, visual or
tactile images in his mind. Swinburne often impresses us as working
primarily with the “stuff” of word-sounds, as Browning with the stuff of
sharp-cut tactile or motor images, and Victor Hugo with the stuff of
visual impressions. But in each case the poet’s sole medium of expression
to us is through verbal symbols, and it is hard to get behind these into
the real workshop of the brain where each poet is busily minting his own
peculiar raw material into the current coin of human speech.
Nevertheless, many poets have been sufficiently conscious of what is going
on within their workshop to tell us something about it. Professor
Fairchild has made an interesting collection
[Footnote: The Making of Poetry, pp. 78, 79.]
of testimony relating to the tumultuous crowding of images, each
clamoring, as it were, for recognition and crying “take me!” He instances,
as other critics have done, the extraordinary succession of images by
which Shelley strives to portray the spirit of the skylark. The similes
actually chosen by Shelley seem to have been merely the lucky candidates
selected from an infinitely greater number. In Francis Thompson’s
captivating description of Shelley as a glorious child the reader is
conscious of the same initial rush of images, although the medium of
expression here is heightened prose instead of verse:
[Footnote: Dublin Review, July, 1908.]
  “Coming to Shelley’s poetry, we peep over the wild mask of
  revolutionary metaphysics, and we see the winsome face of the child.
  Perhaps none of his poems is more purely and typically Shelleian than
  The Cloud, and it is interesting to note how essentially it springs
  from the faculty of make-believe. The same thing is conspicuous,
  though less purely conspicuous, throughout his singing; it is the
  child’s faculty of make-believe raised to the nth power. He is still
  at play, save only that his play is such as manhood stops to watch,
  and his playthings are those which the gods give their children. The
  universe is his box of toys. He dabbles his fingers in the day-fall.
  He is gold-dusty with tumbling amidst the stars. He makes bright
  mischief with the moon. The meteors nuzzle their noses in his hand.
  He teases into growling the kennelled thunder, and laughs at the
  shaking of its fiery chain. He dances in and out of the gates of
  heaven: its floor is littered with his broken fancies. He runs wild
  over the fields of ether. He chases the rolling world. He gets
  between the feet of the horses of the sun. He stands in the lap of
  patient Nature, and twines her loosened tresses after a hundred
  wilful fashions, to see how she will look nicest in his song.”
5. The Selection and Control of Images
It is easier, no doubt, to realize something of the swarming of images in
the stream of consciousness than it is to understand how these images are
selected, combined and controlled. Some principle of association, some law
governing the synthesis, there must be; and English criticism has long
treasured some of the clairvoyant words of Coleridge and Wordsworth upon
this matter. The essential problem is suggested by Wordsworth’s phrase
“the manner in which we associate ideas in a state of excitement.” Is the
“excitement,” then, the chief factor in the selection and combination of
images, and do the “feelings,” as if with delicate tentacles,
instinctively choose and reject and integrate such images as blend with
the poet’s mood?
Coleridge, with his subtle builder’s instinct, uses his favorite word
“synthesis” not merely as applied to images as such, but to all the
faculties of the soul:
“The poet, described in ideal perfection, brings the whole soul of man
into activity, with the subordination of its faculties to each other
according to their relative worth and dignity. He diffuses a tone and a
spirit of unity, that blends, and as it were fuses, each into each, by
that synthetic and magical power to which I would exclusively appropriate
the name of Imagination.” “Synthetic and magical power,” indeed, with a
Coleridge as Master of the Mysteries! But the perplexed student of poetry
may well wish a more exact description of what really takes place.
An American critic, after much searching in recent psychological
explanations of artistic creation, attempts to describe the genesis of a
poem in these words:
[Footnote: Lewis E. Gates, Studies and Appreciations, p. 215. Macmillan,
1900.]
  “The poet concentrates his thought on some concrete piece of life, on
  some incident, character, or bit of personal experience; because of
  his emotional temperament, this concentration of interest stirs in
  him a quick play of feeling and prompts the swift concurrence of many
  images. Under the incitement of these feelings, and in accordance
  with laws of association that may at least in part be described,
  these images grow bright and clear, take definite shapes, fall into
  significant groupings, branch and ramify, and break into sparkling
  mimicry of the actual world of the senses–all the time delicately
  controlled by the poet’s conscious purpose and so growing
  intellectually significant, but all the time, if the work of art is
  to be vital, impelled also in their alert weaving of patterns by the
  moods of the poet, by his fine instinctive sense of the emotional
  expressiveness of this or that image that lurks in the background of
  his consciousness. For this intricate web of images, tinged with his
  most intimate moods, the poet through his intuitive command of words
  finds an apt series of sound-symbols and records them with written
  characters. And so a poem arises through an exquisite distillation of
  personal moods into imagery and into language, and is ready to offer
  to all future generations its undiminishing store of spiritual joy
  and strength.”
A better description than this we are not likely to find, although some
critics would question the phrase, “all the time delicately controlled by
the poet’s conscious purpose."
[Footnote: “Poetry is not like reasoning, a power to be exerted according
to the determination of the will. A man cannot say, ’I will compose
poetry.’. . . It is not subject to the control of the active powers of the
mind. ... Its birth and recurrence have no necessary connection with the
consciousness or will.” Shelley, A Defense of Poetry.]
For sometimes, assuredly, the synthesis of images seems to take place
without the volition of the poet. The hypnotic trance, the narcotic dream
or revery, and even our experience of ordinary dreams, provide abundant
examples. One dreams, for instance, of a tidal river, flowing in with a
gentle full current which bends in one direction all the water-weeds and
the long grasses trailing from the banks; then somehow the tide seems to
change, and all the water and the weeds and grasses, even the fishes in
the stream, turn slowly and flow out to sea. The current synthesizes,
harmonizes, moves onward like music,–and we are aware that it is all a
dream. Coleridge’s “Kubla Khan,” composed in a deep opium slumber, moves
like that, one train of images melting into another like the interwoven
figures of a dance led by the “damsel with a dulcimer.” There is no
“conscious purpose” whatever, and no “meaning” in the ordinary
interpretation of that word. Nevertheless it is perfect integration of
imagery, pure beauty to the senses. Something of this rapture in the sheer
release of control must have been in Charles Lamb’s mind when he wrote to
Coleridge about the “pure happiness”  of being insane. “Dream not,
Coleridge, of having tasted all the grandeur and wildness of fancy till
you have gone mad! All now seems to me vapid, comparatively so.” (June 10,
1796.)
If “Kubla Khan” represents one extreme, Poe’s account of how he wrote “The
Raven"
[Footnote: The Philosophy of Composition.]
–incredible as the story appears to most of us–may serve to illustrate
the other, namely, a cool, conscious, workmanlike control of every element
in the selection and combination of imagery. Wordsworth’s naive
explanation of the task performed by the imagination in his “Cuckoo” and
“Leech-Gatherer"
[Footnote: Preface to poems of 1815-1845.]
occupies a middle ground. We are at least certain of his entire
honesty–and incidentally of his total lack of humor!
  “’Shall I call thee Bird,
  Or but a wandering Voice?’
“This concise interrogation characterizes the seeming ubiquity of the
voice of the cuckoo, and dispossesses the creature almost of a corporeal
existence; the Imagination being tempted to this exertion of her power by
a consciousness in the memory that the cuckoo is almost perpetually heard
throughout the season of spring, but seldom becomes an object of sight....
  “’As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie
  Couched on the bald top of an eminence,
  Wonder to all who do the same espy
  By what means it could thither come, and whence,
  So that it seems a thing endued with sense,
  Like a sea-beast crawled forth, which on a shelf
  Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun himself.
  Such seemed this Man; not all alive or dead.
  Nor all asleep, in his extreme old age.
       *       *       *       *       *
  Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood,
  That heareth not the loud winds when they call,
  And moveth altogether if it move at all.’
“In these images, the conferring, the abstracting, and the modifying
powers of the Imagination, immediately and mediately acting, are all
brought into conjunction. The stone is endowed with something of the power
of life to approximate it to the sea-beast; and the sea-beast stripped of
some of its vital qualities to assimilate it to the stone; which
intermediate image is thus treated for the purpose of bringing the
original image, that of the stone, to a nearer resemblance to the figure
and condition of the aged man; who is divested of so much of the
indications of life and motion as to bring him to the point
where the two objects unite and coalesce in just comparison.”
Wordsworth’s analysis of the processes of his own imagination, like Poe’s
story of the composition of “The Raven,” is an analysis made after the
imagination had functioned. There can be no absolute proof of its
correctness in every detail. It is evident that we have to deal with an
infinite variety of normal and abnormal minds. Some of these defy
classification; others fall into easily recognized types, such as “the
lunatic, the lover and the poet,” as sketched by Theseus, Duke of Athens.
How modern, after all, is the Duke’s little lecture on the psychology of
imagination!
  “The lunatic, the lover and the poet
  Are of imagination all compact;
  One sees more devils than vast hell can hold,
  That is, the madman: the lover, all as frantic,
  Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt:
  The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
  Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
  And as imagination bodies forth
  The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
  Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
  A local habitation and a name.
  Such tricks hath strong imagination,
  That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
  It comprehends some bringer of that joy;
  Or in the night, imagining some fear,
  How easy is a bush supposed a bear!"
[Footnote: Midsummer Night’s Dream, v, i, 7-22.]
Shakspere, it will be observed, does not hesitate to use that dangerous
term “the poet!” Yet as students of poetry we must constantly bring
ourselves back to the recorded experience of individual men, and from
these make our comparisons and generalizations. It may even happen that
some readers will get a clearer conception of the selection and synthesis
of images if they turn for the moment away from poetry and endeavor to
realize something of the same processes as they take place in imaginative
prose. In Hawthorne’s Scarlet Letter, for example, the dominant image,
which becomes the symbol of his entire theme, is the piece of scarlet
cloth which originally caught his attention. This physical object
becomes, after long brooding, subtly changed into a moral symbol of sin
and its concealment. It permeates the book, it is borne openly upon the
breast of one sufferer, it is written terribly in the flesh of another, it
flames at last in the very sky. All the lesser images and symbols of the
romance are mastered by it, subordinated to it; it becomes the dominant
note in the composition. The romance of The Scarlet Letter is, as we say
of any great poem or drama, an “ideal synthesis"; i.e. a putting together
of images in accordance with some central idea. The more significant the
idea or theme or master image, the richer and fuller are the possibilities
of beauty in detail. Apply this familiar law of complexity to a poet’s
conscious or unconscious choice of images. In the essay which we have
already quoted
[Footnote: Studies and Appreciations, p. 216.]
Lewis Gates remarks:
“In every artist there is a definite mental bias, a definite spiritual
organization and play of instincts, which results in large measure from
the common life of his day and generation, and which represents this
life–makes it potent–within the individuality of the artist. This
so-called ’acquired constitution of the life of the soul’–it has been
described by Professor Dilthey with noteworthy acuteness and
thoroughness–determines in some measure the contents of the artist’s
mind, for it determines his interests, and therefore the sensations and
perceptions that he captures and automatically stores up. It guides him in
his judgments of worth, in his instinctive likes and dislikes as regards
conduct and character, and controls in large measure the play of his
imagination as he shapes the action of his drama or epic and the destinies
of his heroes. Its prejudices interfiltrate throughout the molecules of
his entire moral and mental life, and give to each image and idea some
slight shade of attractiveness or repulsiveness, so that when the artist’s
spirit is at work under the stress of feeling, weaving into the fabric of
a poem the competing images and ideas in his consciousness, certain ideas
and images come more readily and others lag behind, and the resulting work
of art gets a colour and an emotional tone and suggestions of value that
subtly reflect the genius of the age.”
6. “Imagist” Verse
Such a conception of the association of images as reflecting not only this
“acquired constitution of the soul” of the poet but also the genius of the
age is in marked contrast to some of the theories held by contemporary
“imagists.” As we have already noted, in Chapter II, they stress the
individual reaction to phenomena, at some tense moment. They discard, as
far as possible, the long “loop-line” of previous experience. As for
diction, they have, like all true artists, a horror of the cliché–the
rubber-stamp word, blurred by use. As for rhythm, they fear any
conventionality of pattern. In subsequent chapters we must look more
closely at these matters of diction and of rhythm, but they are both
involved in any statement of the principles of Imagist verse. Richard
Aldington sums up his article on “The Imagists"
[Footnote: “Greenwich Village,” July 15, 1915.]
in these words:
“Let me resume the cardinal points of the Imagist style:
1. Direct treatment of the subject. 2. A hardness and economy of speech.
3. Individuality of rhythm; vers libre. 4. The exact word. The Imagists
would like to possess ’le mot qui fait image, l’adjectif inattendu et
précis qui dessine de pied en cap et donne la senteur de la chose qu’il
est chargé de rendre, la touche juste, la couleur qui chatoie et vibre.’”
In the preface to Imagist Poets (1915), and in Miss Amy Lowell’s
Tendencies in Modern American Poetry (1917) the tenets of imagism are
stated briefly and clearly. Imagism, we are told, aims to use always the
language of common speech, but to employ always the exact word, not the
nearly-exact nor the merely decorative word; to create new rhythms–as the
expression of new moods–and not to copy old rhythms, which merely echo
old moods; to allow absolute freedom in the choice of a subject; to
present an image, rendering particulars exactly; to produce poetry that is
hard and clear, never blurred or indefinite; to secure condensation.
It will be observed that in the special sort of picture-making which
Imagist poetry achieves, the question of free verse is merely incidental.
“We fight for it as a principle of liberty,” says Miss Lowell, but she
does not insist upon it as the only method of writing poetry. Mr.
Aldington admits frankly that about forty per cent of vers libre is
prose. Mr. Lowes, as we have already remarked, has printed dozens of
passages from Meredith’s novels in the typographical arrangement of free
verse so as to emphasize their “imagist” character. One of the most
effective is this:
  “He was like a Tartar
  Modelled by a Greek:
  Supple
  As the Scythian’s bow,
  Braced
  As the string!”
Suppose, however, that we agree to defer for the moment the vexed question
as to whether images of this kind are to be considered prose or verse.
Examine simply for their vivid picture-making quality the collections
entitled Imagist Poets (1915,1916,1917), or, in the Anthology of
Magazine Verse for 1915, such poems as J. G. Fletcher’s “Green Symphony"
or “H. D.’s” “Sea-Iris” or Miss Lowell’s “The Fruit Shop.” Read Miss
Lowell’s extraordinarily brilliant volume Men, Women and Ghosts (1916),
particularly the series of poems entitled “Towns in Colour.” Then read the
author’s preface, in which her artistic purpose in writing “Towns in
Colour” is set forth: “In these poems, I have endeavoured to give the
colour, and light, and shade, of certain places and hours, stressing the
purely pictorial effect, and with little or no reference to any other
aspect of the places described. It is an enchanting thing to wander
through a city looking for its unrelated beauty, the beauty by which it
captivates the sensuous sense of seeing.” [Footnote: Italics mine.]
Nothing could be more gallantly frank than the phrase “unrelated beauty."
For it serves as a touchstone to distinguish between those imagist poems
which leave us satisfied and those which do not. Sometimes, assuredly, the
insulated, unrelated beauty is enough. What delicate reticence there is in
Richard Aldington’s “Summer”:
  “A butterfly,
  Black and scarlet,
  Spotted with white,
  Fans its wings
  Over a privet flower.
  “A thousand crimson foxgloves,
  Tall bloody pikes,
  Stand motionless in the gravel quarry;
  The wind runs over them.
  “A rose film over a pale sky
  Fantastically cut by dark chimneys;
  Across an old city garden.”
The imagination asks no more.
Now read my friend Baker Brownell’s “Sunday Afternoon”:
  “The wind pushes huge bundles
  Of itself in warm motion
  Through the barrack windows;
  It rattles a sheet of flypaper
  Tacked in a smear of sunshine on the sill.
  A voice and other voices squirt
  A slow path among the room’s tumbled sounds.
  A ukelele somewhere clanks
  In accidental jets
  Up from the room’s background.”
Here the stark truthfulness of the images does not prevent an instinctive
“Well, what of it?” “And afterward, what else?” Unless we adopt the
Japanese theory of “stop poems,” where the implied continuation of the
mood, the suggested application of the symbol or allegory, is the sole
justification of the actual words given, a great deal of imagist verse, in
my opinion, serves merely to sharpen the senses without utilizing the full
imaginative powers of the mind. The making of images is an essential
portion of the poet’s task, but in memorably great poetry it is only a
detail in a  larger whole. Miss Lowell’s “Patterns” is one of the most
effective of contemporary poems, but it is far more than a document of
imagism. It is a triumph of structural imagination.
7. Genius and Inspiration
Whatever may be the value, for students, of trying to analyse the
image-making and image-combining faculty, every one admits that it is a
necessary element in the production of poetry. Let Coleridge have the
final statement of this mystery of his art: “The power of reducing
multitude into unity of effect, and modifying a series of thoughts by some
one predominant thought or feeling, may be cultivated and improved, but
can never be learnt. It is in this that Poeta nascitur non fit.” We
cannot avoid the difficulties of the question by attributing the poet’s
imagination to “genius.” Whether genius is a neurosis, as some think, or
whether it is sanity at perfection, makes little difference here.
Both a Poe and a Sophocles are equally capable of producing ideal
syntheses. Nor does the old word “inspiration” help much either.
Whatever we mean by inspiration–a something not ourselves, supernatural
or sub-liminal–a “vision” of Blake, the “voices” of Joan of Arc, the
“god” that moved within the Corybantian revelers–it is an excitement of
the image-making faculty, and not that faculty itself. Disordered “genius"
and inspiration undisciplined by reason are alike powerless to produce
images that permanently satisfy the sense of beauty. Tolstoy’s common-
sense remark is surely sound: “One’s writing is good only where the
intelligence and the imagination are in equilibrium. As soon as one of
them over-balances the other, it’s all up."
[Footnote: Compare W. A. Neilson’s chapter on “The Balance of Qualities"
in Essentials of Poetry. Houghton Mifflin Company, 1912.]
8. A Summary
Let us now endeavor to summarize this testimony which we have taken
from poets and critics. Though they do not agree in all details, and
though they often use words that are either too vague or too highly
specialized, the general drift of the testimony is fairly clear. Poets
and critics agree that the imagination is something different from the
mere memory-image; that by a process of selection and combination and
re-presentation of images something really new comes into being, and that
we are therefore justified in using the term constructive, or creativeimagination. This imagination embodies, as we say, or “bodies forth,” as
Duke Theseus said, “the forms of things unknown.” It ultimately becomes
the poet’s task to “shape” these forms with his “pen,” that is to say, to
suggest them through word-symbols, arranged in a certain fashion. The
selection of these word-symbols will be discussed in Chapter IV, and their
rhythmical arrangement in Chapter V. But we have tried in the present
chapter to trace the functioning of the poetic imagination in those stages
of its activity which precede the definite shaping of poems with the pen.
If we say, with Professor Fairchild,
[Footnote: Making of Poetry, p. 34.]
that “the central processes or kinds of activity involved in the making of
poetry are three: personalizing, combining and versifying,” it is obvious
that we have been dealing with the first two. If we prefer to use the
famous terms employed by Ruskin in Modern Painters, we have been
considering the penetrative, associative and contemplative types of
imagination. But these Ruskinian names, however brilliantly and
suggestively employed by the master, are dangerous tools for the beginner
in the study of poetry.
If the beginner desires to review, at this point, the chief matters
brought to his attention in the present chapter, he may make a real test
of their validity by opening his senses to the imagery of a few lines of
poetry. Remember that poets are endeavoring to convey the “sense” of
things rather than the knowledge of things. Disregard for the moment the
precise words employed in the following lines, and concentrate the
attention upon the images, as if the image were not made of words at all,
but were mere naked sense-stimulus.
In this line the poet is trying to make us see something ("visual"
image):
  “The bride hath paced into the hall,
  Red as a rose is she.”
Can you see her?
In these lines the poet is trying to make us hear something ("auditory"
image):
  “A noise like of a hidden brook  In the leafy month of June
  That to the sleeping woods all night
  Singeth a quiet tune.”
Do you hear the tune? Do you hear it as clearly as you can hear
  ’The tambourines
  Jing-jing-jingled in the hands of Queens”?
In these lines the poet is trying to make us feel certain bodily
sensations ("tactile” image):
  “I closed my lids and kept them close,
  And the balls like pulses beat;
  For the sky and the sea and the sea and the sky,
  Lay like a load on my weary eye,
  And the dead were at my feet.”
Do your eyes feel that pressure?
You are sitting quite motionless in your chair as you read these lines
("motor” image):
  “I sprang to the stirrup, and Joris, and he;
  I galloped, Dirck galloped, we galloped all three!”
Are you instantly on horseback? If you are, the poet has put you there by
conveying from his mind to yours, through the use of verbal imagery and
rhythm, his “sense” of riding, which has now become your sense of
riding.
If the reader can meet this test of realizing simple images through his
own body-and-mind reaction to their stimulus, the door of poetry is open
to him. He can enter into its limitless enjoyments. If he wishes to
analyse more closely the nature of the pleasure which poetry affords, he
may select any lines he happens to like, and ask himself how the various
functions of the imagination are illustrated by them. Suppose the lines
are Coleridge’s description of the bridal procession, already quoted in
part:
  “The bride hath paced into the hall,
   Red as a rose is she;
   Nodding their heads before her goes
   The merry minstrelsy.”
Here surely is imagination penetrative; the selection of some one
characteristic trait of the object; that trait (the “redness” or the
“nodding”) re-presented to us, and emphasized by conferring, modifying or
abstracting whatever elements the poet wishes to stress or to suppress.
The result is a combination of imagery which forms an idealized picture,
presenting the shows of things as the mind would like to see them and thus
satisfying our sense of beauty. For there is no question that the mind
takes a supreme satisfaction in such an idealization of reality as
Coleridge’s picture of the swift tropical sunset,
  “At one stride comes the dark,”
or Emerson’s picture of the slow New England sunrise,
  “O tenderly the haughty day
  Fills his blue urn with fire.”
Little has been said about beauty in this chapter, but no one doubts that
a sense of beauty guides the “shaping spirit of imagination” in that dim
region through which the poet feels his way before he comes to the
conscious choice of expressive words and to the ordering of those words
into beautiful rhythmical designs.
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
