


THE POET’S WORDS
  “Words are sensible signs necessary for communication."
    JOHN LOCKE, Human Understanding, 3, 2, 1.
  “As conceptions are the images of things to the mind within itself, so
  are words or names the marks of those conceptions to the minds of them
  we converse with."
    SOUTH, quoted in Johnson’s Dictionary.
  “Word: a sound, or combination of sounds, used in any language as the
  sign of a conception, or of a conception together with its grammatical
  relations.... A word is a spoken sign that has arrived at its value as
  used in any language by a series of historical changes, and that holds
  its value by virtue of usage, being exposed to such further changes, of
  form and of meaning, as usage may prescribe...."
    Century Dictionary.
  “A word is not a crystal–transparent and unchanged; it is the skin of a
  living thought, and may vary greatly in color and content according to
  the circumstances and the time in which it is used."
    Justice OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, Towne vs. Eisner.
  “I wish our clever young poets would remember my homely definitions of
  prose and poetry; that is, prose = words in their best order;–poetry =
  the best words in the best order."
    COLERIDGE, Table Talk.
1. The Eye and the Ear
“Literary" language is commonly distinguished from the language of
ordinary life by certain heightenings or suppressions. The novelist or
essayist, let us say, fashions his language more or less in accordance
with his own mood, with his immediate aim in writing, with the capacity of
his expected readers. He is discoursing with a certain real or imaginary
audience. He may put himself on paper, as Montaigne said, as if he were
talking to the first man he happens to meet; or he may choose to address
himself to the few chosen spirits of his generation and of succeeding
generations. He trusts the arbitrary written or printed symbols of
word-sounds to carry his thoughts safely into the minds of other men.
The “literary” user of language in modern times comes to depend upon
the written or printed page; he tends to become more or less “eye-minded";
whereas the typical orator remains “ear-minded"–i.e. peculiarly sensitive
to a series of sounds, and composing for the ear of listeners rather than
for the eye of readers.
Now as compared with the typical novelist, the poet is surely, like the
orator, “ear-minded.” Tonal symbols of ideas and emotions, rather than
visual symbols of ideas and emotions, are the primary stuff with which he
is working, although as soon as the advancing civilization of his race
brings an end to the primitive reciting of poetry and its transmission
through oral repetition alone, it is obvious that he must depend, like
other literary artists, or like the modern musicians, upon the written or
printed signs for the sounds which he has composed. But so stubborn are
the habits of our eyes that we tend always to confuse the look of the
poet’s words upon the printed page with the sound of those words as they
are perceived by the ear. We are seldom guilty of this confusion in the
case of the musician. His “music” is not identified with the arbitrary
black marks which make up his printed score. For most of us there is
no music until those marks are actually translated into terms of tone–
although it is true that the trained reader of music can easily translate
to his inner ear without any audible rendering of the indicated sounds.
This distinction is essential to the understanding of poetry. A poem is
not primarily a series of printed word-signs addressed to the eye; it is a
series of sounds addressed to the ear, and the arbitrary symbols for these
sounds do not convey the poem unless they are audibly rendered–except to
those readers who, like the skilled readers of printed music, can
instantly hear the indicated sounds without any actual rendition of them
into physical tone. Many professed lovers of poetry have no real ear for
it. They are hopelessly “eye-minded.” They try to decide questions of
metre and stanza, of free verse and of emotionally patterned prose by the
appearance of the printed page instead of by the nerves of hearing. Poets
like Mr. Vachel Lindsay–who recites or chants his own verses after the
manner of the primitive bard–have rendered a true service by leading
us away from the confusions wrought by typography, and back to that sheer
delight in rhythmic oral utterance in which poetry originates.
2. How Words convey Feeling
For it must never be forgotten that poetry begins in excitement, in some
body-and-mind experience; that it is capable, through its rhythmic
utterance of words which suggest this experience, of transmitting emotion
to the hearer; and that the nature of language allows the emotion to be
embodied in more or less permanent form. Let us look more closely at some
of the questions involved in the origin, the transmission and embodiment
of poetic feeling, remembering that we are now trying to trace these
processes in so far as they are revealed by the poet’s use of words.
Rhythm will be discussed in the next chapter.
We have already noted that there are no mental images of feeling itself.
The images recognized by the consciousness of poets are those of
experiences and objects associated with feeling. The words employed to
revive and transmit these images are usually described as “concrete” or
“sensuous” in distinction from abstract or purely conceptual. They are
“experiential” words, arising out of bodily or spiritual contact with
objects or ideas that have been personalized, colored with individual
feeling. Such words have a “fringe,” as psychologists say. They are rich
in overtones of meaning; not bare, like words addressed to the sheer
intelligence, but covered with veils of association, with tokens of past
experience. They are like ships laden with cargoes, although the cargo
varies with the texture and the history of each mind. It is probable that
this very word “ship,” just now employed, calls up as many different
mental images as there are readers of this page. Brander Matthews has
recorded a curious divergence of imagery aroused by the familiar word
“forest.” Half a dozen well-known men of letters, chatting together in a
London club, tried to tell one another what “forest” suggested to each:
  “Until that evening I had never thought of forest as clothing itself
  in different colors and taking on different forms in the eyes of
  different men; but I then discovered that even the most innocent
  word may don strange disguises. To Hardy forest suggested the sturdy
  oaks to be assaulted by the woodlanders of Wessex; and to Du Maurier
  it evoked the trim and tidy avenues of the national domain of France.
  To Black the word naturally brought to mind the low scrub of the
  so-called deer-forests of Scotland; and to Gosse it summoned up a
  view of the green-clad mountains that towered up from the
  Scandinavian fiords. To Howells forest recalled the thick woods that
  in his youth fringed the rivers of Ohio; and to me there came back
  swiftly the memory of the wild growths, bristling unrestrained by
  man, in the Chippewa Reservation which I had crossed fourteen years
  before in my canoe trip from Lake Superior to the Mississippi. Simple
  as the word seemed, it was interpreted by each of us in accord with
  his previous personal experience. And these divergent experiences
  exchanged that evening brought home to me as never before the
  inherent and inevitable inadequacy of the vocabulary of every
  language, since there must always be two partners in any communication
  by means of words, and the verbal currency passing from one to the other
  has no fixed value necessarily the same to both of them."
[Footnote: Brander Matthews, These Many Years. Scribner’s, New York,
1917.]
But one need not journey to London town in order to test this matter. Let
half a dozen healthy young Americans stop before the window of a shop
where sporting goods are exhibited. Here are fishing-rods, tennis
racquets, riding-whips, golf-balls, running-shoes, baseball bats,
footballs, oars, paddles, snow-shoes, goggles for motorists, Indian clubs
and rifles. Each of these physical objects focuses the attention of the
observer in more or less exact proportion to his interest in the
particular sport suggested by the implement. If he is a passionate tennis
player, a thousand motor-tactile memories are stirred by the sight of the
racquet. He is already balancing it in his fingers, playing his favorite
strokes with it, winning tournaments with it–though he seems to be
standing quietly in front of the window. The man next him is already
snowshoeing over the frozen hills. But if a man has never played lacrosse,
or been on horseback, or mastered a canoe, the lacrosse racquet or
riding-whip or paddle mean little to him emotionally, except that they may
stir his imaginative curiosity about a sport whose pleasures he has never
experienced. His eye is likely to pass them over as indifferently as if he
were glancing at the window of a druggist or a grocer. These varying
responses of the individual to the visual stimulus of this or that
physical object in a heterogeneous collection may serve to illustrate his
capacity for feeling. Our chance group before the shop window thus becomes
a symbol of all human minds as they confront the actual visible universe.
They hunger and thirst for this or that particular thing, while another
object leaves them cold.
Now suppose that our half-dozen young men are sitting in the dark,
talking–evoking body-and-mind memories by means of words alone. No two
can possibly have the same memories, the same series of mental pictures.
Not even the most vivid and picturesque word chosen by the best talker of
the company has the same meaning for them all. They all understand the
word, approximately, but each feels it in a way unexperienced by his
friend. The freightage of significance carried by each concrete, sensuous,
picture-making word is bound to vary according to the entire physical and
mental history of the man who hears it. Even the commonest and most
universal words for things and sensations–such as “hand,” “foot,” “dark,"
“fear,” “fire,” “warm,” “home"–are suffused with personal emotions,
faintly or clearly felt; they have been or are my hand, foot, fear,
darkness, warmth, happiness. Now the poet is like a man talking or singing
in the dark to a circle of friends. He cannot say to them “See this” or
“Feel that” in the literal sense of “see” and “feel"; he can only call up
by means of words and tunes what his friends have seen and felt already,
and then under the excitement of such memories suggest new combinations,
new weavings of the infinitely varied web of human experience, new voyages
with fresh sails upon seas untried.
It is true that we may picture the poet as singing or talking to himself
in solitude and darkness, obeying primarily the impulse of expression
rather than of communication. Hence John Stuart Mill’s distinction between
the orator and the poet: “Eloquence is heard; poetry is overheard.
Eloquence supposes an audience. The peculiarity of poetry appears to us to
lie in the poet’s utter unconsciousness of a listener. Poetry is feeling
confessing itself to itself in moments of solitude, and embodying itself
in symbols which are the nearest possible representations of the feeling
in the exact shape in which it exists in the poet’s mind."
[Footnote: J. S. Mill, “Thoughts on Poetry,” in Dissertations, vol. 1.
See also F. N. Scott, “The Most Fundamental Differentia of Poetry and
Prose.” Published by Modern Language Association, 19, 2.]
But whether his primary aim be the relief of his own feelings (for a man
swears even when he is alone!) or the communication of his feelings to
other persons, it remains true that a poet’s language betrays his bodily
and mental history. “The poet,” said Thoreau, “writes the history of his
own body.”
For example, a study of Browning’s vocabulary made by Professor C. H.
Herford
[Footnote: Robert Browning, Modern English Writers, pp. 244-66.
Blackwood & Sons. 1905.]
emphasizes that poet’s acute tactual and muscular sensibilities, his quick
and eager apprehension of space-relations:
  “He gloried in the strong sensory-stimulus of glowing color, of
  dazzling light; in the more complex motory-stimulus of intricate,
  abrupt and plastic form.... He delighted in the angular, indented,
  intertwining, labyrinthine varieties of line and surface which call
  for the most delicate, and at the same time most agile, adjustments
  of the eye. He caught at the edges of things.... Spikes and
  wedges and swords run riot in his work.... He loved the grinding,
  clashing and rending sibilants and explosives as Tennyson the
  tender-hefted liquids.... He is the poet of sudden surprises,
  unforseen transformations.... The simple joy in abrupt changes of
  sensation which belonged to his riotous energy of nerve lent support
  to his peremptory way of imagining all change and especially all
  vital and significant becoming.”
The same truth is apparent as we pass from the individual poet to the
poetic literature of his race. Here too is the stamp of bodily history.
Hebrew poetry, as is well known, is always expressing emotion in terms of
bodily sensation.
  ’Anger,” says Renan,
  [Footnote: Quoted by J. H. Gardiner, The Bible as Literature, p.
  114.]
  “is expressed in Hebrew in a throng of ways, each picturesque, and
  each borrowed from physiological facts. Now the metaphor is taken
  from the rapid and animated breathing which accompanies the passion,
  now from heat or from boiling, now from the act of a noisy breaking,
  now from shivering. Discouragement and despair are expressed by
  the melting of the heart, fear by the loosening of the reins.
  Pride is portrayed by the holding high of the head, with the figure
  straight and stiff. Patience is a long breathing, impatience  short breathing, desire is thirst or paleness. Pardon is expressed
  by a throng of metaphors borrowed from the idea of covering, of
  hiding, of coating over the fault. In Job God sews up sins in a
  sack, seals it, then throws it behind him: all to signify that he
  forgets them....
  “My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; my
  heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.
  “Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul.
  “I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep
  waters, where the floods overflow me.
  “I am weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I
  wait for my God.”
Greek poetry, likewise, is made out of “warm, swift, vibrating” words,
thrilling with bodily sensation. Gilbert Murray
[Footnote: “What English Poetry may Learn from Greek,” Atlantic Monthly,
November, 1912.]
has described the weaving of these beautiful single words into patterns:
  “The whole essence of lyric is rhythm. It is the weaving of words
  into a song-pattern, so that the mere arrangement of the syllables
  produces a kind of dancing joy.... Greek lyric is derived directly
  from the religious dance; that is, not merely the pattering of the
  feet, but the yearning movement of the whole body, the ultimate
  expression of emotion that cannot be pressed into articulate speech,
  compact of intense rhythm and intense feeling.”
Nor should it be forgotten that Milton, while praising “a graceful and
ornate rhetoric,” declares that poetry, compared with this, is “more
simple, sensuous and passionate."
[Footnote: Tract on Education. ]
These words “sensuous” and “passionate,” dulled as they have become by
repetition, should be interpreted in their full literal sense. While
language is unquestionably a social device for the exchange of ideas and
feelings, it is also true that poetic diction is a revelation of
individual experience, of body-and-mind contacts with reality. Every poet
is still an Adam in the Garden, inventing new names as fast as the new
wonderful Beasts–-so terrible, so delightful!–come marching by.
3. Words as Current Coin
But the poet’s words, stamped and colored as they are by unique individual
experience, must also have a general transmission value which renders
them current coin. If words were merely representations of private
experience, merely our own nicknames for things, they would not pass the
walls of the Garden inhabited by each man’s imagination. “Expression"
would be possible, but “communication” would be impossible, and indeed
there would be no recognizable terms of expression except the “bow-wow” or
“pooh-pooh” or “ding-dong” of the individual Adam––and even these
expressive syllables might not be the ones acceptable to Eve!
The truth is that though the impulse to expression is individual, and that
in highly developed languages a single man can give his personal stamp to
words, making them say what he wishes them to say, as Dante puts it,
speech is nevertheless primarily a social function. A word is a social
instrument. “It belongs,” says Professor Whitney,
[Footnote: W. D. Whitney, Language and the Study of Language, p. 404.]
“not to the individual, but to the member of society.... What we may
severally choose to say is not language until it be accepted and employed
by our fellows. The whole development of speech, though initiated by the
acts of individuals, is wrought out by the community.”
... A solitary man would never frame a language. Let a child grow up in
utter seclusion, and, however rich and suggestive might be the nature
around him, however full and appreciative his sense of that which lay
without, and his consciousness of that which went on within him, he would
all his life remain a mute.”
What is more, the individual’s mastery of language is due solely to his
social effort in employing it. Speech materials are not inherited; they
are painfully acquired. It is well known that an English child brought up
in China and hearing no word of English will speak Chinese without a trace
of his English parentage in form or idiom.
[Footnote: See Baldwin’s Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology,
article “Language."]
His own body-and-mind experiences will be communicated in the medium
already established by the body-and-mind experiences of the Chinese race.
In that medium only can the thoughts of this English-born child have any
transmission value. His father and mother spoke a tongue moulded by
Chaucer and Shakspere, but to the boy whom we have imagined all that
age-long labor of perfecting a social instrument of speech is lost
without a trace. As far as language is concerned, he is a Chinaman and
nothing else.
Now take the case of a Chinese boy who has come to an American school and
college. Just before writing this paragraph I have read the blue-book of
such a boy, written in a Harvard examination on Tennyson. It was an
exceptionally well-expressed blue-book, in idiomatic English, and it
revealed an unusual appreciation of Tennyson’s delicate and sure
felicities of speech. The Chinese boy, by dint of an intellectual effort
of which most of his American classmates were incapable, had mastered many
of the secrets of an alien tongue, and had taken possession of the rich
treasures of English poetry. If he had been composing verse himself,
instead of writing a college blue-book, it is likely that he would have
preferred to use his own mother-tongue, as the more natural medium for the
expression of his intimate thoughts and feelings. But that expression, no
matter how artistic, would have “communicated” nothing whatever to an
American professor ignorant of the Chinese language. It is clear that the
power of any person to convey his ideas and emotions to others is
conditioned upon the common possession of some medium of exchange.
4. Words an Imperfect Medium
And it is precisely here that we face one of the fundamental difficulties
of the poet’s task; a difficulty that affects, indeed, all human
intercourse. For words are notoriously an imperfect medium of
communication. They “were not invented at first,” says Professor Walter
Raleigh in his book on Wordsworth, “and are very imperfectly adapted at
best, for the severer purposes of truth. They bear upon them all the
weaknesses of their origin, and all the maims inflicted by the
prejudices and fanaticisms of generations of their employers. They
perpetuate the memory or prolong the life of many noble forms of human
extravagance, and they are the monuments of many splendid virtues. But
with all their abilities and dignities they are seldom well fitted for the
quiet and accurate statement of the thing that is.... Beasts fight with
horns, and men, when the guns are silent, with words. The changes of
meaning in words from good to bad and from bad to good senses, which are
quite independent of their root meaning, is proof enough, without detailed
illustration, of the incessant nature of the strife. The question is not
what a word means, but what it imputes."
[Footnote: Raleigh’s Wordsworth. London, 1903.]
Now if the quiet and accurate statement of things as they are is the ideal
language of prose, it is obvious that the characteristic diction of poetry
is unquiet, inaccurate, incurably emotional. Herein lie its dangers and
its glories. No poet can keep for very long to the “neutral style,” to the
cool gray wallpaper words, so to speak; he wants more color–-passionate
words that will “stick fiery off” against the neutral background of
conventional diction. In vain does Horace warn him against “purple
patches"; for he knows that the tolerant Horace allowed himself to use
purple patches whenever he wished. All employers of language for emotional
effect–orators, novelists, essayists, writers of editorials–utilize in
certain passages these colored, heightened, figured words. It is as if
they ordered their printers to set individual words or whole groups of
words in upper-case type.
And yet these “upper-case words” of heightened emotional value are not
really isolated from their context. Their values are relative and not
absolute. Like the high lights of a picture, their effectiveness depends
upon the tone of the composition as a whole. To insert a big or violent
word for its own potency is like sewing the purple patch upon a faded
garment. The predominant thought and feeling of a passage give the
richest individual words their penetrating power, just as the weight of
the axe-head sinks the blade into the wood. “Futurist” poets like
Marinetti have protested against the bonds of syntax, the necessity of
logical subject and predicate, and have experimented with nouns alone.
“Words delivered from the fetters of punctuation,” says Marinetti, “will
flash against one another, will interlace their various forms of
magnetism, and follow the uninterrupted dynamics of force."
[Footnote: There is an interesting discussion of Futurism in Sir Henry
Newbolt’s New Study of English Poetry. Dutton, 1919.]
But do they? The reader may judge for himself in reading Marinetti’s poem
on the siege of a Turkish fort:
  “Towers guns virility flights erection telemetre exstacy toumbtoumb 3
  seconds toumbtoumb waves smiles laughs plaff poaff glouglouglouglou
  hide-and-seek crystals virgins flesh jewels pearls iodine salts
  bromide skirts gas liqueurs bubbles 3 seconds toumbtoumb officer
  whiteness telemetre cross fire megaphone sight-at-thousand-metres
  all-men-to-left enough every-man-to-his post incline-7-degrees
  splendour jet pierce immensity azure deflowering onslaught alleys
  cries labyrinth mattress sobs ploughing desert bed precision
  telemetre monoplane cackling theatre applause monoplane equals
  balcony rose wheel drum trepan gad-fly rout arabs oxen blood-colour
  shambles wounds refuge oasis.”
In these vivid nouns there is certainly some raw material for a poem, just
as a heap of bits of colored glass might make material for a rose-window.
But both poem and window must be built by somebody: the shining fragments
will never fashion themselves into a whole.
5. Predominant Tone-Feeling
If each poem is composed in its own “key,” as we say of music, with its
own scale of “values,” as we say of pictures, it is obvious that the
separate words tend to take on tones and hues from the predominant
tone-feeling of the poem. It is a sort of protective coloration, like
Nature’s devices for blending birds and insects into their background; or,
to choose a more prosaic illustration, like dipping a lump of sugar into a
cup of coffee. The white sugar and the yellowish cream and the black
coffee blend into something unlike any of the separate ingredients, yet
the presence of each is felt. It is true that some words refuse to be
absorbed into the texture of the poem: they remain as it were foreign
substances in the stream of imagery, something alien, stubborn, jarring,
although expressive enough in themselves. All the pioneers in poetic
diction assume this risk of using “un-poetic” words in their desire to
employ expressive words. Classic examples are Wordsworth’s homely “tubs"
and “porringers,” and Walt Whitman’s catalogues of everyday implements
used in various trades. Othello was hissed upon its first appearance on
the Paris stage because of that “vulgar” word handkerchief. Thus “fork"
and “spoon” have almost purely utilitarian associations and are
consequently difficult terms for the service of poetry, but “knife” has a
wider range of suggestion. Did not the peaceful Robert Louis Stevenson
confess his romantic longing to “knife a man”?
But it is not necessary to multiply illustrations of this law of
connotation. The true poetic value of a word lies partly in its history,
in its past employments, and partly also in the new vitality which it
receives from each brain which fills the word with its own life. It is
like an old violin, with its subtle overtones, the result of many
vibrations of the past, but yet each new player may coax a new tune from
it. When Wordsworth writes of
  “The silence that is in the starry sky,
  The sleep that is among the lonely hills,”
he is combining words that are immemorially familiar into a total effect
that is peculiarly “Wordsworthian.” Diction is obviously only a part of a
greater whole in which ideas and emotions are also merged. A concordance
of all the words employed by a poet teaches us much about him, and
conversely a knowledge of the poet’s personality and of his governing
ideas helps us in the study of his diction. Poets often have favorite
words–like Marlowe’s “black,” Shelley’s “light,” Tennyson’s “wind,"
Swinburne’s “fire.” Each of these words becomes suffused with the whole
personality of the poet who employs it. It not only cannot be taken out of
its context in the particular poem in which it appears, but it cannot be
adequately felt without some recognition of the particular sensational
and emotional experience which prompted its use. Many concordance-hunters
thus miss the real game, and fall into the Renaissance error of
word-grubbing for its own sake, as if mere words had a value of their own
independently of the life breathed into them by living men. I recall a
conversation at Bormes with the French poet Angellier. He was complaining
humorously of his friend L., a famous scholar whose big book was “carrying
all the treasures of French literature down to posterity like a
cold-storage transport ship.” “But he published a criticism of one of my
poems,” Angellier went on, “which proved that he did not understand the
poem at all. He had studied it too hard! The words of a poem are
stepping-stones across a brook. If you linger on one of them too long, you
will get your feet wet! You must cross, vite!” If the poets lead us from
one mood to another over a bridge of words, the words themselves are not
the goal of the journey. They are instruments used in the transmission of
emotion.
6. Specific Tone-Color
It is obvious, then, that the full poetic value of a word cannot be
ascertained apart from its context. The value is relative and not
absolute. And nevertheless, just as the bit of colored glass may have a
certain interest and beauty of its own, independently of its possible
place in the rose-window, it is true that separate words possess special
qualities of physical and emotional suggestiveness. Dangerous as it is to
characterize the qualities of the sound of a word apart from the sense of
that word, there is undeniably such a thing as “tone-color.” A piano and a
violin, striking the same note, are easily differentiated by the quality
of the sound, and of two violins, playing the same series of notes, it is
usually possible to declare which instrument has the richer tone or
timbre. Words, likewise, differ greatly in tone-quality. A great deal of
ingenuity has been devoted to the analysis of “bright” and “dark” vowels,
smooth and harsh consonants, with the aim of showing that each sound has
its special expressive force, its peculiar adaptability to transmit a
certain kind of feeling. Says Professor A. H. Tolman:
[Footnote: “The Symbolic Value of Sounds,” in Hamlet and Other Essays,
by A. H. Tolman. Boston, 1904.]
  “Let us arrange the English vowel sounds in the following scale:
  [short i] (little)     [long i]   (I)         [short oo] (wood)
  [short e] (met)        [long u]   (due)       [long ow]  (cow)
  [short a] (mat)        [short ah] (what)      [long o]   (gold)
  [long e]  (mete)       [long ah]  (father)    [long oo]  (gloom)
  [ai]      (fair)       [oi]       (boil)      [aw]       (awe)
  [long a]  (mate)       [short u]  (but)
  “The sounds at the beginning of this scale are especially fitted to
  express uncontrollable joy and delight, gayety, triviality, rapid
  movement, brightness, delicacy, and physical littleness; the sounds
  at the end are peculiarly adapted to express horror, solemnity, awe,
  deep grief, slowness of motion, darkness, and extreme or oppressive
  greatness of size. The scale runs, then, from the little to the
  large, from the bright to the dark, from ecstatic delight to horror,
  and from the trivial to the solemn and awful.”
Robert Louis Stevenson in his Some Technical Elements of Style in
Literature, and many other curious searchers into the secrets of words,
have attempted to explain the physiological basis of these varying
“tone-qualities.” Some of them are obviously imitative of sounds in
nature; some are merely suggestive of these sounds through more or less
remote analogies; some are frankly imitative of muscular effort or of
muscular relaxation. High-pitched vowels and low-pitched vowels, liquid
consonants and harsh consonants, are unquestionably associated with
muscular memories, that is to say, with individual body-and-mind
experiences. Lines like Tennyson’s famous
  “The moan of doves in immemorial elms
   And murmuring of innumerable bees”
thus represent, in their vowel and consonantal expressiveness, the past
history of countless physical sensations, widely shared by innumerable
individuals, and it is to this fact that the “transmission value” of the
lines is due.
Imitative effects are easily recognized, and need no comment:
  “Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings”
  “The mellow ouzel fluting in the elm”
  “The wind that’ll wail like a child
          and the sea that’ll moan like a man.”
Suggestive effects are more subtle. Sometimes they are due primarily to
those rhythmical arrangements of words which we shall discuss in the next
chapter, but poetry often employs the sound of single words to awaken dim
or bright associations. Robert Bridges’s catalogue of the Greek nymphs in
“Eros and Psyche” is an extreme example of risking the total effect of a
stanza upon the mere beautiful sounds of proper names.
  “Swift to her wish came swimming on the waves
  His lovely ocean nymphs, her guides to be,
  The Nereids all, who live among the caves
  And valleys of the deep, Cymodocè,
  Agavè, blue-eyed Hallia and Nesaea,
  Speio, and Thoë, Glaucè and Actaea,
  Iaira, Melitè and Amphinomè,
  Apseudès and Nemertès, Callianassa,
  Cymothoë, Thaleia, Limnorrhea,
  Clymenè, Ianeira and Ianassa,
  Doris and Panopè and Galatea,
  Dynamenè, Dexamenè and Maira,
  Ferusa, Doto, Proto, Callianeira,
  Amphithoë, Oreithuia and Amathea.”
Names of objects like “bobolink” and “raven” may affect us emotionally by
the quality of their tone. Through association with the sounds of the
human voice, heard under stress of various emotions, we attribute joyous
or foreboding qualities to the bird’s tone, and then transfer these
associations to the bare name of the bird.
Names of places are notoriously rich in their evocation of emotion.
  “He caught a chill in the lagoons of Venice,
  And died in Padua.”
Here the fact of illness and death may be prosaic enough, but the very
names of “Venice” and “Padua” are poetry–like “Rome,” “Ireland,"
“Arabia,” “California.”
  “Where the great Vision of the guarded mount
  Looks toward Namancos and Bayona’s hold.”
Who knows precisely where that “guarded mount” is upon the map? And who
cares? “The sailor’s heart,” confesses Lincoln Colcord,
[Footnote: The New Republic, September 16, 1916.]
“refutes the prose of knowledge, and still believes in delectable and
sounding names. He dreams of capes and islands whose appellations are
music and a song.... The first big land sighted on the outward passage is
Java Head; beside it stands Cape Sangian Sira, with its name like a
battle-cry. We are in the Straits of Sunda: name charged with the heady
languor of the Orient, bringing to mind pictures of palm-fringed shores
and native villages, of the dark-skinned men of Java clad in bright
sarongs, clamoring from their black-painted dugouts, selling fruit and
brilliant birds. These waters are rich in names that stir the blood, like
Krakatoa, Gunong Delam, or Lambuan; or finer, more sounding than all the
rest, Telok Betong and Rajah Bassa, a town and a mountain–Telok Betong at
the head of Lampong Bay and Rajah Bassa, grand old bulwark on the Sumatra
shore, the cradle of fierce and sudden squalls.”
It may be urged, of course, that in lines of true poetry the sense carries
the sound with it, and that nothing is gained by trying to analyse the
sounds apart from the sense. Professor C. M. Lewis
[Footnote: Principles of English Verse. New York, 1906.]
asserts bluntly: “When you say Titan you mean something big, and when you
say tittle you mean something small; but it is not the sound of either
word that means either bigness or littleness, it is the sense. If you put
together a great many similar consonants in one sentence, they will
attract special attention to the words in which they occur, and the
significance of those words, whatever it may be, is thereby intensified;
but whether the words are ’a team of little atomies’ or ’a triumphant
terrible Titan,’ it is not the sound of the consonants that makes the
significance. When Tennyson speaks of the shrill-edged shriek of
a mother, his words suggest with peculiar vividness the idea of a shriek;
but when you speak of stars that shyly shimmer, the same sounds only
intensify the idea of shy shimmering.” This is refreshing, and yet it is
to be noted that “Titan” and “tittle” and “shrill-edged shriek” and “shyly
shimmer” are by no means identical in sound: they have merely certain
consonants in common. A fairer test of tone-color may be found if we turn
to frank nonsense-verse, where the formal elements of poetry surely exist
without any control of meaning or “sense”:
  “The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
   Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
   And burbled as it came!
  “’T was brillig, and the slithy toves
     Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
  All mimsy were the borogoves,
    And the mome raths outgrabe.”
  “It seems rather pretty,” commented the wise Alice, “but it’s rather
  hard to understand! Somehow it seems to fill my head with ideas–only
  I don’t exactly know what they are!”
This is precisely what one feels when one listens to a poem recited in a
language of which one happens to be ignorant. The wonderful colored words
are there, and they seem somehow to fill our heads with ideas, only we do
not know what they are. Many readers who know a little Italian or German
will confess that their enjoyment of a lyric in those languages suffers
only a slight, if any, impairment through their ignorance of the precise
meaning of all the words in the poem: if they know enough to feel the
predominant mood–as when we listen to a song sung in a language of which
we are wholly ignorant–we can sacrifice the succession of exact ideas.
For words bare of meaning to the intellect may be covered with veils of
emotional association due to the sound alone. Garrick ridiculed–and
doubtless at the same time envied–George Whitefield’s power to make women
weep by the rich overtones with which he pronounced “that blessed word
Mesopotamia.”
The capacities and the limitations of tone-quality in itself may be seen
no less clearly in parodies. Swinburne, a master technician in words and
rhythm, occasionally delighted, as in “Nephelidia,"
[Footnote: Quoted in Carolyn Wells, A Parody Anthology. New York, 1904.]
to make fun of himself as well as of his poetic contemporaries:
  “Surely no spirit or sense of a soul that was soft
          to the spirit and soul of our senses
    Sweetens the stress of surprising suspicion that
          sobs in the semblance and sound of a sigh;
  Only this oracle opens Olympian, in mystical
          moods and triangular tenses,–
    ’Life is the lust of a lamp for the light that is
          dark till the dawn of the day when we die.’”
Or, take Calverley’s parody of Robert Browning:
  “You see this pebble-stone? It’s a thing I bought
  Of a bit of a chit of a boy i’ the mid o’ the day.
  I like to dock the smaller parts o’ speech,
  As we curtail the already cur-tail’d cur–”
The characteristic tone-quality of the vocabulary of each of these
poets–whether it be
  “A soul that was soft to the spirit and soul of our senses”
or
  “A bit of a chit of a boy i’ the mid o’ the day"–
is as perfectly conveyed by the parodist as if the lines had been written
in dead earnest. Poe’s “Ulalume” is a masterly display of tone-color
technique, but exactly what it means, or whether it means anything at all,
is a matter upon which critics have never been able to agree. It is
certain, however, that a poet’s words possess a kind of physical
suggestiveness, more or less closely related to their mental significance.
In nonsense-verse and parodies we have a glimpse, as it were, at the body
of poetry stripped of its soul.
7. “Figures of Speech”
To understand why poets habitually use figurative language, we must recall
what has been said in Chapter III about verbal images. Under the heat and
pressure of emotion, things alter their shape and size and quality, ideas
are transformed into concrete images, diction becomes impassioned, plain
speech tends to become metaphorical. The language of any excited person,
whether he is uttering himself in prose or verse, is marked by “tropes";
i.e. “turnings"–images which express one thing in the terms of another
thing. The language of feeling is characteristically “tropical,” and
indeed every man who uses metaphors is for the moment talking like a
poet–unless, as too often happens both in prose and verse, the metaphor
has become conventionalized and therefore lifeless. The born poet
thinks in “figures,” in “pictured" language, or, as it has been called, in
“re-presentative" language,
[Footnote: G. L. Raymond, Poetry as a Representative Art, chap. 19.]
since he represents, both to his own mind and to those with whom he is
communicating, the objects of poetic emotion under new forms. If he wishes
to describe an eagle, he need not say: “A rapacious bird of the falcon
family, remarkable for its strength, size, graceful figure, and
extraordinary flight.” He represents these facts by making a picture:
  “He clasps the crag with crooked hands;
  Close to the sun in lonely lands,
  Ring’d with the azure world, he stands.
  “The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls;
  He watches from his mountain walls,
  And like a thunderbolt he falls."
[Footnote: Tennyson, “The Eagle.” ]
Or suppose the poet is a woman, meditating upon the coming of old age, and
reflecting that age brings riches of its own. Observe how this thought is
“troped"; i.e. turned into figures which re-present the fundamental idea:
  “Come, Captain Age,
  With your great sea-chest full of treasure!
  Under the yellow and wrinkled tarpaulin
  Disclose the carved ivory
  And the sandalwood inlaid with pearl,
  Riches of wisdom and years.
  Unfold the India shawl,
  With the border of emerald and orange and crimson and blue,
  Weave of a lifetime.
  I shall be warm and splendid
  With the spoils of the Indies of age."
[Footnote: Sarah N. Cleghorn, “Come, Captain Age."]
It is true, of course, that a poet may sometimes prefer to use
unornamented language, “not elevated,” as Wordsworth said, “above the
level of prose.” Such passages may nevertheless be marked by poetic
beauty, due to the circumstances or atmosphere in which the plain words
are spoken. The drama is full of such instances. “I loved you not,” says
Hamlet; to which Ophelia replies only: “I was the more deceived.” No
figure of speech could be more moving than that.
I once found in an old graveyard on Cape Cod, among the sunny, desolate
sandhills, these lines graven on a headstone:
  “She died, and left to me
  This heath, this calm and quiet scene;
  This memory of what hath been,
  And nevermore will be.”
I had read the lines often enough in books, but here I realized for the
first time the perfection of their beauty.
But though a poet, for special reasons, may now and then renounce the use
of figurative language, it remains true that this is the characteristic
and habitual mode of utterance, not only of poetry but of all emotional
prose. Here are a few sentences from an English sailor’s account of the
fight off Heligoland on August 28, 1915. He was on a destroyer:
  “Scarcely had we started when from out the mist and across our front,
  in furious pursuit, came the first cruiser squadron–the town class,
  Birmingham, etc.–each unit a match for three Mainzes; and as we
  looked and reduced speed they opened fire, and the clear
  ’bang-bang!’ of their guns was just a cooling drink....
  “The Mainz was immensely gallant. The last I saw of her, absolutely
  wrecked alow and aloft, her whole midships a fuming inferno, she had
  one gun forward and one aft still spitting forth fury and defiance
  like a wildcat mad with wounds.
  “Our own four-funnel friend recommenced at this juncture with a
  couple of salvos, but rather half-heartedly, and we really did not
  care a d––, for there, straight ahead of us, in lordly procession,
  like elephants walking through a pack of dogs, came the Lion, Queen
  Mary, Invincible, and New Zealand, our battle cruisers, great and
  grim and uncouth as some antediluvian monsters. How solid they
  looked! How utterly earthquaking!”
The use and the effectiveness of figures depend primarily, then, upon the
mood and intentions of the writer. Figures are figures, whether employed
in prose or verse. Mr. Kipling does not lose his capacity for employing
metaphors as he turns from writing verse to writing stories, and the
rhetorician’s analysis of similes, personifications,  allegories, and all
the other devices of “tropical" language is precisely the same, whether he
is studying poetry or prose. Any good textbook in rhetoric gives adequate
examples of these various classes of figures, and they need not be
repeated here.
8. Words as Permanent Embodiment of Poetic Feeling
We have seen that the characteristic vocabulary of poetry originates in
emotion and that it is capable of transmitting emotion to the hearer or
reader. But how far are words capable of embodying emotion in permanent
form? Poets themselves, in proud consciousness of the enduring character
of their creations, have often boasted that they were building monuments
more enduring than bronze or marble. When Shakspere asserts this in his
sonnets, he is following not only an Elizabethan convention, but a
universal instinct of the men of his craft. Is it a delusion? Here are
words–mere vibrating sounds, light and winged and evanescent things,
assuming a meaning value only through the common consent of those who
interchange them, altering that meaning more or less from year to year,
often passing wholly from the living speech of men, decaying when races
decay and civilizations change. What transiency, what waste and oblivion
like that which waits upon millions on millions of autumn leaves!
Yet nothing in human history is more indisputable than the fact that
certain passages of poetry do survive, age after age, while empires pass,
and philosophies change and science alters the mental attitude of men as
well as the outward circumstances of life upon this planet.
Some thoughts and feelings, then, eternalize themselves in human speech;
most thoughts and feelings do not. Wherein lies the difference?
If most words are perishable stuff, what is it that keeps other words from
perishing? Is it superior organization and arrangement of this fragile
material, “fame’s great antiseptic, style”? Or is it by virtue of some
secret passionate quality imparted to words by the poet, so that the
apparently familiar syllables take on a life and significance which is
really not their own, but his? And is this intimate personalized quality
of words “style,” also, as well as that more external “style” revealed in
clear and orderly and idiomatic arrangement? Or does the mystery of
permanence reside in the poet’s generalizing power, by which he is able to
express universal, and hence permanently interesting human experience? And
therefore, was not the late Professor Courthope right when he declared, “I
take all great poetry to be not so much what Plato thought it, the
utterance of individual genius, half inspired, half insane, as the
enduring voice of the soul and conscience of man living in society”?
Answers to such questions as these depend somewhat upon the “romantic” or
“classic” bias of the critics. Romantic criticism tends to stress the
significance of the personality of the individual poet. The classic school
of criticism tends to emphasize the more general and universal qualities
revealed by the poet’s work. But while the schools and  fashions of
criticism shift their ground and alter their verdicts as succeeding
generations change in taste, the great poets continue as before to
particularize and also to generalize, to be “romantic” and “classic” by
turns, or even in the same poem. They defy critical augury, in their
unending quest of beauty and truth. That they succeed, now and then, in
giving a permanently lovely embodiment to their vision is surely a more
important fact than the rightness or wrongness of whatever artistic theory
they may have invoked or followed.
For many a time, surely, their triumphs are a contradiction of their
theories. To take a very familiar example, Wordsworth’s theory of poetic
diction shifted like a weathercock. In the Advertisement to the Lyrical
Ballads (1798) he asserted: “The following poems are to be considered as
experiments. They were written chiefly with a view to ascertain how far
the language of conversation in the middle and lower classes of society is
adapted to the purposes of poetic pleasure.” In the Preface of the second
edition (1800) he announced that his purpose had been “to ascertain how
far, by fitting to metrical arrangement a selection of the real language
of men in a state of vivid sensation, that sort of pleasure and that
quantity of pleasure may be imparted, which a poet may rationally
endeavour to impart.” But in the famous remarks on poetic diction which
accompanied the third edition (1802) he inserted after the words “A
selection of language really used by men” this additional statement of his
intention: “And at the same time to throw over them a certain colouring of
the imagination whereby ordinary things should be presented to the mind in
an unusual aspect.” In place of the original statement about the
conversation of the middle and lower classes of society, we are now
assured that the language of poetry “if selected truly and judiciously,
must necessarily be dignified and variegated and alive with metaphors and
figures.... This selection will form a distinction ... and will entirely
separate the composition from the vulgarity and meanness of ordinary
life.”
What an amazing change in theory in four years! Yet it is no more
remarkable than Wordsworth’s successive emendations in the text of his
poems. In 1807 his blind Highland boy had gone voyaging in
  “A Household Tub, like one of those
   Which women use to wash their clothes;
     This carried the blind Boy.”
In 1815 the wash-tub becomes
  “The shell of a green turtle, thin
   And hollow–you might sit therein,
     It was so wide and deep.”
And in 1820 the worried and dissatisfied artist changes that unlucky
vessel once more into the final banality of
  “A shell of ample size, and light
   As the pearly car of Amphitrite
     That sportive dolphins drew.”
Sometimes, it is true, this adventurer in poetic diction had rather better
fortune in his alterations. The much-ridiculed lines of 1798 about the
child’s grave–
  “I’ve measured it from side to side,
   ’T is three feet long and two feet wide"–
became in 1820:
  “Though but of compass small and bare
   To thirsty suns and parching air.”
Like his friend Coleridge, Wordsworth forsook gradually his early
experiments with matter-of-fact phrases, with quaintly grotesque figures.
Revolt against conventional eighteenth-century diction had given him a
blessed sense of freedom, but he found his real strength later in subduing
that freedom to a sense of law. Archaisms, queernesses, flatly
naturalistic turns of speech gave place to a vocabulary of simple dignity
and austere beauty. Wordsworth attained his highest originality as an
artist by disregarding singularity, by making familiar words reveal new
potencies of expression.
For after all, we must come back to what William James called the long
“loop-line,” to that reservoir of ideas and feelings which stores up the
experience of individuals and of the race, and to the words which most
effectively evoke that experience. Two classes at Columbia University, a
few years ago, were asked to select fifty English words of basic
importance in the expression of human life. In choosing these words, they
were to aim at reality and strength rather than at beauty. When the two
lists were combined, they presented these seventy-eight different words,
which are here arranged alphabetically: age, ambition, beauty, bloom,
country, courage, dawn, day, death, despair, destiny, devotion, dirge,
disaster, divine, dream, earth, enchantment, eternity, fair, faith,
fantasy, flower, fortune, freedom, friendship, glory, glow, god, grief,
happiness, harmony, hate, heart, heaven, honor, hope, immortality, joy,
justice, knell, life, longing, love, man, melancholy, melody, mercy, moon,
mortal, nature, noble, night, paradise, parting, peace, pleasure, pride,
regret, sea, sigh, sleep, solitude, song, sorrow, soul, spirit, spring,
star, suffer, tears, tender, time, virtue, weep, whisper, wind and youth.
[Footnote: See Nation, February 23, 1911.]
Surely these words, selected as they were for their significance, are not
lacking in beauty of sound. On the contrary, any list of the most
beautiful words in English would include many of them. But it is the
meaning of these “long-loop” words, rather than their formal beauty alone,
which fits them for the service of poetry. And they acquire in that
service a “literary" value, which is subtly blended with their “sound"
value and logical “meaning" value. They connote so much! They suggest more
than they actually say. They unite the individual mood of the moment with
the soul of mankind.
And there is still another mode of union between the individual and the
race, which we must attempt in the next chapter to regard more closely,
but which should be mentioned here in connection with the permanent
embodiment of feeling in words,–namely, the mysterious fact of rhythm.
Single words are born and die, we learn them and forget them, they alter
their meanings, they always say less than we really intend, they are
imperfect instruments for signaling from one brain to another. Yet these
crumbling particles of speech may be miraculously held together and built
into a tune, and with the tune comes another element of law, order,
permanence. The instinct for the drumbeat lies deep down in our bodies; it
affects our mental life, the organization of our emotions, and our
response to the rhythmical arrangement of words. For mere ideas and words
are not poetry, but only part of the material for poetry. A poem does not
come into full being until the words begin to dance.
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
