


Believing as I do that a study of the complete work of some modern poet
should accompany, if possible, every course in the general theory of
poetry, I venture to print here an outline of topical work upon the poetry
of Tennyson. Tennyson’s variety of poetic achievement is so great, and his
technical resources are so remarkable, that he rewards the closest study,
even on the part of those young Americans who cannot forget that he was a
“Victorian”:
I
THE METHOD OF CRITICISM
[The scheme here suggested for the study of poetry is based upon the
methods followed in this book. The student is advised to select some one
poem, and to analyse its content and form as carefully as possible, in
accordance with the outline printed below. The thought and feeling of the
poem should be thoroughly comprehended as a whole before the work of
analysis is begun; and after the analysis is completed, the student should
endeavor again to regard the poem synthetically, i. e., in its total
appeal to the aesthetic judgment, rather than mechanically and part by
part.]
A “IMPRESSION”
Of Nature. What sort of observation of natural phenomena is revealed
in this poem? Impressions of movement, form, color, sound, hours of the
day or night, seasons of the year; knowledge of scientific facts, etc.?
Of Man. What evidence of the poet’s direct knowledge of men? Of
knowledge of man gained through acquaintance with Biblical, classical,
foreign or English literature? Self-knowledge?
Of God. Perception of spiritual laws? Religious attitude? Is this
poem consistent with his other poems?
Does the “raw material” presented by “sense impressions” undergo a
real “change in kind” as it passes through the mind of the poet?
Do you feel in this poem the presence of a creative personality?
What evidence of poetic instinct in the selection of characteristic
traits? In power of representation through images? In idealization?
What is to be said of the range and character of the poet’s vocabulary?
Employment of figurative language? Selection of metre? Use of rhymes?
Modification of rhythm and sound to suggest the idea conveyed? Imitative
effects?
In general, is there harmony between form and content, or is there
evidence of the artist’s caring for one rather than the other?
TENNYSON’S LYRIC POETRY
[Write a criticism of the distinctively lyrical work of Tennyson, based
upon an investigation at first hand of the topics suggested below. Do not
deal with any poems in which the narrative or dramatic element seems to
you the predominant one, as those forms of expression will be made the
subject of subsequent papers.]
A. “IMPRESSION” (i. e., experience, thought, emotion).
General Characteristics.
Does the freshness of the lyric mood seem in Tennyson’s case dependent
upon any philosophical position? Upon sensitiveness to successive
experiences?
Is his lyric egoism a noble one? How far does he identify himself with his
race? With humanity?
Is his lyric passion always genuine? If not, give examples of lyrics that
are deficient in sincerity. Is the lyric passion sustained as the poet
grows old?
Of Nature.
What part does the observation of natural phenomena–such as form, color,
sound, hours of the day or night, seasons, the sky, the sea–play in these
poems? To what extent is the lyrical emotion called forth by the details
of nature? By her composite effects? Give instances of the poetic use of
scientific facts.
Of Man.
What human relationships furnish the themes for his lyrics? In the love-
lyrics, what different relationships of men and women? To what extent does
he find a lyric motive in friendship? In patriotism? How much of his lyric
poetry seems to spring from direct contact with men? From introspection?
From contact with men through the medium of books? How clearly do his
lyrics reflect the social problems of his own time? In his later lyrics
are there traces of deeper or shallower interest in men and women? Of
greater or less faith in the progress of society?
Of God.
Mention lyrics whose themes are based in such conceptions as freedom,
duty, moral responsibility. Does Tennyson’s lyric poetry reveal a sense of
spiritual law? Is the poet’s own attitude clearly evident?
What evidence of poetic instinct in the selection of characteristic
traits? In power of representation through images? Distinguish between
lyrics that owe their poetic quality to the Imagination, and those created
by the Fancy. (Note Alden’s discussion of this point; “Introduction to
Poetry,” pp. 102-112.) How far is Tennyson’s personality indicated by
these instinctive processes through which his poetical material is
transformed?
What may be said in general of his handling of the lyric form: as to
unity, brevity, simplicity of structure? Occasional use of presentative
rather than representative language? Choice of metres? Use of rhymes?
Modification of rhythm and sound to suit the idea conveyed? Evidence of
the artist’s caring for either form or content to the neglect of the
other? Note whatever differences may be traced, in all these respects,
between Tennyson’s earlier and later lyrics.
TENNYSON’S NARRATIVE POETRY
[Write a criticism of the distinctively narrative work of Tennyson, based
upon the questions suggested below.]
A. “IMPRESSION” (i. e., experience, thought, emotion).
General Characteristics.
After classifying Tennyson’s narrative poetry, how many of his themes seem
to you to be of his own invention? Name those based, ostensibly at least,
upon the poet’s own experience. To what extent do you find his narrative
work purely objective, i. e., without admixture of reflective or didactic
elements? What themes are of mythical or legendary origin? Of those having
a historical basis, how many are drawn from English sources? Does his use
of narrative material ever show a deficiency of emotion; i. e., could the
story have been better told in prose? Has he the story-telling gift?
Of Nature.
How far does the description of natural phenomena, as outlined in Topic
II, A, enter into Tennyson’s narrative poetry? Does it always have a
subordinate place, as a part of the setting of the story? Does it overlay
the story with too ornate detail? Does it ever retard the movement unduly?
Of Man. (Note that some of the points mentioned under General
Characteristics apply here.)
What can you say of Tennyson’s power of observing character? Of conceiving
characters in complication and collision with one another or with
circumstances? Give illustrations of the range of human relationships
touched upon in these poems. Do the later narratives show an increased
proportion of tragic situations? Does Tennyson’s narrative poetry throw
any light upon his attitude towards contemporary English society?
Of God. (See Topic II, A.)
Adjust the questions already suggested under Topic II, B, to narrative
poetry. Note especially the revelation of Tennyson’s personality through
the instinctive processes by which his narrative material is transformed.
What may be said in general of his handling of the narrative form, i. e.,
his management of the setting, the characters and the plot in relation to
one another? Have his longer poems, like the “Idylls,” and “The Princess,"
the unity, breadth, and sustained elevation of style that are usually
associated with epic poetry? What can you say of Tennyson’s mastery of
distinctly narrative metres? Of his technical skill in suiting rhythm and
sound to the requirements of his story?
TENNYSON’S DRAMAS
[Reference books for the study of the technique of the drama are easily
available. As preparatory work it will be well to make a careful study of
Tennyson’s dramatic monologues, both in the earlier and later periods.
These throw a good deal of light upon his skill in making characters
delineate themselves, and they reveal incidentally some of his methods of
dramatic narrative. For this paper, however, please confine your criticism
to “Queen Mary,” “Harold,” “Becket,” “The Cup,” “The Falcon,” “The Promise
of May,” and “The Foresters.” In studying “Becket,” compare Irving’s stage
version of the play (Macmillan).]
A. Classify the themes of Tennyson’s dramas. Do you think that these
themes offer promising dramatic material? Do you regard Tennyson’s
previous literary experience as a help or a hindrance to success in the
drama?
Nature. Apply what is suggested under this head in Topics I, II, and
III, to drama.
Man. Apply to the dramas what is suggested under this head in Topics II
and III, especially as regards the observation of character, the
conception of characters in collision, and the sense of the variety of
human relationships. Do these plays give evidence of a genuine comic
sense? What tragic forces seem to have made the most impression upon
Tennyson? Give illustrations, from the plays, of the conflict of the
individual with institutions.
God. Comment upon Tennyson’s doctrine of necessity and retribution. Does
his allotment of poetic justice show a sympathy with the moral order of
the world? Are these plays in harmony with Tennyson’s theology, as
indicated elsewhere in his work? Do they contain any clear exposition of
the problems of the religious life?
B. Compare Topic II, B. In the historical dramas, can you trace the
influence of the poet’s own personality in giving color to historical
personages? Compare Tennyson’s delineation of any of these personages with
that of other poets, novelists, or historians. Do you think he has the
power of creating a character, in the same sense as Shakespeare had it?
How much of his dramatic work do you consider purely objective, i. e.,
untinged by what was called the lyric egoism?
C. What may be said in general of Tennyson’s handling of the dramatic
form? Has he “the dramatic sense”? Of his management of the web of
circumstance in which the characters are involved and brought into
conflict? Comment upon his technical skill as displayed in the different
“parts” and “moments” of his dramas. Does his exhibition of action fulfill
dramatic requirements? Is his vocabulary suited to stage purposes? Give
instances of his purely lyric and narrative gifts as incidentally
illustrated in his dramas. Instance passages that cannot in your opinion
be successfully acted. In your reading of these plays, or observation of
any of them that you have seen acted, are you conscious of the absence of
any quality or qualities that would heighten the pleasure they yield you?
Taken as a whole, is the form of the various plays artistically in
harmony with the themes employed?
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
