


M. S. P.
The method of studying poetry which I have followed in this book was
sketched some years ago in my chapter on “Poetry” in Counsel Upon the
Reading of Books. My confidence that the genetic method is the natural
way of approaching the subject has been shared by many lovers of poetry.
I hope, however, that I have not allowed my insistence upon the threefold
process of “impression, transforming imagination, and expression” to
harden into a set formula. Formulas have a certain dangerous usefulness
for critics and teachers, but they are a very small part of one’s training
in the appreciation of poetry.
I have allotted little or no space to the specific discussion of epic and
drama, as these types are adequately treated in many books. Our own
generation is peculiarly attracted by various forms of the lyric, and in
Part Two I have devoted especial attention to that field.
While I hope that the book may attract the traditional “general reader,"
I have also tried to arrange it in such a fashion that it may be utilized
in the classroom. I have therefore ventured, in the Notes and
Illustrations and Appendix, to suggest some methods and material for the
use of students.
I wish to express my obligations to Professor R. M. Alden, whose
Introduction to Poetry and English Verse I have used in my own Harvard
courses in poetry. His views of metre have probably influenced mine even
more than I am aware. The last decade, which has witnessed such an
extraordinary revival of interest in poetry, has produced many valuable
contributions to poetic theory. I have found Professor Fairchild’s Making
of Poetry particularly suggestive. Attention is called, in the Notes and
Bibliography, to many other recent books on the subject.
Professors A. S. Cook of Yale and F. B. Snyder of Northwestern University
have been kind enough to read in manuscript certain chapters of this book,
and Dr. P. F. Baum of Harvard has assisted me most courteously. I am
indebted to several fellow-writers for their consent to the use of
extracts from their books, particularly to Brander Matthews for a passage
from These Many Years and to Henry Osborn Taylor for a passage from his
Classical Heritage of the Middle Ages.
I wish also to thank the publishers who have generously allowed me to use
brief quotations from copyrighted books, especially Henry Holt & Co. for
permission to use a quotation and drawing from William James’s
Psychology, and The Macmillan Company for permission to borrow from John
La Farge’s delightful Considerations on Painting.
B. P.
Continue...

This eBook of “A Study of Poetry” by Bliss Perry (Professor of English Literature in Harvard University
Author of “A Study of Prose Fiction,” “Walt Whitman,” “The American Mind,” etc.) belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
A Study Of PoetryBy Bliss PerryAt Amazon
