
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





The question may be raised whether the epic or the tragic is the
higher form of imitation. It may be argued that, if the less vulgar is
the higher, and the less vulgar is always that which addresses the
better public, an art addressing any and every one is of a very vulgar
order. It is a belief that their public cannot see the meaning, unless
they add something themselves, that causes the perpetual movements of
the performers—bad flute-players, for instance, rolling about, if
quoit-throwing is to be represented, and pulling at the conductor, if
Scylla is the subject of the piece.  Tragedy, then, is said to be an
art of this order—to be in fact just what the later actors were in
the eyes of their predecessors; for Myrmiscus used to call Callippides
’the ape’, because he thought he so overacted his parts; and a similar
view was taken of Pindarus also.  All Tragedy, however, is said to
stand to the Epic as the newer to the older school of actors. The one,
accordingly, is said to address a cultivated ’audience, which does not
need the accompaniment of gesture; the other, an uncultivated one. If,
therefore, Tragedy is a vulgar art, it must clearly be lower than the
Epic.
The answer to this is twofold. In the first place, one may urge (1)
that the censure does not touch the art of the dramatic poet, but only
that of his interpreter; for it is quite possible to overdo the
gesturing even in an epic recital, as did Sosistratus, and in a
singing contest, as did Mnasitheus of Opus. (2) That one should not
condemn all movement, unless one means to condemn even the dance, but
only that of ignoble people—which is the point of the criticism
passed on Callippides and in the present day on others, that their
women are not like gentlewomen. (3) That Tragedy may produce its
effect even without movement or action in just the same way as Epic
poetry; for from the mere reading of a play its quality may be seen.
So that, if it be superior in all other respects, thi.e.ement of
inferiority is not a necessary part of it.
In the second place, one must remember (1) that Tragedy has everything
that the Epic has (even the epic metre being admissible), together
with a not inconsiderable addition in the shape of the Music (a very
real factor in the pleasure of the drama) and the Spectacle. (2) That
its reality of presentation is felt in the play as read, as well as in
the play as acted. (3) That the tragic imitation requires less space
for the attainment of its end; which is a great advantage, since the
more concentrated effect is more pleasurable than one with a large
admixture of time to dilute it—consider the Oedipus of Sophocles,
for instance, and the effect of expanding it into the number of lines
of the Iliad. (4) That there is less unity in the imitation of the
epic poets, as is proved by the fact that any one work of theirs
supplies matter for several tragedies; the result being that, if they
take what is really a single story, it seems curt when briefly told,
and thin and waterish when on the scale of length usual with their
verse. In saying that there is less unity in an epic, I mean an epic
made up of a plurality of actions, in the same way as the Iliad and
Odyssey have many such parts, each one of them in itself of some
magnitude; yet the structure of the two Homeric poems is as perfect as
can be, and the action in them is as nearly as possible one action.
If, then, Tragedy is superior in these respects, and also besides
these, in its poeti.e.fect (since the two forms of poetry should give
us, not any or every pleasure, but the very special kind we have
mentioned), it is clear that, as attaining the poeti.e.fect better
than the Epic, it will be the higher form of art.
So much for Tragedy and Epic poetry—for these two arts in general and
their species; the number and nature of their constituent parts; the
causes of success and failure in them; the Objections of the critics,
and the Solutions in answer to them.
 

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
