


I find I have fallen into raptures, declamation, and similes, and
have forgotten, in consequence, to tell you what became of the
children. Absorbed in my artistic contemplations, which I briefly
described in my letter of yesterday, I continued sitting on the
plough for two hours. Toward evening a young woman, with a basket
on her arm, came running toward the children, who had not moved
all that time. She exclaimed from a distance, “You are a good
boy, Philip!” She gave me greeting: I returned it, rose, and
approached her. I inquired if she were the mother of those pretty
children. “Yes,” she said; and, giving the eldest a piece of
bread, she took the little one in her arms and kissed it with a
mother’s tenderness. “I left my child in Philip’s care,” she said,
“whilst I went into the town with my eldest boy to buy some wheaten
bread, some sugar, and an earthen pot.” I saw the various articles
in the basket, from which the cover had fallen. “I shall make
some broth to-night for my little Hans (which was the name of the
youngest): that wild fellow, the big one, broke my pot yesterday,
whilst he was scrambling with Philip for what remained of the
contents.”  I inquired for the eldest; and she bad scarcely time
to tell me that he was driving a couple of geese home from the
meadow, when he ran up, and handed Philip an osier-twig. I talked
a little longer with the woman, and found that she was the daughter
of the schoolmaster, and that her husband was gone on a journey
into Switzerland for some money a relation had left him. “They
wanted to cheat him,” she said, “and would not answer his letters;
so he is gone there himself. I hope he has met with no accident,
as I have heard nothing of him since his departure.” I left the
woman, with regret, giving each of the children a kreutzer, with
an additional one for the youngest, to buy some wheaten bread for
his broth when she went to town next; and so we parted. I assure
you, my dear friend, when my thoughts are all in tumult, the sight
of such a creature as this tranquillises my disturbed mind. She
moves in a happy thoughtlessness within the confined circle of her
existence; she supplies her wants from day to day; and, when she
sees the leaves fall, they raise no other idea in her mind than
that winter is approaching. Since that time I have gone out there
frequently. The children have become quite familiar with me; and
each gets a lump of sugar when I drink my coffee, and they share
my milk and bread and butter in the evening. They always receive
their kreutzer on Sundays, for the good woman has orders to give
it to them when I do not go there after evening service. They are
quite at home with me, tell me everything; and I am particularly
amused with observing their tempers, and the simplicity of their
behaviour, when some of the other village children are assembled
with them.
It has given me a deal of trouble to satisfy the anxiety of the
mother, lest (as she says) “they should inconvenience the gentleman.”
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
