


I have just had a sad adventure, which will drive me away from
here. I lose all patience! — Death! — It is not to be remedied;
and you alone are to blame, for you urged and impelled me to fill
a post for which I was by no means suited. I have now reason to
be satisfied, and so have you! But, that you may not again attribute
this fatality to my impetuous temper, I send you, my dear sir, a
plain and simple narration of the affair, as a mere chronicler of
facts would describe it.
The Count of O— likes and distinguishes me. It is well known,
and I have mentioned this to you a hundred times. Yesterday I
dined with him. It is the day on which the nobility are accustomed
to assemble at his house in the evening. I never once thought of
the assembly, nor that we subalterns did not belong to such society.
Well, I dined with the count; and, after dinner, we adjourned to
the large hall. We walked up and down together: and I conversed
with him, and with Colonel B—, who joined us; and in this manner
the hour for the assembly approached. God knows, I was thinking
of nothing, when who should enter but the honourable Lady accompanied
by her noble husband and their silly, scheming daughter, with her
small waist and flat neck; and, with disdainful looks and a haughty
air they passed me by. As I heartily detest the whole race, I
determined upon going away; and only waited till the count had
disengaged himself from their impertinent prattle, to take leave,
when the agreeable Miss B— came in. As I never meet her without
experiencing a heartfelt pleasure, I stayed and talked to her,
leaning over the back of her chair, and did not perceive, till
after some time, that she seemed a little confused, and ceased to
answer me with her usual ease of manner. I was struck with it.
“Heavens!” I said to myself, “can she, too, be like the rest?” I
felt annoyed, and was about to withdraw; but I remained,
notwithstanding, forming excuses for her conduct, fancying she did
not mean it, and still hoping to receive some friendly recognition.
The rest of the company now arrived. There was the Baron F —, in
an entire suit that dated from the coronation of Francis I.; the
Chancellor N—, with his deaf wife; the shabbily-dressed I—, whose
old-fashioned coat bore evidence of modern repairs: this crowned
the whole. I conversed with some of my acquaintances, but they
answered me laconically. I was engaged in observing Miss B—, and
did not notice that the women were whispering at the end of the
room, that the murmur extended by degrees to the men, that Madame
S— addressed the count with much warmth (this was all related to
me subsequently by Miss B—); till at length the count came up to
me, and took me to the window. “You know our ridiculous customs,"
he said. “I perceive the company is rather displeased at your
being here. I would not on any account—” “I beg your excellency’s
pardon!” I exclaimed. “I ought to have thought of this before,
but I know you will forgive this little inattention. I was going,"
I added, “some time ago, but my evil genius detained me.” And I
smiled and bowed, to take my leave. He shook me by the hand, in
a manner which expressed everything. I hastened at once from the
illustrious assembly, sprang into a carriage, and drove to M—.
I contemplated the setting sun from the top of the hill, and read
that beautiful passage in Homer, where Ulysses is entertained by
the hospitable herdsmen. This was indeed delightful.
I returned home to supper in the evening. But few persons were
assembled in the room. They had turned up a corner of the table-cloth,
and were playing at dice. The good-natured A— came in. He laid
down his hat when he saw me, approached me, and said in a low tone,
“You have met with a disagreeable adventure.” “I!” I exclaimed.
“The count obliged you to withdraw from the assembly!” “Deuce
take the assembly!” said I. “I was very glad to be gone.” “I am
delighted,” he added, “that you take it so lightly. I am only
sorry that it is already so much spoken of.” The circumstance
then began to pain me. I fancied that every one who sat down, and
even looked at me, was thinking of this incident; and my heart
became embittered.
And now I could plunge a dagger into my bosom, when I hear myself
everywhere pitied, and observe the triumph of my enemies, who say
that this is always the case with vain persons, whose heads are
turned with conceit, who affect to despise forms and such petty,
idle nonsense.
Say what you will of fortitude, but show me the man who can patiently
endure the laughter of fools, when they have obtained an advantage
over him. ’Tis only when their nonsense is without foundation
that one can suffer it without complaint.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
