
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





As for the poetry which merely narrates, or imitates by means of
versified language (without action), it i.e.ident that it has several
points in common with Tragedy.
I. The construction of its stories should clearly be like that in a
drama; they should be based on a single action, one that is a complete
whole in itself, with a beginning, middle, and end, so as to enable
the work to produce its own proper pleasure with all the organic unity
of a living creature. Nor should one suppose that there is anything
like them in our usual histories. A history has to deal not with one
action, but with one period and all that happened in that to one or
more persons, however disconnected the several events may have been.
Just as two events may take place at the same time, e.g. the
sea-fight off Salamis and the battle with the Carthaginians in Sicily,
without converging to the same end, so too of two consecutive events
one may sometimes come after the other with no one end as their common
issue. Nevertheless most of our epic poets, one may say, ignore the
distinction.
Herein, then, to repeat what we have said before, we have a further
proof of Homer’s marvellous superiority to the rest. He did not
attempt to deal even with the Trojan war in its entirety, though it
was a whole with a definite beginning and end—through a feeling
apparently that it was too long a story to be taken in in one view, or
if not that, too complicated from the variety of incident in it. As it
is, he has singled out one section of the whole; many of the other
incidents, however, he brings in as episodes, using the Catalogue of
the Ships, for instance, and other episodes to relieve the uniformity
of his narrative. As for the other epic poets, they treat of one man,
or one period; or else of an action which, although one, has a
multiplicity of parts in it. This last is what the authors of the
Cypria and Little Iliad have done. And the result is that,
whereas the Iliad or Odyssey supplies materials for only one, or
at most two tragedies, the Cypria does that for several, and the
Little Iliad for more than eight: for an Adjudgment of Arms, a
Philoctetes, a Neoptolemus, a Eurypylus, a Ulysses as Beggar,
a Laconian Women, a Fall of Ilium, and a Departure of the Fleet;
as also a Sinon, and Women of Troy.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
