


It makes me wretched, Wilhelm, to think that there should be men
incapable of appreciating the few things which possess a real value
in life. You remember the walnut trees at S—, under which I used
to sit with Charlotte, during my visits to the worthy old vicar.
Those glorious trees, the very sight of which has so often filled
my heart with joy, how they adorned and refreshed the parsonage
yard, with their wide-extended branches! and how pleasing was our
remembrance of the good old pastor, by whose hands they were
planted so many years ago: The schoolmaster has frequently mentioned
his name. He had it from his grandfather. He must have been a
most excellent man; and, under the shade of those old trees, his
memory was ever venerated by me. The schoolmaster informed us
yesterday, with tears in his eyes, that those trees had been felled.
Yes, cut to the ground! I could, in my wrath, have slain the
monster who struck the first stroke. And I must endure this! —
I, who, if I had had two such trees in my own court, and one had
died from old age, should have wept with real affliction. But
there is some comfort left, such a thing is sentiment, the whole
village murmurs at the misfortune; and I hope the vicar’s wife
will soon find, by the cessation of the villagers’ presents, how
much she has wounded the feelings of the neighborhhood. It was
she who did it, the wife of the present incumbent (our good old
man is dead), a tall, sickly creature who is so far right to
disregard the world, as the world totally disregards her. The
silly being affects to be learned, pretends to examine the canonical
books, lends her aid toward the new-fashioned reformation of
Christendom, moral and critical, and shrugs up her shoulders at
the mention of Lavater’s enthusiasm. Her health is destroyed, on
account of which she is prevented from having any enjoyment here
below. Only such a creature could have cut down my walnut trees!
I can never pardon it. Hear her reasons. The falling leaves made
the court wet and dirty; the branches obstructed the light; boys
threw stones at the nuts when they were ripe, and the noise affected
her nerves; and disturbed her profound meditations, when she was
weighing the diffculties of Kennicot, Semler, and Michaelis.
Finding that all the parish, particularly the old people, were
displeased, I asked “why they allowed it?” “Ah, sir!” they replied,
“when the steward orders, what can we poor peasants do?” But one
thing has happened well. The steward and the vicar (who, for once,
thought to reap some advantage from the caprices of his wife)
intended to divide the trees between them. The revenue-office,
being informed of it, revived an old claim to the ground where the
trees had stood, and sold them to the best bidder. There they
still lie on the ground. If I were the sovereign, I should know
how to deal with them all, vicar, steward, and revenue-office.
Sovereign, did I say? I should, in that case, care little about
the trees that grew in the country.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
