
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





The next points after what we have said above will be these: (1) What
is the poet to aim at, and what is he to avoid, in constructing his
Plots? and (2) What are the conditions on which the tragi.e.fect
depends?
We assume that, for the finest form of Tragedy, the Plot must be not
simple but complex; and further, that it must imitate actions arousing
pity and fear, since that is the distinctive function of this kind of
imitation. It follows, therefore, that there are three forms of Plot
to be avoided. (1) A good man must not be seen passing from happiness
to misery, or (2) a bad man from misery to happiness.
The first situation is not fear-inspiring or piteous, but simply
odious to us. The second is the most untragic that can be; it has no
one of the requisites of Tragedy; it does not appeal either to the
human feeling in us, or to our pity, or to our fears. Nor, on the
other hand, should (3) an extremely bad man be seen falling from
happiness into misery. Such a story may arouse the human feeling in
us, but it will not move us to either pity or fear; pity is occasioned
by undeserved misfortune, and fear by that of one like ourselves; so
that there will be nothing either piteous or fear-inspiring in the
situation. There remains, then, the intermediate kind of personage, a
man not pre-eminently virtuous and just, whose misfortune, however, is
brought upon him not by vice and depravity but by some error of
judgement, of the number of those in the enjoyment of great reputation
and prosperity; e.g. Oedipus, Thyestes, and the men of note of similar
families. The perfect Plot, accordingly, must have a single, and not
(as some tell us) a double issue; the change in the hero’s fortunes
must be not from misery to happiness, but on the contrary from
happiness to misery; and the cause of it must lie not in any
depravity, but in some great error on his part; the man himself being
either such as we have described, or better, not worse, than that.
Fact also confirms our theory. Though the poets began by accepting any
tragic story that came to hand, in these days the finest tragedies are
always on the story of some few houses, on that of Alemeon, Oedipus,
Orestes, Meleager, Thyestes, Telephus, or any others that may have
been involved, as either agents or sufferers, in some deed of horror.
The theoretically best tragedy, then, has a Plot of this description.
The critics, therefore, are wrong who blame Euripides for taking this
line in his tragedies, and giving many of them an unhappy ending. It
is, as we have said, the right line to take. The best proof is this:
on the stage, and in the public performances, such plays, properly
worked out, are seen to be the most truly tragic; and Euripides, even
if hi.e.ecution be faulty i.e.ery other point, is seen to be
nevertheless the most tragic certainly of the dramatists. After this
comes the construction of Plot which some rank first, one with a
double story (like the Odyssey) and an opposite issue for the good
and the bad personages. It is ranked as first only through the
weakness of the audiences; the poets merely follow their public,
writing as its wishes dictate. But the pleasure here is not that of
Tragedy. It belongs rather to Comedy, where the bitterest enemies in
the piece (e.g. Orestes and Aegisthus) walk off good friends at the
end, with no slaying of any one by any one.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
