


Everything conspires against me. I met Miss B— walking to-day.
I could not help joining her; and, when we were at a little distance
from her companions, I expressed my sense of her altered manner
toward me. “O Werther!” she said, in a tone of emotion, “you, who
know my heart, how could you so ill interpret my distress? What
did I not suffer for you, from the moment you entered the room!
I foresaw it all, a hundred times was I on the point of mentioning
it to you. I knew that the S—s and T—s, with their husbands,
would quit the room, rather than remain in your company. I knew
that the count would not break with them: and now so much is said
about it.” “How!” I exclaimed, and endeavoured to conceal my
emotion; for all that Adelin had mentioned to me yesterday recurred
to me painfully at that moment. “Oh, how much it has already cost
me!” said this amiable girl, while her eyes filled with tears. I
could scarcely contain myself, and was ready to throw myself at
her feet. “Explain yourself!” I cried. Tears flowed down her
cheeks. I became quite frantic. She wiped them away, without
attempting to conceal them. “You know my aunt,” she continued;
“she was present: and in what light does she consider the affair!
Last night, and this morning, Werther, I was compelled to listen
to a lecture upon my, acquaintance with you. I have been obliged
to hear you condemned and depreciated; and I could not — I dared
not — say much in your defence.”
Every word she uttered was a dagger to my heart. She did not feel
what a mercy it would have been to conceal everything from me.
She told me, in addition, all the impertinence that would be further
circulated, and how the malicious would triumph; how they would
rejoice over the punishment of my pride, over my humiliation for
that want of esteem for others with which I had often been reproached.
To hear all this, Wilhelm, uttered by her in a voice of the most
sincere sympathy, awakened all my passions; and I am still in a
state of extreme excitement. I wish I could find a man to jeer
me about this event. I would sacrifice him to my resentment. The
sight of his blood might possibly be a relief to my fury. A hundred
times have I seized a dagger, to give ease to this oppressed heart.
Naturalists tell of a noble race of horses that instinctively open
a vein with their teeth, when heated and exhausted by a long course,
in order to breathe more freely. I am often tempted to open a
vein, to procure for myself everlasting liberty.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
