


Believe me, dear Wilhelm, I did not allude to you when I spoke so
severely of those who advise resignation to inevitable fate. I
did not think it possible for you to indulge such a sentiment.
But in fact you are right. I only suggest one objection. In this
world one is seldom reduced to make a selection between two
alternatives. There are as many varieties of conduct and opinion
as there are turns of feature between an aquiline nose and a flat
one.
You will, therefore, permit me to concede your entire argument,
and yet contrive means to escape your dilemma.
Your position is this, I hear you say: “Either you have hopes of
obtaining Charlotte, or you have none. Well, in the first case,
pursue your course, and press on to the fulfilment of your wishes.
In the second, be a man, and shake off a miserable passion, which
will enervate and destroy you.” My dear friend, this is well and
easily said.
But would you require a wretched being, whose life is slowly wasting
under a lingering disease, to despatch himself at once by the
stroke of a dagger? Does not the very disorder which consumes his
strength deprive him of the courage to effect his deliverance?
You may answer me, if you please, with a similar analogy, “Who
would not prefer the amputation of an arm to the periling of life
by doubt and procrastination!” But I know not if I am right, and
let us leave these comparisons.
Enough! There are moments, Wilhelm, when I could rise up and shake
it all off, and when, if I only knew where to go, I could fly from
this place.
My diary, which I have for some time neglected, came before me
today; and I am amazed to see how deliberately I have entangled
myself step by step. To have seen my position so clearly, and
yet to have acted so like a child! Even still I behold the
result plainly, and yet have no thought of acting with greater
prudence.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
