


Madame M— is very ill. I pray for her recovery, because Charlotte
shares my sufferings. I see her occasionally at my friend’s house,
and to-day she has told me the strangest circumstance. Old M—
is a covetous, miserly fellow, who has long worried and annoyed
the poor lady sadly; but she has borne her afflictions patiently.
A few days ago, when the physician informed us that her recovery
was hopeless, she sent for her husband (Charlotte was present),
and addressed him thus: “I have something to confess, which, after
my decease, may occasion trouble and confusion. I have hitherto
conducted your household as frugally and economically as possible,
but you must pardon me for having defrauded you for thirty years.
At the commencement of our married life, you allowed a small sum
for the wants of the kitchen, and the other household expenses.
When our establishment increased and our property grew larger, I
could not persuade you to increase the weekly allowance in proportion:
in short, you know, that, when our wants were greatest, you required
me to supply everything with seven florins a week. I took the
money from you without an observation, but made up the weekly
deficiency from the money-chest; as nobody would suspect your wife
of robbing the household bank. But I have wasted nothing, and
should have been content to meet my eternal Judge without this
confession, if she, upon whom the management of your establishment
will devolve after my decease, would be free from embarrassment
upon your insisting that the allowance made to me, your former
wife, was sufficient.”
I talked with Charlotte of the inconceivable manner in which men
allow themselves to be blinded; how any one could avoid suspecting
some deception, when seven florins only were allowed to defray
expenses twice as great. But I have myself known people who
believed, without any visible astonishment, that their house
possessed the prophet’s never-failing cruse of oil.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
