


The day before yesterday, the physician came from the town to pay
a visit to the judge. He found me on the floor playing with
Charlotte’s children. Some of them were scrambling over me, and
others romped with me; and, as I caught and tickled them, they
made a great noise. The doctor is a formal sort of personage: he
adjusts the plaits of his ruffles, and continually settles his
frill whilst he is talking to you; and he thought my conduct beneath
the dignity of a sensible man. I could perceive this by his
countenance. But I did not suffer myself to be disturbed. I
allowed him to continue his wise conversation, whilst I rebuilt
the children’s card houses for them as fast as they threw them
down. He went about the town afterward, complaining that the
judge’s children were spoiled enough before, but that now Werther
was completely ruining them.
Yes, my dear Wilhelm, nothing on this earth affects my heart so
much as children. When I look on at their doings; when I mark in
the little creatures the seeds of all those virtues and qualities
which they will one day find so indispensable; when I behold in
the obstinate all the future firmness and constancy of a noble
character; in the capricious, that levity and gaiety of temper
which will carry them lightly over the dangers and troubles of
life, their whole nature simple and unpolluted, — then I call
to mind the golden words of the Great Teacher of mankind, “Unless
ye become like one of these!” And now, my friend, these children,
who are our equals, whom we ought to consider as our models, we
treat them as though they were our subjects. They are allowed no
will of their own. And have we, then, none ourselves? Whence comes
our exclusive right? Is it because we are older and more experienced?
Great God! from the height of thy heaven thou beholdest great
children and little children, and no others; and thy Son has long
since declared which afford thee greatest pleasure. But they
believe in him, and hear him not, —that, too, is an old story;
and they train their children after their own image, etc.
Adieu, Wilhelm: I will not further bewilder myself with this subject.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
