
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





At the time when he is constructing his Plots, and engaged on the
Diction in which they are worked out, the poet should remember
(1) to put the actual scenes as far as possible before hi.e.es. In
this way, seeing everything with the vividness of an eye-witness as it
were, he will devise what is appropriate, and be least likely to
overlook incongruities. This is shown by what was censured in
Carcinus, the return of Amphiaraus from the sanctuary; it would have
passed unnoticed, if it had not been actually seen by the audience;
but on the stage his play failed, the incongruity of the incident
offending the spectators. (2) As far as may be, too, the poet should
even act his story with the very gestures of his personages. Given the
same natural qualifications, he who feels the emotions to be described
will be the most convincing; distress and anger, for instance, are
portrayed most truthfully by one who is feeling them at the moment.
Hence it is that poetry demands a man with special gift for it, or
else one with a touch of madness in him; the, former can easily assume
the required mood, and the latter may be actually beside himself with
emotion. (3) His story, again, whether already made or of his own
making, he should first simplify and reduce to a universal form,
before proceeding to lengthen it out by the insertion of episodes. The
following will show how the universal element in Iphigenia, for
instance, may be viewed: A certain maiden having been offered in
sacrifice, and spirited away from her sacrificers into another land,
where the custom was to sacrifice all strangers to the Goddess, she
was made there the priestess of this rite. Long after that the brother
of the priestess happened to come; the fact, however, of the oracle
having for a certain reason bidden him go thither, and his object in
going, are outside the Plot of the play. On his coming he was
arrested, and about to be sacrificed, when he revealed who he
was—either as Euripides puts it, or (as suggested by Polyidus) by the
not improbable exclamation, ’So I too am doomed to be sacrificed, as
my sister was’; and the disclosure led to his salvation. This done,
the next thing, after the proper names have been fixed as a basis for
the story, is to work i.e.isodes or accessory incidents. One must
mind, however, that the episodes are appropriate, like the fit of
madness in Orestes, which led to his arrest, and the purifying, which
brought about his salvation. In plays, then, the episodes are short;
i.e.ic poetry they serve to lengthen out the poem. The argument of
the Odyssey is not a long one.
A certain man has been abroad many years; Poseidon i.e.er on the
watch for him, and he is all alone. Matters at home too have come to
this, that his substance is being wasted and his son’s death plotted
by suitors to his wife. Then he arrives there himself after his
grievous sufferings; reveals himself, and falls on hi.e.emies; and
the end is his salvation and their death. This being all that is
proper to the Odyssey, everything else in it i.e.isode.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
