


If I were not a fool, I could spend the happiest and most delightful
life here. So many agreeable circumstances, and of a kind to
ensure a worthy man’s happiness, are seldom united. Alas! I feel
it too sensibly, — the heart alone makes our happiness! To be
admitted into this most charming family, to be loved by the father
as a son, by the children as a father, and by Charlotte! then the
noble Albert, who never disturbs my happiness by any appearance
of ill-humour, receiving me with the heartiest affection, and
loving me, next to Charlotte, better than all the world! Wilhelm,
you would be delighted to hear us in our rambles, and conversations
about Charlotte. Nothing in the world can be more absurd than our
connection, and yet the thought of it often moves me to tears.
He tells me sometimes of her excellent mother; how, upon her
death-bed, she had committed her house and children to Charlotte,
and had given Charlotte herself in charge to him; how, since that
time, a new spirit had taken possession of her; how, in care and
anxiety for their welfare, she became a real mother to them; how
every moment of her time was devoted to some labour of love in
their behalf, — and yet her mirth and cheerfulness had never
forsaken her. I walk by his side, pluck flowers by the way, arrange
them carefully into a nosegay, then fling them into the first
stream I pass, and watch them as they float gently away. I forget
whether I told you that Albert is to remain here. He has received
a government appointment, with a very good salary; and I understand
he is in high favour at court. I have met few persons so punctual
and methodical in business.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
