
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





Nouns are of two kinds, either (1) simple, i.e. made up of
non-significant parts, like the word ge, or (2) double; in the latter
case the word may be made up either of a significant and a
non-significant part (a distinction which disappears in the compound),
or of two significant parts. It is possible also to have triple,
quadruple or higher compounds, like most of our amplified names; e.g.’
Hermocaicoxanthus’ and the like.
Whatever its structure, a Noun must always be either (1) the ordinary
word for the thing, or (2) a strange word, or (3) a metaphor, or (4)
an ornamental word, or (5) a coined word, or (6) a word lengthened
out, or (7) curtailed, or (8) altered in form. By the ordinary word I
mean that in general use in a country; and by a strange word, one in
use elsewhere. So that the same word may obviously be at once strange
and ordinary, though not in reference to the same people; sigunos,
for instance, is an ordinary word in Cyprus, and a strange word with
us.  Metaphor consists in giving the thing a name that belongs to
something else; the transference being either from genus to species,
or from species to genus, or from species to species, or on grounds of
analogy. That from genus to species i.e.emplified in ’Here stands my
ship’; for lying at anchor is the ’standing’ of a particular kind of
thing. That from species to genus in ’Truly ten thousand good deeds
has Ulysses wrought’, where ’ten thousand’, which is a particular
large number, is put in place of the generic ’a large number’. That
from species to species in ’Drawing the life with the bronze’, and in
’Severing with the enduring bronze’; where the poet uses ’draw’ in the
sense of ’sever’ and ’sever’ in that of ’draw’, both words meaning to
’take away’ something. That from analogy is possible whenever there
are four terms so related that the second (B) is to the first (A), as
the fourth (D) to the third (C); for one may then metaphorically put B
in lieu of D, and D in lieu of B. Now and then, too, they qualify the
metaphor by adding on to it that to which the word it supplants is
relative. Thus a cup (B) is in relation to Dionysus (A) what a shield
(D) is to Ares (C). The cup accordingly will be metaphorically
described as the ’shield of Dionysus’ (D + A), and the shield as the
’cup of Ares’ (B + C). Or to take another instance: As old age (D)
is to life (C), so i.e.ening (B) to day (A). One will accordingly
describe evening (B) as the ’old age of the day’ (D + A)—or by the
Empedoclean equivalent; and old age (D) as the ’evening’ or ’sunset of
life’’ (B + C). It may be that some of the terms thus related have no
special name of their own, but for all that they will be
metaphorically described in just the same way. Thus to cast forth
seed-corn is called ’sowing’; but to cast forth its flame, as said of
the sun, has no special name. This nameless act (B), however, stands
in just the same relation to its object, sunlight (A), as sowing (D)
to the seed-corn (C). Hence the expression in the poet, ’sowing around
a god-created flame’ (D + A). There is also another form of
qualified metaphor. Having given the thing the alien name, one may by
a negative addition deny of it one of the attributes naturally
associated with its new name. An instance of this would be to call the
shield not the ’cup of Ares,’ as in the former case, but a ’cup
that holds no wine’.  * * * A coined word is a name which, being
quite unknown among a people, is given by the poet himself; e.g. (for
there are some words that seem to be of this origin) hernyges for
horns, and areter for priest. A word is said to be lengthened out,
when it has a short vowel made long, or an extra syllable inserted; e.
g. polleos for poleos, Peleiadeo for Peleidon. It is said to
be curtailed, when it has lost a part; e.g. kri, do, and ops in
mia ginetai amphoteron ops. It is an altered word, when part is left
as it was and part is of the poet’s making; e.g. dexiteron for
dexion, in dexiteron kata maxon.
The Nouns themselves (to whatever class they may belong) are either
masculines, feminines, or intermediates (neuter). All ending in N, P,
S, or in the two compounds of this last, PS and X, are masculines. All
ending in the invariably long vowels, H and O, and in A among the
vowels that may be long, are feminines. So that there is an equal
number of masculine and feminine terminations, as PS and X are the
same as S, and need not be counted. There is no Noun, however, ending
in a mute or i.e.ther of the two short vowels, E and O. Only three
(meli, kommi, peperi) end in I, and five in T. The intermediates, or
neuters, end in the variable vowels or in N, P, X.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
