




If a man has frequent intercourse with others, either in the
way of conversation, entertainment, or simple familiarity, he
must either become like them, or change them to his own fashion.
A live coal placed next a dead one will either kindle that or be
quenched by it. Such being the risk, it is well to be cautious in
admitting intimacies of this sort, remembering that one cannot
rub shoulders with a soot-stained man without sharing the soot
oneself. What will you do, supposing the talk turns on
gladiators, or horses, or prize-fighters, or (what is worse) on
persons, condemning this and that, approving the other? Or
suppose a man sneers or jeers or shows a malignant temper? Has
any among us the skill of the lute-player, who knows at the first
touch which strings are out of tune and sets the instrument
right: has any of you such a power as Socrates had, in all his
intercourse with men, of winning them over to his own
convictions? Nay, but you must needs be swayed hither and thither
by the uninstructed. How comes it then that they prove so much
stronger than you? Because they speak from the fulness of the
heart—their low, corrupt views are their real convictions:
whereas your fine sentiments are but from the lips, outwards;
that is why they are so nerveless and dead. It turns one’s
stomach to listen to your exhortations, and hear of your
miserable Virtue, that you prate of up and down. Thus it is that
the Vulgar prove too strong for you. Everywhere strength,
everywhere victory waits your conviction!
Continue...

This complete text of The Golden Sayings of Epictetus is in the public domain.


Also see Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life
by A. A. Long.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Apology, Phaedo and Crito of Plato; the Golden Sayings of Epictetus; the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius with Introductions and Notes (The Harvard Classics [Leatherbound], Deluxe Edition, Registered Edition)By Benjamin JowettAt Amazon
