
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





It is clear that the general origin of poetry was due to two causes,
each of them part of human nature. Imitation is natural to man from
childhood, one of his advantages over the lower animals being this,
that he is the most imitative creature in the world, and learns at
first by imitation. And it is also natural for all to delight in works
of imitation. The truth of this second point is shown by experience:
though the objects themselves may be painful to see, we delight to
view the most realistic representations of them in art, the forms for
example of the lowest animals and of dead bodies. The explanation is
to be found in a further fact: to be learning something is the
greatest of pleasures not only to the philosopher but also to the
rest of mankind, however small their capacity for it; the reason of
the delight in seeing the picture is that one is at the same time
learning—gathering the meaning of things, e.g. that the man there is
so-and-so; for if one has not seen the thing before, one’s pleasure
will not be in the picture as an imitation of it, but will be due to
the execution or colouring or some similar cause. Imitation, then,
being natural to us—as also the sense of harmony and rhythm, the
metres being obviously species of rhythms—it was through their
original aptitude, and by a series of improvements for the most part
gradual on their first efforts, that they created poetry out of their
improvisations.
Poetry, however, soon broke up into two kinds according to the
differences of character in the individual poets; for the graver among
them would represent noble actions, and those of noble personages; and
the meaner sort the actions of the ignoble. The latter class produced
invectives at first, just as others did hymns and panegyrics. We know
of no such poem by any of the pre-Homeric poets, though there were
probably many such writers among them; instances, however, may be
found from Homer downwards, e.g. his Margites, and the similar
poems of others. In this poetry of invective its natural fitness
brought an iambic metre into use; hence our present term ’iambic’,
because it was the metre of their ’iambs’ or invectives against one
another. The result was that the old poets became some of them writers
of heroic and others of iambic verse. Homer’s position, however, is
peculiar: just as he was in the serious style the poet of poets,
standing alone not only through the literary excellence, but also
through the dramatic character of his imitations, so too he was the
first to outline for us the general forms of Comedy by producing not a
dramatic invective, but a dramatic picture of the Ridiculous; his
Margites in fact stands in the same relation to our comedies as the
Iliad and Odyssey to our tragedies. As soon, however, as Tragedy
and Comedy appeared in the field, those naturally drawn to the one
line of poetry became writers of comedies instead of iambs, and those
naturally drawn to the other, writers of tragedies instead of epics,
because these new modes of art were grander and of more esteem than
the old.
If it be asked whether Tragedy is now all that it need be in its
formative elements, to consider that, and decide it theoretically and
in relation to the theatres, is a matter for another inquiry.
It certainly began in improvisations—as did also Comedy; the one
originating with the authors of the Dithyramb, the other with those of
the phallic songs, which still survive as institutions in many of our
cities. And its advance after that was little by little, through their
improving on whatever they had before them at each stage. It was in
fact only after a long series of changes that the movement of Tragedy
stopped on its attaining to its natural form. (1) The number of actors
was first increased to two by Aeschylus, who curtailed the business of
the Chorus, and made the dialogue, or spoken portion, take the leading
part in the play. (2) A third actor and scenery were due to Sophocles.
(3) Tragedy acquired also its magnitude. Discarding short stories and
a ludicrous diction, through its passing out of its satyric stage, it
assumed, though only at a late point in its progress, a tone of
dignity; and its metre changed then from trochaic to iambic. The
reason for their original use of the trochaic tetrameter was that
their poetry was satyric and more connected with dancing than it now
is. As soon, however, as a spoken part came in, nature herself found
the appropriate metre. The iambic, we know, is the most speakable of
metres, as is shown by the fact that we very often fall into it in
conversation, whereas we rarely talk hexameters, and only when we
depart from the speaking tone of voice. (4) Another change was a
plurality of episodes or acts. As for the remaining matters, the
superadded embellishments and the account of their introduction, these
must be taken as said, as it would probably be a long piece of work to
go through the details.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
