


My days are as happy as those reserved by God for his elect; and,
whatever be my fate hereafter, I can never say that I have not
tasted joy, — the purest joy of life. You know Walheim. I am
now completely settled there. In that spot I am only half a league
from Charlotte; and there I enjoy myself, and taste all the pleasure
which can fall to the lot of man. 
Little did I imagine, when I selected Walheim for my pedestrian
excursions, that all heaven lay so near it. How often in my
wanderings from the hillside or from the meadows across the river,
have I beheld this hunting-lodge, which now contains within it all
the joy of my heart!
I have often, my dear Wilhelm, reflected on the eagerness men feel
to wander and make new discoveries, and upon that secret impulse
which afterward inclines them to return to their narrow circle,
conform to the laws of custom, and embarrass themselves no longer
with what passes around them.
It is so strange how, when I came here first, and gazed upon that
lovely valley from the hillside, I felt charmed with the entire
scene surrounding me. The little wood opposite — how delightful
to sit under its shade! How fine the view from that point of
rock! Then, that delightful chain of hills, and the exquisite
valleys at their feet! Could I but wander and lose myself amongst
them! I went, and returned without finding what I wished. Distance,
my friend, is like futurity. A dim vastness is spread before our
souls: the perceptions of our mind are as obscure as those of our
vision; and we desire earnestly to surrender up our whole being,
that it may be filled with the complete and perfect bliss of one
glorious emotion. But alas! when we have attained our object,
when the distant there becomes the present here, all is changed:
we are as poor and circumscribed as ever, and our souls still
languish for unattainable happiness.
So does the restless traveller pant for his native soil, and find
in his own cottage, in the arms of his wife, in the affections of
his children, and in the labour necessary for their support, that
happiness which he had sought in vain through the wide world.
When, in the morning at sunrise, I go out to Walheim, and with my
own hands gather in the garden the pease which are to serve for
my dinner, when I sit down to shell them, and read my Homer during
the intervals, and then, selecting a saucepan from the kitchen,
fetch my own butter, put my mess on the fire, cover it up, and sit
down to stir it as occasion requires, I figure to myself the
illustrious suitors of Penelope, killing, dressing, and preparing
their own oxen and swine. Nothing fills me with a more pure and
genuine sense of happiness than those traits of patriarchal life
which, thank Heaven! I can imitate without affectation. Happy is
it, indeed, for me that my heart is capable of feeling the same
simple and innocent pleasure as the peasant whose table is covered
with food of his own rearing, and who not only enjoys his meal, but
remembers with delight the happy days and sunny mornings when he
planted it, the soft evenings when he watered it, and the pleasure
he experienced in watching its daily growth.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
