


Albert is arrived, and I must take my departure. Were he the best
and noblest of men, and I in every respect his inferior, I could
not endure to see him in possession of such a perfect being.
Possession! — enough, Wilhelm: her betrothed is here, — a fine,
worthy fellow, whom one cannot help liking. Fortunately I was not
present at their meeting. It would have broken my heart! And he
is so considerate: he has not given Charlotte one kiss in my
presence. Heaven reward him for it! I must love him for the
respect with which he treats her. He shows a regard for me, but
for this I suspect I am more indebted to Charlotte than to his own
fancy for me. Women have a delicate tact in such matters, and it
should be so. They cannot always succeed in keeping two rivals
on terms with each other; but, when they do, they are the only
gainers.
I cannot help esteeming Albert. The coolness of his temper contrasts
strongly with the impetuosity of mine, which I cannot conceal.
He has a great deal of feeling, and is fully sensible of the
treasure he possesses in Charlotte. He is free from ill-humour,
which you know is the fault I detest most.
He regards me as a man of sense; and my attachment to Charlotte,
and the interest I take in all that concerns her, augment his
triumph and his love. I shall not inquire whether he may not at
times tease her with some little jealousies; as I know, that, were
I in his place, I should not be entirely free from such sensations.
But, be that as it may, my pleasure with Charlotte is over. Call
it folly or infatuation, what signifies a name? The thing speaks
for itself. Before Albert came, I knew all that I know now. I
knew I could make no pretensions to her, nor did I offer any, that
is, as far as it was possible, in the presence of so much loveliness,
not to pant for its enjoyment. And now, behold me like a silly
fellow, staring with astonishment when another comes in, and
deprives me of my love.
I bite my lips, and feel infinite scorn for those who tell me to
be resigned, because there is no help for it. Let me escape from
the yoke of such silly subterfuges! I ramble through the woods;
and when I return to Charlotte, and find Albert sitting by her
side in the summer-house in the garden, I am unable to bear it,
behave like a fool, and commit a thousand extravagances. “For
Heaven’s sake,” said Charlotte today, “let us have no more scenes
like those of last night! You terrify me when you are so violent."
Between ourselves, I am always away now when he visits her: and I
feel delighted when I find her alone.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
