


MISS JEFFRIES MAKES A CALL
That morning Miss Jeffries ate two eggs. She ate them successively,
with increasing deliberation, and afterwards she lingered
interminably over her toast and marmalade.
Still Ryder made no appearance and since the Arab waiter had
informed her that he had not yet breakfasted she concluded that he
was not at the hotel but had spent the night with some friend of
his–probably that Andrew McLean to whom he was always running off.
Nor was he in to luncheon. That was rank extravagance because he was
paying at pension rates. His extravagance, however, was no affair of
hers. Neither, she informed herself frigidly, was his appearance or
his non-appearance. It was only rather dull of Jack to lose so many,
well, opportunities.
She was not going to be in Cairo forever. Not much longer, in fact.
There were adages about gathering rosebuds while ye may and making
hay while the sun shone that Jack Ryder would do well to observe.
Other men did, reflected Jinny Jeffries with a proud lift of her
ruddy head. Only somehow, the other men–
Well, Jack was provokingly attractive! Only of course, if he was
going to rely upon his attraction and not upon his attentions–
Deliberately Miss Jeffries smiled upon a stalwart tourist from New
York and promised her society for a foursome at bridge in the hotel
lounge that evening.
Later, when Jack still failed to materialize and behold her
inaccessibility, the exhibition seemed hardly to have been worth
while.... And there were difficulties getting rid of the New Yorker
the next day. He had ideas about excursions.
It was during the forenoon of the next day that the first twinge of
genuine worry shot across the sustained resentment which she was
pleased to call her complete indifference. She recalled the vigor of
Ryder’s warnings about mentioning his adventure and the grave
dangers of disclosure, and she began to wonder.
She wished, rather, that he had gone safely out of the house before
she went away.
Of course nothing could happen. He had done nothing to give himself
away. He was simply a veiled shadow, moving humbly as befitted a
lowly stranger among the high and hospitable surroundings.
But still, it would have been better if he had gone....
Those turbaned women had looked queerly at them when they were
talking so long in the window. Perhaps it was not simply at the
intimacy between a young American and a veiled Oriental. Perhaps
their voices had been unguarded or Jack’s tones had awakened
suspicion. Perhaps he had given himself away in his long talk with
the bride. She remembered a Frenchwoman who had come to interrupt
that talk who had looked rather sharply at Jack.... And that
dreadful eunuch was always staring....
She thought of a great many things now, more and more things every
minute.
And still she told herself that she was absurd, that Jack would be
the first to ridicule her alarm. He was probably enjoying himself,
staying on with his friends, forgetting all about herself.... Still
his room at the hotel had not been slept in for two nights now nor
had he called at the hotel and he certainly didn’t have an extensive
supply of clothes and linen upon him beneath the mantle.
Particularly she remembered that he had exhibited some funny black
tennis shoes which he had thought would go appropriately with a
woman’s robes. Absurd, to think of him as spending two days in
tennis shoes, and absurd to say that he would go to the shops and
buy more when he had plenty of footgear in his hotel room.
Unless he wore McLean’s.
She had always regarded the unknown McLean as a most unnecessary
absorbent of Jack Ryder’s time and attention and now that view was
deeply reinforced.
By noon she decided to do something. She would telephone that
Andrew McLean and see if Jack had been there. The Agricultural Bank,
that was the place. An obliging hotel clerk–clerks were always
obliging to Miss Jeffries–gave her the number and she slipped into
the booth feeling a ridiculous amount of excitement and suspense.
She had never telephoned in Cairo–only been telephoned to–and she
was not prepared for the fact that the telephone company was French.
At the phone girl’s ’Numero?–Quel numero, s’il vous plait?_” Jinny
hastily choked back the English response and clutched violently at
French numerals.
“_Huit cent–no, quatre vingt–un moment!_” she demanded desperately
and hanging up the receiver, sat down to write out her number in
French correctly.
And then she got the Bank, and, still clinging to her French, she
requested to speak to Monsieur McLean and was informed that it was
Monsieur McLean himself.
“_Je suis–oh, how absurd! Of course you speak English,” she
exclaimed. “This French telephone upset me.... I wanted to speak to
Mr. Ryder if he is there–or else leave a message for him, if you
know when he will come in.”
“Ryder?” There was a faint intonation of surprise in the voice.
“I’ve no idea really when he’ll be in,” said McLean, “but you may
leave the message if you like.”
“Hasn’t he–haven’t you seen him for some time?” stammered Jinny,
feeling that McLean must be taking her for a pursuing adventuress.
“Well–not for some time.”
Her heart sank.
“Not–not for two days?”
“It might be that,” said the Scotchman cautiously.
Two days. Forty-eight hours, almost, since she had left him in that
harem! And McLean had not seen him. Of course there might be other
friends who had and McLean might know of them.
“I’m afraid I’ll have to see you,” she said desperately. “It’s
rather important about Jack Ryder–and if I could just talk with you
a minute–this afternoon–?”
“I have no appointment for three fifteen,” McLean told her
concisely.
Evidently he expected her to call at the Bank.... He was used to
being called on.... “Shall I come–?” she began.
“I can see you at three fifteen,” McLean reassured her, and she
repeated “Three fifteen,” with an odd vibration in her voice.
“I wonder,” she murmured, “if I came at three ten–or three
twenty–?”
But she didn’t. She was humorously careful to make it exactly a
quarter past the hour when she left her cab before McLean’s
official looking residence and stepped into the tiled entrance.
She had no very clear notion of Andrew McLean except that he was, as
Jack had said, Scotch, single, and skeptical, that he was Jack’s
intimate friend and an official sort of banker–and the word banker
had unconsciously prepared her for stout dignity and middle age.
She was not at all prepared for the lean, sandy-haired, rather
abrupt young man who came forward from the depths of the gratefully
cool reception room, and after a nervous hand clasp waved her to a
chair.
He was still holding her card, and as he glanced covertly at it she
recalled that she had given him no name over the telephone and that
he had known her only by the time of her appointment. Decidedly she
must have made an odd impression!
Well, he could see for himself now, she thought, a trifle defiantly.
Certainly he was taking stock of her out of those shrewd swift gray
eyes of his. He could see that she was, well–certainly a nice girl!
As a matter of fact McLean could see that she was considerably more.
Rather disconcertingly more! It was not often that such white-clad
apparitions, piquant of face and coppery of hair, teased the eyes in
his receiving room.
“You wanted to see me–?” he offered mechanically.
“Perhaps you have heard Jack Ryder speak of me–of Jinny Jeffries?"
began the girl, determined to put the affair on a sound social
footing as soon as possible.
McLean considered and, in honesty, shook his head. “He very seldom
mentioned young ladies.”
“Oh–!” Jinny tried not to appear dashed. “We are very old
friends–in America–and of course I’ve seen a good deal of him
since I’ve been in Cairo. In fact, he is stopping now at the same
hotel with us–with my aunt and uncle and myself.”
McLean smiled. “He said it was a tooth,” he mentioned dryly.
In Jinny’s eyes a little flicker answered him, but her words were
ingenuous. “Oh, of course he has been having a time with the
dentist. That’s why he couldn’t return to his camp. What I meant
was, that at the hotel we have been seeing him every day until–he
has just disappeared since day before yesterday and we–that is,
I–am very much concerned about it.”
“Disappeared? You mean, he–”
“Just disappeared, that’s all. He hasn’t been at the hotel–he
hasn’t been anywhere that I know of, and I haven’t heard a word from
him–so I telephoned you and then when I found he hadn’t been
here–”
McLean looked off into space. “Eh, well, he’ll turn up,” he said
comfortingly. “Jack’s erratic, you may say, in his comings and
goings. He means nothing by it.... I’ve known him do the same to
me.... Any time, now; you’re likely to hear–”
Miss Jeffries sat up a little straighter and her cheeks burned with
brighter warmth.
“It isn’t just that I want to see him, Mr. McLean,” she took quietly
distinct pains to explain. “It’s because I am anxious–”
“Not a need, not a need in the world. Jack knows his way about....
He may have been called back to the diggings, you know–if they dug
up a bit porcelain there or a few grains of corn the boy would
forget the sun was shining.”
Perhaps his caller’s burnished hair had shaped that thought. “Jack
knows his way about,” he repeated encouragingly, as one who
demolishes the absurd fears of women and children.
“You don’t quite understand.” Jinny’s tones were silken smooth. “You
see, I left him in rather unusual circumstances. It was a place
where he had no business in the world to be–”
At McLean’s unguardedly startled gaze her humor overtook her wrath.
“Oh, it was quite all right for me_” she replied mischievously to
that look. “Only not for him. You see, he was masquerading–”
“Again?” thought McLean, involuntarily. Lord, what a hand for the
lassies that lad was–and he had thought him such an aloof one!
“Masquerading as a woman–so he could take me to a reception.”
Jinny began to falter. Just putting that escapade into words
portrayed its less commendable features.
“It was a woman’s reception,” she began again, “at a Turkish house.
A marriage reception–”
She had certainly secured McLean’s whole-hearted attention.
“A marriage reception–a Turkish marriage reception?” he said very
sharply and amazedly as his caller continued to pause. “Do you mean
to say that Jack Ryder went into a Turkish house dressed as a
woman–?”
There was a pronounced angularity of feature about the young
Scotchman which now took on a chiseled sternness.
Swiftly Jinny interposed. “Oh, you mustn’t blame him, Mr. McLean!
You see, I wanted very much to go to a Turkish reception and I
didn’t have the courage to go alone or drag some other tourist as
inexperienced as myself, and so Jack–why, there didn’t seem any
harm in his dressing up. Just for fun, you know. He put on a Turkish
mantle and a veil up to his eyes and he was sure he’d never be found
out. I ought not to have let him, I know–it was my fault–”
She looked so flushed and innocent and distressed that McLean’s
chivalry rose swiftly to her need.
“Indeed you mustn’t blame yourself Miss–Miss Jeffries. You don’t
know Egypt–and Jack does. He knew that if he had been discovered
there would have been no help for him–and no questions asked
afterwards. And it might have been very dangerous for you. The
blame is just his now,” he said decisively, yet not without a
certain weak-kneed sympathy with the culprit.
For if the girl had looked like this ... he could see that she would
be a difficult little piece to withstand ... though any man with an
ounce of sense in his head would have behaved as a responsible
protector and not as a reckless school boy.
“What happened?” he said quickly.
“Oh, nothing happened–nothing that I know of. We got along very
well, I thought, although now I remember that some people didstare.... But I wasn’t worried at the time. I thought it was just
because I was an American and he was apparently a Turkish woman, but
there was no reason why an American might not get a Turkish woman to
act as a guide, was there?... And then Jack told me to go home
first–he said it would be simpler that way and that he would slip
over to some friend’s or to some safe place and take his disguise
off. He wore a gray suit beneath it, and the only funny thing was
some black tennis shoes.... So I left him. And he hasn’t been back
since.”
She added as McLean was silent, “He told me that he had some
engagement for that evening, so I did not begin to worry until the
next day.”
“Now just how long ago was this?”
“Two days ago. Day before yesterday afternoon.”
She looked anxiously at McLean’s face and took alarm at his careful
absence of expression.
“Oh, Mr. McLean, do you think–”
He brushed that aside. “And where was it–this reception?”
“At an old palace, forever away on the edge of the city. I don’t
remember the street–we drove and I had the cab wait. But it
belonged to a Turkish general. Hamdi Bey,” she brought out
triumphantly. “General Hamdi Bey.”
McLean did not correct her idea of the title. His expression was
more carefully non-committal than ever, while behind its quiet guard
his thoughts were breaking out like a revolution.
Hamdi Bey.... A wedding reception.... The daughter of Tewfick
Pasha....
In the secret depths of his soul he uttered profane and troubled
words. That French girl, again.... So Ryder had not forgotten that
affair, although he had kept silent about it of late. He had bided
his time and taken that rash means of seeing the girl again–and he
had involved this unknowing young American in a risk of scandal and
deceived her into believing herself responsible for this caprice
while all the time she had been a mere cloak and it had been his own
diabolical desire....
Miss Jeffries was surprised to see a sudden sorry softness dawn in
the young man’s look upon her. And she was surprised, too, at his
next question.
“I wonder, now, if you were the young lady who took him to a
masquerade ball–some time ago?”
Lightly she acknowledged it. “You’ll think I’m always taking him to
things,” she said brightly, but McLean’s troubled gaze did not
quicken with a smile.
He was experiencing a vast compassion. She was so innocent, so
unconscious of the quicksands about her.... Probably she had never
heard a breath of that first adventure.
And it was this fair Christian creature whom Jack Ryder had
abandoned for a veiled girl from a Turk’s harem!
McLean filled with cold, antagonistic wonder. He forgot the lovely
image of the French miniature, and remembering Tewfick’s rounded
eyes and olive features he thought of the veiled girl–most
illogically, for he knew that Tewfick was not her father–as some
bold-eyed, warm-skinned image of base allure.
Sorrowfully he shook his head over his friend. He determined to
protect him and to protect this girl’s innocence of his behavior. He
would help her to save him.... She could do it yet–if only she did
not learn the truth and turn from him. If ever she had been able to
make Jack go to a masquerade–that cursed masquerade!–she could
work other, more beneficent, miracles.
So now he asked, very cautiously, his mind on divided paths, “Do you
say there was nothing to draw suspicion–he did not talk to any
one, the guests or the bride–?”
“Oh, yes, he did talk to the bride,” said Miss Jeffries with such
utter unconsciousness that McLean’s heart hardened against the
renegade.
“He talked quite a while to her,” she said.
“Did you notice anything–?”
“Oh, I couldn’t hear what was said. He was the last in line and he
stayed for some time. He said afterward that it was all right. She
was very nice to him,” said Jinny earnestly, producing every scrap
of incident for McLean’s judgment. “She showed him some of her
presents–something about her neck.”
In mid-speech McLean changed a startled “God!” to “Good!”
“She wasn’t suspicious, then?” he said weakly.
“Not as far as I could see. Oh, nothing seemed to be wrong. But I
did feel uneasy until I got away and then, Jack hasn’t come back–”
Again she looked at the young Scotchman for confirmation of her fear
and again she saw that careful expressionless calm.
“It’s no need for alarm,” he told her slowly, “since nothing went
wrong. I see no reason why Jack couldn’t have walked out of that
reception. If we only knew where he was going later–”
“Yes, something might have happened later,” Jinny took up. “I
thought of that. He might have wanted some more fun and felt more
reckless–Oh, I am worried,” she confessed, her gray eyes very
round and childlike.
And if anything had happened she would always blame herself, thought
McLean ironically.... The unthinking deviltry of the young
scoundrel!... When he found him he’d have a few things to say!
“That’s why I came to you,” Jinny went on. “I hesitated, for he had
warned me so against telling any one, but no one else knows–”
“And no one must know,” McLean assured her crisply. “I daresay it’s
a mare’s nest and Jack will be found safe and sound at his diggings
or off on a lark with some friend or other, but it’s well to make
sure and you did quite right in coming to me.”
Jinny thought she had done quite right, too.
There was a satisfying strength about McLean. She resented a trifle
his masculine way of trying to keep the dark side from her; she was
not greatly misled by that untroubled look of his and yet she was
unconsciously reassured by it.... And although he refused to be
stampeded by alarm he was not incredulous of it, for his manner was
frankly grave.
“I’ll send out at once,” he said decisively, “and see if I can pick
up any gossip of that reception. I’ve a very clever clerk with
brothers in the bazaars who is a perfect wireless for information.
He has told me the night before a man was to be murdered.”
He paused, reflecting that was not a happy suggestion.
“Then I’ll send out to Jack’s diggings. That express doesn’t stop
to-night, but I’ll find a way. And I’ll let you know as soon as I
can.”
“You’re very kind,” said Jinny gratefully.
His competent manner brought her a light-hearted sensation of
difficulties already solved. Jack was as good as found, she felt in
swift reaction. If he was in any trouble this forceful young man
would settle it.
But probably he wasn’t in any trouble. Probably he was just at his
diggings–rushing off from her in the exasperating way he seemed to
do whenever they were getting on particularly well.... She
remembered how he had bolted from that masquerade which had begun so
happily. He had said he was ill, but she had never completely slain
the suspicion that his illness sprang from ennui and disinclination.
She rose. “I mustn’t take any more of your time, Mr. McLean–and you
probably have a four fifteen engagement.”
But her light raillery failed of its mark.
“Eh? No, I have not,” seriously he assured her. “You are quite the
last one I took on–the last before tea.”
He paused confused with a strange suggestion.... Tea.... His servant
did it rather well.... And it was time–
Usually he had it in the garden. It was a charming garden, full of
roses, with a nice view of the Citadel–and his strange suggestion
expanded with a rosy vision of Jinny among the roses, beside his
wicker table.... Would she possibly care to–?
He struggled with his idea–and with his shyness. And then the sense
that it wasn’t quite decent, somehow, to be offering tea to this
girl whom anxiety for Ryder’s unknown lot had brought to him
overcame that unwonted impulse.
He dismissed the idea. And like all shy men he was oddly relieved at
the passing of the necessity for initiative, even while he felt his
mild hope’s expiring pang.
He stepped before her to open the doors to which she was now taking
herself.
In the entrance he saw his clerk–the clever one–going out, and
excusing himself he went forward to detain the man. For a moment
there ensued a low-toned colloquy. Then the clerk, a dark-browned
keen-featured fellow in European clothes with a red fez, began to
relate something.
When McLean turned back to Jinny Jeffries she saw that his look was
sharply altered. There was a transfixed air about him and when he
spoke his voice told her that he had had a shock.
“My man tells me,” he said, “that Hamdi Bey’s bride is dead. He
buried her yesterday.”
Continue...

This eBook of The Fortieth Door (1920, dedicated to Arthur Mills Corwin) by Mary Hastings Bradley belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Fortieth DoorBy Mary Hastings BradleyAt Amazon
