
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





A Peripety is the change from one state of things within the play to
its opposite of the kind described, and that too in the way we are
saying, in the probable or necessary sequence of events; as it is for
instance in Oedipus: here the opposite state of things is produced
by the Messenger, who, coming to gladden Oedipus and to remove his
fears as to his mother, reveals the secret of his birth. And in
Lynceus: just as he is being led off for execution, with Danaus at
his side to put him to death, the incidents preceding this bring it
about that he is saved and Danaus put to death. A Discovery is, as the
very word implies, a change from ignorance to knowledge, and thus to
either love or hate, in the personages marked for good or evil
fortune. The finest form of Discovery is one attended by Peripeties,
like that which goes with the Discovery in Oedipus. There are no
doubt other forms of it; what we have said may happen in a way in
reference to inanimate things, even things of a very casual kind; and
it is also possible to discover whether some one has done or not done
something. But the form most directly connected with the Plot and the
action of the piece is the first-mentioned. This, with a Peripety,
will arouse either pity or fear—actions of that nature being what
Tragedy is assumed to represent; and it will also serve to bring about
the happy or unhappy ending. The Discovery, then, being of persons, it
may be that of one party only to the other, the latter being already
known; or both the parties may have to discover themselves. Iphigenia,
for instance, was discovered to Orestes by sending the letter; and
another Discovery was required to reveal him to Iphigenia.
Two parts of the Plot, then, Peripety and Discovery, are on matters of
this sort. A third part is Suffering; which we may define as an action
of a destructive or painful nature, such as murders on the stage,
tortures, woundings, and the like. The other two have been already
explained.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
