


AZIZA
From the slackening grip of his astounded arms she stepped backward,
still smiling faintly and holding up in admonishment the palm she
had pressed against his mouth.
“But what–what the dev–” muttered Ryder.
She nodded mysteriously, and beckoned.
“Come,” she whispered, catching up her candle, and after holding it
high for a moment, staring at him, she extinguished it suddenly, and
turned to lead the cautious way across the stone spaces while Ryder
closely followed.
Not Aimée, then. But some messenger, he could only suppose. Some
confidante, at need. A handmaid? The whisper of her silks, the
remembered gleam of jewels in the henna hair flouted that thought,
and not troubling his ingenuity with alternatives he was content to
follow her swift steps.
They were now in those open rubbishy spaces where he remembered the
crumbling masonry and broken arches of old, disregarded mosques; now
they were again enclosed in narrow stone walls, winding past cellars
and store rooms.
The girl’s advance grew more cautious. Often she stopped and
listened, peering ahead into the darkness, and now, as she took
another turning, her care redoubled and Ryder needed no exhortation
to imitate it. Obeying a gesture of her arm, he followed at a
greater distance, prepared, at the warning of a sound, to flatten
himself against the wall or dart into some cranny of retreat.
They were now in the cellars. The corridor was widening out before
them with a pallid showing of light, crossed with many bars, at some
far end.... They stole towards it. It was a window, or barred gate,
he saw, and he heard again that lapping of restless water against
stone.
He could see, too, in the dimness the curve of a stair near the
gate.
Abruptly his guide checked him. Wary and noiseless he waited while
she stole forward to those stairs, peering up into the gloom,
attentive for any sound from above.... Apparently satisfied, she
went on towards the barred gate, and bent down over a spot of
darkness which Ryder had taken for a shadow.
He saw now that it had some semblance to a human outline.
Closely the girl bent and he caught the pallor of her hands,
searching swiftly, and then a muffled clink.... Next moment, a
wraith with soundless steps, she was back at his side again, urging
him on with her. They passed the stairs; he felt the soft yield of
carpet beneath his feet; they passed that recumbent figure and now
he heard the rhythm of a sleeper’s heavy breath, escaping muffledly
from the folds of a thick mantle which the sleeper’s habits had
wrapped about his head. For all the mantle he was aware of the fumes
of wine.
“I saw that Ja’afar had his drink,” said the girl suddenly in softly
whispered Turkish, her head close to his. “He is my friend. I do not
neglect him,” and under her breath she laughed, as she exhibited the
great bunch of keys she had taken from the imbiber.
Stooping now before the gate she fitted the key into the lock. Then
over her shoulder she looked up at the young man, and asked him a
quick question.
He did not understand. That was the trouble with his vernacular. It
would go on very well for a time, when he had a clue to the sense,
or when it was a question of every day expression, but a sudden
divergence, an unexpected word, was apt to prove a hopeless
obstacle.
Now she repeated her question again, more slowly, and again he shook
his head.
Now she stood up, frowning a little and began again in English,
“You–no, I not know–This way? You do it?” A sudden smile broke
over her face as she made a swift pushing gesture with her hands,
that, with her pointing to the water outside, sent Ryder a sudden
enlightenment.
“Swim? You mean–do I swim?”
She nodded. “Not go–” She made a swift downward movement of her
hands and then pointed again to that water just outside the gate.
“Not go down–not sink?” interpreted Ryder. “No, indeed, I can
swim,” he assured her, and revisited with smiling satisfaction she
knelt again before the barred gate.
Open it swung with so sharp a crack that both glanced at the figure
behind them, and then at the shadowy gloom of the stairs. But no
alarm sounded. Outside the gate Ryder saw the darkness of fairly
wide rippling waters, visited with floating stars, and beyond a
low-lying, dun bank.
Escape was there. Freedom. Safety. He felt an exultant longing to
plunge in and strike out, but he turned, questioningly, to the
mysterious rescuer.
“Aimée?” he asked, under his breath. “Where is she?” He repeated it
in the vernacular, distrusting her English, and in the vernacular
she answered, “You want her? You want to take her away with you?”
She laughed softly at the quick flash in his eyes and hardly waited
for his speech.
“Good–what a lover! You are not afraid?”
Mendaciously he assured her that he was not.
“Good!” she said again, with a showing of white teeth between her
carmined lips. “You take her–you take her away from him. That is
what I want. You understand?”
Very suddenly he understood.
Continue...

This eBook of The Fortieth Door (1920, dedicated to Arthur Mills Corwin) by Mary Hastings Bradley belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Fortieth DoorBy Mary Hastings BradleyAt Amazon
