


On the afternoon of their arrival in London Ford convoyed Mrs.
Ashton to an old-established private hotel in Craven Street.
“Here,” he explained, “you will be within a few hundred yards of
the place in which your husband is said to spend his time. I will
be living in the same hotel. If I find him you will know it in ten
minutes.”
The widow gave a little gasp, whether of excitement or of happiness
Ford could not determine.
“Whatever happens,” she begged. “will you let me hear from you
sometimes? You are the only person I know in London--and--it’s so
big it frightens me. I don’t want to be a burden,” she went on
eagerly, “but if I can feel you are within call--”
“What you need,” said Ford heartily, “is less of the doctor’s nerve
tonic and sleeping draughts, and a little innocent diversion. To-
night I am going to take you to the Savoy to supper.”
Mrs. Ashton exclaimed delightedly, and then was filled with
misgivings.
“I have nothing to wear,” she protested, “and over here, in the
evening, the women dress so well. I have a dinner gown,” she
exclaimed, “but it’s black. Would that do?”
Ford assured her nothing could be better. He had a man’s vanity in
liking a woman with whom he was seen in public to be pretty and
smartly dressed, and he felt sure that in black the blond beauty of
Mrs. Ashton would appear to advantage. They arranged to meet at
eleven on the promenade leading to the Savoy supper-room, and
parted with mutual satisfaction at the prospect.
The finding of Harry Ashton was so simple that in its very
simplicity it appeared spectacular.
On leaving Mrs. Ashton, Ford engaged rooms at the Hotel Cecil.
Before visiting his rooms he made his way to the American bar. He
did not go there seeking Harry Ashton. His object was entirely
self-centred. His purpose was to drink to himself and to the
lights of London. But as though by appointment, the man he had
promised to find was waiting for him. As Ford entered the room, at
a table facing the door sat Ashton. There was no mistaking him.
He wore a mustache, but it was no disguise. He was the same good-
natured, good-looking youth who, in the photograph from under a
Panama hat, had smiled upon the world. With a glad cry Ford rushed
toward him.
“Fancy meeting YOU!” he exclaimed.
Mr. Ashton’s good-natured smile did not relax. He merely shook his
head.
“Afraid you have made a mistake,” he said. The reporter regarded
him blankly. His face showed his disappointment.
“Aren’t you Charles W. Garrett, of New York?” he demanded.
“Not me,” said Mr. Ashton.
“But,” Ford insisted in hurt tones, as though he were being trifled
with, “you have been told you look like him, haven’t you?”
Mr. Ashton’s good nature was unassailable.
“Sorry,” he declared, “never heard of him.”
Ford became garrulous, he could not believe two men could look so
much alike. It was a remarkable coincidence. The stranger must
certainly have a drink, the drink intended for his twin. Ashton
was bored, but accepted. He was well acquainted with the easy
good-fellowship of his countrymen. The room in which he sat was a
meeting-place for them. He considered that they were always giving
each other drinks, and not only were they always introducing
themselves, but saying, “Shake hands with my friend, Mr. So-and-
So.” After five minutes they showed each other photographs of the
children. This one, though as loquacious as the others, seemed
better dressed, more “wise"; he brought to the exile the atmosphere
of his beloved Broadway, so Ashton drank to him pleasantly.
“My name is Sydney Carter,” he volunteered.
As a poker-player skims over the cards in his hand, Ford, in his
mind’s eye, ran over the value of giving or not giving his right
name. He decided that Ashton would not have heard it and that, if
he gave a false one, there was a chance that later Ashton might
find out that he had done so. Accordingly he said, “Mine is Austin
Ford,” and seated himself at Ashton’s table. Within ten minutes
the man he had promised to pluck from among the eight million
inhabitants of London was smiling sympathetically at his jests and
buying a drink.
On the steamer Ford had rehearsed the story with which, should he
meet Ashton, he would introduce himself. It was one arranged to
fit with his theory that Ashton was a crook. If Ashton were a
crook Ford argued that to at once ingratiate himself in his good
graces he also must be a crook. His plan was to invite Ashton to
co-operate with him in some scheme that was openly dishonest. By
so doing he hoped apparently to place himself at Ashton’s mercy.
He believed if he could persuade Ashton he was more of a rascal
than Ashton himself, and an exceedingly stupid rascal, any distrust
the bookmaker might feel toward him would disappear. He made his
advances so openly, and apparently showed his hand so carelessly,
that, from being bored, Ashton became puzzled, then interested; and
when Ford insisted he should dine with him, he considered it so
necessary to find out who the youth might be who was forcing
himself upon him that he accepted the invitation.
They adjourned to dress and an hour later, at Ford’s suggestion,
they met at the Carlton. There Ford ordered a dinner calculated to
lull his newly made friend into a mood suited to confidence, but
which had on Ashton exactly the opposite effect. Merely for the
pleasure of his company, utter strangers were not in the habit of
treating him to strawberries in February, and vintage champagne;
and, in consequence, in Ford’s hospitality he saw only cause for
suspicion. If, as he had first feared, Ford was a New York
detective, it was most important he should know that. No one
better than Ashton understood that, at that moment, his presence in
New York meant, for the police, unalloyed satisfaction, and for
himself undisturbed solitude. But Ford was unlike any detective of
his acquaintance; and his acquaintance had been extensive. It was
true Ford was familiar with all the habits of Broadway and the
Tenderloin. Of places with which Ashton was intimate, and of men
with whom Ashton had formerly been well acquainted, he talked
glibly. But, if he were a detective, Ashton considered, they
certainly had improved the class.
The restaurant into which for the first time Ashton had penetrated,
and in which he felt ill at ease, was to Ford, he observed, a
matter of course. Evidently for Ford it held no terrors. He
criticised the service, patronized the head waiters, and grumbled
at the food; and when, on leaving the restaurant, an Englishman and
his wife stopped at their table to greet him, he accepted their
welcome to London without embarrassment.
Ashton, rolling his cigar between his lips, observed the incident
with increasing bewilderment.
“You’ve got some swell friends,” he growled. “I’ll bet you never
met THEM at Healey’s!”
“I meet all kinds of people in my business,” said Ford. “I once
sold that man some mining stock, and the joke of it was,” he added,
smiling knowingly, “it turned out to be good.”
Ashton decided that the psychological moment had arrived.
“What IS your business?” he asked.
“I’m a company promoter,” said Ford easily. “I thought I told
you.”
“I did not tell you that I was a company promoter, too, did I?"
demanded Ashton.
“No,” answered Ford, with apparent surprise. “Are you? That’s
funny.”
Ashton watched for the next move, but the subject seemed in no way
to interest Ford. Instead of following it up he began afresh.
“Have you any money lying idle?” he asked abruptly. “About a
thousand pounds.”
Ashton recognized that the mysterious stranger was about to
disclose both himself and whatever object he had in seeking him
out. He cast a quick glance about him.
“I can always find money,” he said guardedly. “What’s the
proposition?”
With pretended nervousness Ford leaned forward and began the story
he had rehearsed. It was a new version of an old swindle and to
every self-respecting confidence man was well known as the “sick
engineer” game. The plot is very simple. The sick engineer is
supposed to be a mining engineer who, as an expert, has examined a
gold mine and reported against it. For his services the company
paid him partly in stock. He falls ill and is at the point of
death. While he has been ill much gold has been found in the mine
he examined, and the stock which he considers worthless is now
valuable. Of this, owing to his illness, he is ignorant. One
confidence man acts the part of the sick engineer, and the other
that of a broker who knows the engineer possesses the stock but has
no money with which to purchase it from him. For a share of the
stock he offers to tell the dupe where it and the engineer can be
found. They visit the man, apparently at the point of death, and
the dupe gives him money for his stock. Later the dupe finds the
stock is worthless, and the supposed engineer and the supposed
broker divide the money he paid for it. In telling the story Ford
pretended he was the broker and that he thought in Ashton he had
found a dupe who would buy the stock from the sick engineer.
As the story unfolded and Ashton appreciated the part Ford expected
him to play in it, his emotions were so varied that he was in
danger of apoplexy. Amusement, joy, chagrin, and indignation
illuminated his countenance. His cigar ceased to burn, and with
his eyes opened wide he regarded Ford in pitying wonder.
“Wait!” he commanded. He shook his head uncomprehendingly. “Tell
me,” he asked, “do I look as easy as that, or are you just
naturally foolish?”
Ford pretended to fall into a state of great alarm.
“I don’t understand,” he stammered.
“Why, son,” exclaimed Ashton kindly, “I was taught that story in
the public schools. I invented it. I stopped using it before you
cut your teeth. Gee!” he exclaimed delightedly. “I knew I had
grown respectable-looking, but I didn’t think I was so damned
respectable-looking as that!” He began to laugh silently; so
greatly was he amused that the tears shone in his eyes and his
shoulders shook.
“I’m sorry for you, son,” he protested, “but that’s the funniest
thing that’s come my way in two years. And you buying me hot-house
grapes, too, and fancy water! I wish you could see your face,” he
taunted.
Ford pretended to be greatly chagrined.
“All right,” he declared roughly. “The laugh’s on me this time,
but just because I lost one trick, don’t think I don’t know my
business. Now that I’m wise to what YOU are we can work together
and--”
The face of young Mr. Ashton became instantly grave. His jaws
snapped like a trap. When he spoke his tone was assured and
slightly contemptuous.
“Not with ME you can’t work!” he said.
“Don’t think because I fell down on this,” Ford began hotly.
“I’m not thinking of you at all,” said Ashton. “You’re a nice
little fellow all right, but you have sized me up wrong. I am on
the ’straight and narrow’ that leads back to little old New York
and God’s country, and I am warranted not to run off my trolley.”
The words were in the vernacular, but the tone in which the young
man spoke rang so confidently that it brought to Ford a pleasant
thrill of satisfaction. From the first he had found in the
personality of the young man something winning and likable; a
shrewd manliness and tolerant good-humor. His eyes may have shown
his sympathy, for, in sudden confidence, Ashton leaned nearer.
“It’s like this,” he said. “Several years ago I made a bad break
and, about a year later, they got on to me and I had to cut and
run. In a month the law of limitation lets me loose and I can go
back. And you can bet I’m GOING back. I will be on the bowsprit
of the first boat. I’ve had all I want of the ’fugitive-from-
justice’ game, thank you, and I have taken good care to keep a
clean bill of health so that I won’t have to play it again.
They’ve been trying to get me for several years--especially the
Pinkertons. They have chased me all over Europe. Chased me with
all kinds of men; sometimes with women; they’ve tried everything
except blood-hounds. At first I thought YOU were a ’Pink,’ that’s
why--”
“I!” interrupted Ford, exploding derisively. “That’s GOOD! That’s
one on YOU.” He ceased laughing and regarded Ashton kindly. “How
do you know I’m not?” he asked.
For an instant the face of the bookmaker grew a shade less red and
his eyes searched those of Ford in a quick agony of suspicion.
Ford continued to smile steadily at him, and Ashton breathed with
relief.
“I’ll take a chance with you,” he said, “and if you are as bad a
detective as you are a sport I needn’t worry.”
They both laughed, and, with sudden mutual liking, each raised his
glass and nodded.
“But they haven’t got me yet,” continued Ashton, “and unless they
get me in the next thirty days I’m free. So you needn’t think that
I’ll help you. It’s ’never again’ for me. The first time, that
was the fault of the crowd I ran with; the second time, that would
be MY fault. And there ain’t going to be any second time.”
He shook his head doggedly, and with squared shoulders leaned back
in his chair.
“If it only breaks right for me,” he declared, “I’ll settle down in
one of those ’Own-your own-homes,’ forty-five minutes from
Broadway, and never leave the wife and the baby.”
The words almost brought Ford to his feet. He had forgotten the
wife and the baby. He endeavored to explain his surprise by a
sudden assumption of incredulity.
“Fancy you married!” he exclaimed.
“Married!” protested Ashton. “I’m married to the finest little
lady that ever wore skirts, and in thirty-seven days I’ll see her
again. Thirty-seven days,” he repeated impatiently. “Gee! That’s
a hell of a long time!”
Ford studied the young man with increased interest. That he was
speaking sincerely, from the heart, there seemed no possible doubt.
Ashton frowned and his face clouded. “I’ve not been able to treat
her just right,” he volunteered. “If she wrote me, the letters
might give them a clew, and I don’t write HER because I don’t want
her to know all my troubles until they’re over. But I know,” he
added, “that five minutes’ talk will set it all right. That is, if
she still feels about me the way I feel about her.”
The man crushed his cigar in his fingers and threw the pieces on
the floor. “That’s what’s been the worst!” he exclaimed bitterly.
“Not hearing, not knowing. It’s been hell!”
His eyes as he raised them were filled with suffering, deep and
genuine.
Ford rose suddenly. “Let’s go down to the Savoy for supper,” he
said.
“Supper!” growled Ashton. “What’s the use of supper? Do you
suppose cold chicken and a sardine can keep me from THINKING?”
Ford placed his hand on the other’s shoulder.
“You come with me,” he said kindly. “I’m going to do you a favor.
I’m going to bring you a piece of luck. Don’t ask me any
questions,” he commanded hurriedly. “Just take my word for it.”
They had sat so late over their cigars that when they reached the
restaurant on the Embankment the supper-room was already partly
filled, and the corridors and lounge were brilliantly lit and gay
with well-dressed women. Ashton regarded the scene with gloomy
eyes. Since he had spoken of his wife he had remained silent,
chewing savagely on a fresh cigar. But Ford was grandly excited.
He did not know exactly what he intended to do. He was prepared to
let events direct themselves, but of two things he was assured:
Mrs. Ashton loved her husband, and her husband loved her. As the
god in the car who was to bring them together, he felt a delightful
responsibility.
The young men left the coat-room and came down the short flight of
steps that leads to the wide lounge of the restaurant. Ford
slightly in advance, searching with his eyes for Mrs Ashton, found
her seated alone in the lounge, evidently waiting for him. At the
first glance she was hardly be recognized. Her low-cut dinner gown
of black satin that clung to her like a wet bath robe was the last
word of the new fashion; and since Ford had seen her her blond hair
had been arranged by an artist. Her appearance was smart, elegant,
daring. She was easily the prettiest and most striking-looking
woman in the room, and for an instant Ford stood gazing at her,
trying to find in the self-possessed young woman the deserted wife
of the steamer. She did not see Ford. Her eyes were following the
progress down the hall of a woman, and her profile was toward him.
The thought of the happiness he was about to bring to two young
people gave Ford the sense of a genuine triumph, and when he turned
to Ashton to point out his wife to him he was thrilling with pride
and satisfaction. His triumph received a bewildering shock.
Already Ashton had discovered the presence of Mrs. Ashton. He was
standing transfixed, lost to his surroundings, devouring her with
his eyes. And then, to the amazement of Ford, his eyes filled with
fear, doubt, and anger. Swiftly, with the movement of a man
ducking a blow, he turned and sprang up the stairs and into the
coat-room. Ford, bewildered and more conscious of his
surroundings, followed him less quickly, and was in consequence
only in time to see Ashton, dragging his overcoat behind him,
disappear into the court-yard. He seized his own coat and raced in
pursuit. As he ran into the court-yard Ashton, in the Strand, was
just closing the door of a taxicab, but before the chauffeur could
free it from the surrounding traffic, Ford had dragged the door
open, and leaped inside. Ashton was huddled in the corner,
panting, his face pale with alarm.
“What the devil ails you?” roared Ford. “Are you trying to shake
me? You’ve got to come back. You must speak to her.”
“Speak to her!” repeated Ashton. His voice was sunk to a whisper.
The look of alarm in his face was confused with one grim and
menacing. “Did you know she was there?” he demanded softly. “Did
you take me there, knowing--?”
“Of course I knew,” protested Ford. “She’s been looking for you--”
His voice subsided in a squeak of amazement and pain. Ashton’s
left hand had shot out and swiftly seized his throat. With the
other he pressed an automatic revolver against Ford’s shirt front.
“I know she’s been looking for me,” the man whispered thickly.
“For two years she’s been looking for me. I know all about HER!
But, WHO IN HELL ARE YOU?”
Ford, gasping and gurgling, protested loyally.
“You are wrong!” he cried. “She’s been at home waiting for you.
She thinks you have deserted her and your baby. I tell you she
loves you, you fool, she LOVES you!”
The fingers on his throat suddenly relaxed; the flaming eyes of
Ashton, glaring into his, wavered and grew wide with amazement.
“Loves me,” he whispered. “WHO loves me?”
“Your wife,” protested Ford; “the girl at the Savoy, your wife.”
Again the fingers of Ashton pressed deep around his neck.
“That is not my wife,” he whispered. His voice was unpleasantly
cold and grim. “That’s ’Baby Belle,’ with her hair dyed, a
detective lady of the Pinkertons, hired to find me. And YOU know
it. Now, who are YOU?”
To permit him to reply Ashton released his hand, but at the same
moment, in a sudden access of fear, dug the revolver deeper into
the pit of Ford’s stomach.
“Quick!” he commanded. “Never mind the girl. WHO ARE YOU?”
Ford collapsed against the cushioned corner of the cab. “And she
begged me to find you,” he roared, “because she LOVED you, because
she wanted to BELIEVE in you!” He held his arms above his head.
“Go ahead and shoot!” he cried. “You want to know who I am?” he
demanded. His voice rang with rage. “I’m an amateur. Just a
natural born fool-amateur! Go on and shoot!”
The gun in Ashton’s hand sank to his knee. Between doubt and
laughter his face was twisted in strange lines. The cab was
whirling through a narrow, unlit street leading to Covent Garden.
Opening the door Ashton called to the chauffeur, and then turned to
Ford.
“You get off here!” he commanded. “Maybe you’re a ’Pink,’ maybe
you’re a good fellow. I think you’re a good fellow, but I’m not
taking any chances. Get out!”
Ford scrambled to the street, and as the taxicab again butted
itself forward, Ashton leaned far through the window. “Good-by,
son,” he called. “Send me a picture-postal card to Paris. For I
am off to Maxim’s,” he cried, “and you can go to--”
“Not at all!” shouted the amateur detective indignantly. “I’m
going back to take supper with ’Baby Belle’!”
 

This complete text of The Amateur by Richard Harding Davis is in the public domain.


Also available by this author: The Bar Sinister.
“This story leaves you grinning from ear-to-ear” says one reader.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The AmateurBy Richard Harding DavisAt Amazon
