




“Epictetus, I have often come desiring to hear you speak,
and you have never given me any answer; now if possible, I
entreat you, say something to me.”
“Is there, do you think,” replied Epictetus, “an art of
speaking as of other things, if it is to be done skilfully and
with profit to the hearer?”
“Yes.”
“And are all profited by what they hear, or only some among
them? So that it seems there is an art of hearing as well as of
speaking. . . . To make a statue needs skill: to view a statue
aright needs skill also.”
“Admitted.”
“And I think all will allow that one who proposes to hear
philosophers speak needs a considerable training in hearing. Is
that not so? Then tell me on what subject you are able to hear
me.”
“Why, on good and evil.”
“The good and evil of what? a horse, an ox?”
“No; of a man.”
“Do we know then what Man is? what his nature is? what is the
idea we have of him? And are our ears practised in any degree on
the subject? Nay, do you understand what Nature is? can you
follow me in any degree when I say that I shall have to use
demonstration? Do you understand what Demonstration is? what True
or False is? . . .must I drive you to Philosophy? . . . Show me
what good I am to do by discoursing with you. Rouse my desire to
do so. The sight of the pasture it loves stirs in a sheep the
desire to feed: show it a stone or a bit of bread and it remains
unmoved. Thus we also have certain natural desires, aye, and one
that moves us to speak when we find a listener that is worth his
salt: one that himself stirs the spirit. But if he sits by like
a stone or a tuft of grass, how can he rouse a man’s desire?”
“Then you will say nothing to me?”
“I can only tell you this: that one who knows not who he is
and to what end he was born; what kind of world this is and with
whom he is associated therein; one who cannot distinguish Good
and Evil, Beauty and Foulness, . . . Truth and Falsehood, will
never follow Reason in shaping his desires and impulses and
repulsions, nor yet in assent, denial, or suspension of
judgment; but will in one word go about deaf and blind, thinking
himself to be somewhat, when he is in truth of no account. Is
there anything new in  all this? Is not this ignorance the cause
of all the mistakes and mischances of men since the human race
began? . . .”
“This is all I have to say to you, and even this against the
grain. Why? Because you have not stirred my spirit. For what can
I see in you to stir me, as a spirited horse will stir a judge of
horses? Your body? That you maltreat. Your dress? That is
luxurious. Your behaviour, your look?—Nothing whatever. When you
want to hear a philosopher, do not say, ’You say nothing to me’;
only show yourself worthy or fit to hear, and then you will see
how you will move the speaker.”
Continue...

This complete text of The Golden Sayings of Epictetus is in the public domain.


Also see Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life
by A. A. Long.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Apology, Phaedo and Crito of Plato; the Golden Sayings of Epictetus; the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius with Introductions and Notes (The Harvard Classics [Leatherbound], Deluxe Edition, Registered Edition)By Benjamin JowettAt Amazon
