
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





The tragic fear and pity may be aroused by the Spectacle; but they may
also be aroused by the very structure and incidents of the play—which
is the better way and shows the better poet. The Plot in fact should
be so framed that, even without seeing the things take place, he who
simply hears the account of them shall be filled with horror and pity
at the incidents; which is just the effect that the mere recital of
the story in Oedipus would have on one. To produce this same effect
by means of the Spectacle is less artistic, and requires extraneous
aid.  Those, however, who make use of the Spectacle to put before us
that which is merely monstrous and not productive of fear, are wholly
out of touch with Tragedy; not every kind of pleasure should be
required of a tragedy, but only its own proper pleasure.
The tragic pleasure is that of pity and fear, and the poet has to
produce it by a work of imitation; it is clear, therefore, that the
causes should be included in the incidents of his story. Let us see,
then, what kinds of incident strike one as horrible, or rather as
piteous. In a deed of this description the parties must necessarily be
either friends, or enemies, or indifferent to one another. Now when
enemy does it on enemy, there is nothing to move us to pity either in
his doing or in his meditating the deed, except so far as the actual
pain of the sufferer is concerned; and the same is true when the
parties are indifferent to one another. Whenever the tragic deed,
however, is done within the family—when murder or the like is done or
meditated by brother on brother, by son on father, by mother on son,
or son on mother—these are the situations the poet should seek after.
The traditional stories, accordingly, must be kept as they are, e.g.
the murder of Clytaemnestra by Orestes and of Eriphyle by Alcmeon. At
the same time even with these there is something left to the poet
himself; it is for him to devise the right way of treating them. Let
us explain more clearly what we mean by ’the right way’. The deed of
horror may be done by the doer knowingly and consciously, as in the
old poets, and in Medea’s murder of her children in Euripides. Or he
may do it, but in ignorance of his relationship, and discover that
afterwards, as does the Oedipus in Sophocles. Here the deed is
outside the play; but it may be within it, like the act of the Alcmeon
in Astydamas, or that of the Telegonus in Ulysses Wounded. A third
possibility is for one meditating some deadly injury to another, in
ignorance of his relationship, to make the discovery in time to draw
back. These exhaust the possibilities, since the deed must necessarily
be either done or not done, and either knowingly or unknowingly.
The worst situation is when the personage is with full knowledge on
the point of doing the deed, and leaves it undone. It is odious and
also (through the absence of suffering) untragic; hence it is that no
one is made to act thus except in some few instances, e.g. Haemon and
Creon in Antigone. Next after this comes the actual perpetration of
the deed meditated. A better situation than that, however, is for the
deed to be done in ignorance, and the relationship discovered
afterwards, since there is nothing odious in it, and the Discovery
will serve to astound us. But the best of all is the last; what we
have in Cresphontes, for example, where Merope, on the point of
slaying her son, recognizes him in time; in Iphigenia, where sister
and brother are in a like position; and in Helle, where the son
recognizes his mother, when on the point of giving her up to her
enemy.
This will explain why our tragedies are restricted (as we said just
now) to such a small number of families. It was accident rather than
art that led the poets in quest of subjects to embody this kind of
incident in their Plots. They are still obliged, accordingly, to have
recourse to the families in which such horrors have occurred.
On the construction of the Plot, and the kind of Plot required for
Tragedy, enough has now been said.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
