
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





II. Besides this, Epic poetry must divide into the same species as
Tragedy; it must be either simple or complex, a story of character or
one of suffering. Its parts, too, with the exception of Song and
Spectacle, must be the same, as it requires Peripeties, Discoveries,
and scenes of suffering just like Tragedy. Lastly, the Thought and
Diction in it must be good in their way. All these elements appear in
Homer first; and he has made due use of them. His two poems are each
examples of construction, the Iliad simple and a story of suffering,
the Odyssey complex (there is Discovery throughout it) and a story
of character. And they are more than this, since in Diction and
Thought too they surpass all other poems.
There is, however, a difference in the Epic as compared with Tragedy,
(1) in its length, and (2) in its metre. (1) As to its length, the
limit already suggested will suffice: it must be possible for the
beginning and end of the work to be taken in in one view—a condition
which will be fulfilled if the poem be shorter than the old epics, and
about as long as the series of tragedies offered for one hearing. For
the extension of its length epic poetry has a special advantage, of
which it makes large use. In a play one cannot represent an action
with a number of parts going on simultaneously; one is limited to the
part on the stage and connected with the actors. Whereas i.e.ic
poetry the narrative form makes it possible for one to describe a
number of simultaneous incidents; and these, if germane to the
subject, increase the body of the poem. This then is a gain to the
Epic, tending to give it grandeur, and also variety of interest and
room for episodes of diverse kinds. Uniformity of incident by the
satiety it soon creates is apt to ruin tragedies on the stage. (2) As
for its metre, the heroic has been assigned it from experience; were
any one to attempt a narrative poem in some one, or in several, of the
other metres, the incongruity of the thing would be apparent. The
heroic; in fact is the gravest and weightiest of metres—which is what
makes it more tolerant than the rest of strange words and metaphors,
that also being a point in which the narrative form of poetry goes
beyond all others. The iambic and trochaic, on the other hand, are
metres of movement, the one representing that of life and action, the
other that of the dance. Still more unnatural would it appear, it one
were to write an epic in a medley of metres, as Chaeremon did. Hence
it is that no one has ever written a long story in any but heroic
verse; nature herself, as we have said, teaches us to select the metre
appropriate to such a story.
Homer, admirable as he is i.e.ery other respect, i.e.pecially so in
this, that he alone among epic poets is not unaware of the part to be
played by the poet himself in the poem. The poet should say very
little in propria persona, as he is no imitator when doing that.
Whereas the other poets are perpetually coming forward in person, and
say but little, and that only here and there, as imitators, Homer
after a brief preface brings in forthwith a man, a woman, or some
other Character—no one of them characterless, but each with
distinctive characteristics.
The marvellous is certainly required in Tragedy. The Epic, however,
affords more opening for the improbable, the chief factor in the
marvellous, because in it the agents are not visibly before one. The
scene of the pursuit of Hector would be ridiculous on the stage—the
Greeks halting instead of pursuing him, and Achilles shaking his head
to stop them; but in the poem the absurdity is overlooked. The
marvellous, however, is a cause of pleasure, as is shown by the fact
that we all tell a story with additions, in the belief that we are
doing our hearers a pleasure.
Homer more than any other has taught the rest of us the art of framing
lies in the right way. I mean the use of paralogism. Whenever, if A is
or happens, a consequent, B, is or happens, men’s notion is that, if
the B is, the A also is—but that is a false conclusion. Accordingly,
if A is untrue, but there is something else, B, that on the assumption
of its truth follows as its consequent, the right thing then is to add
on the B. Just because we know the truth of the consequent, we are in
our own minds led on to the erroneous inference of the truth of the
antecedent. Here is an instance, from the Bath-story in the Odyssey.
A likely impossibility is always preferable to an unconvincing
possibility. The story should never be made up of improbable
incidents; there should be nothing of the sort in it. If, however,
such incidents are unavoidable, they should be outside the piece, like
the hero’s ignorance in Oedipus of the circumstances of Lams’ death;
not within it, like the report of the Pythian games in Electra, or
the man’s having come to Mysia from Tegea without uttering a word on
the way, in The Mysians. So that it is ridiculous to say that one’s
Plot would have been spoilt without them, since it is fundamentally
wrong to make up such Plots. If the poet has taken such a Plot,
however, and one sees that he might have put it in a more probable
form, he is guilty of absurdity as well as a fault of art. Even in the
Odyssey the improbabilities in the setting-ashore of Ulysses would
be clearly intolerable in the hands of an inferior poet. As it is, the
poet conceals them, his other excellences veiling their absurdity.
Elaborate Diction, however, is required only in places where there is
no action, and no Character or Thought to be revealed. Where there is
Character or Thought, on the other hand, an over-ornate Diction tends
to obscure them.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
