



Morning (Caspar David Friedrich)

I have paid my visit to my native place with all the devotion of
a pilgrim, and have experienced many unexpected emotions. Near
the great elm tree, which is a quarter of a league from the village,
I got out of the carriage, and sent it on before, that alone, and
on foot, I might enjoy vividly and heartily all the pleasure of
my recollections. I stood there under that same elm which was
formerly the term and object of my walks. How things have since
changed! Then, in happy ignorance, I sighed for a world I did not
know, where I hoped to find every pleasure and enjoyment which my
heart could desire; and now, on my return from that wide world, O
my friend, how many disappointed hopes and unsuccessful plans have
I brought back!
As I contemplated the mountains which lay stretched out before me,
I thought how often they had been the object of my dearest desires.
Here used I to sit for hours together with my eyes bent upon them,
ardently longing to wander in the shade of those woods, to lose
myself in those valleys, which form so delightful an object in the
distance. With what reluctance did I leave this charming spot;
when my hour of recreation was over, and my leave of absence
expired! I drew near to the village: all the well-known old
summerhouses and gardens were recognised again; I disliked the new
ones, and all other alterations which had taken place. I entered
the village, and all my former feelings returned. I cannot, my
dear friend, enter into details, charming as were my sensations:
they would be dull in the narration. I had intended to lodge in
the market-place, near our old house. As soon as I entered, I
perceived that the schoolroom, where our childhood had been taught
by that good old woman, was converted into a shop. I called to
mind the sorrow, the heaviness, the tears, and oppression of heart,
which I experienced in that confinement. Every step produced some
particular impression. A pilgrim in the Holy Land does not meet
so many spots pregnant with tender recollections, and his soul is
hardly moved with greater devotion. One incident will serve for
illustration. I followed the course of a stream to a farm, formerly
a delightful walk of mine, and paused at the spot, where, when
boys, we used to amuse ourselves making ducks and drakes upon the
water. I recollected so well how I used formerly to watch the
course of that same stream, following it with inquiring eagerness,
forming romantic ideas of the countries it was to pass through;
but my imagination was soon exhausted: while the water continued
flowing farther and farther on, till my fancy became bewildered
by the contemplation of an invisible distance. Exactly such, my
dear friend, so happy and so confined, were the thoughts of our
good ancestors. Their feelings and their poetry were fresh as
childhood. And, when Ulysses talks of the immeasurable sea and
boundless earth, his epithets are true, natural, deeply felt, and
mysterious. Of what importance is it that I have learned, with
every schoolboy, that the world is round? Man needs but little
earth for enjoyment, and still less for his final repose.
I am at present with the prince at his hunting lodge. He is a man
with whom one can live happily. He is honest and unaffected. There
are, however, some strange characters about him, whom I cannot at
all understand. They do not seem vicious, and yet they do not
carry the appearance of thoroughly honest men. Sometimes I am
disposed to believe them honest, and yet I cannot persuade myself
to confide in them. It grieves me to hear the prince occasionally
talk of things which he has only read or heard of, and always with
the same view in which they have been represented by others.
He values my understanding and talents more highly than my heart,
but I am proud of the latter only. It is the sole source of
everything of our strength, happiness, and misery. All the knowledge
I possess every one else can acquire, but my heart is exclusively
my own.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
