




It was the first and most striking characteristic of
Socrates never to become heated in discourse, never to utter an
injurious or insulting word—on the contrary, he persistently
bore insult from others and thus put an end to the fray. If you
care to know the extent of his power in this direction, read
Xenophon’s Banquet, and you will see how many quarrels he put an
end to. That is why the Poets are right in so highly commending
this faculty:—
Quickly and wisely withal even bitter feuds would he settle.
Nevertheless the practice is not very safe at present,
especially in Rome. One who adopts it, I need not say, ought not
to carry it out in an obscure corner, but boldly accost, if
occasion serve, some personage of rank or wealth.
“Can you tell me, sir, to whose care you entrust your
horses?”
“I can.”
“Is it to the first comer, who knows nothing about them?”
“Certainly not.”
“Well, what of the man who takes care of your gold, your
silver or your raiment?”
“He must be experienced also.”
“And your body—have you ever considered about entrusting
it to any one’s care?”
“Of course I have.”
“And no doubt to a person of experience as a trainer, a
physician?”
“Surely.”
“Are these things the best you possess, or have you anything
more precious?”
“What can you mean?”
“I mean that which employs these; which weighs all things;
which takes counsel and resolve.”
“Oh, you mean the soul.”
“You take me rightly; I do mean the soul. By Heaven, I hold
that far more precious than all else I possess. Can you show me
then what care you bestow on the soul? For it can scarcely be
thought that a man of your wisdom and consideration in the city
would suffer your most precious possession to go to ruin through
carelessness and neglect.”
“Certainly not.”
“Well, do you take care of it yourself? Did any one teach
you the right method, or did you discover it yourself?”
Now here comes in the danger: first, that the great man may
answer, “Why, what is that to you, my good fellow? are you my
master?” And then, if you persist in troubling him, may raise his
hand to strike you. It is a practice of which I was myself a warm
admirer until such experiences as these befell me.
Continue...

This complete text of The Golden Sayings of Epictetus is in the public domain.


Also see Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life
by A. A. Long.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Apology, Phaedo and Crito of Plato; the Golden Sayings of Epictetus; the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius with Introductions and Notes (The Harvard Classics [Leatherbound], Deluxe Edition, Registered Edition)By Benjamin JowettAt Amazon
