
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





From what we have said it will be seen that the poet’s function is to
describe, not the thing that has happened, but a kind of thing that
might happen, i.e. what is possible as being probable or necessary.
The distinction between historian and poet is not in the one writing
prose and the other verse—you might put the work of Herodotus into
verse, and it would still be a species of history; it consists really
in this, that the one describes the thing that has been, and the
other a kind of thing that might be. Hence poetry is something more
philosophic and of graver import than history, since its statements
are of the nature rather of universals, whereas those of history are
singulars. By a universal statement I mean one as to what such or such
a kind of man will probably or necessarily say or do—which is the
aim of poetry, though it affixes proper names to the characters; by a
singular statement, one as to what, say, Alcibiades did or had done to
him. In Comedy this has become clear by this time; it is only when
their plot is already made up of probable incidents that the.g.ve it
a basis of proper names, choosing for the purpose any names that may
occur to them, instead of writing like the old iambic poets about
particular persons. In Tragedy, however, they still adhere to the
historic names; and for this reason: what convinces is the possible;
now whereas we are not yet sure as to the possibility of that which
has not happened, that which has happened is manifestly possible, else
it would not have come to pass. Nevertheless even in Tragedy there are
some plays with but one or two known names in them, the rest being
inventions; and there are some without a single known name, e.g.
Agathon’s Anthens, in which both incidents and names are of the poet’s
invention; and it is no less delightful on that account.  So that one
must not aim at a rigid adherence to the traditional stories on which
tragedies are based. It would be absurd, in fact, to do so, as even
the known stories are only known to a few, though they are a delight
none the less to all.
It i.e.ident from the above that, the poet must be more the poet of
his stories or Plots than of his verses, inasmuch as he is a poet by
virtue of the imitative element in his work, and it is actions that he
imitates. And if he should come to take a subject from actual history,
he is none the less a poet for that; since some historic occurrences
may very well be in the probable and possible order of things; and it
is in that aspect of them that he is their poet.
Of simple Plots and actions the episodic are the worst. I call a Plot
episodic when there is neither probability nor necessity in the
sequence of episodes. Actions of this sort bad poets construct through
their own fault, and good ones on account of the players. His work
being for public performance, a good poet often stretches out a Plot
beyond its capabilities, and is thus obliged to twist the sequence of
incident.
Tragedy, however, is an imitation not only of a complete action, but
also of incidents arousing pity and fear. Such incidents have the very
greatest effect on the mind when they occur unexpectedly and at the
same time in consequence of one another; there is more of the
marvellous in them then than if they happened of themselves or by mere
chance. Even matters of chance seem most marvellous if there is an
appearance of design as it were in them; as for instance the statue of
Mitys at Argos killed the author of Mitys’ death by falling down on
him when a looker-on at a public spectacle; for incidents like that we
think to be not without a meaning. A Plot, therefore, of this sort is
necessarily finer than others.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
