


Unhappy being that I am! Why do I thus deceive myself? What is
to come of all this wild, aimless, endless passion? I cannot pray
except to her. My imagination sees nothing but her: all surrounding
objects are of no account, except as they relate to her. In this
dreamy state I enjoy many happy hours, till at length I feel
compelled to tear myself away from her. Ah, Wilhelm, to what
does not my heart often compel me! When I have spent several hours
in her company, till I feel completely absorbed by her figure, her
grace, the divine expression of her thoughts, my mind becomes
gradually excited to the highest excess, my sight grows dim, my
hearing confused, my breathing oppressed as if by the hand of a
murderer, and my beating heart seeks to obtain relief for my aching
senses. I am sometimes unconscious whether I really exist. If
in such moments I find no sympathy, and Charlotte does not allow
me to enjoy the melancholy consolation of bathing her hand with
my tears, I feel compelled to tear myself from her, when I either
wander through the country, climb some precipitous cliff, or force
a path through the trackless thicket, where I am lacerated and
torn by thorns and briers; and thence I find relief. Sometimes I
lie stretched on the ground, overcome with fatigue and dying with
thirst; sometimes, late in the night, when the moon shines above
me, I recline against an aged tree in some sequestered forest, to
rest my weary limbs, when, exhausted and worn, I sleep till break
of day. O Wilhelm! the hermit’s cell, his sackcloth, and girdle
of thorns would be luxury and indulgence compared with what I suffer.
Adieu! I see no end to this wretchedness except the grave.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
