



Riesengebirge (Caspar David Friedrich)

How happy I am that I am gone! My dear friend, what a thing is
the heart of man! To leave you, from whom I have been inseparable,
whom I love so dearly, and yet to feel happy! I know you will
forgive me. Have not other attachments been specially appointed
by fate to torment a head like mine? Poor Leonora! and yet I was
not to blame. Was it my fault, that, whilst the peculiar charms
of her sister afforded me an agreeable entertainment, a passion
for me was engendered in her feeble heart? And yet am I wholly
blameless? Did I not encourage her emotions? Did I not feel
charmed at those truly genuine expressions of nature, which, though
but little mirthful in reality, so often amused us? Did I not —
but oh! what is man, that he dares so to accuse himself? My dear
friend I promise you I will improve; I will no longer, as has ever
been my habit, continue to ruminate on every petty vexation which
fortune may dispense; I will enjoy the present, and the past shall
be for me the past. No doubt you are right, my best of friends,
there would be far less suffering amongst mankind, if men — and
God knows why they are so fashioned — did not employ their
imaginations so assiduously in recalling the memory of past sorrow,
instead of bearing their present lot with equanimity. Be kind
enough to inform my mother that I shall attend to her business to
the best of my ability, and shall give her the earliest information
about it. I have seen my aunt, and find that she is very far from
being the disagreeable person our friends allege her to be. She
is a lively, cheerful woman, with the best of hearts. I explained
to her my mother’s wrongs with regard to that part of her portion
which has been withheld from her. She told me the motives and
reasons of her own conduct, and the terms on which she is willing
to give up the whole, and to do more than we have asked. In short,
I cannot write further upon this subject at present; only assure
my mother that all will go on well. And I have again observed,
my dear friend, in this trifling affair, that misunderstandings
and neglect occasion more mischief in the world than even malice
and wickedness. At all events, the two latter are of less frequent
occurrence.
In other respects I am very well off here. Solitude in this
terrestrial paradise is a genial balm to my mind, and the young
spring cheers with its bounteous promises my oftentimes misgiving
heart. Every tree, every bush, is full of flowers; and one might
wish himself transformed into a butterfly, to float about in this
ocean of perfume, and find his whole existence in it. 
The town itself is disagreeable; but then, all around, you find an
inexpressible beauty of nature. This induced the late Count M to
lay out a garden on one of the sloping hills which here intersect
each other with the most charming variety, and form the most lovely
valleys. The garden is simple; and it is easy to perceive, even
upon your first entrance, that the plan was not designed by a
scientific gardener, but by a man who wished to give himself up
here to the enjoyment of his own sensitive heart. Many a tear
have I already shed to the memory of its departed master in a
summer-house which is now reduced to ruins, but was his favourite
resort, and now is mine. I shall soon be master of the place. 
The gardener has become attached to me within the last few days,
and he will lose nothing thereby.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
