


What I have lately said of painting is equally true with respect
to poetry. It is only necessary for us to know what is really
excellent, and venture to give it expression; and that is saying
much in few words. To-day I have had a scene, which, if literally
related, would, make the most beautiful idyl in the world. But
why should I talk of poetry and scenes and idyls? Can we never
take pleasure in nature without having recourse to art?
If you expect anything grand or magnificent from this introduction,
you will be sadly mistaken. It relates merely to a peasant-lad,
who has excited in me the warmest interest. As usual, I shall
tell my story badly; and you, as usual, will think me extravagant.
It is Walheim once more — always Walheim — which produces these
wonderful phenomena.
A party had assembled outside the house under the linden-trees,
to drink coffee. The company did not exactly please me; and, under
one pretext or another, I lingered behind.
A peasant came from an adjoining house, and set to work arranging
some part of the same plough which I had lately sketched. His
appearance pleased me; and I spoke to him, inquired about his
circumstances, made his acquaintance, and, as is my wont with
persons of that class, was soon admitted into his confidence. He
said he was in the service of a young widow, who set great store
by him. He spoke so much of his mistress, and praised her so
extravagantly, that I could soon see he was desperately in love
with her. “She is no longer young,” he said: “and she was treated
so badly by her former husband that she does not mean to marry
again.” From his account it was so evident what incomparable
charms she possessed for him, and how ardently he wished she would
select him to extinguish the recollection of her first husband’s
misconduct, that I should have to repeat his own words in order
to describe the depth of the poor fellow’s attachment, truth, and
devotion. It would, in fact, require the gifts of a great poet
to convey the expression of his features, the harmony of his voice,
and the heavenly fire of his eye. No words can portray the
tenderness of his every movement and of every feature: no effort
of mine could do justice to the scene. His alarm lest I should
misconceive his position with regard to his mistress, or question
the propriety of her conduct, touched me particularly. The charming
manner with which he described her form and person, which, without
possessing the graces of youth, won and attached him to her, is
inexpressible, and must be left to the imagination. I have never
in my life witnessed or fancied or conceived the possibility of
such intense devotion, such ardent affections, united with so much
purity. Do not blame me if I say that the recollection of this
innocence and truth is deeply impressed upon my very soul; that
this picture of fidelity and tenderness haunts me everywhere; and
that my own heart, as though enkindled by the flame, glows and
burns within me.
I mean now to try and see her as soon as I can: or perhaps, on
second thoughts, I had better not; it is better I should behold
her through the eyes of her lover. To my sight, perhaps, she would
not appear as she now stands before me; and why should I destroy
so sweet a picture?
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
