


I thank you, Wilhelm, for your cordial sympathy, for your excellent
advice; and I implore you to be quiet. Leave me to my sufferings.
In spite of my wretchedness, I have still strength enough for
endurance. I revere religion — you know I do. I feel that it
can impart strength to the feeble and comfort to the afflicted,
but does it affect all men equally? Consider this vast universe:
you will see thousands for whom it has never existed, thousands
for whom it will never exist, whether it be preached to them, or
not; and must it, then, necessarily exist for me? Does not the
Son of God himself say that they are his whom the Father has given
to him? Have I been given to him? What if the Father will retain
me for himself, as my heart sometimes suggests? I pray you, do
not misinterpret this. Do not extract derision from my harmless
words. I pour out my whole soul before you. Silence were otherwise
preferable to me, but I need not shrink from a subject of which
few know more than I do myself. What is the destiny of man, but
to fill up the measure of his sufferings, and to drink his allotted
cup of bitterness? And if that same cup proved bitter to the God
of heaven, under a human form, why should I affect a foolish pride,
and call it sweet? Why should I be ashamed of shrinking at that
fearful moment, when my whole being will tremble between existence
and annihilation, when a remembrance of the past, like a flash of
lightning, will illuminate the dark gulf of futurity, when everything
shall dissolve around me, and the whole world vanish away? Is not
this the voice of a creature oppressed beyond all resource,
self-deficient, about to plunge into inevitable destruction, and
groaning deeply at its inadequate strength, “My God! my God! why
hast thou forsaken me?” And should I feel ashamed to utter the
same expression? Should I not shudder at a prospect which had its
fears, even for him who folds up the heavens like a garment?
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
