




A life entangled with Fortune is like a torrent. It is
turbulent and muddy; hard to pass and masterful of mood: noisy
and of brief continuance.
The soul that companies with Virtue is like an ever-flowing
source. It is a pure, clear, and wholesome draught; sweet, rich,
and generous of its store; that injures not, neither destroys.
It is a shame that one who sweetens his drink with the gifts
of the bee, should embitter God’s gift Reason with vice.
Crows pick out the eyes of the dead, when the dead have no
longer need of them; but flatterers mar the soul of the living,
and her eyes they blind.
Keep neither a blunt knife nor an ill-disciplined looseness
of tongue.
Nature hath given men one tongue but two ears, that we may
hear from others twice as much as we speak.
Do not give sentence in another tribunal till you have been
yourself judged in the tribunal of Justice.
It is shameful for a Judge to be judged by others.
Give me by all means the shorter and nobler life, instead of
one that is longer but of less account!
Freedom is the name of virtue: Slavery, of vice. . . . None
is a slave whose acts are free.
Of pleasures, those which occur most rarely give the most
delight.
Exceed due measure, and the most delightful things become
the least delightful.
The anger of an ape—the threat of a flatterer:—these
deserve equal regard.
Chastise thy passions that they avenge not themselves upon
thee.
No man is free who is not master of himself.
A ship should not ride on a single anchor, nor life on a
single hope.
Fortify thyself with contentment: that is an impregnable
stronghold.
No man who is a lover of money, of pleasure, of glory, is
likewise a lover of Men; but only he that is a lover of
whatsoever things are fair and good.
Think of God more often than thou breathest.
Choose the life that is noblest, for custom can make it
sweet to thee.
Let thy speech of God be renewed day by day, aye, rather
than thy meat and drink.
Even as the Sun doth not wait for prayers and incantations
to rise, but shines forth and is welcomed by all: so thou also
wait not for clapping of hands and shouts and praise to do thy
duty; nay, do good of thine own accord, and thou wilt be loved
like the Sun.
Let no man think that he is loved by any who loveth none.
If thou rememberest that God standeth by to behold and visit
all that thou doest; whether in the body or in the soul, thou
surely wilt not err in any prayer or deed; and thou shalt have
God to dwell with thee.
Note.—Schweighaeuser’s great edition collects 181 fragments
attributed to Epictetus, of which but a few are certainly
genuine. Some (as xxi., xxiv., above) bear the stamp of
Pythagorean origin; others, though changed in form, may well be
based upon Epictetean sayings. Most have been preserved in the
Anthology of John of Stobi (Stobaeus), a Byzantine collector, of
whom scarcely anything is known but that he probably wrote
towards the end of the fifth century, and made his vast body of
extracts from more than five hundred authors for his son’s use.
The best examination of the authenticity of the Fragments is
Quaestiones Epicteteae, by R. Asmus, 1888. The above selection
includes some of doubtful origin but intrinsic interest.—Crossley.
 

This complete text of The Golden Sayings of Epictetus is in the public domain.


Also see Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life
by A. A. Long.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Apology, Phaedo and Crito of Plato; the Golden Sayings of Epictetus; the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius with Introductions and Notes (The Harvard Classics [Leatherbound], Deluxe Edition, Registered Edition)By Benjamin JowettAt Amazon
