


What is the matter with me, dear Wilhelm? I am afraid of myself!
Is not my love for her of the purest, most holy, and most brotherly
nature? Has my soul ever been sullied by a single sensual desire?
but I will make no protestations. And now, ye nightly visions,
how truly have those mortals understood you, who ascribe your
various contradictory effects to some invincible power! This night
I tremble at the avowal — I held her in my arms, locked in a close
embrace: I pressed her to my bosom, and covered with countless
kisses those dear lips which murmured in reply soft protestations
of love. My sight became confused by the delicious intoxication
of her eyes. Heavens! is it sinful to revel again in such happiness,
to recall once more those rapturous moments with intense delight?
Charlotte! Charlotte! I am lost! My senses are bewildered, my
recollection is confused, mine eyes are bathed in tears — I am
ill; and yet I am well — I wish for nothing — I have no desires
— it were better I were gone.
Under the circumstances narrated above, a determination to quit
this world had now taken fixed possession of Werther’s soul. Since
Charlotte’s return, this thought had been the final object of all
his hopes and wishes; but he had resolved that such a step should
not be taken with precipitation, but with calmness and tranquillity,
and with the most perfect deliberation.
His troubles and internal struggles may be understood from the
following fragment, which was found, without any date, amongst
his papers, and appears to have formed the beginning of a letter
to Wilhelm.
“Her presence, her fate, her sympathy for me, have power still to
extract tears from my withered brain.
“One lifts up the curtain, and passes to the other side, — that
is all! And why all these doubts and delays? Because we know not
what is behind — because there is no returning — and because our
mind infers that all is darkness and confusion, where we have
nothing but uncertainty.”
His appearance at length became quite altered by the effect of
his melancholy thoughts; and his resolution was now finally and
irrevocably taken, of which the following ambiguous letter, which
he addressed to his friend, may appear to afford some proof.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
