


I must write to you from this place, my dear Charlotte, from a
small room in a country inn, where I have taken shelter from a
severe storm. During my whole residence in that wretched place
D—, where I lived amongst strangers, — strangers, indeed, to
this heart, — I never at any time felt the smallest inclination
to correspond with you; but in this cottage, in this retirement,
in this solitude, with the snow and hail beating against my
lattice-pane, you are my first thought. The instant I entered,
your figure rose up before me, and the remembrance! O my Charlotte,
the sacred, tender remembrance! Gracious Heaven! restore to me
the happy moment of our first acquaintance.
Could you but see me, my dear Charlotte, in the whirl of
dissipation, — how my senses are dried up, but my heart is at no
time full. I enjoy no single moment of happiness: all is vain —
nothing touches me. I stand, as it were, before the raree-show:
I see the little puppets move, and I ask whether it is not an
optical illusion. I am amused with these puppets, or, rather, I
am myself one of them: but, when I sometimes grasp my neighbour’s
hand, I feel that it is not natural; and I withdraw mine with a
shudder. In the evening I say I will enjoy the next morning’s
sunrise, and yet I remain in bed: in the day I promise to ramble
by moonlight; and I, nevertheless, remain at home. I know not why
I rise, nor why I go to sleep.
The leaven which animated my existence is gone: the charm which
cheered me in the gloom of night, and aroused me from my morning
slumbers, is for ever fled.
I have found but one being here to interest me, a Miss B—. She
resembles you, my dear Charlotte, if any one can possibly resemble
you. “Ah!” you will say, “he has learned how to pay fine compliments."
And this is partly true. I have been very agreeable lately, as
it was not in my power to be otherwise. I have, moreover, a deal
of wit: and the ladies say that no one understands flattery better,
or falsehoods you will add; since the one accomplishment invariably
accompanies the other. But I must tell you of Miss B—. She has
abundance of soul, which flashes from her deep blue eyes. Her
rank is a torment to her, and satisfies no one desire of her heart.
She would gladly retire from this whirl of fashion, and we often
picture to ourselves a life of undisturbed happiness in distant
scenes of rural retirement: and then we speak of you, my dear
Charlotte; for she knows you, and renders homage to your merits;
but her homage is not exacted, but voluntary, she loves you, and
delights to hear you made the subject of conversation.
Oh, that I were sitting at your feet in your favourite little room,
with the dear children playing around us! If they became troublesome
to you, I would tell them some appalling goblin story; and they
would crowd round me with silent attention. The sun is setting
in glory; his last rays are shining on the snow, which covers the
face of the country: the storm is over, and I must return to my
dungeon. Adieu!— Is Albert with you? and what is he to you? God
forgive the question.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
