


THE PAINTED CASE
“She’s fainted,” said Ryder in a voice that shook. From his pocket
he drew swiftly a thermos bottle but before the top was off those
long lashes fluttered, and from under their shadow the soft, dark
eyes looked up at him with a smile of very gallant reassurance.
“Not–faint,” said the girl, in a breath of a voice. “But it was so
long–so hot–”
“Drink this.” Ryder slipped an arm about her, offering the filled
top of the thermos. “It’s over, all over,” he murmured as she drank.
“You’re safe now, safe.... You’re at the museum.... Then we’ll get
you to the hotel–”
“Hotel–?” the girl echoed with a faint implication of humor in that
silver bell of a voice.
She put her hands to her hair and to her face in which the hues of
life mingled with the pallor of exhaustion; on her small fingers
sparkled the gleam of diamonds and from her slender arms fell back
the gold and jade tissues of her chiffon robe.
To McLean she had increasingly the appearance of a creature of
enchantments. And to see that young loveliness in its strange gleam
of color lying against his friend’s supporting tan linen arm–
Sardonically his eyes sought Ryder.
“So that was your mummy!”
“There was nothing else to do.” Ryder had withdrawn his arm; the two
men faced each other across the girl. “I was in a blue funk–you
see, I was hiding her in the inner chamber until I could smuggle her
away. And when those wolves came on the scent, and not an instant to
lose–I got the bandages off the real mummy and about Aimée....
Lord, it was a close call!”
He drew a long breath. “I hadn’t a gun. I hadn’t a thing–and I had
to grin and play it through ... And I was deathly afraid of
Thatcher.”
“Thatcher?”
“Yes, Thatcher. You see I’d popped the mummy into a case without its
bandages and if Thatcher had glimpsed that he’d have said
something–Oh, innocently–that would have given the show away. He
knew there was only one mummy and it was wrapped. But the Lord was
with me. The men opened the empty case first and at the second they
said nothing to show it wasn’t empty and Thatcher didn’t look in.
Then they went on to the third.”
“And me–when I heard those voices–I stopped breathing,” said the
girl. “But I shook so–I thought they would think that mummy was
coming to life! And the dust–Oh, it was almost beyond my force not
to sneeze–”
“You’d have sneezed us to Kingdom Come,” said Ryder, gayly now.
“But I did not,” she protested. “I lay there and thought of Hamdi
looking down upon me, and my flesh crept.... Oh, it was terrible!
And yet it was funny.”
Funny.... McLean gazed in sardonic astonishment upon the two young
creatures with such misguided humor that they found something funny
in this appalling business. Flying from palaces ... hiding in tombs
... taking a mummy’s place beneath the dusty bandages of the dead
... Funny....
And yet there was laughter in their young eyes when they looked at
each other and a curve of astounding amusement in their lips.
It touched McLean to wonder. It touched him–queerly–to an odd and
aching pain. For he saw suddenly that he was looking upon something
deathless and imperishable, yet fragile and fleeting as the breath
of time....
They were so young, so absorbed, so oblivious....
He had forgotten Jinny Jeffries. So too,–not for the first time,
alas!–had Ryder. Now her clear voice from the doorway made them
start.
“You might present me, Jack.”
Ryder turned, so did the girl in the painted case, and her eyes
widened with a startled surprise. The doorway had not been within
her vision.
Jinny was leaning back against the door, her hand behind her on the
knob she was to guard, her figure still rigid with astonishment.
“I didn’t know you–you dug them up–alive,” she said with a quiver
of uncertain humor.
“My dear Jinny, I had for–Miss Jeffries, let me present you to
Mademoiselle Delcassé,” said Jack gravely. “I know that you met her
the day of her reception–”
Only in that moment did Jinny place the haunting recollection.
“But she was burned–she was killed,” she protested, shaken now with
excitement.
“She was not burned–although there was a fire. The man who called
himself her husband pretended she was killed in order to save his
pride. For she escaped from him. And he tried to get her back,
setting another man, a false father, after her with lying
witnesses–Oh, it’s a long story!–so I had to hide her in this
case.”
“But Jack, you–why were you hiding her–? Did you get her out?"
stammered Jinny.
“The night of that reception. You see, I knew she was truly a French
girl who had been stolen by Tewfick Pasha and brought up as his
daughter–Oh, that’s a long story, too! But at McLean’s I had
happened on the agents who were searching for her from her aunt in
France, and so I knew.... And at the reception when I found she
hated that marriage I stayed behind and–and managed to get her
away,"–thus lightly did Ryder indicate the dangers of that
night!–"so she could escape to France.”
“Oh–France!” said Jinny.
She could be forgiven for the tone. She had been kept shamefully in
the dark, misled, ignored.... She had been a catspaw, a bystander.
Not that she cared. Not that she would let them think for a minute
that she cared....
But as for this talk of France–
Her eyes met the eyes of the girl in the mummy case. And Jinny found
herself looking, not at the interloper, the enchantress, but at a
very young, frightened girl, lost in a strange world, but resolved
upon courage. She saw more than the men could see. She saw the
loveliness, the helplessness, and she saw too the sensitive dignity,
the delicate, defensive spirit....
Really, she was a child.
And to have gone through so much, dared such danger.... She
remembered that dark, forbidding palace, the guarded doors, the
hideous blacks–and that bright, smiling figure in its misty
veil.... And now that little figure sat in its strange hiding place,
confronting her with a lost child’s eyes....
Into Jinny’s bright gray eyes came a mist of tears. She was queerly
moved. It was a mingled emotion, but if some drops for her own
disconcertment were mingled with the warm prompting of pity, her
compassion was none the less true.
“I’ll be so glad to do anything I can to help,” she said
impulsively. “If you have no friends to trust in Cairo–”
“I have no friends to trust–beyond this room,” said the girl.
“Then I’ll take you to the hotel with me. You can register as one of
our party and keep your room till we leave–we are going in four
days now. And, oh, I know! You can cross on the same steamer with us
to Europe, for there’s a woman at the hotel who wants to give up her
transportation and go on to the Holy Land–she was moaning about it
only this noon. It would all fit in beautifully.”
It seemed to McLean that an angel from Heaven was revealing her
blessed goodness.
Ryder took the revelation delightedly for granted.
“Bully for you, Jinny,” he said warmly. “I knew I could count on
you.”
If for one moment a twinge of wry reminder recalled that she had
never been able exactly to count upon him it did not dim his mood.
He was alight with triumph.
“I’ll see to the transportation,” he said quickly, doing mental
arithmetic about present sums in the bank. “And we won’t wire your
aunt until you’re safely out of Egypt–better send a wireless from
the ship. I think your aunt is near Paris–”
“We are going to hurry to Paris,” said Jinny, “That was our regular
plan–”
“And London?” said McLean.
“London, later, of course. Cathedrals, lakes and universities–then
London.”
“I shall be in London,” said McLean thoughtfully, “in June.... If
you are not too occupied–”
“With cathedrals?” said Miss Jeffries.
“Where are the things?” demanded Ryder ruthlessly, and thus
recalled, Jinny produced the bag.
McLean moved toward the door. “We might go and mount guard in the
corridor,” he suggested, and he and Jinny stepped outside, back into
the everyday world of Egypt where nothing at all had been happening
but the arrival of a caravan from the excavations.
Within the room Ryder stooped and lifted the girl from the case and
set her lightly on the floor. Ruefully she shook out the torn
chiffons of that French audacity of a robe, and with a whimsical
smile surveyed the soiled little slippers that she had discarded in
her disguise when she had ridden behind the turbaned Ryder upon the
Arab horse.
So little time ago, and yet so long away–
Under her long lashes she looked up at the young man, who had set
the old life crumbling about her at a touch. Wistfulness edged the
brave smile with which she murmured, “And so it is all arranged–so
quick. I am safe–I go to the hotel with that nice girl–”
“And I won’t be able to see you,” he said suddenly.
“But you have seen me, monsieur, these many days–”
“Seen you? I haven’t seen you. I’ve sat outside a tomb on guard,
I’ve marched beside a mummy case–and–and we’ve said so little–”
It was true. They had said little. The hours had been absorbed in
action. Their words had always been of explanation, of reassurance,
of anxious planning. Of the future, the future after safety had been
achieved, they had said nothing. It had all been uncertain,
nebulous, vague....
And now it was upon them.
“And I have never said Thank you,” she murmured. “I–I think I began
by saying Thank you, monsieur. I remember saying that my education
had proceeded to the Ts!”
“If–if only you never want to unsay it,” he muttered. “You don’t
know what’s ahead–life’s so uncertain–”
“No, I do not know what is ahead,” she told him, “but I am
free–free for whatever will come.”
The brightness of that freedom shone suddenly from her upturned
face.
“Anything is better than that man,” she vowed. “Even if my aunt,
that Madame Delcassé, should not like me–you see, I have thought of
everything, and I am not afraid.”
“Like you–? She’ll love you,” said Ryder bitterly. “She’ll go mad
over you and give you all she has–she’ll marry you to a count–”
“Another marriage?” Aimée raised brows of mockery. “But I am through
with the marriages of convenience–”
“You’re so lovely, darling, that you’ll have the world at your
feet,” said the young man huskily.
He looked at her with eyes that could not hide their pain. “Oh,
I–you–it’s not fair–” he muttered incoherently.
He had meant–ever since that sobering moment of guardianship in the
desert–to be very fair. He would not bind her with a word, a touch.
Not since that impulsive clasp of reunion in the palace had he
touched her in caress. With the reverence of his deep tenderness he
had served her in the tomb, meaning to deny his heart, to delay its
revelation, to wait upon her freedom and her youth....
Nobly he had resolved.... But now parting was upon him.
“It’s not fair to you,” he said desperately–and drew closer.
For at his blurted words her look had magically changed. The
defensive lightness was fled. A breathless wonder shone out at him
... a delicious shyness brushed with dancing expectation like the
gleam of a butterfly’s wing.
No glamorous moonlight was about them now. No scented shadowy
garden.... But the enchantment was there, in the bare and dusty
room, with its grim old mummy cases, the enchantment and the very
flame of youth.
“Sweet, I’ll be on the ship–I’ll wait till you are ready,” he vowed
and at her low murmur, “Ready–?” he gave back, “Ready–for love,"
with a boy’s stammer over the first sound of that word between them.
“But what is this now,” she said wondering, yet with a little elfish
gleam of laughter, “but–love?”
His last resolve went to the winds.
And as his arms closed about her, as he held to his heart all that
young loveliness that had been his despair and his delight, there
was more than joy in the confused tumult of his youth, there was
the supreme exultation of triumphant daring.
For he had opened the forbidden door; he had challenged the
adventure and overcome the risk.
He had won. And he would hold his winnings.
“Aimée,” he whispered. “Aimée–Beloved.”
 

This eBook of The Fortieth Door (1920, dedicated to Arthur Mills Corwin) by Mary Hastings Bradley belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Fortieth DoorBy Mary Hastings BradleyAt Amazon
