


That the life of man is but a dream, many a man has surmised
heretofore; and I, too, am everywhere pursued by this feeling.
When I consider the narrow limits within which our active and
inquiring faculties are confined; when I see how all our energies
are wasted in providing for mere necessities, which again have no
further end than to prolong a wretched existence; and then that
all our satisfaction concerning certain subjects of investigation
ends in nothing better than a passive resignation, whilst we amuse
ourselves painting our prison-walls with bright figures and brilliant
landscapes, — when I consider all this, Wilhelm, I am silent.
I examine my own being, and find there a world, but a world rather
of imagination and dim desires, than of distinctness and living
power. Then everything swims before my senses, and I smile and
dream while pursuing my way through the world.
All learned professors and doctors are agreed that children do not
comprehend the cause of their desires; but that the grown-up should
wander about this earth like children, without knowing whence they
come, or whither they go, influenced as little by fixed motives,
but guided like them by biscuits, sugar-plums, and the rod, — this
is what nobody is willing to acknowledge; and yet I think it is
palpable.
I know what you will say in reply; for I am ready to admit that
they are happiest, who, like children, amuse themselves with their
playthings, dress and undress their dolls, and attentively watch
the cupboard, where mamma has locked up her sweet things, and,
when at last they get a delicious morsel, eat it greedily, and
exclaim, “More!” These are certainly happy beings; but others
also are objects of envy, who dignify their paltry employments,
and sometimes even their passions, with pompous titles, representing
them to mankind as gigantic achievements performed for their welfare
and glory. But the man who humbly acknowledges the vanity of all
this, who observes with what pleasure the thriving citizen converts
his little garden into a paradise, and how patiently even the poor
man pursues his weary way under his burden, and how all wish equally
to behold the light of the sun a little longer, — yes, such a man
is at peace, and creates his own world within himself; and he is
also happy, because he is a man. And then, however limited his
sphere, he still preserves in his bosom the sweet feeling of liberty,
and knows that he can quit his prison whenever he likes.
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
