


BEYOND THE DOOR
Ryder had stood stock still with amazement when the girl began to
scream. She had gone mad, he thought for an instant, in masculine
bewilderment, and then her madness revealed its treacherous cunning,
for she began crying wildly for help against an invader, an infidel,
a dog of a Christian who had stolen into her rooms.
She had chucked him to the lions, Ryder perceived; one furious flash
of lightning jealousy and Oriental anger had overthrown, in that
wild and lawless head, every other design for him for which she had
risked so much.
He had scorned her.... He had flouted her caprice.... He had dared
to refuse the languors of those dangerous eyes....
The hurrying footsteps appeared to him the tread of a legion in
action, and he had no desire to rush out upon the oncomers; he had,
indeed, distinct doubts of his ruthless ability to pass that supple,
clawing, incensed creature at the door.
He whirled and made a bolt for the window, striking at the fastened
grill. He heard the snapping of wooden bolts and the splintering of
wood and out through the hole he climbed to a precipitous, head-long
flight that fairly felt the clutching hands upon his ankle.
He had meant to make a jump for it. A three-story plunge into the
Nile appeared a gentle exercise compared to the alternative within
the palace, but in the very act of releasing his hold he changed his
mind.
Quicker than he had ever moved before, in any vicissitude of his
lithe and agile youth, he clambered up, not down, and crouching back
from sight upon the jutting top of the window, he sent his coat
sailing violently through space.
He dared not look over for its descent upon the water, for other
heads were peering from below and he could hear an excited outburst
of speech, that broke sharply off.
Evidently they were hurrying down to the water gate. Swiftly he
utilized this misdirection for his own ends.
The roofs. That was the refuge to make for. Flat, long-reaching
roofs, from which one could climb off onto a wall or a palm or a
side street.
He had only a story to ascend and he made it in record time, fearful
that the searchers whom he heard now launching a boat below would
turn their eyes skywards.
But he gained the top without an outcry being raised and found
himself upon the roof where the ladies of the harem took their air
unseen of any save the blind eyes of the muezzin in the Sultan
mosque upon the hill. There were divans and a little taboret or two
and a framework where an awning could be raised against the sun.
There was also a trap door.
And here, tempestuously he changed his mind again. He abandoned the
goal of outer walls and chances of escape. He wrenched violently at
that trap door. It was bolted but the bolt was an ancient one and
gave at his furious exertions, letting him down into a narrow spiral
staircase between walls.
Down he plunged in haste, before some confused searcher should dash
up. It was no place to meet an opposing force. Nor was the corridor
in which he found himself much better.
It was black and baffling as a labyrinth, with unexpected turnings,
and he kept gingerly close to the wall with one hand clutching a bit
of iron which he had taken into his possession and his pocket when
Aziza had led him out of the underground walls–the very bit of
pointed iron, it was, with which the volatile creature had effected
his rescue.
He considered it an invaluable souvenir and twice, in his nervous
apprehension, he almost brought it down upon shadows.
Direction he judged vaguely by the screaming which was still going
on at a tremendous rate–evidently the girl had gone off into
genuine hysterics or else she had determined not to leave her
agitation at the intrusion in any manner of question. No doubt the
outcries were a relief to her mingled emotions–remorse at her
impetuosity and chagrin that her thwarted plans might conceivably be
now among those emotions–and since the vicinity of those shrieks
must be a gathering place to be avoided by him he stole on, down the
upper hall, and finding a stair, he went down for two continuous
flights.
Aimée’s rooms, he knew, had been upon the water, and recalling the
general direction of those two lighted windows that he had seen so
recently from without, his excavator’s instinct led him on. Once he
saw the flitting figure of a turbaned woman in time to draw back
into a heaven-sent niche and again he flattened into a soundless
shadow against the wall as two young serving girls ran by on
slippered feet, their anklets tinkling, chattering to each other in
delighted excitement.
And then the stealthy opening of a door–it was the very door by
which Yussuf had precipitated himself upon the struggle at the
supper table some age-long hours ago–gave him a glimpse into the
far glooms of the reception room, where its long side of mashrubiyeh
windows revealed now between its fretwork tiny chinks of a paling
sky.
He could make out the dark-draped marriage throne and the pallor of
the disordered cloth upon the abandoned table below, and behind the
table the dark draperies of the remaining portières before the
doorway into the boudoir where he had hidden himself and into which
he had last seen Aimée thrust.
At the other end of the great room were the entrance stairs to the
harem, and there, he imagined, a watchman was stationed, or else
stout bolts and bars were guarding the situation. There remained an
arched doorway into other formal rooms through which he had seen
Aimée and the guests disappear for the wedding supper, and that way
led, he surmised, down into the service quarters.
A sorry choice of exits! He could form no plan in advance but trust
blindly to the amazing chances of adventure. And first, before he
rushed for escape, there was Aimée to find.
Yet for all the mad hazard of the situation he was elated with life.
He felt as if he had never fully lived until now, when every breath
was informed with the sharp prescience of danger. He was at once
cool and exultant, wary yet reckless, with the joyous recklessness
of utter desperation.
With cat-like care he surveyed the drawing-room; it appeared
deserted but as he watched his tense nerves could see the shadows
forming, taking furtive, crouching shape–and then dissolving
harmlessly into a rug, a chair, or a stirring drapery. His eyes
grown used to the dimness he identified the mantle upon the floor in
which he had come and which he had extended to Aimée in that brief
moment of fatuous triumph, and beyond it, across a chair, was the
portière which the black had torn down from the doorway to wrap
about Ryder’s helpless form as he had carried him down to living
death.
That mantle, he thought, might yet be useful, and he stole forward
and recovered it, but, as he straightened, another shadow darted out
from the boudoir door and silhouetted for an instant against the
lighted, room he saw a figure in a long, swinging military cloak.
Discovery was inevitable and Ryder made a swift plunge to take the
cloaked figure by surprise, but even as one hand shot out and
gripped the throat while the other held his threatening iron aloft,
his clutch relaxed, his arm fell nervelessly at his side.
For from the figure had come the broken gasp of a soft voice, and
the face upturned to his was a pale oval under dark, disordered
hair.
“Aimée!” he breathed in exultant, still half-incredulous joy.
“Aimée!... Did I hurt you–?”
“Oh, no, no!” came Aimée’s shaken voice. “Oh, you are safe!”
He felt her trembling in his clasp and he swept her close to him.
For one breathless instant they clung together, in a sharp,
passionate gladness which blurred every sense of dread or danger.
They were safe–they were together–and for the moment it was
enough. Every obstacle was surmounted, every terror conquered.
They clung, obliviously, like children, her pale face against his
shoulder, her hair brushing his lips, her wild heartbeats throbbing
against his own.
Then the girl, remembering, lifted her head.
“Quick–we must go,” she whispered. “For there I made a fire–”
He fallowed her frightened, backward glance at the boudoir door and
suddenly saw its cracks and key hole strangely radiant with light.
“He left me, to go to those screams,” she was saying rapidly. “I
tried to run that way–and found that woman coming back. And I told
her to wait–in her own room–and I slipped back in there–and
suddenly it came to me to thrust the candle about. I thought I would
run out and if I met any one I would call, ’Fire’, and say the
general was burning and perhaps in the confusion–”
The terrible desperation of her both stirred and wrung him. She was
so little, so helpless, so trembling in his clasp ... so made for
love and tenderness.... And to think of her in such fear and horror
that she went thrusting reckless candles into her hangings, setting
a palace on fire in the blind fury for escape....
To such work had this night brought her.... This night, and three
men–for he and the craven Tewfick and the fanatic bey were all
linked in this night’s work. Yes, and another man–and he thought
swiftly, in a lightning flash of wonder, how little that Paul
Delcassé had known when he set his eager face toward the Old World,
with his wife and baby with him, that he was setting his feet into
such a web ... that his wife would die, languishing in a pasha’s
harem, and his little daughter would one night be flying in mad
terror from the cruel beast the weak pasha had sold her to!
And how little, for that matter, he had known when he had set his
own face toward those same sands what secrets he would discover
there and what forbidden ways his heart would know.
These thoughts all went through him like one thought, in some clear,
remote background of his mind, while he was swiftly drawing on the
military cloak she gave him and wrapping her in the black mantle.
There was a veil on the mantle’s hood that she could fling across
her face when she wished, but Ryder had no fez to complete the
deceptive outline of his masquerade. He must trust to the dark and
to the concealment of the high, military collar of the cloak.
“Do you know a way?” he whispered and at her shaken head, “The water
gate,” he said, thinking swiftly.
There would be a crowd now about the gate, but if they could only
manage to gain those cellars and hide somewhere they could steal out
later upon that waterman.
It seemed the most feasible of all the desperate plans. The roofs
might be a trap. The harem entrance led into a garden and the garden
was guarded by an impassable wall. But if he could only get to the
river he knew that he was a strong enough swimmer to save Aimée, or
he might even terrorize the watchman into furnishing a boat.
She did not question but guided him swiftly through the arch that
led down into the banqueting hall. Twice that day she had gone down
those stairs. Once in her bridal state, her eyes shining, her cheeks
glowing with the wild joy of Ryder’s arrival and dreams of escape,
and again, scarcely an hour gone by, she had descended them, tense
and desperate, her revolver at the general’s head, seeking vainly
Ryder’s rescue.
And now a third time, a guilty, reckless fugitive in the night, she
stole down those stairs into the many-columned hall where she had
been fêted in state among her guests. Here her only knowledge was of
the stone corridor and the locked door through which the bey had led
her, but Ryder knew the way that Aziza had brought him and he turned
cautiously toward those wide, curving stairs.
Keeping Aimée a few steps behind him, he went down the soft carpet
and peered out at the bottom towards the water gate. He saw no bars;
the gate was open and against the pale square of the water were the
black silhouettes of the general and the gateman, both leaning out
at some splashing in the river.
He knew a boy’s reckless impulse to shove them both in. It was an
unholy thought his better judgment rejected–unless driven to
it–yet some prankish element in his roused recklessness would not
have deplored the necessity.
If they looked about–!
But they did not stir as, with Aimée’s cold hand in his, he made the
tiptoed descent and slipped softly about the corner of the steps.
Then, instead of going on down the hall to some hiding place in the
ruins, he took a suddenly revealed, sharper turn into a narrow
passage just beyond the stairs.
It might lead to another gate, some service entrance, perhaps, it
ran so straight and direct between its walls.
Intuitively that excavator’s sense of his defined the direction.
They were going parallel with the river, although a little way back
from the water wall, and in the direction of the men’s part of the
palace, the selamlik.
He recalled the selamlik vaguely as an irregular mass of buildings,
and though the formal entrance was of course through the garden from
the avenue, there was a narrow side street or lane leading back to
the water’s edge between this part of the palace and the nest
building, and very likely there was some entrance on that lane.
Bitterly he blamed himself for his lack of complete inspection that
morning. To be sure he had told himself, then, as he strolled about
the high garden walls and peered down the narrow lane on one side of
the Nile backwaters, that he didn’t need a map of the place for his
arrival at an afternoon reception; he was simply going in and out,
and clothes and speech were his only real concern.
He had even said to himself that he might not reveal himself to
Aimée–if she did not discover him. He wanted merely to see her
again, and be sure that she understood her own history–he had no
notion of attempting any further relations with her, any resumption
of their forbidden and dangerous acquaintance.
And it was true that had been the defiant and protesting surface of
his thoughts, but deep within himself there had always been that
hot, hidden spark, ready to kindle to a flame at her word–and with
it the unowned, secret longing that she would speak the word.
And when she had called on him for help, when the trembling appeal
had sprung past her stricken pride, and he had seen the terror in
her soft, child’s eyes, then the spark had struck its conflagration.
He had become nothing but a hot, headstrong fury of devotion.
And he said to himself now that he might have known it was going to
happen, and that if he had not been so concerned that morning about
saving his face and preserving this fiction of indifference he would
know a little more about the labyrinth they were poking about
in–the little more that tips the scale between safety and
destruction.
But he did not know and blind Chance was his only goddess.
The passage had brought him to a wall and a narrow stairs while
another passage led off to the right, apparently to the forward
regions of the place.
He took the stairs. He had had enough of underground regions when
they did not lead to water gates and the stairs promised novelty at
least.
He wished he knew more about Turkish palaces. He supposed they had a
fairly consistent ground plan, but beyond a few main features of
inner courts and halls he was culpably ignorant of their intentions.
If it were an early Egyptian tomb or temple now! But then, perhaps
the Turks were more indefinite in their building and rebuilding.
At the head of the stairs a door stood half ajar. Through the crack
he strained his eyes, but his anxious glance met only the darkness
of utter night. Not a gleam of light. And not a sound–except the
far, hollow stamping of some stabled horse.
Softly he pushed the door open and he and Aimée slipped within. The
place, whatever it was, appeared deserted, a dark, bare, backstairs
region–for he stumbled over a bucket–from which to the right he
could just discern a hall leading into the forward part of the
palace, wanly lighted some distance on, with the pale flicker of an
old ceiling lamp.
They seemed to be at the end of the hall and the darker shadows in
the walls about them appeared to be a number of doors–closed, so
his groping hands informed him.
Oh, for his excavator’s steady light, or a pocket flash! Oh, for a
light of any kind, even a temporary match! But he dared not risk the
scratch, for now he caught the thud of footfalls overhead, heavy
footfalls, and there might be stairs unexpectedly close at hand.
He turned to Aimée but the girl shook her head helplessly and
hesitant and dashed, for all their young confidence, they wavered a
moment hand in hand in the dark, fearful of what a rash move might
bring upon them. And in the beating stillness Ryder became conscious
that the muffled, monotonous stamping of a horse is a gloomy,
disheartening thing in the night, and that footsteps overhead are of
all noises the most nervous and unsettling.
What was behind those doors? Not a spark of light came from them,
that was one comfort. The rooms, kitchen, service, store rooms or
whatever they were, appeared in the same blackness and oblivion....
But any door might open on a roomful of sleeping gardeners and
grooms....
Life and more than life hung on the blind goddess.
It was only an instant that they hesitated there, yet it appeared an
eternity of indecision, then nearer footsteps sounded, coming down
that hall. No more wavering of the scales!
Ryder turned to the door at his left, at the very end of the wall
beyond which came that far stamping, and wrenched it open, closing
it swiftly behind him. He saw a light now, a mild, yellow ray
through an opened door ahead that vaguely illumined the strange old
vehicles of the palace, and the stables were beyond.
Some one else was beyond, too, in the stables, for that very instant
he saw a black horse backed restively into sight, its tossing head
evading the hands that were trying to bridle it.
“The Fortieth Door!” said Ryder to himself with an involuntary
thrust of humor.
The door of the horse! The door of forbidden daring! He knew now the
vague associations that had stirred in him as he had stared blindly
about that place of doors.... But he had opened so many forbidden
doors of late that this last was welcome as the supreme test.
And nothing in the world could have been more welcome than a
horse–a horse with a way out behind it!
“Stay back,” he said under his breath to Aimée, and clasping his bit
of iron he moved toward the door.
He could see the attendant now, who was finishing his bridling, and
it was Yussuf, the eunuch, so busy gentling and soothing the horse
that he cast only one glance in the direction of the sounds he heard
and that one glance misled him in its glimpse of the general’s
cloak.
“By your favor–but an instant,” he called out, “and he is ready–”
“Stand aside,” said Ryder very clearly, emerging from the shadows at
the horse’s heels. “Out of the way with you. The horse is for me.”
A moment Yussuf gaped. Then he dropped the bridle and his hand went
swiftly to the knife hilt in his belt.
“Fool!” said Ryder contemptuously. “Would you tempt fate? Do you
think I am such that your knife could harm me? Must I prove to you
again that walls are nothings–that I but let myself be taken to
prove my powers?”
Ethiopians are superstitious. And Yussuf knew that his brick and
mortar had been strong.... Yet they have great trust in a crooked,
short-bladed knife, and Yussuf did not relax his hold upon his and
for all that Ryder could See there was no hesitation in the grinning
ferocity of his black face.
Yet his spring was an instant delayed and in that instant Ryder
spoke again.
“Look, now at the wall behind you,” he said quickly.
Yussuf looked. And as he turned his bullet head Ryder jumped close
and brought his iron down upon it with a sickening force he thought
scarcely short of murder.
To his amazement the black did not fall, but staggered only, and
Ryder had need to send the knife spinning from his grasp and strike
again before the eunuch’s knees sagged and his huge bulk sank at
Ryder’s feet.
This time Ryder took no chance with a shammed unconsciousness. He
snatched down bits of leather from the wall and bound the man’s
hands and feet in tight security and seeing that he was breathing,
although heavily, he thrust a gagging handkerchief into his mouth.
Then he dragged the heavy body towards a pile of hay he saw
in a vacant stall and concealed it effectively but not too
smotheringly–although Yussuf, he felt, would be no grievous loss
to society.
Vaguely in the back of his consciousness he had been aware of the
excited plunge of the horse and then of a low, soothing murmur of
speech, and now he turned to find Aimée holding the bridle and
stroking the quivering creature with gentle, fearless hands.
“Is he dead?” she asked quietly of the eunuch.
“Stunned,” said Ryder, meaning reassurement and was startled by the
passion of her cry, “Oh, I could kill them all–all!”
“I will–if they try to stop us,” he promised grimly, forgetful of
that oath to Aziza.
Hastily he glanced about the stalls. There was no other horse there,
only a pair of mild-eyed donkeys, and though there might conceivably
be other horses behind other doors there was no instant to spare in
search.
This luck was too prodigious to risk.
The door to the street had already been unbolted and now he threw
it back with a quick look into the dark emptiness of the narrow side
street, and then, with a tight hold of the reins, he swung himself
into the saddle and Aimée up into his arms, her head on his
shoulder, her arms clasping him.
It was a huge Bedouin saddle with high-arched back and curved pummel
and the slender pair no more than filled it, making apparently no
weight at all for the spirited beast which tore out of the stalls at
the charging gallop beloved of Eastern horsemen.
For a moment Ryder felt wildly that he might meet the fate of the
rash youth in his patron story. He had never ridden a horse like
this, which, like all high-mettled Arabs, resented the authority of
any but his master, and though a good horseman Ryder had all he
could do to keep his seat and Aimée in his arms.
Around the corner of the lane the horse went racing, and down the
dark, lebbek-lined avenue his flying feet struck back their sparks
of fire. Across an open square he plunged, while irate camels
screamed at him and a harsh voice shouted back loud curses. It
seemed to Ryder that other voices joined in–that there was a
pursuit, an outcry–and then they were out down an open road, wildly
galloping, like a mad highwayman under a pale morning sky.
Continue...

This eBook of The Fortieth Door (1920, dedicated to Arthur Mills Corwin) by Mary Hastings Bradley belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Fortieth DoorBy Mary Hastings BradleyAt Amazon
