
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





The perfection of Diction is for it to be at once clear and not mean.
The clearest indeed is that made up of the ordinary words for things,
but it is mean, as is shown by the poetry of Cleophon and Sthenelus.
On the other hand the Diction becomes distinguished and non-prosaic by
the use of unfamiliar terms, i.e. strange words, metaphors,
lengthened forms, and everything that deviates from the ordinary modes
of speech.—But a whole statement in such terms will be either a
riddle or a barbarism, a riddle, if made up of metaphors, a barbarism,
if made up of strange words. The very nature indeed of a riddle is
this, to describe a fact in an impossible combination of words (which
cannot be done with the real names for things, but can be with their
metaphorical substitutes); e.g. ’I saw a man glue brass on another
with fire’, and the like. The corresponding use of strange words
results in a barbarism.—A certain admixture, accordingly, of
unfamiliar terms is necessary. These, the strange word, the metaphor,
the ornamental equivalent, etc.. will save the language from seeming
mean and prosaic, while the ordinary words in it will secure the
requisite clearness. What helps most, however, to render the Diction
at once clear and non-prosaic is the use of the lengthened, curtailed,
and altered forms of words. Their deviation from the ordinary words
will, by making the language unlike that in general use.g.ve it a
non-prosaic appearance; and their having much in common with the words
in general use will give it the quality of clearness. It is not right,
then, to condemn these modes of speech, and ridicule the poet for
using them, as some have done; e.g. the elder Euclid, who said it was
easy to make poetry if one were to be allowed to lengthen the words in
the statement itself as much as one likes—a procedure he caricatured
by reading ’Epixarhon eidon Marathonade Badi—gonta, and ouk han g’
eramenos ton ekeinou helle boron as verses. A too apparent use of
these licences has certainly a ludicrous effect, but they are not
alone in that; the rule of moderation applies to all the constituents
of the poetic vocabulary; even with metaphors, strange words, and the
rest, the effect will be the same, if one uses them improperly and
with a view to provoking laughter. The proper use of them is a very
different thing. To realize the difference one should take an epic
verse and see how it reads when the normal words are introduced. The
same should be done too with the strange word, the metaphor, and the
rest; for one has only to put the ordinary words in their place to see
the truth of what we are saying. The same iambic, for instance, is
found in Aeschylus and Euripides, and as it stands in the former it is
a poor line; whereas Euripides, by the change of a single word, the
substitution of a strange for what is by usage the ordinary word, has
made it seem a fine one. Aeschylus having said in his Philoctetes:
 phagedaina he mon sarkas hesthiei podos
Euripides has merely altered the hesthiei here into thoinatai. Or
suppose
 nun de m’ heon holigos te kai outidanos kai haeikos
to be altered by the substitution of the ordinary words into
 nun de m’ heon mikros te kai hasthenikos kai haeidos
Or the line
 diphron haeikelion katatheis olingen te trapexan
into
 diphron moxtheron katatheis mikran te trapexan
Or heiones boosin into heiones kraxousin. Add to this that Ariphrades
used to ridicule the tragedians for introducing expressions unknown in
the language of common life, doeaton hapo (for apo domaton),
sethen, hego de nin, Achilleos peri (for peri Achilleos), and
the like. The mere fact of their not being in ordinary speech gives
the Diction a non-prosaic character; but Ariphrades was unaware of
that. It is a great thing, indeed, to make a proper use of these
poetical forms, as also of compounds and strange words. But the
greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor. It is the one
thing that cannot be learnt from others; and it is also a sign of
genius, since a good metaphor implies an intuitive perception of the
similarity in dissimilars.
Of the kinds of words we have enumerated it may be observed that
compounds are most in place in the dithyramb, strange words in heroic,
and metaphors in iambic poetry. Heroic poetry, indeed, may avail
itself of them all. But in iambic verse, which models itself as far as
possible on the spoken language, only those kinds of words are in
place which are allowable also in an oration, i.e. the ordinary word,
the metaphor, and the ornamental equivalent.
Let this, then, suffice as an account of Tragedy, the art imitating by
means of action on the stage.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
