


“Why do I not write to you?” You lay claim to learning, and ask
such a question. You should have guessed that I am well — that
is to say — in a word, I have made an acquaintance who has won
my heart: I have — I know not.
To give you a regular account of the manner in which I have become
acquainted with the most amiable of women would be a difficult task.
I am a happy and contented mortal, but a poor historian.
An angel! Nonsense! Everybody so describes his mistress; and yet
I find it impossible to tell you how perfect she is, or why she is
so perfect: suffice it to say she has captivated all my senses.
So much simplicity with so much understauding — so mild, and yet
so resolute — a mind so placid, and a life so active.
But all this is ugly balderdash, which expresses not a single
character nor feature. Some other time — but no, not some other
time, now, this very instant, will I tell you all about it. Now
or never. Well, between ourselves, since I commenced my letter,
I have been three times on the point of throwing down my pen, of
ordering my horse, and riding out. And yet I vowed this morning
that I would not ride to-day, and yet every moment I am rushing
to the window to see how high the sun is.
I could not restrain myself — go to her I must. I have just
returned, Wilhelm; and whilst I am taking supper I will write to
you. What a delight it was for my soul to see her in the midst
of her dear, beautiful children, — eight brothers and sisters!
But, if I proceed thus, you will be no wiser at the end of my
letter than you were at the beginning. Attend, then, and I will
compel myself to give you the details.
I mentioned to you the other day that I had become acquainted with
S—, the district judge, and that he had invited me to go and visit
him in his retirement, or rather in his little kingdom. But I
neglected going, and perhaps should never have gone, if chance had
not discovered to me the treasure which lay concealed in that
retired spot. Some of our young people had proposed giving a ball
in the country, at which I consented to be present. I offered my
hand for the evening to a pretty and agreeable, but rather commonplace,
sort of girl from the immediate neighbourhood; and it was agreed
that I should engage a carriage, and call upon Charlotte, with my
partner and her aunt, to convey them to the ball. My companion
informed me, as we drove along through the park to the hunting-lodge,
that I should make the acquaintance of a very charming young lady.
“Take care,” added the aunt, “that you do not lose your heart."
“Why?” said I. “Because she is already engaged to a very worthy
man,” she replied, “who is gone to settle his affairs upon the
death of his father, and will succeed to a very considerable
inheritance.” This information possessed no interest for me.
When we arrived at the gate, the sun was setting behind the tops
of the mountains. The atmosphere was heavy; and the ladies expressed
their fears of an approaching storm, as masses of low black clouds
were gathering in the horizon. I relieved their anxieties by
pretending to be weather-wise, although I myself had some
apprehensions lest our pleasure should be interrupted.
I alighted; and a maid came to the door, and requested us to wait
a moment for her mistress. I walked across the court to a well-built
house, and, ascending the flight of steps in front, opened the door,
and saw before me the most charming spectacle I had ever witnessed.
Six children, from eleven to two years old, were running about the
hall, and surrounding a lady of middle height, with a lovely figure,
dressed in a robe of simple white, trimmed with pink ribbons. She
was holding a rye loaf in her hand, and was cutting slices for the
little ones all around, in proportion to their age and appetite.
She performed her task in a graceful and affectionate manner; each
claimant awaiting his turn with outstretched hands, and boisterously
shouting his thanks. Some of them ran away at once, to enjoy their
evening meal; whilst others, of a gentler disposition, retired to
the courtyard to see the strangers, and to survey the carriage in
which their Charlotte was to drive away. “Pray forgive me for
giving you the trouble to come for me, and for keeping the ladies
waiting: but dressing, and arranging some household duties before
I leave, had made me forget my children’s supper; and they do not
like to take it from any one but me.” I uttered some indifferent
compliment: but my whole soul was absorbed by her air, her voice,
her manner; and I had scarcely recovered myself when she ran into
her room to fetch her gloves and fan. The young ones threw inquiring
glances at me from a distance; whilst I approached the youngest,
a most delicious little creature. He drew back; and Charlotte,
entering at the very moment, said, “Louis, shake hands with your
cousin.” The little fellow obeyed willingly; and I could not
resist giving him a hearty kiss, notwithstanding his rather dirty
face. “Cousin,” said I to Charlotte, as I handed her down, “do
you think I deserve the happiness of being related to you?” She
replied, with a ready smile, “Oh! I have such a number of cousins,
that I should be sorry if you were the most undeserving of them."
In taking leave, she desired her next sister, Sophy, a girl about
eleven years old, to take great care of the children, and to say
good-bye to papa for her when he came home from his ride. She
enjoined to the little ones to obey their sister Sophy as they
would herself, upon which some promised that they would; but a
little fair-haired girl, about six years old, looked discontented,
and said, “But Sophy is not you, Charlotte; and we like you best."
The two eldest boys had clambered up the carriage; and, at my
request, she permitted them to accompany us a little way through
the forest, upon their promising to sit very still, and hold fast.
We were hardly seated, and the ladies had scarcely exchanged
compliments, making the usual remarks upon each other’s dress, and
upon the company they expected to meet, when Charlotte stopped the
carriage, and made her brothers get down. They insisted upon
kissing her hands once more; which the eldest did with all the
tenderness of a youth of fifteen, but the other in a lighter and
more careless manner. She desired them again to give her love to
the children, and we drove off.
The aunt inquired of Charlotte whether she had finished the book
she had last sent her. “No,” said Charlotte; “I did not like it:
you can have it again. And the one before was not much better."
I was surprised, upon asking the title, to hear that it was ____.
(We feel obliged to suppress the passage in the letter, to prevent
any one from feeling aggrieved; although no author need pay much
attention to the opinion of a mere girl, or that of an unsteady
young man.)
I found penetration and character in everything she said: every
expression seemed to brighten her features with new charms, —with
new rays of genius, — which unfolded by degrees, as she felt
herself understood.
“When I was younger,” she observed, “I loved nothing so much as
romances. Nothing could equal my delight when, on some holiday,
I could settle down quietly in a corner, and enter with my whole
heart and soul into the joys or sorrows of some fictitious Leonora.
I do not deny that they even possess some charms for me yet. But
I read so seldom, that I prefer books suited exactly to my taste.
And I like those authors best whose scenes describe my own situation
in life, — and the friends who are about me, whose stories touch
me with interest, from resembling my own homely existence, — which,
without being absolutely paradise, is, on the whole, a source of
indescribable happiness.”
I endeavoured to conceal the emotion which these words occasioned,
but it was of slight avail; for, when she had expressed so truly
her opinion of “The Vicar of Wakefield,” and of other works, the
names of which I omit (Though the names are omitted, yet the authors
mentioned deserve Charlotte’s approbation, and will feel it in
their hearts when they read this passage. It concerns no other
person.), I could no longer contain myself, but gave full utterance
to what I thought of it: and it was not until Charlotte had addressed
herself to the two other ladies, that I remembered their presence,
and observed them sitting mute with astonishment. The aunt looked
at me several times with an air of raillery, which, however, I did
not at all mind.
We talked of the pleasures of dancing. “If it is a fault to love
it,” said Charlotte, “I am ready to confess that I prize it above
all other amusements. If anything disturbs me, I go to the piano,
play an air to which I have danced, and all goes right again
directly.”
You, who know me, can fancy how steadfastly I gazed upon her rich
dark eyes during these remarks, how my very soul gloated over her
warm lips and fresh, glowing cheeks, how I became quite lost in
the delightful meaning of her words, so much so, that I scarcely
heard the actual expressions. In short, I alighted from the
carriage like a person in a dream, and was so lost to the dim
world around me, that I scarcely heard the music which resounded
from the illuminated ballroom.
The two Messrs. Andran and a certain N. N. (I cannot trouble myself
with the names), who were the aunt’s and Charlotte’s partners,
received us at the carriage-door, and took possession of their
ladies, whilst I followed with mine.
We commenced with a minuet. I led out one lady after another,
and precisely those who were the most disagreeable could not bring
themselves to leave off. Charlotte and her partner began an English
country dance, and you must imagine my delight when it was their
turn to dance the figure with us. You should see Charlotte dance.
She dances with her whole heart and soul: her figure is all harmony,
elegance, and grace, as if she were conscious of nothing else, and
had no other thought or feeling; and, doubtless, for the moment,
every other sensation is extinct.
She was engaged for the second country dance, but promised me the
third, and assured me, with the most agreeable freedom, that she
was very fond of waltzing. “It is the custom here,” she said,
“for the previous partners to waltz together; but my partner is
an indifferent waltzer, and will feel delighted if I save him the
trouble. Your partner is not allowed to waltz, and, indeed, is
equally incapable: but I observed during the country dance that
you waltz well; so, if you will waltz with me, I beg you would
propose it to my partner, and I will propose it to yours.” We
agreed, and it was arranged that our partners should mutually
entertain each other.
We set off, and, at first, delighted ourselves with the usual
graceful motions of the arms. With what grace, with what ease,
she moved! When the waltz commenced, and the dancers whirled
around each other in the giddy maze, there was some confusion,
owing to the incapacity of some of the dancers. We judiciously
remained still, allowing the others to weary themselves; and, when
the awkward dancers had withdrawn, we joined in, and kept it up
famously together with one other couple, — Andran and his partner.
Never did I dance more lightly. I felt myself more than mortal,
holding this loveliest of creatures in my arms, flying, with her
as rapidly as the wind, till I lost sight of every other object;
and O Wilhelm, I vowed at that moment, that a maiden whom I loved,
or for whom I felt the slightest attachment, never, never should
waltz with any one else but with me, if I went to perdition for it!
— you will understand this.
We took a few turns in the room to recover our breath. Charlotte
sat down, and felt refreshed by partaking of some oranges which I
had had secured, — the only ones that had been left; but at every
slice which, from politeness, she offered to her neighbours, I felt
as though a dagger went through my heart.
We were the second couple in the third country dance. As we were
going down (and Heaven knows with what ecstasy I gazed at her arms
and eyes, beaming with the sweetest feeling of pure and genuine
enjoyment), we passed a lady whom I had noticed for her charming
expression of countenance; although she was no longer young. She
looked at Charlotte with a smile, then, holding up her finger in
a threatening attitude, repeated twice in a very significant tone
of voice the name of “Albert.”
“Who is Albert,” said I to Charlotte, “if it is not impertinent
to ask?” She was about to answer, when we were obliged to separate,
in order to execute a figure in the dance; and, as we crossed over
again in front of each other, I perceived she looked somewhat
pensive. “Why need I conceal it from you?” she said, as she gave
me her hand for the promenade. “Albert is a worthy man, to whom
I am engaged.” Now, there was nothing new to me in this (for the
girls had told me of it on the way); but it was so far new that
I had not thought of it in connection with her whom, in so short
a time, I had learned to prize so highly. Enough, I became confused,
got out in the figure, and occasioned general confusion; so that
it required all Charlotte’s presence of mind to set me right by
pulling and pushing me into my proper place.
The dance was not yet finished when the lightning which had for
some time been seen in the horizon, and which I had asserted to
proceed entirely from heat, grew more violent; and the thunder was
heard above the music. When any distress or terror surprises us
in the midst of our amusements, it naturally makes a deeper impression
than at other times, either because the contrast makes us more
keenly susceptible, or rather perhaps because our senses are then
more open to impressions, and the shock is consequently stronger.
To this cause I must ascribe the fright and shrieks of the ladies.
One sagaciously sat down in a corner with her back to the window,
and held her fingers to her ears; a second knelt down before her,
and hid her face in her lap; a third threw herself between them,
and embraced her sister with a thousand tears; some insisted on
going home; others, unconscious of their actions, wanted sufficient
presence of mind to repress the impertinence of their young partners,
who sought to direct to themselves those sighs which the lips of
our agitated beauties intended for heaven. Some of the gentlemen
had gone down-stairs to smoke a quiet cigar, and the rest of the
company gladly embraced a happy suggestion of the hostess to retire
into another room which was provided with shutters and curtains.
We had hardly got there, when Charlotte placed the chairs in a
circle; and, when the company had sat down in compliance with her
request, she forthwith proposed a round game.
I noticed some of the company prepare their mouths and draw
themselves up at the prospect of some agreeable forfeit. “Let us
play at counting,” said Charlotte. “Now, pay attention: I shall
go round the circle from right to left; and each person is to count,
one after the other, the number that comes to him, and must count
fast; whoever stops or mistakes is to have a box on the ear, and
so on, till we have counted a thousand.” It was delightful to see
the fun. She went round the circle with upraised arm. “One,"
said the first; “two,” the second; “three,” the third; and so on,
till Charlotte went faster and faster. One made a mistake, instantly
a box on the ear; and, amid the laughter that ensued, came another
box; and so on, faster and faster. I myself came in for two. I
fancied they were harder than the rest, and felt quite delighted.
A general laughter and confusion put an end to the game long before
we had counted as far as a thousand. The party broke up into
little separate knots: the storm had ceased, and I followed Charlotte
into the ballroom. On the way she said, “The game banished their
fears of the storm.” I could make no reply. “I myself,” she
continued, “was as much frightened as any of them; but by affecting
courage, to keep up the spirits of the others, I forgot my
apprehensions.” We went to the window. It was still thundering
at a distance: a soft rain was pouring down over the country,
and filled the air around us with delicious odours. Charlotte
leaned forward on her arm; her eyes wandered over the scene; she
raised them to the sky, and then turned them upon me; they were
moistened with tears; she placed her hand on mine and said,
“Klopstock!” at once I remembered the magnificent ode which was
in her thoughts: I felt oppressed with the weight of my sensations,
and sank under them. It was more than I could bear. I bent over
her hand, kissed it in a stream of delicious tears, and again
looked up to her eyes. Divine Klopstock! why didst thou not see
thy apotheosis in those eyes? And thy name so often profaned,
would that I never heard it repeated!
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
