


I am grateful to your love, Wilhelm, for having repeated your
advice so seasonably. Yes, you are right: it is undoubtedly
better that I should depart. But I do not entirely approve your
scheme of returning at once to your neighbourhood; at least, I
should Iike to make a little excursion on the way, particularly
as we may now expect a continued frost, and consequently good
roads. I am much pleased with your intention of coming to fetch
me; only delay your journey for a fortnight, and wait for another
letter from me. One should gather nothing before it is ripe, and
a fortnight sooner or later makes a great difference. Entreat my
mother to pray for her son, and tell her I beg her pardon for all
the unhappiness I have occasioned her. It has ever been my fate
to give pain to those whose happiness I should have promoted.
Adieu, my dearest friend. May every blessing of Heaven attend
you! Farewell.
We find it difficult to express the emotions with which Charlotte’s
soul was agitated during the whole of this time, whether in relation
to her husband or to her unfortunate friend; although we are enabled,
by our knowledge of her character, to understand their nature.
It is certain that she had formed a determination, by every means
in her power to keep Werther at a distance; and, if she hesitated
in her decision, it was from a sincere feeling of friendly pity,
knowing how much it would cost him, indeed, that he would find it
almost impossible to comply with her wishes. But various causes
now urged her to be firm. Her hushand preserved a strict silence
about the whole matter; and she never made it a subject of
conversation, feeling bound to prove to him by her conduct that
her sentiments agreed with his.
The same day, which was the Sunday before Christmas, after Werther
had written the last-mentioned letter to his friend, he came in
the evening to Charlotte’s house, and found her alone. She was
busy preparing some little gifts for her brothers and sisters,
which were to be distributed to them on Christmas Day. He began
talking of the delight of the children, and of that age when the
sudden appearance of the Christmas-tree, decorated with fruit and
sweetmeats, and lighted up with wax candles, causes such transports
of joy. “You shall have a gift too, if you behave well,” said
Charlotte, hiding her embarrassment under sweet smile. “And what
do you call behaving well? What should I do, what can I do, my
dear Charlotte?” said he. “Thursday night,” she answered, “is
Christmas Eve. The children are all to be here, and my father too:
there is a present for each; do you come likewise, but do not come
before that time.” Werther started. “I desire you will not: it must
be so,” she continued. “I ask it of you as a favour, for my own
peace and tranquillity. We cannot go on in this manner any longer."
He turned away his face walked hastily up and down the room, muttering
indistinctly, “We cannot go on in this manner any longer!” Charlotte,
seeing the violent agitation into which these words had thrown him,
endeavoured to divert his thoughts by different questions, but in vain.
“No, Charlotte!” he exclaimed; “I will never see you any more!"
“And why so?” she answered. “We may — we must see each other
again; only let it be with more discretion. Oh! why were you born
with that excessive, that ungovernable passion for everything that
is dear to you?” Then, taking his hand, she said, “I entreat of
you to be more calm: your talents, your understanding, your genius,
will furnish you with a thousand resources. Be a man, and conquer
an unhappy attachment toward a creature who can do nothing but pity
you.” He bit his lips, and looked at her with a gloomy countenance.
She continued to hold his hand. “Grant me but a moment’s patience,
Werther,” she said. “Do you not see that you are deceiving yourself,
that you are seeking your own destruction? Why must you love me,
me only, who belong to another? I fear, I much fear, that it is
only the impossibility of possessing me which makes your desire for
me so strong.” He drew back his hand, whilst he surveyed her with
a wild and angry look. “’Tis well!” he exclaimed, “’tis very well!
Did not Albert furnish you with this reflection? It is profound,
a very profound remark.” “A reflection that any one might easily
make,” she answered; “and is there not a woman in the whole world
who is at liberty, and has the power to make you happy? Conquer
yourself: look for such a being, and believe me when I say that you
will certainly find her. I have long felt for you, and for us all:
you have confined yourself too long within the limits of too narrow
a circle. Conquer yourself; make an effort: a short journey will
be of service to you. Seek and find an object worthy of your love;
then return hither, and let us enjoy together all the happiness of
the most perfect friendship.”
“This speech,” replied Werther with a cold smile, “this speech
should be printed, for the benefit of all teachers. My dear
Charlotte, allow me but a short time longer, and all will be well."
“But however, Werther,” she added, “do not come again before
Christmas.” He was about to make some answer, when Albert came in.
They saluted each other coldly, and with mutual embarrassment paced
up and down the room. Werther made some common remarks; Albert
did the same, and their conversation soon dropped. Albert asked
his wife about some household matters; and, finding that his
commissions were not executed, he used some expressions which, to
Werther’s ear, savoured of extreme harshness. He wished to go,
but had not power to move; and in this situation he remained till
eight o’clock, his uneasiness and discontent continually increasing.
At length the cloth was laid for supper, and he took up his hat
and stick. Albert invited him to remain; but Werther, fancying
that he was merely paying a formal compliment, thanked him coldly,
amd left the house.
Werther returned home, took the candle from his servant, and retired
to his room alone. He talked for some time with great earnestness
to himself, wept aloud, walked in a state of great excitement
through his chamber; till at length, without undressing, he threw
himself on the bed, where he was found by his servant at eleven
o’clock, when the latter ventured to enter the room, and take off
his boots. Werther did not prevent him, but forbade him to come in
the morning till he should ring.
On Monday morning, the 21st of December, he wrote to Charlotte the
following letter, which was found, sealed, on his bureau after his
death, and was given to her. I shall insert it in fragments; as
it appears, from several circumstances, to have been written in
that manner.
“It is all over, Charlotte: I am resolved to die! I make this
declaration deliberately and coolly, without any romantic passion,
on this morning of the day when I am to see you for the last time.
At the moment you read these lines, O best of women, the cold grave
will hold the inanimate remains of that restless and unhappy being
who, in the last moments of his existence, knew no pleasure so
great as that of conversing with you! I have passed a dreadful
night or rather, let me say, a propitious one; for it has given
me resolution, it has fixed my purpose. I am resolved to die.
When I tore myself from you yesterday, my senses were in tumult
and disorder; my heart was oppressed, hope and pleasure had fled
from me for ever, and a petrifying cold had seized my wretched
being. I could scarcely reach my room. I threw myself on my knees;
and Heaven, for the last time, granted me the consolation of
shedding tears. A thousand ideas, a thousand schemes, arose within
my soul; till at length one last, fixed, final thought took
possession of my heart. It was to die. I lay down to rest; and
in the morning, in the quiet hour of awakening, the same determination
was upon me. To die! It is not despair: it is conviction that I
have filled up the measure of my sufferings, that I have reached
my appointed term, and must sacrifice myself for thee. Yes,
Charlotte, why should I not avow it? One of us three must die:
it shall be Werther. O beloved Charlotte! this heart, excited by
rage and fury, has often conceived the horrid idea of murdering
your husband — you — myself! The lot is cast at length. And
in the bright, quiet evenings of summer, when you sometimes wander
toward the mountains, let your thoughts then turn to me: recollect
how often you have watched me coming to meet you from the valley;
then bend your eyes upon the churchyard which contains my grave,
and, by the light of the setting sun, mark how the evening breeze
waves the tall grass which grows above my tomb. I was calm when
I began this letter, but the recollection of these scenes makes
me weep like a child.”
About ten in the morning, Werther called his servant, and, whilst
he was dressing, told him that in a few days he intended to set
out upon a journey, and bade him therefore lay his clothes in
order, and prepare them for packing up, call in all his accounts,
fetch home the books he had lent, and give two months’ pay to the
poor dependants who were accustomed to receive from him a weekly
allowance.
He breakfasted in his room, and then mounted his horse, and went
to visit the steward, who, however, was not at home. He walked
pensively in the garden, and seemed anxious to renew all the ideas
that were most painful to him.
The children did not suffer him to remain alone long. They followed
him, skipping and dancing before him, and told him, that after
to-morrow and tomorrow and one day more, they were to receive their
Christmas gift from Charlotte; and they then recounted all the
wonders of which they had formed ideas in their child imaginations.
“Tomorrow and tomorrow,” said he, “and one day more!” And he
kissed them tenderly. He was going; but the younger boy stopped
him, to whisper something in his ear. He told him that his elder
brothers had written splendid New-Year’s wishes so large! one for
papa, and another for Albert and Charlotte, and one for Werther;
and they were to be presented early in the morning, on New Year’s
Day. This quite overcame him. He made each of the children a
present, mounted his horse, left his compliments for papa and
mamma, and, with tears in his eyes, rode away from the place.
He returned home about five o’clock, ordered his servant to keep
up his fire, desired him to pack his books and linen at the bottom
of the trunk, and to place his coats at the top. He then appears
to have made the following addition to the letter addressed to
Charlotte:
“You do not expect me. You think I will obey you, and not visit
you again till Christmas Eve. O Charlotte, today or never! On
Christmas Eve you will hold this paper in your hand; you will
tremble, and moisten it with your tears. I will — I must! Oh, how
happy I feel to be determined!”
In the meantime, Charlotte was in a pitiable state of mind. After
her last conversation with Werther, she found how painful to herself
it would be to decline his visits, and knew how severely he would
suffer from their separation.
She had, in conversation with Albert, mentioned casually that Werther
would not return before Christmas Eve; and soon afterward Albert
went on horseback to see a person in the neighbourhood, with whom
he had to transact some business which would detain him all night.
Charlotte was sitting alone. None of her family were near, and
she gave herself up to the reflections that silently took possession
of her mind. She was for ever united to a husband whose love and
fidelity she had proved, to whom she was heartily devoted, and who
seemed to be a special gift from Heaven to ensure her happiness.
On the other hand, Werther had become dear to her. There was a
cordial unanimity of sentiment between them from the very first
hour of their acquaintance, and their long association and repeated
interviews had made an indelible impression upon her heart. She
had been accustomed to communicate to him every thought and feeling
which interested her, and his absence threatened to open a void
in her existence which it might be impossible to fill. How heartily
she wished that she might change him into her brother, — that she
could induce him to marry one of her own friends, or could reestablish
his intimacy with Albert.
She passed all her intimate friends in review before her mind, but
found something objectionable in each, and could decide upon none
to whom she would consent to give him.
Amid all these considerations she felt deeply but indistinctly
that her own real but unexpressed wish was to retain him for herself,
and her pure and amiable heart felt from this thought a sense of
oppression which seemed to forbid a prospect of happiness. She
was wretched: a dark cloud obscured her mental vision.
It was now half-past six o’clock, and she heard Werther’s step on
the stairs. She at once recognised his voice, as he inquired if
she were at home. Her heart beat audibly — we could almost say
for the first time — at his arrival. It was too late to deny
herself; and, as he entered, she exclaimed, with a sort of ill
concealed confusion, “You have not kept your word!” “I promised
nothing,” he answered. “But you should have complied, at least
for my sake,” she continued. “ I implore you, for both our sakes.”
She scarcely knew what she said or did; and sent for some friends,
who, by their presence, might prevent her being left alone with
Werther. He put down some books he had brought with him, then
made inquiries about some others, until she began to hope that her
friends might arrive shortly, entertaining at the same time a
desire that they might stay away.
At one moment she felt anxious that the servant should remain in
the adjoining room, then she changed her mind. Werther, meanwhile,
walked impatiently up and down. She went to the piano, and
determined not to retire. She then collected her thoughts, and
sat down quietly at Werther’s side, who had taken his usual place
on the sofa.
“Have you brought nothing to read?” she inquired. He had nothing.
“There in my drawer,” she continued, “you will find your own
translation of some of the songs of Ossian. I have not yet read
them, as I have still hoped to hear you recite them; but, for some
time past, I have not been able to accomplish such a wish.” He
smiled, and went for the manuscript, which he took with a shudder.
He sat down; and, with eyes full of tears, he began to read.
“Star of descending night! fair is thy light in the west! thou
liftest thy unshorn head from thy cloud; thy steps are stately on
thy hill. What dost thou behold in the plain? The stormy winds
are laid. The murmur of the torrent comes from afar. Roaring
waves climb the distant rock. The flies of evening are on their
feeble wings: the hum of their course is on the field. What dost
thou behold, fair light? But thou dost smile and depart. The
waves come with joy around thee: they bathe thy lovely hair.
Farewell, thou silent beam! Let the light of Ossian’s soul arise!
“And it does arise in its strength! I behold my departed friends.
Their gathering is on Lora, as in the days of other years. Fingal
comes like a watery column of mist! his heroes are around: and
see the bards of song, gray-haired Ullin! stately Ryno! Alpin with
the tuneful voice: the soft complaint of Minona! How are ye changed,
my friends, since the days of Selma’s feast! when we contended,
like gales of spring as they fly along the hill, and bend by turns
the feebly whistling grass.
“Minona came forth in her beauty, with downcast look and tearful
eye. Her hair was flying slowly with the blast that rushed
unfrequent from the hill. The souls of the heroes were sad when
she raised the tuneful voice. Oft had they seen the grave of
Salgar, the dark dwelling of white-bosomed Colma. Colma left alone
on the hill with all her voice of song! Salgar promised to come!
but the night descended around. Hear the voice of Colma, when she
sat alone on the hill!
“Colma. It is night: I am alone, forlorn on the hill of storms.
The wind is heard on the mountain. The torrent is howling down
the rock. No hut receives me from the rain: forlorn on the hill
of winds!
“Rise moon! from behind thy clouds. Stars of the night, arise!
Lead me, some light, to the place where my love rests from the
chase alone! His bow near him unstrung, his dogs panting around
him! But here I must sit alone by the rock of the mossy stream.
The stream and the wind roar aloud. I hear not the voice of my
love! Why delays my Salgar; why the chief of the hill his promise?
Here is the rock and here the tree! here is the roaring stream!
Thou didst promise with night to be here. Ah! whither is my Salgar
gone? With thee I would fly from my father, with thee from my
brother of pride. Our race have long been foes: we are not foes,
O Salgar!
“Cease a little while, O wind! stream, be thou silent awhile! let
my voice be heard around! let my wanderer hear me! Salgar! it is
Colma who calls. Here is the tree and the rock. Salgar, my love,
I am here! Why delayest thou thy coming? Lo! the calm moon comes
forth. The flood is bright in the vale. The rocks are gray on
the steep. I see him not on the brow. His dogs come not before
him with tidings of his near approach. Here I must sit alone!
“Who lie on the heath beside me? Are they my love and my brother?
Speak to me, O my friends! To Colma they give no reply. Speak
to me: I am alone! My soul is tormented with fears. Ah, they are
dead! Their swords are red from the fight. O my brother! my
brother! why hast thou slain my Salgar! Why, O Salgar, hast thou
slain my brother! Dear were ye both to me! what shall I say in
your praise? Thou wert fair on the hill among thousands! he was
terrible in fight! Speak to me! hear my voice! hear me, sons of
my love! They are silent! silent for ever! Cold, cold, are their
breasts of clay! Oh, from the rock on the hill, from the top of
the windy steep, speak, ye ghosts of the dead! Speak, I will not
be afraid! Whither are ye gone to rest? In what cave of the hill
shall I find the departed? No feeble voice is on the gale: no
answer half drowned in the storm!
“I sit in my grief: I wait for morning in my tears! Rear the tomb,
ye friends of the dead. Close it not till Colma come. My life
flies away like a dream. Why should I stay behind? Here shall I
rest with my friends, by the stream of the sounding rock. When
night comes on the hill when the loud winds arise my ghost shall
stand in the blast, and mourn the death of my friends. The hunter
shall hear from his booth; he shall fear, but love my voice! For
sweet shall my voice be for my friends: pleasant were her friends 
to Colma.
“Such was thy song, Minona, softly blushing daughter of Torman.
Our tears descended for Colma, and our souls were sad! Ullin came
with his harp; he gave the song of Alpin. The voice of Alpin was
pleasant, the soul of Ryno was a beam of fire! But they had rested
in the narrow house: their voice had ceased in Selma! Ullin had
returned one day from the chase before the heroes fell. He heard
their strife on the hill: their song was soft, but sad! They
mourned the fall of Morar, first of mortal men! His soul was like
the soul of Fingal: his sword like the sword of Oscar. But he
fell, and his father mourned: his sister’s eyes were full of tears.
Minona’s eyes were full of tears, the sister of car-borne Morar.
She retired from the song of Ullin, like the moon in the west,
when she foresees the shower, and hides her fair head in a cloud.
I touched the harp with Ullin: the song of morning rose!
Continue...

This complete text of “The Sorrows of Young Werther” (the German
“Die Leiden des jungen Werther”) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (translated by R.D. Boylan - Edited by Nathen Haskell Dole), as well as the paintings by Caspar David Friedrich, are in the public domain.


Over at Amazon.com, you can get the book
Sorrows of Young Werther and Selected Writings.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
