
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





As regards Problems and their Solutions, one may see the number and
nature of the assumptions on which they proceed by viewing the matter
in the following way. (1) The poet being an imitator just like the
painter or other maker of likenesses, he must necessarily in all
instances represent things in one or other of three aspects, either as
they were or are, or as they are said or thought to be or to have
been, or as they ought to be. (2) All this he does in language, with
an admixture, it may be, of strange words and metaphors, as also of
the various modified forms of words, since the use of these is
conceded in poetry. (3) It is to be remembered, too, that there is not
the same kind of correctness in poetry as in politics, or indeed any
other art. There is, however, within the limits of poetry itself a
possibility of two kinds of error, the one directly, the other only
accidentally connected with the art. If the poet meant to describe the
thing correctly, and failed through lack of power of expression, his
art itself is at fault. But if it was through his having meant to
describe it in some incorrect way (e.g. to make the horse in movement
have both right legs thrown forward) that the technical error (one in
a matter of, say, medicine or some other special science), or
impossibilities of whatever kind they may be, have got into his
description, hi.e.ror in that case is not in the essentials of the
poetic art. These, therefore, must be the premisses of the Solutions
in answer to the criticisms involved in the Problems.
I. As to the criticisms relating to the poet’s art itself. Any
impossibilities there may be in his descriptions of things are faults.
But from another point of view they are justifiable, if they serve the
end of poetry itself—if (to assume what we have said of that end)
they make the effect of some portion of the work more astounding. The
Pursuit of Hector is an instance in point. If, however, the poetic end
might have been as well or better attained without sacrifice of
technical correctness in such matters, the impossibility is not to be
justified, since the description should be, if it can, entirely free
from error. One may ask, too, whether the error is in a matter
directly or only accidentally connected with the poetic art; since it
is a lesser error in an artist not to know, for instance, that the
hind has no horns, than to produce an unrecognizable picture of one.
II. If the poet’s description be criticized as not true to fact, one
may urge perhaps that the object ought to be as described—an answer
like that of Sophocles, who said that he drew men as they ought to be,
and Euripides as they were. If the description, however, be neither
true nor of the thing as it ought to be, the answer must be then, that
it is in accordance with opinion. The tales about Gods, for instance,
may be as wrong as Xenophanes thinks, neither true nor the better
thing to say; but they are certainly in accordance with opinion. Of
other statements in poetry one may perhaps say, not that they are
better than the truth, but that the fact was so at the time; e.g. the
description of the arms: ’their spears stood upright, butt-end upon
the ground’; for that was the usual way of fixing them then, as it is
still with the Illyrians. As for the question whether something said
or done in a poem is morally right or not, in dealing with that one
should consider not only the intrinsic quality of the actual word or
deed, but also the person who says or does it, the person to whom he
says or does it, the time, the means, and the motive of the
agent—whether he does it to attain a greate.g.od, or to avoid a
greater evil.)
III. Other criticisms one must meet by considering the language of the
poet: (1) by the assumption of a strange word in a passage like
oureas men proton, where by oureas Homer may perhaps mean not
mules but sentinels. And in saying of Dolon, hos p e toi eidos men
heen kakos, his meaning may perhaps be, not that Dolon’s body was
deformed, but that his face was ugly, as eneidos is the Cretan word
for handsome-faced. So, too, goroteron de keraie may mean not ’mix
the wine stronger’, as though for topers, but ’mix it quicker’. (2)
Other expressions in Homer may be explained as metaphorical; e.g. in
halloi men ra theoi te kai aneres eudon (hapantes) pannux as
compared with what he tells us at the same time, e toi hot hes pedion
to Troikon hathreseien, aulon suriggon *te homadon* the word
hapantes ’all’, is metaphorically put for ’many’, since ’all’ is a
species of ’many ’. So also his oie d’ ammoros is metaphorical, the
best known standing ’alone’. (3) A change, as Hippias suggested, in
the mode of reading a word will solve the difficulty in didomen de
oi, and to men ou kataputhetai hombro. (4) Other difficulties may
be solved by another punctuation; e.g. in Empedocles, aipsa de thnet
ephyonto, ta prin mathon athanata xora te prin kekreto. Or (5) by the
assumption of an equivocal term, as in parocheken de pleo nux, where
pleo i.e.uivocal. Or (6) by an appeal to the custom of language.
Wine-and-water we call ’wine’; and it is on the same principle that
Homer speaks of a knemis neoteuktou kassiteroio, a ’greave of
new-wrought tin.’ A worker in iron we call a ’brazier’; and it is on
the same principle that Ganymede is described as the ’wine-server’ of
Zeus, though the Gods do not drink wine. This latter, however, may be
an instance of metaphor. But whenever also a word seems to imply some
contradiction, it is necessary to reflect how many ways there may be
of understanding it in the passage in question; e.g. in Homer’s te r’
hesxeto xalkeon hegxos one should consider the possible senses of
’was stopped there’—whether by taking it in this sense or in that one
will best avoid the fault of which Glaucon speaks: ’They start with
some improbable presumption; and having so decreed it themselves,
proceed to draw inferences, and censure the poet as though he had
actually said whatever they happen to believe, if his statement
conflicts with their own notion of things.’ This is how Homer’s
silence about Icarius has been treated. Starting with, the notion of
his having been a Lacedaemonian, the critics think it strange for
Telemachus not to have met him when he went to Lacedaemon. Whereas the
fact may have been as the Cephallenians say, that the wife of Ulysses
was of a Cephallenian family, and that her father’s name was Icadius,
not Icarius. So that it is probably a mistake of the critics that has
given rise to the Problem.
Speaking generally, one has to justify (1) the Impossible by reference
to the requirements of poetry, or to the better, or to opinion. For
the purposes of poetry a convincing impossibility is preferable to an
unconvincing possibility; and if men such as Zeuxis depicted be
impossible, the answer is that it is better they should be like that,
as the artist ought to improve on his model. (2) The Improbable one
has to justify either by showing it to be in accordance with opinion,
or by urging that at times it is not improbable; for there is a
probability of things happening also against probability. (3) The
contradictions found in the poet’s language one should first test as
one does an opponent’s confutation in a dialectical argument, so as to
see whether he means the same thing, in the same relation, and in the
same sense, before admitting that he has contradicted either something
he has said himself or what a man of sound sense assumes as true. But
there is no possible apology for improbability of Plot or depravity of
character, when they are not necessary and no use is made of them,
like the improbability in the appearance of Aegeus in Medea and the
baseness of Menelaus in Orestes.
The objections, then, of critics start with faults of five kinds: the
allegation is always that something i.e.ther (1) impossible, (2)
improbable, (3) corrupting, (4) contradictory, or (5) against
technical correctness. The answers to these objections must be sought
under one or other of the above-mentioned heads, which are twelve in
number.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
