
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





(4) There is a further point to be borne in mind. Every tragedy is in
part Complication and in part Denouement; the incidents before the
opening scene, and often certain also of those within the play,
forming the Complication; and the rest the Denouement. By Complication
I mean all from the beginning of the story to the point just before
the change in the hero’s fortunes; by Denouement, all from the
beginning of the change to the end. In the Lynceus of Theodectes,
for instance, the Complication includes, together with the presupposed
incidents, the seizure of the child and that in turn of the parents;
and the Denouement all from the indictment for the murder to the end.
Now it is right, when one speaks of a tragedy as the same or not the
same as another, to do so on the ground before all else of their Plot,
i.e. as having the same or not the same Complication and Denouement.
Yet there are many dramatists who, after a good Complication, fail in
the Denouement. But it is necessary for both points of construction to
be always duly mastered. (5) There are four distinct species of
Tragedy—that being the number of the constituents also that have been
mentioned: first, the complex Tragedy, which is all Peripety and
Discovery; second, the Tragedy of suffering, e.g. the Ajaxes and
Ixions; third, the Tragedy of character, e.g. The Phthiotides and
Peleus. The fourth constituent is that of ’Spectacle’, exemplified
in The Phorcides, in Prometheus, and in all plays with the scene
laid in the nether world. The poet’s aim, then, should be to combine
every element of interest, if possible, or else the more important and
the major part of them. This is now especially necessary owing to the
unfair criticism to which the poet is subjected in these days. Just
because there have been poets before him strong in the several species
of tragedy, the critics now expect the one man to surpass that which
was the strong point of each one of his predecessors. (6) One should
also remember what has been said more than once, and not write a
tragedy on an epic body of incident (i.e. one with a plurality of
stories in it), by attempting to dramatize, for instance, the entire
story of the Iliad. In the epic owing to its scale every part is
treated at proper length; with a drama, however, on the same story the
result is very disappointing. This is shown by the fact that all who
have dramatized the fall of Ilium in its entirety, and not part by
part, like Euripides, or the whole of the Niobe story, instead of a
portion, like Aeschylus, either fail utterly or have but ill success
on the stage; for that and that alone was enough to rui.e.en a play
by Agathon. Yet in their Peripeties, as also in their simple plots,
the poets I mean show wonderful skill in aiming at the kind of effect
they desire—a tragic situation that arouses the human feeling in one,
like the clever villain (e.g. Sisyphus) deceived, or the brave
wrongdoer worsted. This is probable, however, only in Agathon’s sense,
when he speaks of the probability of even improbabilities coming to
pass. (7) The Chorus too should be regarded as one of the actors; it
should be an integral part of the whole, and take a share in the
action—that which it has in Sophocles rather than in Euripides. With
the later poets, however, the songs in a play of theirs have no more
to do with the Plot of that than of any other tragedy. Hence it is
that they are now singing intercalary pieces, a practice first
introduced by Agathon. And yet what real difference is there between
singing such intercalary pieces, and attempting to fit in a speech, or
even a whole act, from one play into another?
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
