
Aristotle (384 BCE-322 BCE)





Discovery in general has been explained already. As for the species of
Discovery, the first to be noted is (1) the least artistic form of it,
of which the poets make most use through mere lack of invention,
Discovery by signs or marks. Of these signs some are congenital, like
the ’lance-head which the Earth-born have on them’, or ’stars’, such
as Carcinus brings in in his Thyestes; others acquired after birth—
these latter being either marks on the body, e.g. scars, or external
tokens, like necklaces, or to take another sort of instance, the ark
in the Discovery in Tyro. Even these, however, admit of two uses, a
better and a worse; the scar of Ulysses is an instance; the Discovery
of him through it is made in one way by the nurse and in another by
the swineherds. A Discovery using signs as a means of assurance is
less artistic, as indeed are all such as imply reflection; whereas one
bringing them in all of a sudden, as in the Bath-story, is of a
better order. Next after these are (2) Discoveries made directly by
the poet; which are inartistic for that very reason; e.g. Orestes’
Discovery of himself in Iphigenia: whereas his sister reveals who
she is by the letter, Orestes is made to say himself what the poet
rather than the story demands. This, therefore, is not far removed
from the first-mentioned fault, since he might have presented certain
tokens as well. Another instance is the ’shuttle’s voice’ in the
Tereus of Sophocles. (3) A third species is Discovery through
memory, from a man’s consciousness being awakened by something seen or
heard. Thus in The Cyprioe of Dicaeogenes, the sight of the picture
makes the man burst into tears; and in the Tale of Alcinous, hearing
the harper Ulysses is reminded of the past and weeps; the Discovery of
them being the result. (4) A fourth kind is Discovery through
reasoning; e.g. in The Choephoroe: ’One like me is here; there is
no one like me but Orestes; he, therefore, must be here.’ Or that
which Polyidus the Sophist suggested for Iphigenia; since it was
natural for Orestes to reflect: ’My sister was sacrificed, and I am to
be sacrificed like her.’ Or that in the Tydeus of Theodectes: ’I
came to find a son, and am to die myself.’ Or that in The Phinidae:
on seeing the place the women inferred their fate, that they were to
die there, since they had also been exposed there. (5) There is, too,
a composite Discovery arising from bad reasoning on the side of the
other party. An instance of it is in Ulysses the False Messenger: he
said he should know the bow—which he had not seen; but to suppose
from that that he would know it again (as though he had once seen it)
was bad reasoning. (6) The best of all Discoveries, however, is that
arising from the incidents themselves, when the great surprise comes
about through a probable incident, like that in the Oedipus of
Sophocles; and also in Iphigenia; for it was not improbable that she
should wish to have a letter taken home. These last are the only
Discoveries independent of the artifice of signs and necklaces. Next
after them come Discoveries through reasoning.
Continue...

This complete text of the The Poetics book by Aristotle,
translated by Ingram Bywater, with a preface by Gilbert Murray,
is in the public domain. This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on April 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The preface to Aristotle's Art of poetry (1705) (Augustan Reprint Society. Publication)By André DacierAt Amazon
