




If we were as intent upon our own business as the old fellows at
Rome are upon what interests them, we too might perhaps
accomplish something. I know a man older than I am, now
Superintendent of the Corn-market at Rome, and I remember when he
passed through this place on his way back from exile, what an
account he gave me of his former life, declaring that for the
future, once home again, his only care should be to pass his
remaining years in quiet and tranquility. “For how few years have
I left!” he cried. “That,” I said, “you will not do; but the
moment the scent of Rome is in your nostrils, you will forget it
all; and if you can but gain admission to Court, you will be glad
enough to elbow your way in, and thank God for it.” “Epictetus,"
he replied, “if ever you find me setting as much as one foot
within the Court, think what you will of me.”
Well, as it was, what did he do? Ere ever he entered the
city, he was met by a despatch from the Emperor. He took it, and
forgot the whole of his resolutions. From that moment, he has
been piling one thing upon another. I should like to be beside
him to remind him of what he said when passing this way, and to
add, How much better a prophet I am than you!
What then? do I say man is not made for an active life? Far
from it! . . . But there is a great difference between other
men’s occupations and ours. . . . A glance at theirs will make it
clear to you. All day long they do nothing but calculate,
contrive, consult how to wring their profit out of food-stuffs,
farm-plots and the like. . . . Whereas, I entreat you to learn
what the administration of the World is, and what place a Being
endowed with reason holds therein: to consider what you are
yourself, and wherein your Good and Evil consists.
Continue...

This complete text of The Golden Sayings of Epictetus is in the public domain.


Also see Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life
by A. A. Long.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Apology, Phaedo and Crito of Plato; the Golden Sayings of Epictetus; the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius with Introductions and Notes (The Harvard Classics [Leatherbound], Deluxe Edition, Registered Edition)By Benjamin JowettAt Amazon
