




’Nonsense!’ said the official from the Admiralty.
Sir Walter got up and left the room while we looked blankly at
the table.  He came back in ten minutes with a long face.  ’I have
spoken to Alloa,’ he said.  ’Had him out of bed–very grumpy.  He
went straight home after Mulross’s dinner.’
’But it’s madness,’ broke in General Winstanley.  ’Do you mean
to tell me that that man came here and sat beside me for the best
part of half an hour and that I didn’t detect the imposture?  Alloa
must be out of his mind.’
’Don’t you see the cleverness of it?’ I said.  ’You were too
interested in other things to have any eyes.  You took Lord Alloa for
granted.  If it had been anybody else you might have looked more
closely, but it was natural for him to be here, and that put you all
to sleep.’
Then the Frenchman spoke, very slowly and in good English.
’The young man is right.  His psychology is good.  Our enemies
have not been foolish!’
He bent his wise brows on the assembly.
’I will tell you a tale,’ he said.  ’It happened many years ago in
Senegal.  I was quartered in a remote station, and to pass the time
used to go fishing for big barbel in the river.  A little Arab mare
used to carry my luncheon basket–one of the salted dun breed you
got at Timbuctoo in the old days.  Well, one morning I had good
sport, and the mare was unaccountably restless.  I could hear her
whinnying and squealing and stamping her feet, and I kept soothing
her with my voice while my mind was intent on fish.  I could see
her all the time, as I thought, out of a corner of my eye, tethered
to a tree twenty yards away.  After a couple of hours I began to
think of food.  I collected my fish in a tarpaulin bag, and moved
down the stream towards the mare, trolling my line.  When I got up
to her I flung the tarpaulin on her back–’
He paused and looked round.
’It was the smell that gave me warning.  I turned my head and
found myself looking at a lion three feet off ...  An old man-eater,
that was the terror of the village ...  What was left of the mare, a
mass of blood and bones and hide, was behind him.’
’What happened?’ I asked.  I was enough of a hunter to know a
true yarn when I heard it.
’I stuffed my fishing-rod into his jaws, and I had a pistol.  Also
my servants came presently with rifles.  But he left his mark on me.’
He held up a hand which lacked three fingers.
’Consider,’ he said.  ’The mare had been dead more than an hour,
and the brute had been patiently watching me ever since.  I never
saw the kill, for I was accustomed to the mare’s fretting, and I
never marked her absence, for my consciousness of her was only of
something tawny, and the lion filled that part.  If I could blunder
thus, gentlemen, in a land where men’s senses are keen, why should
we busy preoccupied urban folk not err also?’
Sir Walter nodded.  No one was ready to gainsay him.
’But I don’t see,’ went on Winstanley.  ’Their object was to get
these dispositions without our knowing it.  Now it only required
one of us to mention to Alloa our meeting tonight for the whole
fraud to be exposed.’
Sir Walter laughed dryly.  ’The selection of Alloa shows their
acumen.  Which of us was likely to speak to him about tonight?  Or
was he likely to open the subject?’
I remembered the First Sea Lord’s reputation for taciturnity and
shortness of temper.
’The one thing that puzzles me,’ said the General, ’is what good
his visit here would do that spy fellow?  He could not carry away
several pages of figures and strange names in his head.’
’That is not difficult,’ the Frenchman replied.  ’A good spy is
trained to have a photographic memory.  Like your own Macaulay.
You noticed he said nothing, but went through these papers again
and again.  I think we may assume that he has every detail stamped
on his mind.  When I was younger I could do the same trick.’
’Well, I suppose there is nothing for it but to change the plans,’
said Sir Walter ruefully.
Whittaker was looking very glum.  ’Did you tell Lord Alloa what
has happened?’ he asked.  ’No?  Well, I can’t speak with absolute
assurance, but I’m nearly certain we can’t make any serious change
unless we alter the geography of England.’
’Another thing must be said,’ it was Royer who spoke.  ’I talked
freely when that man was here.  I told something of the military
plans of my Government.  I was permitted to say so much.  But that
information would be worth many millions to our enemies.  No, my
friends, I see no other way.  The man who came here and his
confederates must be taken, and taken at once.’
’Good God,’ I cried, ’and we have not a rag of a clue.’
’Besides,’ said Whittaker, ’there is the post.  By this time the news
will be on its way.’
’No,’ said the Frenchman.  ’You do not understand the habits
of the spy.  He receives personally his reward, and he delivers
personally his intelligence.  We in France know something of the
breed.  There is still a chance, MES AMIS.  These men must cross
the sea, and there are ships to be searched and ports to be
watched.  Believe me, the need is desperate for both France and Britain.’
Royer’s grave good sense seemed to pull us together.  He was the
man of action among fumblers.  But I saw no hope in any face, and
I felt none.  Where among the fifty millions of these islands and
within a dozen hours were we to lay hands on the three cleverest
rogues in Europe?
Then suddenly I had an inspiration.
’Where is Scudder’s book?’ I cried to Sir Walter.  ’Quick, man, I
remember something in it.’
He unlocked the door of a bureau and gave it to me.
I found the place.  THIRTY-NINE STEPS, I read, and again, THIRTY-NINE
STEPS–I COUNTED THEM–HIGH TIDE 10.17 P.M.
The Admiralty man was looking at me as if he thought I had
gone mad.
’Don’t you see it’s a clue,’ I shouted.  ’Scudder knew where these
fellows laired–he knew where they were going to leave the
country, though he kept the name to himself.  Tomorrow was the
day, and it was some place where high tide was at 10.17.’
’They may have gone tonight,’ someone said.
’Not they.  They have their own snug secret way, and they won’t
be hurried.  I know Germans, and they are mad about working to a
plan.  Where the devil can I get a book of Tide Tables?’
Whittaker brightened up.  ’It’s a chance,’ he said.  ’Let’s go over
to the Admiralty.’
We got into two of the waiting motor-cars–all but Sir Walter,
who went off to Scotland Yard–to ’mobilize MacGillivray’, so he said.
We marched through empty corridors and big bare chambers
where the charwomen were busy, till we reached a little room lined
with books and maps.  A resident clerk was unearthed, who
presently fetched from the library the Admiralty Tide Tables.  I sat
at the desk and the others stood round, for somehow or other I had
got charge of this expedition.
It was no good.  There were hundreds of entries, and so far as I
could see 10.17 might cover fifty places.  We had to find some way
of narrowing the possibilities.
I took my head in my hands and thought.  There must be some
way of reading this riddle.  What did Scudder mean by steps?  I
thought of dock steps, but if he had meant that I didn’t think he
would have mentioned the number.  It must be some place where
there were several staircases, and one marked out from the others
by having thirty-nine steps.
Then I had a sudden thought, and hunted up all the steamer
sailings.  There was no boat which left for the Continent at 10.17 p.m.
Why was high tide so important?  If it was a harbour it must be
some little place where the tide mattered, or else it was a heavy-
draught boat.  But there was no regular steamer sailing at that hour,
and somehow I didn’t think they would travel by a big boat from a
regular harbour.  So it must be some little harbour where the tide
was important, or perhaps no harbour at all.
But if it was a little port I couldn’t see what the steps signified.
There were no sets of staircases on any harbour that I had ever
seen.  It must be some place which a particular staircase identified,
and where the tide was full at 10.17.  On the whole it seemed to me
that the place must be a bit of open coast.  But the staircases kept
puzzling me.
Then I went back to wider considerations.  Whereabouts would a
man be likely to leave for Germany, a man in a hurry, who wanted
a speedy and a secret passage?  Not from any of the big harbours.
And not from the Channel or the West Coast or Scotland, for,
remember, he was starting from London.  I measured the distance
on the map, and tried to put myself in the enemy’s shoes.  I
should try for Ostend or Antwerp or Rotterdam, and I should
sail from somewhere on the East Coast between Cromer and Dover.
All this was very loose guessing, and I don’t pretend it was
ingenious or scientific.  I wasn’t any kind of Sherlock Holmes.  But I
have always fancied I had a kind of instinct about questions like
this.  I don’t know if I can explain myself, but I used to use my
brains as far as they went, and after they came to a blank wall I
guessed, and I usually found my guesses pretty right.
So I set out all my conclusions on a bit of Admiralty paper.  They
ran like this:
Continue...

This eBook of “The Thirty-nine Steps” by John Buchan belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Four Adventures of Richard Hannay: The Thirty-Nine Steps/Greenmantle/Mr. Standfast/the Three HostagesBy John BuchanAt Amazon
