




WARGRAVE. – WAXWORKS. – SONNING. – OUR STEW. – MONTMORENCY IS SARCASTIC. 
- FIGHT BETWEEN MONTMORENCY AND THE TEA-KETTLE. – GEORGE’S BANJO STUDIES. 
- MEET WITH DISCOURAGEMENT. – DIFFICULTIES IN THE WAY OF THE MUSICAL 
AMATEUR. – LEARNING TO PLAY THE BAGPIPES. – HARRIS FEELS SAD AFTER 
SUPPER. – GEORGE AND I GO FOR A WALK. – RETURN HUNGRY AND WET. – THERE IS 
A STRANGENESS ABOUT HARRIS. – HARRIS AND THE SWANS, A REMARKABLE STORY. – 
HARRIS HAS A TROUBLED NIGHT.
WE caught a breeze, after lunch, which took us gently up past Wargrave 
and Shiplake.  Mellowed in the drowsy sunlight of a summer’s afternoon, 
Wargrave, nestling where the river bends, makes a sweet old picture as 
you pass it, and one that lingers long upon the retina of memory.
The “George and Dragon” at Wargrave boasts a sign, painted on the one 
side by Leslie, R.A., and on the other by Hodgson of that ilk.  Leslie 
has depicted the fight; Hodgson has imagined the scene, “After the Fight” 
- George, the work done, enjoying his pint of beer.
Day, the author of SANDFORD AND MERTON, lived and – more credit to the 
place still – was killed at Wargrave.  In the church is a memorial to 
Mrs. Sarah Hill, who bequeathed 1 pound annually, to be divided at 
Easter, between two boys and two girls who “have never been undutiful to 
their parents; who have never been known to swear or to tell untruths, to 
steal, or to break windows.”  Fancy giving up all that for five shillings 
a year!  It is not worth it.
It is rumoured in the town that once, many years ago, a boy appeared who 
really never had done these things – or at all events, which was all that 
was required or could be expected, had never been known to do them – and 
thus won the crown of glory.  He was exhibited for three weeks afterwards 
in the Town Hall, under a glass case.
What has become of the money since no one knows.  They say it is always 
handed over to the nearest wax-works show.
Shiplake is a pretty village, but it cannot be seen from the river, being 
upon the hill.  Tennyson was married in Shiplake Church.
The river up to Sonning winds in and out through many islands, and is 
very placid, hushed, and lonely.  Few folk, except at twilight, a pair or 
two of rustic lovers, walk along its banks.  `Arry and Lord Fitznoodle 
have been left behind at Henley, and dismal, dirty Reading is not yet 
reached.  It is a part of the river in which to dream of bygone days, and 
vanished forms and faces, and things that might have been, but are not, 
confound them.
We got out at Sonning, and went for a walk round the village.  It is the 
most fairy-like little nook on the whole river.  It is more like a stage 
village than one built of bricks and mortar.  Every house is smothered in 
roses, and now, in early June, they were bursting forth in clouds of 
dainty splendour.  If you stop at Sonning, put up at the “Bull,” behind 
the church.  It is a veritable picture of an old country inn, with green, 
square courtyard in front, where, on seats beneath the trees, the old men 
group of an evening to drink their ale and gossip over village politics; 
with low, quaint rooms and latticed windows, and awkward stairs and 
winding passages.
We roamed about sweet Sonning for an hour or so, and then, it being too 
late to push on past Reading, we decided to go back to one of the 
Shiplake islands, and put up there for the night.  It was still early 
when we got settled, and George said that, as we had plenty of time, it 
would be a splendid opportunity to try a good, slap-up supper.  He said 
he would show us what could be done up the river in the way of cooking, 
and suggested that, with the vegetables and the remains of the cold beef 
and general odds and ends, we should make an Irish stew.
It seemed a fascinating idea.  George gathered wood and made a fire, and 
Harris and I started to peel the potatoes.  I should never have thought 
that peeling potatoes was such an undertaking.  The job turned out to be 
the biggest thing of its kind that I had ever been in.  We began 
cheerfully, one might almost say skittishly, but our light-heartedness 
was gone by the time the first potato was finished.  The more we peeled, 
the more peel there seemed to be left on; by the time we had got all the 
peel off and all the eyes out, there was no potato left – at least none 
worth speaking of.  George came and had a look at it – it was about the 
size of a pea-nut.  He said:
“Oh, that won’t do!  You’re wasting them.  You must scrape them.”
So we scraped them, and that was harder work than peeling.  They are such 
an extraordinary shape, potatoes – all bumps and warts and hollows.  We 
worked steadily for five-and-twenty minutes, and did four potatoes.  Then 
we struck.  We said we should require the rest of the evening for 
scraping ourselves.
I never saw such a thing as potato-scraping for making a fellow in a 
mess.  It seemed difficult to believe that the potato-scrapings in which 
Harris and I stood, half smothered, could have come off four potatoes.  
It shows you what can be done with economy and care.
George said it was absurd to have only four potatoes in an Irish stew, so 
we washed half-a-dozen or so more, and put them in without peeling.  We 
also put in a cabbage and about half a peck of peas.  George stirred it 
all up, and then he said that there seemed to be a lot of room to spare, 
so we overhauled both the hampers, and picked out all the odds and ends 
and the remnants, and added them to the stew.  There were half a pork pie 
and a bit of cold boiled bacon left, and we put them in.  Then George 
found half a tin of potted salmon, and he emptied that into the pot.
He said that was the advantage of Irish stew: you got rid of such a lot 
of things.  I fished out a couple of eggs that had got cracked, and put 
those in.  George said they would thicken the gravy.
I forget the other ingredients, but I know nothing was wasted; and I 
remember that, towards the end, Montmorency, who had evinced great 
interest in the proceedings throughout, strolled away with an earnest and 
thoughtful air, reappearing, a few minutes afterwards, with a dead water-
rat in his mouth, which he evidently wished to present as his 
contribution to the dinner; whether in a sarcastic spirit, or with a 
genuine desire to assist, I cannot say.
We had a discussion as to whether the rat should go in or not.  Harris 
said that he thought it would be all right, mixed up with the other 
things, and that every little helped; but George stood up for precedent.  
He said he had never heard of water-rats in Irish stew, and he would 
rather be on the safe side, and not try experiments.
Harris said:
“If you never try a new thing, how can you tell what it’s like?  It’s men 
such as you that hamper the world’s progress.  Think of the man who first 
tried German sausage!”
It was a great success, that Irish stew.  I don’t think I ever enjoyed a 
meal more.  There was something so fresh and piquant about it.  One’s 
palate gets so tired of the old hackneyed things: here was a dish with a 
new flavour, with a taste like nothing else on earth.
And it was nourishing, too.  As George said, there was good stuff in it.  
The peas and potatoes might have been a bit softer, but we all had good 
teeth, so that did not matter much: and as for the gravy, it was a poem – 
a little too rich, perhaps, for a weak stomach, but nutritious.
We finished up with tea and cherry tart.  Montmorency had a fight with 
the kettle during tea-time, and came off a poor second.
Throughout the trip, he had manifested great curiosity concerning the 
kettle.  He would sit and watch it, as it boiled, with a puzzled 
expression, and would try and rouse it every now and then by growling at 
it.  When it began to splutter and steam, he regarded it as a challenge, 
and would want to fight it, only, at that precise moment, some one would 
always dash up and bear off his prey before he could get at it.
To-day he determined he would be beforehand.  At the first sound the 
kettle made, he rose, growling, and advanced towards it in a threatening 
attitude.  It was only a little kettle, but it was full of pluck, and it 
up and spit at him.
“Ah! would ye!” growled Montmorency, showing his teeth; “I’ll teach ye to 
cheek a hard-working, respectable dog; ye miserable, long-nosed, dirty-
looking scoundrel, ye.  Come on!”
And he rushed at that poor little kettle, and seized it by the spout.
Then, across the evening stillness, broke a blood-curdling yelp, and 
Montmorency left the boat, and did a constitutional three times round the 
island at the rate of thirty-five miles an hour, stopping every now and 
then to bury his nose in a bit of cool mud.
From that day Montmorency regarded the kettle with a mixture of awe, 
suspicion, and hate.  Whenever he saw it he would growl and back at a 
rapid rate, with his tail shut down, and the moment it was put upon the 
stove he would promptly climb out of the boat, and sit on the bank, till 
the whole tea business was over.
George got out his banjo after supper, and wanted to play it, but Harris 
objected: he said he had got a headache, and did not feel strong enough 
to stand it.  George thought the music might do him good – said music 
often soothed the nerves and took away a headache; and he twanged two or 
three notes, just to show Harris what it was like.
Harris said he would rather have the headache.
George has never learned to play the banjo to this day.  He has had too 
much all-round discouragement to meet.  He tried on two or three 
evenings, while we were up the river, to get a little practice, but it 
was never a success.  Harris’s language used to be enough to unnerve any 
man; added to which, Montmorency would sit and howl steadily, right 
through the performance.  It was not giving the man a fair chance.
“What’s he want to howl like that for when I’m playing?” George would 
exclaim indignantly, while taking aim at him with a boot.
“What do you want to play like that for when he is howling?” Harris would 
retort, catching the boot.  “You let him alone.  He can’t help howling.  
He’s got a musical ear, and your playing MAKES him howl.”
So George determined to postpone study of the banjo until he reached 
home.  But he did not get much opportunity even there.  Mrs. P. used to 
come up and say she was very sorry – for herself, she liked to hear him – 
but the lady upstairs was in a very delicate state, and the doctor was 
afraid it might injure the child.
Then George tried taking it out with him late at night, and practising 
round the square.  But the inhabitants complained to the police about it, 
and a watch was set for him one night, and he was captured.  The evidence 
against him was very clear, and he was bound over to keep the peace for 
six months.
He seemed to lose heart in the business after that.  He did make one or 
two feeble efforts to take up the work again when the six months had 
elapsed, but there was always the same coldness – the same want of 
sympathy on the part of the world to fight against; and, after awhile, he 
despaired altogether, and advertised the instrument for sale at a great 
sacrifice – “owner having no further use for same” – and took to learning 
card tricks instead.
It must be disheartening work learning a musical instrument.  You would 
think that Society, for its own sake, would do all it could to assist a 
man to acquire the art of playing a musical instrument.  But it doesn’t!
I knew a young fellow once, who was studying to play the bagpipes, and 
you would be surprised at the amount of opposition he had to contend 
with.  Why, not even from the members of his own family did he receive 
what you could call active encouragement.  His father was dead against 
the business from the beginning, and spoke quite unfeelingly on the 
subject.
My friend used to get up early in the morning to practise, but he had to 
give that plan up, because of his sister.  She was somewhat religiously 
inclined, and she said it seemed such an awful thing to begin the day 
like that.
So he sat up at night instead, and played after the family had gone to 
bed, but that did not do, as it got the house such a bad name.  People, 
going home late, would stop outside to listen, and then put it about all 
over the town, the next morning, that a fearful murder had been committed 
at Mr. Jefferson’s the night before; and would describe how they had 
heard the victim’s shrieks and the brutal oaths and curses of the 
murderer, followed by the prayer for mercy, and the last dying gurgle of 
the corpse.
So they let him practise in the day-time, in the back-kitchen with all 
the doors shut; but his more successful passages could generally be heard 
in the sitting-room, in spite of these precautions, and would affect his 
mother almost to tears.
She said it put her in mind of her poor father (he had been swallowed by 
a shark, poor man, while bathing off the coast of New Guinea – where the 
connection came in, she could not explain).
Then they knocked up a little place for him at the bottom of the garden, 
about quarter of a mile from the house, and made him take the machine 
down there when he wanted to work it; and sometimes a visitor would come 
to the house who knew nothing of the matter, and they would forget to 
tell him all about it, and caution him, and he would go out for a stroll 
round the garden and suddenly get within earshot of those bagpipes, 
without being prepared for it, or knowing what it was.  If he were a man 
of strong mind, it only gave him fits; but a person of mere average 
intellect it usually sent mad.
There is, it must be confessed, something very sad about the early 
efforts of an amateur in bagpipes.  I have felt that myself when 
listening to my young friend.  They appear to be a trying instrument to 
perform upon.  You have to get enough breath for the whole tune before 
you start – at least, so I gathered from watching Jefferson.
He would begin magnificently with a wild, full, come-to-the-battle sort 
of a note, that quite roused you.  But he would get more and more piano 
as he went on, and the last verse generally collapsed in the middle with 
a splutter and a hiss.
You want to be in good health to play the bagpipes.
Young Jefferson only learnt to play one tune on those bagpipes; but I 
never heard any complaints about the insufficiency of his repertoire – 
none whatever.  This tune was “The Campbells are Coming, Hooray – 
Hooray!” so he said, though his father always held that it was “The Blue 
Bells of Scotland.”  Nobody seemed quite sure what it was exactly, but 
they all agreed that it sounded Scotch.
Strangers were allowed three guesses, and most of them guessed a 
different tune each time.
Harris was disagreeable after supper, – I think it must have been the 
stew that had upset him: he is not used to high living, – so George and I 
left him in the boat, and settled to go for a mouch round Henley.  He 
said he should have a glass of whisky and a pipe, and fix things up for 
the night.  We were to shout when we returned, and he would row over from 
the island and fetch us.
“Don’t go to sleep, old man,” we said as we started.
“Not much fear of that while this stew’s on,” he grunted, as he pulled 
back to the island.
Henley was getting ready for the regatta, and was full of bustle.  We met 
a goodish number of men we knew about the town, and in their pleasant 
company the time slipped by somewhat quickly; so that it was nearly 
eleven o’clock before we set off on our four-mile walk home – as we had 
learned to call our little craft by this time.
It was a dismal night, coldish, with a thin rain falling; and as we 
trudged through the dark, silent fields, talking low to each other, and 
wondering if we were going right or not, we thought of the cosy boat, 
with the bright light streaming through the tight-drawn canvas; of Harris 
and Montmorency, and the whisky, and wished that we were there.
We conjured up the picture of ourselves inside, tired and a little 
hungry; of the gloomy river and the shapeless trees; and, like a giant 
glow-worm underneath them, our dear old boat, so snug and warm and 
cheerful.  We could see ourselves at supper there, pecking away at cold 
meat, and passing each other chunks of bread; we could hear the cheery 
clatter of our knives, the laughing voices, filling all the space, and 
overflowing through the opening out into the night.  And we hurried on to 
realise the vision.
We struck the tow-path at length, and that made us happy; because prior 
to this we had not been sure whether we were walking towards the river or 
away from it, and when you are tired and want to go to bed uncertainties 
like that worry you.  We passed Skiplake as the clock was striking the 
quarter to twelve; and then George said, thoughtfully:
“You don’t happen to remember which of the islands it was, do you?”
“No,” I replied, beginning to grow thoughtful too, “I don’t.  How many 
are there?”
“Only four,” answered George.  “It will be all right, if he’s awake.”
“And if not?” I queried; but we dismissed that train of thought.
We shouted when we came opposite the first island, but there was no 
response; so we went to the second, and tried there, and obtained the 
same result.
“Oh!  I remember now,” said George; “it was the third one.”
And we ran on hopefully to the third one, and hallooed.
No answer!
The case was becoming serious. it was now past midnight.  The hotels at 
Skiplake and Henley would be crammed; and we could not go round, knocking 
up cottagers and householders in the middle of the night, to know if they 
let apartments!  George suggested walking back to Henley and assaulting a 
policeman, and so getting a night’s lodging in the station-house.  But 
then there was the thought, “Suppose he only hits us back and refuses to 
lock us up!”
We could not pass the whole night fighting policemen.  Besides, we did 
not want to overdo the thing and get six months.
We despairingly tried what seemed in the darkness to be the fourth 
island, but met with no better success.  The rain was coming down fast 
now, and evidently meant to last.  We were wet to the skin, and cold and 
miserable.  We began to wonder whether there were only four islands or 
more, or whether we were near the islands at all, or whether we were 
anywhere within a mile of where we ought to be, or in the wrong part of 
the river altogether; everything looked so strange and different in the 
darkness.  We began to understand the sufferings of the Babes in the 
Wood.
Just when we had given up all hope – yes, I know that is always the time 
that things do happen in novels and tales; but I can’t help it.  I 
resolved, when I began to write this book, that I would be strictly 
truthful in all things; and so I will be, even if I have to employ 
hackneyed phrases for the purpose.
It WAS just when we had given up all hope, and I must therefore say so.  
Just when we had given up all hope, then, I suddenly caught sight, a 
little way below us, of a strange, weird sort of glimmer flickering among 
the trees on the opposite bank.  For an instant I thought of ghosts: it 
was such a shadowy, mysterious light.  The next moment it flashed across 
me that it was our boat, and I sent up such a yell across the water that 
made the night seem to shake in its bed.
We waited breathless for a minute, and then – oh! divinest music of the 
darkness! – we heard the answering bark of Montmorency.  We shouted back 
loud enough to wake the Seven Sleepers – I never could understand myself 
why it should take more noise to wake seven sleepers than one – and, 
after what seemed an hour, but what was really, I suppose, about five 
minutes, we saw the lighted boat creeping slowly over the blackness, and 
heard Harris’s sleepy voice asking where we were.
There was an unaccountable strangeness about Harris.  It was something 
more than mere ordinary tiredness.  He pulled the boat against a part of 
the bank from which it was quite impossible for us to get into it, and 
immediately went to sleep.  It took us an immense amount of screaming and 
roaring to wake him up again and put some sense into him; but we 
succeeded at last, and got safely on board.
Harris had a sad expression on him, so we noticed, when we got into the 
boat.  He gave you the idea of a man who had been through trouble.  We 
asked him if anything had happened, and he said-
“Swans!”
It seemed we had moored close to a swan’s nest, and, soon after George 
and I had gone, the female swan came back, and kicked up a row about it.  
Harris had chivied her off, and she had gone away, and fetched up her old 
man.  Harris said he had had quite a fight with these two swans; but 
courage and skill had prevailed in the end, and he had defeated them.
Half-an-hour afterwards they returned with eighteen other swans!  It must 
have been a fearful battle, so far as we could understand Harris’s 
account of it.  The swans had tried to drag him and Montmorency out of 
the boat and drown them; and he had defended himself like a hero for four 
hours, and had killed the lot, and they had all paddled away to die.
“How many swans did you say there were?” asked George.
“Thirty-two,” replied Harris, sleepily.
“You said eighteen just now,” said George.
“No, I didn’t,” grunted Harris; “I said twelve.  Think I can’t count?”
What were the real facts about these swans we never found out.  We 
questioned Harris on the subject in the morning, and he said, “What 
swans?” and seemed to think that George and I had been dreaming.
Oh, how delightful it was to be safe in the boat, after our trials and 
fears!  We ate a hearty supper, George and I, and we should have had some 
toddy after it, if we could have found the whisky, but we could not.  We 
examined Harris as to what he had done with it; but he did not seem to 
know what we meant by “whisky,” or what we were talking about at all.  
Montmorency looked as if he knew something, but said nothing.
I slept well that night, and should have slept better if it had not been 
for Harris.  I have a vague recollection of having been woke up at least 
a dozen times during the night by Harris wandering about the boat with 
the lantern, looking for his clothes.  He seemed to be worrying about his 
clothes all night.
Twice he routed up George and myself to see if we were lying on his 
trousers.  George got quite wild the second time.
“What the thunder do you want your trousers for, in the middle of the 
night?” he asked indignantly.  “Why don’t you lie down, and go to sleep?”
I found him in trouble, the next time I awoke, because he could not find 
his socks; and my last hazy remembrance is of being rolled over on my 
side, and of hearing Harris muttering something about its being an 
extraordinary thing where his umbrella could have got to.
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
