




PLANS DISCUSSED. – PLEASURES OF “CAMPING-OUT,” ON FINE NIGHTS. – DITTO, 
WET NIGHTS. – COMPROMISE DECIDED ON. – MONTMORENCY, FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF. 
- FEARS LEST HE IS TOO GOOD FOR THIS WORLD, FEARS SUBSEQUENTLY DISMISSED 
AS GROUNDLESS. – MEETING ADJOURNS.
WE pulled out the maps, and discussed plans.
We arranged to start on the following Saturday from Kingston.  Harris and 
I would go down in the morning, and take the boat up to Chertsey, and 
George, who would not be able to get away from the City till the 
afternoon (George goes to sleep at a bank from ten to four each day, 
except Saturdays, when they wake him up and put him outside at two), 
would meet us there.
Should we “camp out” or sleep at inns?
George and I were for camping out.  We said it would be so wild and free, 
so patriarchal like.
Slowly the golden memory of the dead sun fades from the hearts of the 
cold, sad clouds.  Silent, like sorrowing children, the birds have ceased 
their song, and only the moorhen’s plaintive cry and the harsh croak of 
the corncrake stirs the awed hush around the couch of waters, where the 
dying day breathes out her last.
From the dim woods on either bank, Night’s ghostly army, the grey 
shadows, creep out with noiseless tread to chase away the lingering rear-
guard of the light, and pass, with noiseless, unseen feet, above the 
waving river-grass, and through the sighing rushes; and Night, upon her 
sombre throne, folds her black wings above the darkening world, and, from 
her phantom palace, lit by the pale stars, reigns in stillness.
Then we run our little boat into some quiet nook, and the tent is 
pitched, and the frugal supper cooked and eaten.  Then the big pipes are 
filled and lighted, and the pleasant chat goes round in musical 
undertone; while, in the pauses of our talk, the river, playing round the 
boat, prattles strange old tales and secrets, sings low the old child’s 
song that it has sung so many thousand years – will sing so many thousand 
years to come, before its voice grows harsh and old – a song that we, who 
have learnt to love its changing face, who have so often nestled on its 
yielding bosom, think, somehow, we understand, though we could not tell 
you in mere words the story that we listen to.
And we sit there, by its margin, while the moon, who loves it too, stoops 
down to kiss it with a sister’s kiss, and throws her silver arms around 
it clingingly; and we watch it as it flows, ever singing, ever 
whispering, out to meet its king, the sea – till our voices die away in 
silence, and the pipes go out – till we, common-place, everyday young men 
enough, feel strangely full of thoughts, half sad, half sweet, and do not 
care or want to speak – till we laugh, and, rising, knock the ashes from 
our burnt-out pipes, and say “Good-night,” and, lulled by the lapping 
water and the rustling trees, we fall asleep beneath the great, still 
stars, and dream that the world is young again – young and sweet as she 
used to be ere the centuries of fret and care had furrowed her fair face, 
ere her children’s sins and follies had made old her loving heart – sweet 
as she was in those bygone days when, a new-made mother, she nursed us, 
her children, upon her own deep breast – ere the wiles of painted 
civilization had lured us away from her fond arms, and the poisoned 
sneers of artificiality had made us ashamed of the simple life we led 
with her, and the simple, stately home where mankind was born so many 
thousands years ago.
Harris said:
“How about when it rained?”
You can never rouse Harris.  There is no poetry about Harris – no wild 
yearning for the unattainable.  Harris never “weeps, he knows not why.”  
If Harris’s eyes fill with tears, you can bet it is because Harris has 
been eating raw onions, or has put too much Worcester over his chop.
If you were to stand at night by the sea-shore with Harris, and say:
“Hark! do you not hear?  Is it but the mermaids singing deep below the 
waving waters; or sad spirits, chanting dirges for white corpses, held by 
seaweed?”  Harris would take you by the arm, and say:
“I know what it is, old man; you’ve got a chill.  Now, you come along 
with me.  I know a place round the corner here, where you can get a drop 
of the finest Scotch whisky you ever tasted – put you right in less than 
no time.”
Harris always does know a place round the corner where you can get 
something brilliant in the drinking line.  I believe that if you met 
Harris up in Paradise (supposing such a thing likely), he would 
immediately greet you with:
“So glad you’ve come, old fellow; I’ve found a nice place round the 
corner here, where you can get some really first-class nectar.”
In the present instance, however, as regarded the camping out, his 
practical view of the matter came as a very timely hint.  Camping out in 
rainy weather is not pleasant.
It is evening.  You are wet through, and there is a good two inches of 
water in the boat, and all the things are damp.  You find a place on the 
banks that is not quite so puddly as other places you have seen, and you 
land and lug out the tent, and two of you proceed to fix it.
It is soaked and heavy, and it flops about, and tumbles down on you, and 
clings round your head and makes you mad.  The rain is pouring steadily 
down all the time.  It is difficult enough to fix a tent in dry weather: 
in wet, the task becomes herculean.  Instead of helping you, it seems to 
you that the other man is simply playing the fool.  Just as you get your 
side beautifully fixed, he gives it a hoist from his end, and spoils it 
all.
“Here! what are you up to?” you call out.
“What are YOU up to?” he retorts; “leggo, can’t you?”
“Don’t pull it; you’ve got it all wrong, you stupid ass!” you shout.
“No, I haven’t,” he yells back; “let go your side!”
“I tell you you’ve got it all wrong!” you roar, wishing that you could 
get at him; and you give your ropes a lug that pulls all his pegs out.
“Ah, the bally idiot!” you hear him mutter to himself; and then comes a 
savage haul, and away goes your side.  You lay down the mallet and start 
to go round and tell him what you think about the whole business, and, at 
the same time, he starts round in the same direction to come and explain 
his views to you.  And you follow each other round and round, swearing at 
one another, until the tent tumbles down in a heap, and leaves you 
looking at each other across its ruins, when you both indignantly 
exclaim, in the same breath:
“There you are! what did I tell you?”
Meanwhile the third man, who has been baling out the boat, and who has 
spilled the water down his sleeve, and has been cursing away to himself 
steadily for the last ten minutes, wants to know what the thundering 
blazes you’re playing at, and why the blarmed tent isn’t up yet.
At last, somehow or other, it does get up, and you land the things.  It 
is hopeless attempting to make a wood fire, so you light the methylated 
spirit stove, and crowd round that.
Rainwater is the chief article of diet at supper.  The bread is two-
thirds rainwater, the beefsteak-pie is exceedingly rich in it, and the 
jam, and the butter, and the salt, and the coffee have all combined with 
it to make soup.
After supper, you find your tobacco is damp, and you cannot smoke.  
Luckily you have a bottle of the stuff that cheers and inebriates, if 
taken in proper quantity, and this restores to you sufficient interest in 
life to induce you to go to bed.
There you dream that an elephant has suddenly sat down on your chest, and 
that the volcano has exploded and thrown you down to the bottom of the 
sea – the elephant still sleeping peacefully on your bosom.  You wake up 
and grasp the idea that something terrible really has happened.  Your 
first impression is that the end of the world has come; and then you 
think that this cannot be, and that it is thieves and murderers, or else 
fire, and this opinion you express in the usual method.  No help comes, 
however, and all you know is that thousands of people are kicking you, 
and you are being smothered.
Somebody else seems in trouble, too.  You can hear his faint cries coming 
from underneath your bed.  Determining, at all events, to sell your life 
dearly, you struggle frantically, hitting out right and left with arms 
and legs, and yelling lustily the while, and at last something gives way, 
and you find your head in the fresh air.  Two feet off, you dimly observe 
a half-dressed ruffian, waiting to kill you, and you are preparing for a 
life-and-death struggle with him, when it begins to dawn upon you that 
it’s Jim.
“Oh, it’s you, is it?” he says, recognising you at the same moment.
“Yes,” you answer, rubbing your eyes; “what’s happened?”
“Bally tent’s blown down, I think,” he says.
“Where’s Bill?”
Then you both raise up your voices and shout for “Bill!” and the ground 
beneath you heaves and rocks, and the muffled voice that you heard before 
replies from out the ruin:
“Get off my head, can’t you?”
And Bill struggles out, a muddy, trampled wreck, and in an unnecessarily 
aggressive mood – he being under the evident belief that the whole thing 
has been done on purpose.
In the morning you are all three speechless, owing to having caught 
severe colds in the night; you also feel very quarrelsome, and you swear 
at each other in hoarse whispers during the whole of breakfast time.
We therefore decided that we would sleep out on fine nights; and hotel 
it, and inn it, and pub. it, like respectable folks, when it was wet, or 
when we felt inclined for a change.
Montmorency hailed this compromise with much approval.  He does not revel 
in romantic solitude.  Give him something noisy; and if a trifle low, so 
much the jollier.  To look at Montmorency you would imagine that he was 
an angel sent upon the earth, for some reason withheld from mankind, in 
the shape of a small fox-terrier.  There is a sort of Oh-what-a-wicked-
world-this-is-and-how-I-wish-I-could-do-something-to-make-it-better-and-
nobler expression about Montmorency that has been known to bring the 
tears into the eyes of pious old ladies and gentlemen.
When first he came to live at my expense, I never thought I should be 
able to get him to stop long.  I used to sit down and look at him, as he 
sat on the rug and looked up at me, and think: “Oh, that dog will never 
live.  He will be snatched up to the bright skies in a chariot, that is 
what will happen to him.”
But, when I had paid for about a dozen chickens that he had killed; and 
had dragged him, growling and kicking, by the scruff of his neck, out of 
a hundred and fourteen street fights; and had had a dead cat brought 
round for my inspection by an irate female, who called me a murderer; and 
had been summoned by the man next door but one for having a ferocious dog 
at large, that had kept him pinned up in his own tool-shed, afraid to 
venture his nose outside the door for over two hours on a cold night; and 
had learned that the gardener, unknown to myself, had won thirty 
shillings by backing him to kill rats against time, then I began to think 
that maybe they’d let him remain on earth for a bit longer, after all.
To hang about a stable, and collect a gang of the most disreputable dogs 
to be found in the town, and lead them out to march round the slums to 
fight other disreputable dogs, is Montmorency’s idea of “life;” and so, 
as I before observed, he gave to the suggestion of inns, and pubs., and 
hotels his most emphatic approbation.
Having thus settled the sleeping arrangements to the satisfaction of all 
four of us, the only thing left to discuss was what we should take with 
us; and this we had begun to argue, when Harris said he’d had enough 
oratory for one night, and proposed that we should go out and have a 
smile, saying that he had found a place, round by the square, where you 
could really get a drop of Irish worth drinking.
George said he felt thirsty (I never knew George when he didn’t); and, as 
I had a presentiment that a little whisky, warm, with a slice of lemon, 
would do my complaint good, the debate was, by common assent, adjourned 
to the following night; and the assembly put on its hats and went out.
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
