




ARRANGEMENTS SETTLED. – HARRIS’S METHOD OF DOING WORK. – HOW THE ELDERLY, 
FAMILY-MAN PUTS UP A PICTURE. – GEORGE MAKES A SENSIBLE, REMARK. – 
DELIGHTS OF EARLY MORNING BATHING. – PROVISIONS FOR GETTING UPSET.
SO, on the following evening, we again assembled, to discuss and arrange 
our plans.  Harris said:
“Now, the first thing to settle is what to take with us.  Now, you get a 
bit of paper and write down, J., and you get the grocery catalogue, 
George, and somebody give me a bit of pencil, and then I’ll make out a 
list.”
That’s Harris all over – so ready to take the burden of everything 
himself, and put it on the backs of other people.
He always reminds me of my poor Uncle Podger.  You never saw such a 
commotion up and down a house, in all your life, as when my Uncle Podger 
undertook to do a job.  A picture would have come home from the frame-
maker’s, and be standing in the dining-room, waiting to be put up; and 
Aunt Podger would ask what was to be done with it, and Uncle Podger would 
say:
“Oh, you leave that to ME.  Don’t you, any of you, worry yourselves about 
that.  I’LL do all that.”
And then he would take off his coat, and begin.  He would send the girl 
out for sixpen’orth of nails, and then one of the boys after her to tell 
her what size to get; and, from that, he would gradually work down, and 
start the whole house.
“Now you go and get me my hammer, Will,” he would shout; “and you bring 
me the rule, Tom; and I shall want the step-ladder, and I had better have 
a kitchen-chair, too; and, Jim! you run round to Mr. Goggles, and tell 
him, `Pa’s kind regards, and hopes his leg’s better; and will he lend him 
his spirit-level?’  And don’t you go, Maria, because I shall want 
somebody to hold me the light; and when the girl comes back, she must go 
out again for a bit of picture-cord; and Tom! – where’s Tom? – Tom, you 
come here; I shall want you to hand me up the picture.”
And then he would lift up the picture, and drop it, and it would come out 
of the frame, and he would try to save the glass, and cut himself; and 
then he would spring round the room, looking for his handkerchief.  He 
could not find his handkerchief, because it was in the pocket of the coat 
he had taken off, and he did not know where he had put the coat, and all 
the house had to leave off looking for his tools, and start looking for 
his coat; while he would dance round and hinder them.
“Doesn’t anybody in the whole house know where my coat is?  I never came 
across such a set in all my life – upon my word I didn’t.  Six of you! – 
and you can’t find a coat that I put down not five minutes ago!  Well, of 
all the – “
Then he’d get up, and find that he had been sitting on it, and would call 
out:
“Oh, you can give it up!  I’ve found it myself now.  Might just as well 
ask the cat to find anything as expect you people to find it.”
And, when half an hour had been spent in tying up his finger, and a new 
glass had been got, and the tools, and the ladder, and the chair, and the 
candle had been brought, he would have another go, the whole family, 
including the girl and the charwoman, standing round in a semi-circle, 
ready to help.  Two people would have to hold the chair, and a third 
would help him up on it, and hold him there, and a fourth would hand him 
a nail, and a fifth would pass him up the hammer, and he would take hold 
of the nail, and drop it.
“There!” he would say, in an injured tone, “now the nail’s gone.”
And we would all have to go down on our knees and grovel for it, while he 
would stand on the chair, and grunt, and want to know if he was to be 
kept there all the evening.
The nail would be found at last, but by that time he would have lost the 
hammer.
“Where’s the hammer?  What did I do with the hammer?  Great heavens!  
Seven of you, gaping round there, and you don’t know what I did with the 
hammer!”
We would find the hammer for him, and then he would have lost sight of 
the mark he had made on the wall, where the nail was to go in, and each 
of us had to get up on the chair, beside him, and see if we could find 
it; and we would each discover it in a different place, and he would call 
us all fools, one after another, and tell us to get down.  And he would 
take the rule, and re-measure, and find that he wanted half thirty-one 
and three-eighths inches from the corner, and would try to do it in his 
head, and go mad.
And we would all try to do it in our heads, and all arrive at different 
results, and sneer at one another.  And in the general row, the original 
number would be forgotten, and Uncle Podger would have to measure it 
again.
He would use a bit of string this time, and at the critical moment, when 
the old fool was leaning over the chair at an angle of forty-five, and 
trying to reach a point three inches beyond what was possible for him to 
reach, the string would slip, and down he would slide on to the piano, a 
really fine musical effect being produced by the suddenness with which 
his head and body struck all the notes at the same time.
And Aunt Maria would say that she would not allow the children to stand 
round and hear such language.
At last, Uncle Podger would get the spot fixed again, and put the point 
of the nail on it with his left hand, and take the hammer in his right 
hand.  And, with the first blow, he would smash his thumb, and drop the 
hammer, with a yell, on somebody’s toes.
Aunt Maria would mildly observe that, next time Uncle Podger was going to 
hammer a nail into the wall, she hoped he’d let her know in time, so that 
she could make arrangements to go and spend a week with her mother while 
it was being done.
“Oh! you women, you make such a fuss over everything,” Uncle Podger would 
reply, picking himself up.  “Why, I LIKE doing a little job of this 
sort.”
And then he would have another try, and, at the second blow, the nail 
would go clean through the plaster, and half the hammer after it, and 
Uncle Podger be precipitated against the wall with force nearly 
sufficient to flatten his nose.
Then we had to find the rule and the string again, and a new hole was 
made; and, about midnight, the picture would be up – very crooked and 
insecure, the wall for yards round looking as if it had been smoothed 
down with a rake, and everybody dead beat and wretched – except Uncle 
Podger.
“There you are,” he would say, stepping heavily off the chair on to the 
charwoman’s corns, and surveying the mess he had made with evident pride.  
“Why, some people would have had a man in to do a little thing like 
that!”
Harris will be just that sort of man when he grows up, I know, and I told 
him so.  I said I could not permit him to take so much labour upon 
himself.  I said:
“No; YOU get the paper, and the pencil, and the catalogue, and George 
write down, and I’ll do the work.”
The first list we made out had to be discarded.  It was clear that the 
upper reaches of the Thames would not allow of the navigation of a boat 
sufficiently large to take the things we had set down as indispensable; 
so we tore the list up, and looked at one another!
George said:
“You know we are on a wrong track altogether.  We must not think of the 
things we could do with, but only of the things that we can’t do 
without.”
George comes out really quite sensible at times.  You’d be surprised.  I 
call that downright wisdom, not merely as regards the present case, but 
with reference to our trip up the river of life, generally.  How many 
people, on that voyage, load up the boat till it is ever in danger of 
swamping with a store of foolish things which they think essential to the 
pleasure and comfort of the trip, but which are really only useless 
lumber.
How they pile the poor little craft mast-high with fine clothes and big 
houses; with useless servants, and a host of swell friends that do not 
care twopence for them, and that they do not care three ha’pence for; 
with expensive entertainments that nobody enjoys, with formalities and 
fashions, with pretence and ostentation, and with – oh, heaviest, maddest 
lumber of all! – the dread of what will my neighbour think, with luxuries 
that only cloy, with pleasures that bore, with empty show that, like the 
criminal’s iron crown of yore, makes to bleed and swoon the aching head 
that wears it!
It is lumber, man – all lumber!  Throw it overboard.  It makes the boat 
so heavy to pull, you nearly faint at the oars.  It makes it so 
cumbersome and dangerous to manage, you never know a moment’s freedom 
from anxiety and care, never gain a moment’s rest for dreamy laziness – 
no time to watch the windy shadows skimming lightly o’er the shallows, or 
the glittering sunbeams flitting in and out among the ripples, or the 
great trees by the margin looking down at their own image, or the woods 
all green and golden, or the lilies white and yellow, or the sombre-
waving rushes, or the sedges, or the orchis, or the blue forget-me-nots.
Throw the lumber over, man!  Let your boat of life be light, packed with 
only what you need – a homely home and simple pleasures, one or two 
friends, worth the name, someone to love and someone to love you, a cat, 
a dog, and a pipe or two, enough to eat and enough to wear, and a little 
more than enough to drink; for thirst is a dangerous thing.
You will find the boat easier to pull then, and it will not be so liable 
to upset, and it will not matter so much if it does upset; good, plain 
merchandise will stand water.  You will have time to think as well as to 
work.  Time to drink in life’s sunshine – time to listen to the AEolian 
music that the wind of God draws from the human heart-strings around us – 
time to -
I beg your pardon, really.  I quite forgot.
Well, we left the list to George, and he began it.
“We won’t take a tent, suggested George; “we will have a boat with a 
cover.  It is ever so much simpler, and more comfortable.”
It seemed a good thought, and we adopted it.  I do not know whether you 
have ever seen the thing I mean.  You fix iron hoops up over the boat, 
and stretch a huge canvas over them, and fasten it down all round, from 
stem to stern, and it converts the boat into a sort of little house, and 
it is beautifully cosy, though a trifle stuffy; but there, everything has 
its drawbacks, as the man said when his mother-in-law died, and they came 
down upon him for the funeral expenses.
George said that in that case we must take a rug each, a lamp, some soap, 
a brush and comb (between us), a toothbrush (each), a basin, some tooth-
powder, some shaving tackle (sounds like a French exercise, doesn’t it?), 
and a couple of big-towels for bathing.  I notice that people always make 
gigantic arrangements for bathing when they are going anywhere near the 
water, but that they don’t bathe much when they are there.
It is the same when you go to the sea-side.  I always determine – when 
thinking over the matter in London – that I’ll get up early every 
morning, and go and have a dip before breakfast, and I religiously pack 
up a pair of drawers and a bath towel.  I always get red bathing drawers.  
I rather fancy myself in red drawers.  They suit my complexion so.  But 
when I get to the sea I don’t feel somehow that I want that early morning 
bathe nearly so much as I did when I was in town.
On the contrary, I feel more that I want to stop in bed till the last 
moment, and then come down and have my breakfast.  Once or twice virtue 
has triumphed, and I have got out at six and half-dressed myself, and 
have taken my drawers and towel, and stumbled dismally off.  But I 
haven’t enjoyed it.  They seem to keep a specially cutting east wind, 
waiting for me, when I go to bathe in the early morning; and they pick 
out all the three-cornered stones, and put them on the top, and they 
sharpen up the rocks and cover the points over with a bit of sand so that 
I can’t see them, and they take the sea and put it two miles out, so that 
I have to huddle myself up in my arms and hop, shivering, through six 
inches of water.  And when I do get to the sea, it is rough and quite 
insulting.
One huge wave catches me up and chucks me in a sitting posture, as hard 
as ever it can, down on to a rock which has been put there for me.  And, 
before I’ve said “Oh! Ugh!” and found out what has gone, the wave comes 
back and carries me out to mid-ocean.  I begin to strike out frantically 
for the shore, and wonder if I shall ever see home and friends again, and 
wish I’d been kinder to my little sister when a boy (when I was a boy, I 
mean).  Just when I have given up all hope, a wave retires and leaves me 
sprawling like a star-fish on the sand, and I get up and look back and 
find that I’ve been swimming for my life in two feet of water.  I hop 
back and dress, and crawl home, where I have to pretend I liked it.
In the present instance, we all talked as if we were going to have a long 
swim every morning.
George said it was so pleasant to wake up in the boat in the fresh 
morning, and plunge into the limpid river.  Harris said there was nothing 
like a swim before breakfast to give you an appetite.  He said it always 
gave him an appetite.  George said that if it was going to make Harris 
eat more than Harris ordinarily ate, then he should protest against 
Harris having a bath at all.
He said there would be quite enough hard work in towing sufficient food 
for Harris up against stream, as it was.
I urged upon George, however, how much pleasanter it would be to have 
Harris clean and fresh about the boat, even if we did have to take a few 
more hundredweight of provisions; and he got to see it in my light, and 
withdrew his opposition to Harris’s bath.
Agreed, finally, that we should take THREE bath towels, so as not to keep 
each other waiting.
For clothes, George said two suits of flannel would be sufficient, as we 
could wash them ourselves, in the river, when they got dirty.  We asked 
him if he had ever tried washing flannels in the river, and he replied: 
“No, not exactly himself like; but he knew some fellows who had, and it 
was easy enough;” and Harris and I were weak enough to fancy he knew what 
he was talking about, and that three respectable young men, without 
position or influence, and with no experience in washing, could really 
clean their own shirts and trousers in the river Thames with a bit of 
soap.
We were to learn in the days to come, when it was too late, that George 
was a miserable impostor, who could evidently have known nothing whatever 
about the matter.  If you had seen these clothes after – but, as the 
shilling shockers say, we anticipate.
George impressed upon us to take a change of under-things and plenty of 
socks, in case we got upset and wanted a change; also plenty of 
handkerchiefs, as they would do to wipe things, and a pair of leather 
boots as well as our boating shoes, as we should want them if we got 
upset.
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
