




KINGSTON. – INSTRUCTIVE REMARKS ON EARLY ENGLISH HISTORY. – INSTRUCTIVE 
OBSERVATIONS ON CARVED OAK AND LIFE IN GENERAL. – SAD CASE OF STIVVINGS, 
JUNIOR. – MUSINGS ON ANTIQUITY. – I FORGET THAT I AM STEERING. – 
INTERESTING RESULT. – HAMPTON COURT MAZE. – HARRIS AS A GUIDE.
IT was a glorious morning, late spring or early summer, as you care to 
take it, when the dainty sheen of grass and leaf is blushing to a deeper 
green; and the year seems like a fair young maid, trembling with strange, 
wakening pulses on the brink of womanhood.
The quaint back streets of Kingston, where they came down to the water’s 
edge, looked quite picturesque in the flashing sunlight, the glinting 
river with its drifting barges, the wooded towpath, the trim-kept villas 
on the other side, Harris, in a red and orange blazer, grunting away at 
the sculls, the distant glimpses of the grey old palace of the Tudors, 
all made a sunny picture, so bright but calm, so full of life, and yet so 
peaceful, that, early in the day though it was, I felt myself being 
dreamily lulled off into a musing fit.
I mused on Kingston, or “Kyningestun,” as it was once called in the days 
when Saxon “kinges” were crowned there.  Great Caesar crossed the river 
there, and the Roman legions camped upon its sloping uplands.  Caesar, 
like, in later years, Elizabeth, seems to have stopped everywhere: only 
he was more respectable than good Queen Bess; he didn’t put up at the 
public-houses.
She was nuts on public-houses, was England’s Virgin Queen.  There’s 
scarcely a pub. of any attractions within ten miles of London that she 
does not seem to have looked in at, or stopped at, or slept at, some time 
or other.  I wonder now, supposing Harris, say, turned over a new leaf, 
and became a great and good man, and got to be Prime Minister, and died, 
if they would put up signs over the public-houses that he had patronised: 
“Harris had a glass of bitter in this house;” “Harris had two of Scotch 
cold here in the summer of `88;” “Harris was chucked from here in 
December, 1886.”
No, there would be too many of them!  It would be the houses that he had 
never entered that would become famous.  “Only house in South London that 
Harris never had a drink in!”  The people would flock to it to see what 
could have been the matter with it.
How poor weak-minded King Edwy must have hated Kyningestun!  The 
coronation feast had been too much for him.  Maybe boar’s head stuffed 
with sugar-plums did not agree with him (it wouldn’t with me, I know), 
and he had had enough of sack and mead; so he slipped from the noisy 
revel to steal a quiet moonlight hour with his beloved Elgiva.
Perhaps, from the casement, standing hand-in-hand, they were watching the 
calm moonlight on the river, while from the distant halls the boisterous 
revelry floated in broken bursts of faint-heard din and tumult.
Then brutal Odo and St. Dunstan force their rude way into the quiet room, 
and hurl coarse insults at the sweet-faced Queen, and drag poor Edwy back 
to the loud clamour of the drunken brawl.
Years later, to the crash of battle-music, Saxon kings and Saxon revelry 
were buried side by side, and Kingston’s greatness passed away for a 
time, to rise once more when Hampton Court became the palace of the 
Tudors and the Stuarts, and the royal barges strained at their moorings 
on the river’s bank, and bright-cloaked gallants swaggered down the 
water-steps to cry: “What Ferry, ho!  Gadzooks, gramercy.”
Many of the old houses, round about, speak very plainly of those days 
when Kingston was a royal borough, and nobles and courtiers lived there, 
near their King, and the long road to the palace gates was gay all day 
with clanking steel and prancing palfreys, and rustling silks and 
velvets, and fair faces.  The large and spacious houses, with their 
oriel, latticed windows, their huge fireplaces, and their gabled roofs, 
breathe of the days of hose and doublet, of pearl-embroidered stomachers, 
and complicated oaths.  They were upraised in the days “when men knew how 
to build.”  The hard red bricks have only grown more firmly set with 
time, and their oak stairs do not creak and grunt when you try to go down 
them quietly.
Speaking of oak staircases reminds me that there is a magnificent carved 
oak staircase in one of the houses in Kingston.  It is a shop now, in the 
market-place, but it was evidently once the mansion of some great 
personage.  A friend of mine, who lives at Kingston, went in there to buy 
a hat one day, and, in a thoughtless moment, put his hand in his pocket 
and paid for it then and there.
The shopman (he knows my friend) was naturally a little staggered at 
first; but, quickly recovering himself, and feeling that something ought 
to be done to encourage this sort of thing, asked our hero if he would 
like to see some fine old carved oak.  My friend said he would, and the 
shopman, thereupon, took him through the shop, and up the staircase of 
the house.  The balusters were a superb piece of workmanship, and the 
wall all the way up was oak-panelled, with carving that would have done 
credit to a palace.
From the stairs, they went into the drawing-room, which was a large, 
bright room, decorated with a somewhat startling though cheerful paper of 
a blue ground.  There was nothing, however, remarkable about the 
apartment, and my friend wondered why he had been brought there.  The 
proprietor went up to the paper, and tapped it.  It gave forth a wooden 
sound.
“Oak,” he explained.  “All carved oak, right up to the ceiling, just the 
same as you saw on the staircase.”
“But, great Caesar! man,” expostulated my friend; “you don’t mean to say 
you have covered over carved oak with blue wall-paper?”
“Yes,” was the reply: “it was expensive work.  Had to match-board it all 
over first, of course.  But the room looks cheerful now.  It was awful 
gloomy before.”
I can’t say I altogether blame the man (which is doubtless a great relief 
to his mind).  From his point of view, which would be that of the average 
householder, desiring to take life as lightly as possible, and not that 
of the old-curiosity-shop maniac, there is reason on his side.  Carved 
oak is very pleasant to look at, and to have a little of, but it is no 
doubt somewhat depressing to live in, for those whose fancy does not lie 
that way.  It would be like living in a church.
No, what was sad in his case was that he, who didn’t care for carved oak, 
should have his drawing-room panelled with it, while people who do care 
for it have to pay enormous prices to get it.  It seems to be the rule of 
this world.  Each person has what he doesn’t want, and other people have 
what he does want.
Married men have wives, and don’t seem to want them; and young single 
fellows cry out that they can’t get them.  Poor people who can hardly 
keep themselves have eight hearty children.  Rich old couples, with no 
one to leave their money to, die childless.
Then there are girls with lovers.  The girls that have lovers never want 
them.  They say they would rather be without them, that they bother them, 
and why don’t they go and make love to Miss Smith and Miss Brown, who are 
plain and elderly, and haven’t got any lovers?  They themselves don’t 
want lovers.  They never mean to marry.
It does not do to dwell on these things; it makes one so sad.
There was a boy at our school, we used to call him Sandford and Merton.  
His real name was Stivvings.  He was the most extraordinary lad I ever 
came across.  I believe he really liked study.  He used to get into awful 
rows for sitting up in bed and reading Greek; and as for French irregular 
verbs there was simply no keeping him away from them.  He was full of 
weird and unnatural notions about being a credit to his parents and an 
honour to the school; and he yearned to win prizes, and grow up and be a 
clever man, and had all those sorts of weak-minded ideas.  I never knew 
such a strange creature, yet harmless, mind you, as the babe unborn.
Well, that boy used to get ill about twice a week, so that he couldn’t go 
to school.  There never was such a boy to get ill as that Sandford and 
Merton.  If there was any known disease going within ten miles of him, he 
had it, and had it badly.  He would take bronchitis in the dog-days, and 
have hay-fever at Christmas.  After a six weeks’ period of drought, he 
would be stricken down with rheumatic fever; and he would go out in a 
November fog and come home with a sunstroke.
They put him under laughing-gas one year, poor lad, and drew all his 
teeth, and gave him a false set, because he suffered so terribly with 
toothache; and then it turned to neuralgia and ear-ache.  He was never 
without a cold, except once for nine weeks while he had scarlet fever; 
and he always had chilblains.  During the great cholera scare of 1871, 
our neighbourhood was singularly free from it.  There was only one 
reputed case in the whole parish: that case was young Stivvings.
He had to stop in bed when he was ill, and eat chicken and custards and 
hot-house grapes; and he would lie there and sob, because they wouldn’t 
let him do Latin exercises, and took his German grammar away from him.
And we other boys, who would have sacrificed ten terms of our school-life 
for the sake of being ill for a day, and had no desire whatever to give 
our parents any excuse for being stuck-up about us, couldn’t catch so 
much as a stiff neck.  We fooled about in draughts, and it did us good, 
and freshened us up; and we took things to make us sick, and they made us 
fat, and gave us an appetite.  Nothing we could think of seemed to make 
us ill until the holidays began.  Then, on the breaking-up day, we caught 
colds, and whooping cough, and all kinds of disorders, which lasted till 
the term recommenced; when, in spite of everything we could manoeuvre to 
the contrary, we would get suddenly well again, and be better than ever.
Such is life; and we are but as grass that is cut down, and put into the 
oven and baked.
To go back to the carved-oak question, they must have had very fair 
notions of the artistic and the beautiful, our great-great-grandfathers.  
Why, all our art treasures of to-day are only the dug-up commonplaces of 
three or four hundred years ago.  I wonder if there is real intrinsic 
beauty in the old soup-plates, beer-mugs, and candle-snuffers that we 
prize so now, or if it is only the halo of age glowing around them that 
gives them their charms in our eyes.  The “old blue” that we hang about 
our walls as ornaments were the common every-day household utensils of a 
few centuries ago; and the pink shepherds and the yellow shepherdesses 
that we hand round now for all our friends to gush over, and pretend they 
understand, were the unvalued mantel-ornaments that the mother of the 
eighteenth century would have given the baby to suck when he cried.
Will it be the same in the future?  Will the prized treasures of to-day 
always be the cheap trifles of the day before?  Will rows of our willow-
pattern dinner-plates be ranged above the chimneypieces of the great in 
the years 2000 and odd?  Will the white cups with the gold rim and the 
beautiful gold flower inside (species unknown), that our Sarah Janes now 
break in sheer light-heartedness of spirit, be carefully mended, and 
stood upon a bracket, and dusted only by the lady of the house?
That china dog that ornaments the bedroom of my furnished lodgings.  It 
is a white dog.  Its eyes blue.  Its nose is a delicate red, with spots.  
Its head is painfully erect, its expression is amiability carried to 
verge of imbecility.  I do not admire it myself.  Considered as a work of 
art, I may say it irritates me.  Thoughtless friends jeer at it, and even 
my landlady herself has no admiration for it, and excuses its presence by 
the circumstance that her aunt gave it to her.
But in 200 years’ time it is more than probable that that dog will be dug 
up from somewhere or other, minus its legs, and with its tail broken, and 
will be sold for old china, and put in a glass cabinet.  And people will 
pass it round, and admire it.  They will be struck by the wonderful depth 
of the colour on the nose, and speculate as to how beautiful the bit of 
the tail that is lost no doubt was.
We, in this age, do not see the beauty of that dog.  We are too familiar 
with it.  It is like the sunset and the stars: we are not awed by their 
loveliness because they are common to our eyes.  So it is with that china 
dog.  In 2288 people will gush over it.  The making of such dogs will 
have become a lost art.  Our descendants will wonder how we did it, and 
say how clever we were.  We shall be referred to lovingly as “those grand 
old artists that flourished in the nineteenth century, and produced those 
china dogs.”
The “sampler” that the eldest daughter did at school will be spoken of as 
“tapestry of the Victorian era,” and be almost priceless.  The blue-and-
white mugs of the present-day roadside inn will be hunted up, all cracked 
and chipped, and sold for their weight in gold, and rich people will use 
them for claret cups; and travellers from Japan will buy up all the 
“Presents from Ramsgate,” and “Souvenirs of Margate,” that may have 
escaped destruction, and take them back to Jedo as ancient English 
curios.
At this point Harris threw away the sculls, got up and left his seat, and 
sat on his back, and stuck his legs in the air.  Montmorency howled, and 
turned a somersault, and the top hamper jumped up, and all the things 
came out.
I was somewhat surprised, but I did not lose my temper.  I said, 
pleasantly enough:
“Hulloa! what’s that for?”
“What’s that for?  Why – “
No, on second thoughts, I will not repeat what Harris said.  I may have 
been to blame, I admit it; but nothing excuses violence of language and 
coarseness of expression, especially in a man who has been carefully 
brought up, as I know Harris has been.  I was thinking of other things, 
and forgot, as any one might easily understand, that I was steering, and 
the consequence was that we had got mixed up a good deal with the tow-
path.  It was difficult to say, for the moment, which was us and which 
was the Middlesex bank of the river; but we found out after a while, and 
separated ourselves.
Harris, however, said he had done enough for a bit, and proposed that I 
should take a turn; so, as we were in, I got out and took the tow-line, 
and ran the boat on past Hampton Court.  What a dear old wall that is 
that runs along by the river there!  I never pass it without feeling 
better for the sight of it.  Such a mellow, bright, sweet old wall; what 
a charming picture it would make, with the lichen creeping here, and the 
moss growing there, a shy young vine peeping over the top at this spot, 
to see what is going on upon the busy river, and the sober old ivy 
clustering a little farther down!  There are fifty shades and tints and 
hues in every ten yards of that old wall.  If I could only draw, and knew 
how to paint, I could make a lovely sketch of that old wall, I’m sure.  
I’ve often thought I should like to live at Hampton Court.  It looks so 
peaceful and so quiet, and it is such a dear old place to ramble round in 
the early morning before many people are about.
But, there, I don’t suppose I should really care for it when it came to 
actual practice.  It would be so ghastly dull and depressing in the 
evening, when your lamp cast uncanny shadows on the panelled walls, and 
the echo of distant feet rang through the cold stone corridors, and now 
drew nearer, and now died away, and all was death-like silence, save the 
beating of one’s own heart.
We are creatures of the sun, we men and women.  We love light and life.  
That is why we crowd into the towns and cities, and the country grows 
more and more deserted every year.  In the sunlight – in the daytime, 
when Nature is alive and busy all around us, we like the open hill-sides 
and the deep woods well enough: but in the night, when our Mother Earth 
has gone to sleep, and left us waking, oh! the world seems so lonesome, 
and we get frightened, like children in a silent house.  Then we sit and 
sob, and long for the gas-lit streets, and the sound of human voices, and 
the answering throb of human life.  We feel so helpless and so little in 
the great stillness, when the dark trees rustle in the night-wind.  There 
are so many ghosts about, and their silent sighs make us feel so sad.  
Let us gather together in the great cities, and light huge bonfires of a 
million gas-jets, and shout and sing together, and feel brave.
Harris asked me if I’d ever been in the maze at Hampton Court.  He said 
he went in once to show somebody else the way.  He had studied it up in a 
map, and it was so simple that it seemed foolish – hardly worth the 
twopence charged for admission.  Harris said he thought that map must 
have been got up as a practical joke, because it wasn’t a bit like the 
real thing, and only misleading.  It was a country cousin that Harris 
took in.  He said:
“We’ll just go in here, so that you can say you’ve been, but it’s very 
simple.  It’s absurd to call it a maze.  You keep on taking the first 
turning to the right.  We’ll just walk round for ten minutes, and then go 
and get some lunch.”
They met some people soon after they had got inside, who said they had 
been there for three-quarters of an hour, and had had about enough of it.  
Harris told them they could follow him, if they liked; he was just going 
in, and then should turn round and come out again.  They said it was very 
kind of him, and fell behind, and followed.
They picked up various other people who wanted to get it over, as they 
went along, until they had absorbed all the persons in the maze.  People 
who had given up all hopes of ever getting either in or out, or of ever 
seeing their home and friends again, plucked up courage at the sight of 
Harris and his party, and joined the procession, blessing him.  Harris 
said he should judge there must have been twenty people, following him, 
in all; and one woman with a baby, who had been there all the morning, 
insisted on taking his arm, for fear of losing him.
Harris kept on turning to the right, but it seemed a long way, and his 
cousin said he supposed it was a very big maze.
“Oh, one of the largest in Europe,” said Harris.
“Yes, it must be,” replied the cousin, “because we’ve walked a good two 
miles already.”
Harris began to think it rather strange himself, but he held on until, at 
last, they passed the half of a penny bun on the ground that Harris’s 
cousin swore he had noticed there seven minutes ago.  Harris said: “Oh, 
impossible!” but the woman with the baby said, “Not at all,” as she 
herself had taken it from the child, and thrown it down there, just 
before she met Harris.  She also added that she wished she never had met 
Harris, and expressed an opinion that he was an impostor.  That made 
Harris mad, and he produced his map, and explained his theory.
“The map may be all right enough,” said one of the party, “if you know 
whereabouts in it we are now.”
Harris didn’t know, and suggested that the best thing to do would be to 
go back to the entrance, and begin again.  For the beginning again part 
of it there was not much enthusiasm; but with regard to the advisability 
of going back to the entrance there was complete unanimity, and so they 
turned, and trailed after Harris again, in the opposite direction.  About 
ten minutes more passed, and then they found themselves in the centre.
Harris thought at first of pretending that that was what he had been 
aiming at; but the crowd looked dangerous, and he decided to treat it as 
an accident.
Anyhow, they had got something to start from then.  They did know where 
they were, and the map was once more consulted, and the thing seemed 
simpler than ever, and off they started for the third time.
And three minutes later they were back in the centre again.
After that, they simply couldn’t get anywhere else.  Whatever way they 
turned brought them back to the middle.  It became so regular at length, 
that some of the people stopped there, and waited for the others to take 
a walk round, and come back to them.  Harris drew out his map again, 
after a while, but the sight of it only infuriated the mob, and they told 
him to go and curl his hair with it.  Harris said that he couldn’t help 
feeling that, to a certain extent, he had become unpopular.
They all got crazy at last, and sang out for the keeper, and the man came 
and climbed up the ladder outside, and shouted out directions to them.  
But all their heads were, by this time, in such a confused whirl that 
they were incapable of grasping anything, and so the man told them to 
stop where they were, and he would come to them.  They huddled together, 
and waited; and he climbed down, and came in.
He was a young keeper, as luck would have it, and new to the business; 
and when he got in, he couldn’t find them, and he wandered about, trying 
to get to them, and then HE got lost.  They caught sight of him, every 
now and then, rushing about the other side of the hedge, and he would see 
them, and rush to get to them, and they would wait there for about five 
minutes, and then he would reappear again in exactly the same spot, and 
ask them where they had been.
They had to wait till one of the old keepers came back from his dinner 
before they got out.
Harris said he thought it was a very fine maze, so far as he was a judge; 
and we agreed that we would try to get George to go into it, on our way 
back.
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
