




BLACKMAILING. – THE PROPER COURSE TO PURSUE. – SELFISH BOORISHNESS OF 
RIVER-SIDE LANDOWNER. – “NOTICE” BOARDS. – UNCHRISTIANLIKE FEELINGS OF 
HARRIS. – HOW HARRIS SINGS A COMIC SONG. – A HIGH-CLASS PARTY. – SHAMEFUL 
CONDUCT OF TWO ABANDONED YOUNG MEN. – SOME USELESS INFORMATION. – GEORGE 
BUYS A BANJO.
WE stopped under the willows by Kempton Park, and lunched.  It is a 
pretty little spot there: a pleasant grass plateau, running along by the 
water’s edge, and overhung by willows.  We had just commenced the third 
course – the bread and jam – when a gentleman in shirt-sleeves and a 
short pipe came along, and wanted to know if we knew that we were 
trespassing.  We said we hadn’t given the matter sufficient consideration 
as yet to enable us to arrive at a definite conclusion on that point, but 
that, if he assured us on his word as a gentleman that we WERE 
trespassing, we would, without further hesitation, believe it.
He gave us the required assurance, and we thanked him, but he still hung 
about, and seemed to be dissatisfied, so we asked him if there was 
anything further that we could do for him; and Harris, who is of a chummy 
disposition, offered him a bit of bread and jam.
I fancy he must have belonged to some society sworn to abstain from bread 
and jam; for he declined it quite gruffly, as if he were vexed at being 
tempted with it, and he added that it was his duty to turn us off.
Harris said that if it was a duty it ought to be done, and asked the man 
what was his idea with regard to the best means for accomplishing it.  
Harris is what you would call a well-made man of about number one size, 
and looks hard and bony, and the man measured him up and down, and said 
he would go and consult his master, and then come back and chuck us both 
into the river.
Of course, we never saw him any more, and, of course, all he really 
wanted was a shilling.  There are a certain number of riverside roughs 
who make quite an income, during the summer, by slouching about the banks 
and blackmailing weak-minded noodles in this way.  They represent 
themselves as sent by the proprietor.  The proper course to pursue is to 
offer your name and address, and leave the owner, if he really has 
anything to do with the matter, to summon you, and prove what damage you 
have done to his land by sitting down on a bit of it.  But the majority 
of people are so intensely lazy and timid, that they prefer to encourage 
the imposition by giving in to it rather than put an end to it by the 
exertion of a little firmness.
Where it is really the owners that are to blame, they ought to be shown 
up.  The selfishness of the riparian proprietor grows with every year.  
If these men had their way they would close the river Thames altogether.  
They actually do this along the minor tributary streams and in the 
backwaters.  They drive posts into the bed of the stream, and draw chains 
across from bank to bank, and nail huge notice-boards on every tree.  The 
sight of those notice-boards rouses every evil instinct in my nature.  I 
feel I want to tear each one down, and hammer it over the head of the man 
who put it up, until I have killed him, and then I would bury him, and 
put the board up over the grave as a tombstone.
I mentioned these feelings of mine to Harris, and he said he had them 
worse than that.  He said he not only felt he wanted to kill the man who 
caused the board to be put up, but that he should like to slaughter the 
whole of his family and all his friends and relations, and then burn down 
his house.  This seemed to me to be going too far, and I said so to 
Harris; but he answered:
“Not a bit of it.  Serve `em all jolly well right, and I’d go and sing 
comic songs on the ruins.”
I was vexed to hear Harris go on in this blood-thirsty strain.  We never 
ought to allow our instincts of justice to degenerate into mere 
vindictiveness.  It was a long while before I could get Harris to take a 
more Christian view of the subject, but I succeeded at last, and he 
promised me that he would spare the friends and relations at all events, 
and would not sing comic songs on the ruins.
You have never heard Harris sing a comic song, or you would understand 
the service I had rendered to mankind.  It is one of Harris’s fixed ideas 
that he CAN sing a comic song; the fixed idea, on the contrary, among 
those of Harris’s friends who have heard him try, is that he CAN’T and 
never will be able to, and that he ought not to be allowed to try.
When Harris is at a party, and is asked to sing, he replies: “Well, I can 
only sing a COMIC song, you know;” and he says it in a tone that implies 
that his singing of THAT, however, is a thing that you ought to hear 
once, and then die.
“Oh, that IS nice,” says the hostess.  “Do sing one, Mr. Harris;” and 
Harris gets up, and makes for the piano, with the beaming cheeriness of a 
generous-minded man who is just about to give somebody something.
“Now, silence, please, everybody” says the hostess, turning round; “Mr. 
Harris is going to sing a comic song!”
“Oh, how jolly!” they murmur; and they hurry in from the conservatory, 
and come up from the stairs, and go and fetch each other from all over 
the house, and crowd into the drawing-room, and sit round, all smirking 
in anticipation.
Then Harris begins.
Well, you don’t look for much of a voice in a comic song.  You don’t 
expect correct phrasing or vocalization.  You don’t mind if a man does 
find out, when in the middle of a note, that he is too high, and comes 
down with a jerk.  You don’t bother about time.  You don’t mind a man 
being two bars in front of the accompaniment, and easing up in the middle 
of a line to argue it out with the pianist, and then starting the verse 
afresh.  But you do expect the words.
You don’t expect a man to never remember more than the first three lines 
of the first verse, and to keep on repeating these until it is time to 
begin the chorus.  You don’t expect a man to break off in the middle of a 
line, and snigger, and say, it’s very funny, but he’s blest if he can 
think of the rest of it, and then try and make it up for himself, and, 
afterwards, suddenly recollect it, when he has got to an entirely 
different part of the song, and break off, without a word of warning, to 
go back and let you have it then and there.  You don’t – well, I will 
just give you an idea of Harris’s comic singing, and then you can judge 
of it for yourself.
HARRIS (STANDING UP IN FRONT OF PIANO AND ADDRESSING THE EXPECTANT MOB): 
“I’m afraid it’s a very old thing, you know.  I expect you all know it, 
you know.  But it’s the only thing I know.  It’s the Judge’s song out of 
PINAFORE – no, I don’t mean PINAFORE – I mean – you know what I mean – 
the other thing, you know.  You must all join in the chorus, you know.”
[Murmurs of delight and anxiety to join in the chorus.  Brilliant 
performance of prelude to the Judge’s song in “Trial by Jury” by nervous 
Pianist.  Moment arrives for Harris to join in.  Harris takes no notice 
of it.  Nervous pianist commences prelude over again, and Harris, 
commencing singing at the same time, dashes off the first two lines of 
the First Lord’s song out of “Pinafore.”  Nervous pianist tries to push 
on with prelude, gives it up, and tries to follow Harris with 
accompaniment to Judge’s song out “Trial by Jury,” finds that doesn’t 
answer, and tries to recollect what he is doing, and where he is, feels 
his mind giving way, and stops short.]
HARRIS (WITH KINDLY ENCOURAGEMENT): “It’s all right.  You’re doing it 
very well, indeed – go on.”
NERVOUS PIANIST: “I’m afraid there’s a mistake somewhere.  What are you 
singing?”
HARRIS (PROMPTLY): “Why the Judge’s song out of Trial by Jury.  Don’t you 
know it?”
SOME FRIEND OF HARRIS’S (FROM THE BACK OF THE ROOM): “No, you’re not, you 
chuckle-head, you’re singing the Admiral’s song from PINAFORE.”
[Long argument between Harris and Harris’s friend as to what Harris is 
really singing.  Friend finally suggests that it doesn’t matter what 
Harris is singing so long as Harris gets on and sings it, and Harris, 
with an evident sense of injustice rankling inside him, requests pianist 
to begin again.  Pianist, thereupon, starts prelude to the Admiral’s 
song, and Harris, seizing what he considers to be a favourable opening in 
the music, begins.]
HARRIS:
” `When I was young and called to the Bar.’ “
[GENERAL ROAR OF LAUGHTER, TAKEN BY HARRIS AS A COMPLIMENT.  PIANIST, 
THINKING OF HIS WIFE AND FAMILY, GIVES UP THE UNEQUAL CONTEST AND 
RETIRES; HIS PLACE BEING TAKEN BY A STRONGER-NERVED MAN.
THE NEW PIANIST (CHEERILY): “Now then, old man, you start off, and I’ll 
follow.  We won’t bother about any prelude.”
HARRIS (UPON WHOM THE EXPLANATION OF MATTERS HAS SLOWLY DAWNED – 
LAUGHING): “By Jove!  I beg your pardon.  Of course – I’ve been mixing up 
the two songs.  It was Jenkins confused me, you know.  Now then.
[SINGING; HIS VOICE APPEARING TO COME FROM THE CELLAR, AND SUGGESTING THE 
FIRST LOW WARNINGS OF AN APPROACHING EARTHQUAKE.
” `When I was young I served a term
As office-boy to an attorney’s firm.’
(Aside to pianist): “It is too low, old man; we’ll have that over again, 
if you don’t mind.”
[SINGS FIRST TWO LINES OVER AGAIN, IN A HIGH FALSETTO THIS TIME.  GREAT 
SURPRISE ON THE PART OF THE AUDIENCE.  NERVOUS OLD LADY NEAR THE FIRE 
BEGINS TO CRY, AND HAS TO BE LED OUT.]
HARRIS (continuing):
“I swept the windows and I swept the door,
And I – `
No – no, I cleaned the windows of the big front door.  And I polished up 
the floor – no, dash it – I beg your pardon – funny thing, I can’t think 
of that line.  And I – and I – Oh, well, we’ll get on to the chorus, and 
chance it (SINGS):
`And I diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-de,
Till now I am the ruler of the Queen’s navee.’
Now then, chorus – it is the last two lines repeated, you know.
GENERAL CHORUS:
“And he diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-dee’d,
Till now he is the ruler of the Queen’s navee.”
And Harris never sees what an ass he is making of himself, and how he is 
annoying a lot of people who never did him any harm.  He honestly 
imagines that he has given them a treat, and says he will sing another 
comic song after supper.
Speaking of comic songs and parties, reminds me of a rather curious 
incident at which I once assisted; which, as it throws much light upon 
the inner mental working of human nature in general, ought, I think, to 
be recorded in these pages.
We were a fashionable and highly cultured party.  We had on our best 
clothes, and we talked pretty, and were very happy – all except two young 
fellows, students, just returned from Germany, commonplace young men, who 
seemed restless and uncomfortable, as if they found the proceedings slow.  
The truth was, we were too clever for them.  Our brilliant but polished 
conversation, and our high-class tastes, were beyond them.  They were out 
of place, among us.  They never ought to have been there at all.  
Everybody agreed upon that, later on.
We played MORCEAUX from the old German masters.  We discussed philosophy 
and ethics.  We flirted with graceful dignity.  We were even humorous – 
in a high-class way.
Somebody recited a French poem after supper, and we said it was 
beautiful; and then a lady sang a sentimental ballad in Spanish, and it 
made one or two of us weep – it was so pathetic.
And then those two young men got up, and asked us if we had ever heard 
Herr Slossenn Boschen (who had just arrived, and was then down in the 
supper-room) sing his great German comic song.
None of us had heard it, that we could remember.
The young men said it was the funniest song that had ever been written, 
and that, if we liked, they would get Herr Slossenn Boschen, whom they 
knew very well, to sing it.  They said it was so funny that, when Herr 
Slossenn Boschen had sung it once before the German Emperor, he (the 
German Emperor) had had to be carried off to bed.
They said nobody could sing it like Herr Slossenn Boschen; he was so 
intensely serious all through it that you might fancy he was reciting a 
tragedy, and that, of course, made it all the funnier.  They said he 
never once suggested by his tone or manner that he was singing anything 
funny – that would spoil it.  It was his air of seriousness, almost of 
pathos, that made it so irresistibly amusing.
We said we yearned to hear it, that we wanted a good laugh; and they went 
downstairs, and fetched Herr Slossenn Boschen.
He appeared to be quite pleased to sing it, for he came up at once, and 
sat down to the piano without another word.
“Oh, it will amuse you.  You will laugh,” whispered the two young men, as 
they passed through the room, and took up an unobtrusive position behind 
the Professor’s back.
Herr Slossenn Boschen accompanied himself.  The prelude did not suggest a 
comic song exactly.  It was a weird, soulful air.  It quite made one’s 
flesh creep; but we murmured to one another that it was the German 
method, and prepared to enjoy it.
I don’t understand German myself.  I learned it at school, but forgot 
every word of it two years after I had left, and have felt much better 
ever since.  Still, I did not want the people there to guess my 
ignorance; so I hit upon what I thought to be rather a good idea.  I kept 
my eye on the two young students, and followed them.  When they tittered, 
I tittered; when they roared, I roared; and I also threw in a little 
snigger all by myself now and then, as if I had seen a bit of humour that 
had escaped the others.  I considered this particularly artful on my 
part.
I noticed, as the song progressed, that a good many other people seemed 
to have their eye fixed on the two young men, as well as myself.  These 
other people also tittered when the young men tittered, and roared when 
the young men roared; and, as the two young men tittered and roared and 
exploded with laughter pretty continuously all through the song, it went 
exceedingly well.
And yet that German Professor did not seem happy.  At first, when we 
began to laugh, the expression of his face was one of intense surprise, 
as if laughter were the very last thing he had expected to be greeted 
with.  We thought this very funny: we said his earnest manner was half 
the humour.  The slightest hint on his part that he knew how funny he was 
would have completely ruined it all.  As we continued to laugh, his 
surprise gave way to an air of annoyance and indignation, and he scowled 
fiercely round upon us all (except upon the two young men who, being 
behind him, he could not see).  That sent us into convulsions.  We told 
each other that it would be the death of us, this thing.  The words 
alone, we said, were enough to send us into fits, but added to his mock 
seriousness – oh, it was too much!
In the last verse, he surpassed himself.  He glowered round upon us with 
a look of such concentrated ferocity that, but for our being forewarned 
as to the German method of comic singing, we should have been nervous; 
and he threw such a wailing note of agony into the weird music that, if 
we had not known it was a funny song, we might have wept.
He finished amid a perfect shriek of laughter.  We said it was the 
funniest thing we had ever heard in all our lives.  We said how strange 
it was that, in the face of things like these, there should be a popular 
notion that the Germans hadn’t any sense of humour.  And we asked the 
Professor why he didn’t translate the song into English, so that the 
common people could understand it, and hear what a real comic song was 
like.
Then Herr Slossenn Boschen got up, and went on awful.  He swore at us in 
German (which I should judge to be a singularly effective language for 
that purpose), and he danced, and shook his fists, and called us all the 
English he knew.  He said he had never been so insulted in all his life.
It appeared that the song was not a comic song at all.  It was about a 
young girl who lived in the Hartz Mountains, and who had given up her 
life to save her lover’s soul; and he died, and met her spirit in the 
air; and then, in the last verse, he jilted her spirit, and went on with 
another spirit – I’m not quite sure of the details, but it was something 
very sad, I know.  Herr Boschen said he had sung it once before the 
German Emperor, and he (the German Emperor) had sobbed like a little 
child.  He (Herr Boschen) said it was generally acknowledged to be one of 
the most tragic and pathetic songs in the German language.
It was a trying situation for us – very trying.  There seemed to be no 
answer.  We looked around for the two young men who had done this thing, 
but they had left the house in an unostentatious manner immediately after 
the end of the song.
That was the end of that party.  I never saw a party break up so quietly, 
and with so little fuss.  We never said good-night even to one another.  
We came downstairs one at a time, walking softly, and keeping the shady 
side.  We asked the servant for our hats and coats in whispers, and 
opened the door for ourselves, and slipped out, and got round the corner 
quickly, avoiding each other as much as possible.
I have never taken much interest in German songs since then.
We reached Sunbury Lock at half-past three.  The river is sweetly pretty 
just there before you come to the gates, and the backwater is charming; 
but don’t attempt to row up it.
I tried to do so once.  I was sculling, and asked the fellows who were 
steering if they thought it could be done, and they said, oh, yes, they 
thought so, if I pulled hard.  We were just under the little foot-bridge 
that crosses it between the two weirs, when they said this, and I bent 
down over the sculls, and set myself up, and pulled.
I pulled splendidly.  I got well into a steady rhythmical swing.  I put 
my arms, and my legs, and my back into it.  I set myself a good, quick, 
dashing stroke, and worked in really grand style.  My two friends said it 
was a pleasure to watch me.  At the end of five minutes, I thought we 
ought to be pretty near the weir, and I looked up.  We were under the 
bridge, in exactly the same spot that we were when I began, and there 
were those two idiots, injuring themselves by violent laughing.  I had 
been grinding away like mad to keep that boat stuck still under that 
bridge.  I let other people pull up backwaters against strong streams 
now.
We sculled up to Walton, a rather large place for a riverside town.  As 
with all riverside places, only the tiniest corner of it comes down to 
the water, so that from the boat you might fancy it was a village of some 
half-dozen houses, all told.  Windsor and Abingdon are the only towns 
between London and Oxford that you can really see anything of from the 
stream.  All the others hide round corners, and merely peep at the river 
down one street: my thanks to them for being so considerate, and leaving 
the river-banks to woods and fields and water-works.
Even Reading, though it does its best to spoil and sully and make hideous 
as much of the river as it can reach, is good-natured enough to keep its 
ugly face a good deal out of sight.
Caesar, of course, had a little place at Walton – a camp, or an 
entrenchment, or something of that sort.  Caesar was a regular up-river 
man.  Also Queen Elizabeth, she was there, too.  You can never get away 
from that woman, go where you will.  Cromwell and Bradshaw (not the guide 
man, but the King Charles’s head man) likewise sojourned here.  They must 
have been quite a pleasant little party, altogether.
There is an iron “scold’s bridle” in Walton Church.  They used these 
things in ancient days for curbing women’s tongues.  They have given up 
the attempt now.  I suppose iron was getting scarce, and nothing else 
would be strong enough.
There are also tombs of note in the church, and I was afraid I should 
never get Harris past them; but he didn’t seem to think of them, and we 
went on.  Above the bridge the river winds tremendously.  This makes it 
look picturesque; but it irritates you from a towing or sculling point of 
view, and causes argument between the man who is pulling and the man who 
is steering.
You pass Oatlands Park on the right bank here.  It is a famous old place.  
Henry VIII. stole it from some one or the other, I forget whom now, and 
lived in it.  There is a grotto in the park which you can see for a fee, 
and which is supposed to be very wonderful; but I cannot see much in it 
myself.  The late Duchess of York, who lived at Oatlands, was very fond 
of dogs, and kept an immense number.  She had a special graveyard made, 
in which to bury them when they died, and there they lie, about fifty of 
them, with a tombstone over each, and an epitaph inscribed thereon.
Well, I dare say they deserve it quite as much as the average Christian 
does.
At “Corway Stakes” – the first bend above Walton Bridge – was fought a 
battle between Caesar and Cassivelaunus.  Cassivelaunus had prepared the 
river for Caesar, by planting it full of stakes (and had, no doubt, put 
up a notice-board).  But Caesar crossed in spite of this.  You couldn’t 
choke Caesar off that river.  He is the sort of man we want round the 
backwaters now.
Halliford and Shepperton are both pretty little spots where they touch 
the river; but there is nothing remarkable about either of them.  There 
is a tomb in Shepperton churchyard, however, with a poem on it, and I was 
nervous lest Harris should want to get out and fool round it.  I saw him 
fix a longing eye on the landing-stage as we drew near it, so I managed, 
by an adroit movement, to jerk his cap into the water, and in the 
excitement of recovering that, and his indignation at my clumsiness, he 
forgot all about his beloved graves.
At Weybridge, the Wey (a pretty little stream, navigable for small boats 
up to Guildford, and one which I have always been making up my mind to 
explore, and never have), the Bourne, and the Basingstoke Canal all enter 
the Thames together.  The lock is just opposite the town, and the first 
thing that we saw, when we came in view of it, was George’s blazer on one 
of the lock gates, closer inspection showing that George was inside it.
Montmorency set up a furious barking, I shrieked, Harris roared; George 
waved his hat, and yelled back.  The lock-keeper rushed out with a drag, 
under the impression that somebody had fallen into the lock, and appeared 
annoyed at finding that no one had.
George had rather a curious oilskin-covered parcel in his hand.  It was 
round and flat at one end, with a long straight handle sticking out of 
it.
“What’s that?” said Harris – “a frying-pan?”
“No,” said George, with a strange, wild look glittering in his eyes; 
“they are all the rage this season; everybody has got them up the river.  
It’s a banjo.”
“I never knew you played the banjo!” cried Harris and I, in one breath.
“Not exactly,” replied George: “but it’s very easy, they tell me; and 
I’ve got the instruction book!”
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
