




LOCKS. – GEORGE AND I ARE PHOTOGRAPHED. – WALLINGFORD. – DORCHESTER. – 
ABINGDON. – A FAMILY MAN. – A GOOD SPOT FOR DROWNING. – A DIFFICULT BIT 
OF WATER. – DEMORALIZING EFFECT OF RIVER AIR.
WE left Streatley early the next morning, and pulled up to Culham, and 
slept under the canvas, in the backwater there.
The river is not extraordinarily interesting between Streatley and 
Wallingford.  From Cleve you get a stretch of six and a half miles 
without a lock.  I believe this is the longest uninterrupted stretch 
anywhere above Teddington, and the Oxford Club make use of it for their 
trial eights.
But however satisfactory this absence of locks may be to rowing-men, it 
is to be regretted by the mere pleasure-seeker.
For myself, I am fond of locks.  They pleasantly break the monotony of 
the pull.  I like sitting in the boat and slowly rising out of the cool 
depths up into new reaches and fresh views; or sinking down, as it were, 
out of the world, and then waiting, while the gloomy gates creak, and the 
narrow strip of day-light between them widens till the fair smiling river 
lies full before you, and you push your little boat out from its brief 
prison on to the welcoming waters once again.
They are picturesque little spots, these locks.  The stout old lock-
keeper, or his cheerful-looking wife, or bright-eyed daughter, are 
pleasant folk to have a passing chat with. *  You meet other boats there, 
and river gossip is exchanged.  The Thames would not be the fairyland it 
is without its flower-decked locks.
* Or rather WERE.  The Conservancy of late seems to have constituted 
itself into a society for the employment of idiots.  A good many of the 
new lock-keepers, especially in the more crowded portions of the river, 
are excitable, nervous old men, quite unfitted for their post.
Talking of locks reminds me of an accident George and I very nearly had 
one summer’s morning at Hampton Court.
It was a glorious day, and the lock was crowded; and, as is a common 
practice up the river, a speculative photographer was taking a picture of 
us all as we lay upon the rising waters.
I did not catch what was going on at first, and was, therefore, extremely 
surprised at noticing George hurriedly smooth out his trousers, ruffle up 
his hair, and stick his cap on in a rakish manner at the back of his 
head, and then, assuming an expression of mingled affability and sadness, 
sit down in a graceful attitude, and try to hide his feet.
My first idea was that he had suddenly caught sight of some girl he knew, 
and I looked about to see who it was.  Everybody in the lock seemed to 
have been suddenly struck wooden.  They were all standing or sitting 
about in the most quaint and curious attitudes I have ever seen off a 
Japanese fan.  All the girls were smiling.  Oh, they did look so sweet!  
And all the fellows were frowning, and looking stern and noble.
And then, at last, the truth flashed across me, and I wondered if I 
should be in time.  Ours was the first boat, and it would be unkind of me 
to spoil the man’s picture, I thought.
So I faced round quickly, and took up a position in the prow, where I 
leant with careless grace upon the hitcher, in an attitude suggestive of 
agility and strength.  I arranged my hair with a curl over the forehead, 
and threw an air of tender wistfulness into my expression, mingled with a 
touch of cynicism, which I am told suits me.
As we stood, waiting for the eventful moment, I heard someone behind call 
out:
“Hi! look at your nose.”
I could not turn round to see what was the matter, and whose nose it was 
that was to be looked at.  I stole a side-glance at George’s nose!  It 
was all right – at all events, there was nothing wrong with it that could 
be altered.  I squinted down at my own, and that seemed all that could be 
expected also.
“Look at your nose, you stupid ass!” came the same voice again, louder.
And then another voice cried:
“Push your nose out, can’t you, you – you two with the dog!”
Neither George nor I dared to turn round.  The man’s hand was on the cap, 
and the picture might be taken any moment.  Was it us they were calling 
to?  What was the matter with our noses?  Why were they to be pushed out!
But now the whole lock started yelling, and a stentorian voice from the 
back shouted:
“Look at your boat, sir; you in the red and black caps.  It’s your two 
corpses that will get taken in that photo, if you ain’t quick.”
We looked then, and saw that the nose of our boat had got fixed under the 
woodwork of the lock, while the in-coming water was rising all around it, 
and tilting it up.  In another moment we should be over.  Quick as 
thought, we each seized an oar, and a vigorous blow against the side of 
the lock with the butt-ends released the boat, and sent us sprawling on 
our backs.
We did not come out well in that photograph, George and I.  Of course, as 
was to be expected, our luck ordained it, that the man should set his 
wretched machine in motion at the precise moment that we were both lying 
on our backs with a wild expression of “Where am I? and what is it?” on 
our faces, and our four feet waving madly in the air.
Our feet were undoubtedly the leading article in that photograph.  
Indeed, very little else was to be seen.  They filled up the foreground 
entirely.  Behind them, you caught glimpses of the other boats, and bits 
of the surrounding scenery; but everything and everybody else in the lock 
looked so utterly insignificant and paltry compared with our feet, that 
all the other people felt quite ashamed of themselves, and refused to 
subscribe to the picture.
The owner of one steam launch, who had bespoke six copies, rescinded the 
order on seeing the negative.  He said he would take them if anybody 
could show him his launch, but nobody could.  It was somewhere behind 
George’s right foot.
There was a good deal of unpleasantness over the business.  The 
photographer thought we ought to take a dozen copies each, seeing that 
the photo was about nine-tenths us, but we declined.  We said we had no 
objection to being photo’d full-length, but we preferred being taken the 
right way up.
Wallingford, six miles above Streatley, is a very ancient town, and has 
been an active centre for the making of English history.  It was a rude, 
mud-built town in the time of the Britons, who squatted there, until the 
Roman legions evicted them; and replaced their clay-baked walls by mighty 
fortifications, the trace of which Time has not yet succeeded in sweeping 
away, so well those old-world masons knew how to build.
But Time, though he halted at Roman walls, soon crumbled Romans to dust; 
and on the ground, in later years, fought savage Saxons and huge Danes, 
until the Normans came.
It was a walled and fortified town up to the time of the Parliamentary 
War, when it suffered a long and bitter siege from Fairfax.  It fell at 
last, and then the walls were razed.
From Wallingford up to Dorchester the neighbourhood of the river grows 
more hilly, varied, and picturesque.  Dorchester stands half a mile from 
the river.  It can be reached by paddling up the Thame, if you have a 
small boat; but the best way is to leave the river at Day’s Lock, and 
take a walk across the fields.  Dorchester is a delightfully peaceful old 
place, nestling in stillness and silence and drowsiness.
Dorchester, like Wallingford, was a city in ancient British times; it was 
then called Caer Doren, “the city on the water.”  In more recent times 
the Romans formed a great camp here, the fortifications surrounding which 
now seem like low, even hills.  In Saxon days it was the capital of 
Wessex.  It is very old, and it was very strong and great once.  Now it 
sits aside from the stirring world, and nods and dreams.
Round Clifton Hampden, itself a wonderfully pretty village, old-
fashioned, peaceful, and dainty with flowers, the river scenery is rich 
and beautiful.  If you stay the night on land at Clifton, you cannot do 
better than put up at the “Barley Mow.”  It is, without exception, I 
should say, the quaintest, most old-world inn up the river.  It stands on 
the right of the bridge, quite away from the village.  Its low-pitched 
gables and thatched roof and latticed windows give it quite a story-book 
appearance, while inside it is even still more once-upon-a-timeyfied.
It would not be a good place for the heroine of a modern novel to stay 
at.  The heroine of a modern novel is always “divinely tall,” and she is 
ever “drawing herself up to her full height.”  At the “Barley Mow” she 
would bump her head against the ceiling each time she did this.
It would also be a bad house for a drunken man to put up at.  There are 
too many surprises in the way of unexpected steps down into this room and 
up into that; and as for getting upstairs to his bedroom, or ever finding 
his bed when he got up, either operation would be an utter impossibility 
to him.
We were up early the next morning, as we wanted to be in Oxford by the 
afternoon.  It is surprising how early one can get up, when camping out.  
One does not yearn for “just another five minutes” nearly so much, lying 
wrapped up in a rug on the boards of a boat, with a Gladstone bag for a 
pillow, as one does in a featherbed.  We had finished breakfast, and were 
through Clifton Lock by half-past eight.
From Clifton to Culham the river banks are flat, monotonous, and 
uninteresting, but, after you get through Culhalm Lock – the coldest and 
deepest lock on the river – the landscape improves.
At Abingdon, the river passes by the streets.  Abingdon is a typical 
country town of the smaller order – quiet, eminently respectable, clean, 
and desperately dull.  It prides itself on being old, but whether it can 
compare in this respect with Wallingford and Dorchester seems doubtful.  
A famous abbey stood here once, and within what is left of its sanctified 
walls they brew bitter ale nowadays.
In St. Nicholas Church, at Abingdon, there is a monument to John 
Blackwall and his wife Jane, who both, after leading a happy married 
life, died on the very same day, August 21, 1625; and in St. Helen’s 
Church, it is recorded that W. Lee, who died in 1637, “had in his 
lifetime issue from his loins two hundred lacking but three.”  If you 
work this out you will find that Mr. W. Lee’s family numbered one hundred 
and ninety-seven.  Mr. W. Lee – five times Mayor of Abingdon – was, no 
doubt, a benefactor to his generation, but I hope there are not many of 
his kind about in this overcrowded nineteenth century.
From Abingdon to Nuneham Courteney is a lovely stretch.  Nuneham Park is 
well worth a visit.  It can be viewed on Tuesdays and Thursdays.  The 
house contains a fine collection of pictures and curiosities, and the 
grounds are very beautiful.
The pool under Sandford lasher, just behind the lock, is a very good 
place to drown yourself in.  The undercurrent is terribly strong, and if 
you once get down into it you are all right.  An obelisk marks the spot 
where two men have already been drowned, while bathing there; and the 
steps of the obelisk are generally used as a diving-board by young men 
now who wish to see if the place really IS dangerous.
Iffley Lock and Mill, a mile before you reach Oxford, is a favourite 
subject with the river-loving brethren of the brush.  The real article, 
however, is rather disappointing, after the pictures.  Few things, I have 
noticed, come quite up to the pictures of them, in this world.
We passed through Iffley Lock at about half-past twelve, and then, having 
tidied up the boat and made all ready for landing, we set to work on our 
last mile.
Between Iffley and Oxford is the most difficult bit of the river I know.  
You want to be born on that bit of water, to understand it.  I have been 
over it a fairish number of times, but I have never been able to get the 
hang of it.  The man who could row a straight course from Oxford to 
Iffley ought to be able to live comfortably, under one roof, with his 
wife, his mother-in-law, his elder sister, and the old servant who was in 
the family when he was a baby.
First the current drives you on to the right bank, and then on to the 
left, then it takes you out into the middle, turns you round three times, 
and carries you up stream again, and always ends by trying to smash you 
up against a college barge.
Of course, as a consequence of this, we got in the way of a good many 
other boats, during the mile, and they in ours, and, of course, as a 
consequence of that, a good deal of bad language occurred.
I don’t know why it should be, but everybody is always so exceptionally 
irritable on the river.  Little mishaps, that you would hardly notice on 
dry land, drive you nearly frantic with rage, when they occur on the 
water.  When Harris or George makes an ass of himself on dry land, I 
smile indulgently; when they behave in a chuckle-head way on the river, I 
use the most blood-curdling language to them.  When another boat gets in 
my way, I feel I want to take an oar and kill all the people in it.
The mildest tempered people, when on land, become violent and blood-
thirsty when in a boat.   I did a little boating once with a young lady.  
She was naturally of the sweetest and gentlest disposition imaginable, 
but on the river it was quite awful to hear her.
“Oh, drat the man!” she would exclaim, when some unfortunate sculler 
would get in her way; “why don’t he look where he’s going?”
And, “Oh, bother the silly old thing!” she would say indignantly, when 
the sail would not go up properly.  And she would catch hold of it, and 
shake it quite brutally.
Yet, as I have said, when on shore she was kind-hearted and amiable 
enough.
The air of the river has a demoralising effect upon one’s temper, and 
this it is, I suppose, which causes even barge men to be sometimes rude 
to one another, and to use language which, no doubt, in their calmer 
moments they regret.
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
