




THREE INVALIDS. – SUFFERINGS OF GEORGE AND HARRIS. – A VICTIM TO ONE 
HUNDRED AND SEVEN FATAL MALADIES. – USEFUL PRESCRIPTIONS. – CURE FOR 
LIVER COMPLAINT IN CHILDREN. – WE AGREE THAT WE ARE OVERWORKED, AND NEED 
REST. – A WEEK ON THE ROLLING DEEP? – GEORGE SUGGESTS THE RIVER. – 
MONTMORENCY LODGES AN OBJECTION. – ORIGINAL MOTION CARRIED BY MAJORITY OF 
THREE TO ONE.
THERE were four of us – George, and William Samuel Harris, and myself, 
and Montmorency.  We were sitting in my room, smoking, and talking about 
how bad we were – bad from a medical point of view I mean, of course.
We were all feeling seedy, and we were getting quite nervous about it.  
Harris said he felt such extraordinary fits of giddiness come over him at 
times, that he hardly knew what he was doing; and then George said that 
HE had fits of giddiness too, and hardly knew what HE was doing.  With 
me, it was my liver that was out of order.  I knew it was my liver that 
was out of order, because I had just been reading a patent liver-pill 
circular, in which were detailed the various symptoms by which a man 
could tell when his liver was out of order.  I had them all.
It is a most extraordinary thing, but I never read a patent medicine 
advertisement without being impelled to the conclusion that I am 
suffering from the particular disease therein dealt with in its most 
virulent form.  The diagnosis seems in every case to correspond exactly 
with all the sensations that I have ever felt.
I remember going to the British Museum one day to read up the treatment 
for some slight ailment of which I had a touch – hay fever, I fancy it 
was.  I got down the book, and read all I came to read; and then, in an 
unthinking moment, I idly turned the leaves, and began to indolently 
study diseases, generally.  I forget which was the first distemper I 
plunged into – some fearful, devastating scourge, I know – and, before I 
had glanced half down the list of “premonitory symptoms,” it was borne in 
upon me that I had fairly got it.
I sat for awhile, frozen with horror; and then, in the listlessness of 
despair, I again turned over the pages.  I came to typhoid fever – read 
the symptoms – discovered that I had typhoid fever, must have had it for 
months without knowing it – wondered what else I had got; turned up St. 
Vitus’s Dance – found, as I expected, that I had that too, – began to get 
interested in my case, and determined to sift it to the bottom, and so 
started alphabetically – read up ague, and learnt that I was sickening 
for it, and that the acute stage would commence in about another 
fortnight.  Bright’s disease, I was relieved to find, I had only in a 
modified form, and, so far as that was concerned, I might live for years.  
Cholera I had, with severe complications; and diphtheria I seemed to have 
been born with.  I plodded conscientiously through the twenty-six 
letters, and the only malady I could conclude I had not got was 
housemaid’s knee.
I felt rather hurt about this at first; it seemed somehow to be a sort of 
slight.  Why hadn’t I got housemaid’s knee?  Why this invidious 
reservation? After a while, however, less grasping feelings prevailed.  I 
reflected that I had every other known malady in the pharmacology, and I 
grew less selfish, and determined to do without housemaid’s knee.  Gout, 
in its most malignant stage, it would appear, had seized me without my 
being aware of it; and zymosis I had evidently been suffering with from 
boyhood.  There were no more diseases after zymosis, so I concluded there 
was nothing else the matter with me.
I sat and pondered.  I thought what an interesting case I must be from a 
medical point of view, what an acquisition I should be to a class!  
Students would have no need to “walk the hospitals,” if they had me.  I 
was a hospital in myself.  All they need do would be to walk round me, 
and, after that, take their diploma.
Then I wondered how long I had to live.  I tried to examine myself.  I 
felt my pulse.  I could not at first feel any pulse at all.  Then, all of 
a sudden, it seemed to start off.  I pulled out my watch and timed it.  I 
made it a hundred and forty-seven to the minute.  I tried to feel my 
heart.  I could not feel my heart.  It had stopped beating.  I have since 
been induced to come to the opinion that it must have been there all the 
time, and must have been beating, but I cannot account for it.  I patted 
myself all over my front, from what I call my waist up to my head, and I 
went a bit round each side, and a little way up the back.  But I could 
not feel or hear anything.  I tried to look at my tongue.  I stuck it out 
as far as ever it would go, and I shut one eye, and tried to examine it 
with the other.  I could only see the tip, and the only thing that I 
could gain from that was to feel more certain than before that I had 
scarlet fever.
I had walked into that reading-room a happy, healthy man.  I crawled out 
a decrepit wreck.
I went to my medical man.  He is an old chum of mine, and feels my pulse, 
and looks at my tongue, and talks about the weather, all for nothing, 
when I fancy I’m ill; so I thought I would do him a good turn by going to 
him now.  “What a doctor wants,” I said, “is practice.  He shall have me.  
He will get more practice out of me than out of seventeen hundred of your 
ordinary, commonplace patients, with only one or two diseases each.”  So 
I went straight up and saw him, and he said:
“Well, what’s the matter with you?”
I said:
“I will not take up your time, dear boy, with telling you what is the 
matter with me.  Life is brief, and you might pass away before I had 
finished.  But I will tell you what is NOT the matter with me.  I have 
not got housemaid’s knee.  Why I have not got housemaid’s knee, I cannot 
tell you; but the fact remains that I have not got it.  Everything else, 
however, I HAVE got.”
And I told him how I came to discover it all.
Then he opened me and looked down me, and clutched hold of my wrist, and 
then he hit me over the chest when I wasn’t expecting it – a cowardly 
thing to do, I call it – and immediately afterwards butted me with the 
side of his head.  After that, he sat down and wrote out a prescription, 
and folded it up and gave it me, and I put it in my pocket and went out.
I did not open it.  I took it to the nearest chemist’s, and handed it in.  
The man read it, and then handed it back.
He said he didn’t keep it.
I said:
“You are a chemist?”
He said:
“I am a chemist.  If I was a co-operative stores and family hotel 
combined, I might be able to oblige you.  Being only a chemist hampers 
me.”
I read the prescription.  It ran:
“1 lb. beefsteak, with
 1 pt. bitter beer
every 6 hours.
1 ten-mile walk every morning.
1 bed at 11 sharp every night.
And don’t stuff up your head with things you don’t understand.”
I followed the directions, with the happy result – speaking for myself – 
that my life was preserved, and is still going on.
In the present instance, going back to the liver-pill circular, I had the 
symptoms, beyond all mistake, the chief among them being “a general 
disinclination to work of any kind.”
What I suffer in that way no tongue can tell.  From my earliest infancy I 
have been a martyr to it.  As a boy, the disease hardly ever left me for 
a day.  They did not know, then, that it was my liver.  Medical science 
was in a far less advanced state than now, and they used to put it down 
to laziness.
“Why, you skulking little devil, you,” they would say, “get up and do 
something for your living, can’t you?” – not knowing, of course, that I 
was ill.
And they didn’t give me pills; they gave me clumps on the side of the 
head.  And, strange as it may appear, those clumps on the head often 
cured me – for the time being.  I have known one clump on the head have 
more effect upon my liver, and make me feel more anxious to go straight 
away then and there, and do what was wanted to be done, without further 
loss of time, than a whole box of pills does now.
You know, it often is so – those simple, old-fashioned remedies are 
sometimes more efficacious than all the dispensary stuff.
We sat there for half-an-hour, describing to each other our maladies.  I 
explained to George and William Harris how I felt when I got up in the 
morning, and William Harris told us how he felt when he went to bed; and 
George stood on the hearth-rug, and gave us a clever and powerful piece 
of acting, illustrative of how he felt in the night.
George FANCIES he is ill; but there’s never anything really the matter 
with him, you know.
At this point, Mrs. Poppets knocked at the door to know if we were ready 
for supper.  We smiled sadly at one another, and said we supposed we had 
better try to swallow a bit.  Harris said a little something in one’s 
stomach often kept the disease in check; and Mrs. Poppets brought the 
tray in, and we drew up to the table, and toyed with a little steak and 
onions, and some rhubarb tart.
I must have been very weak at the time; because I know, after the first 
half-hour or so, I seemed to take no interest whatever in my food – an 
unusual thing for me – and I didn’t want any cheese.
This duty done, we refilled our glasses, lit our pipes, and resumed the 
discussion upon our state of health.  What it was that was actually the 
matter with us, we none of us could be sure of; but the unanimous opinion 
was that it – whatever it was – had been brought on by overwork.
“What we want is rest,” said Harris.
“Rest and a complete change,” said George.  “The overstrain upon our 
brains has produced a general depression throughout the system.  Change 
of scene, and absence of the necessity for thought, will restore the 
mental equilibrium.”
George has a cousin, who is usually described in the charge-sheet as a 
medical student, so that he naturally has a somewhat family-physicianary 
way of putting things.
I agreed with George, and suggested that we should seek out some retired 
and old-world spot, far from the madding crowd, and dream away a sunny 
week among its drowsy lanes – some half-forgotten nook, hidden away by 
the fairies, out of reach of the noisy world – some quaint-perched eyrie 
on the cliffs of Time, from whence the surging waves of the nineteenth 
century would sound far-off and faint.
Harris said he thought it would be humpy.  He said he knew the sort of 
place I meant; where everybody went to bed at eight o’clock, and you 
couldn’t get a REFEREE for love or money, and had to walk ten miles to 
get your baccy.
“No,” said Harris, “if you want rest and change, you can’t beat a sea 
trip.”
I objected to the sea trip strongly.  A sea trip does you good when you 
are going to have a couple of months of it, but, for a week, it is 
wicked.
You start on Monday with the idea implanted in your bosom that you are 
going to enjoy yourself.  You wave an airy adieu to the boys on shore, 
light your biggest pipe, and swagger about the deck as if you were 
Captain Cook, Sir Francis Drake, and Christopher Columbus all rolled into 
one.  On Tuesday, you wish you hadn’t come.  On Wednesday, Thursday, and 
Friday, you wish you were dead.  On Saturday, you are able to swallow a 
little beef tea, and to sit up on deck, and answer with a wan, sweet 
smile when kind-hearted people ask you how you feel now.  On Sunday, you 
begin to walk about again, and take solid food.  And on Monday morning, 
as, with your bag and umbrella in your hand, you stand by the gunwale, 
waiting to step ashore, you begin to thoroughly like it.
I remember my brother-in-law going for a short sea trip once, for the 
benefit of his health.  He took a return berth from London to Liverpool; 
and when he got to Liverpool, the only thing he was anxious about was to 
sell that return ticket.
It was offered round the town at a tremendous reduction, so I am told; 
and was eventually sold for eighteenpence to a bilious-looking youth who 
had just been advised by his medical men to go to the sea-side, and take 
exercise.
“Sea-side!” said my brother-in-law, pressing the ticket affectionately 
into his hand; “why, you’ll have enough to last you a lifetime; and as 
for exercise! why, you’ll get more exercise, sitting down on that ship, 
than you would turning somersaults on dry land.”
He himself – my brother-in-law – came back by train.  He said the North-
Western Railway was healthy enough for him.
Another fellow I knew went for a week’s voyage round the coast, and, 
before they started, the steward came to him to ask whether he would pay 
for each meal as he had it, or arrange beforehand for the whole series.
The steward recommended the latter course, as it would come so much 
cheaper.  He said they would do him for the whole week at two pounds 
five.  He said for breakfast there would be fish, followed by a grill.  
Lunch was at one, and consisted of four courses.  Dinner at six – soup, 
fish, entree, joint, poultry, salad, sweets, cheese, and dessert.  And a 
light meat supper at ten.
My friend thought he would close on the two-pound-five job (he is a 
hearty eater), and did so.
Lunch came just as they were off Sheerness.  He didn’t feel so hungry as 
he thought he should, and so contented himself with a bit of boiled beef, 
and some strawberries and cream.  He pondered a good deal during the 
afternoon, and at one time it seemed to him that he had been eating 
nothing but boiled beef for weeks, and at other times it seemed that he 
must have been living on strawberries and cream for years.
Neither the beef nor the strawberries and cream seemed happy, either – 
seemed discontented like.
At six, they came and told him dinner was ready.  The announcement 
aroused no enthusiasm within him, but he felt that there was some of that 
two-pound-five to be worked off, and he held on to ropes and things and 
went down.  A pleasant odour of onions and hot ham, mingled with fried 
fish and greens, greeted him at the bottom of the ladder; and then the 
steward came up with an oily smile, and said:
“What can I get you, sir?”
“Get me out of this,” was the feeble reply.
And they ran him up quick, and propped him up, over to leeward, and left 
him.
For the next four days he lived a simple and blameless life on thin 
captain’s biscuits (I mean that the biscuits were thin, not the captain) 
and soda-water; but, towards Saturday, he got uppish, and went in for 
weak tea and dry toast, and on Monday he was gorging himself on chicken 
broth.  He left the ship on Tuesday, and as it steamed away from the 
landing-stage he gazed after it regretfully.
“There she goes,” he said, “there she goes, with two pounds’ worth of 
food on board that belongs to me, and that I haven’t had.”
He said that if they had given him another day he thought he could have 
put it straight.
So I set my face against the sea trip.  Not, as I explained, upon my own 
account.  I was never queer.  But I was afraid for George.  George said 
he should be all right, and would rather like it, but he would advise 
Harris and me not to think of it, as he felt sure we should both be ill.  
Harris said that, to himself, it was always a mystery how people managed 
to get sick at sea – said he thought people must do it on purpose, from 
affectation – said he had often wished to be, but had never been able.
Then he told us anecdotes of how he had gone across the Channel when it 
was so rough that the passengers had to be tied into their berths, and he 
and the captain were the only two living souls on board who were not ill.  
Sometimes it was he and the second mate who were not ill; but it was 
generally he and one other man.  If not he and another man, then it was 
he by himself.
It is a curious fact, but nobody ever is sea-sick – on land.  At sea, you 
come across plenty of people very bad indeed, whole boat-loads of them; 
but I never met a man yet, on land, who had ever known at all what it was 
to be sea-sick.  Where the thousands upon thousands of bad sailors that 
swarm in every ship hide themselves when they are on land is a mystery.
If most men were like a fellow I saw on the Yarmouth boat one day, I 
could account for the seeming enigma easily enough.  It was just off 
Southend Pier, I recollect, and he was leaning out through one of the 
port-holes in a very dangerous position.  I went up to him to try and 
save him.
“Hi! come further in,” I said, shaking him by the shoulder.  “You’ll be 
overboard.”
“Oh my!  I wish I was,” was the only answer I could get; and there I had 
to leave him.
Three weeks afterwards, I met him in the coffee-room of a Bath hotel, 
talking about his voyages, and explaining, with enthusiasm, how he loved 
the sea.
“Good sailor!” he replied in answer to a mild young man’s envious query; 
“well, I did feel a little queer ONCE, I confess.  It was off Cape Horn.  
The vessel was wrecked the next morning.”
I said:
“Weren’t you a little shaky by Southend Pier one day, and wanted to be 
thrown overboard?”
“Southend Pier!” he replied, with a puzzled expression.
“Yes; going down to Yarmouth, last Friday three weeks.”
“Oh, ah – yes,” he answered, brightening up; “I remember now.  I did have 
a headache that afternoon.  It was the pickles, you know.  They were the 
most disgraceful pickles I ever tasted in a respectable boat.  Did you 
have any?”
For myself, I have discovered an excellent preventive against sea-
sickness, in balancing myself.  You stand in the centre of the deck, and, 
as the ship heaves and pitches, you move your body about, so as to keep 
it always straight.  When the front of the ship rises, you lean forward, 
till the deck almost touches your nose; and when its back end gets up, 
you lean backwards.  This is all very well for an hour or two; but you 
can’t balance yourself for a week.
George said:
“Let’s go up the river.”
He said we should have fresh air, exercise and quiet; the constant change 
of scene would occupy our minds (including what there was of Harris’s); 
and the hard work would give us a good appetite, and make us sleep well.
Harris said he didn’t think George ought to do anything that would have a 
tendency to make him sleepier than he always was, as it might be 
dangerous.
He said he didn’t very well understand how George was going to sleep any 
more than he did now, seeing that there were only twenty-four hours in 
each day, summer and winter alike; but thought that if he DID sleep any 
more, he might just as well be dead, and so save his board and lodging.
Harris said, however, that the river would suit him to a “T.”  I don’t 
know what a “T” is (except a sixpenny one, which includes bread-and-
butter and cake AD LIB., and is cheap at the price, if you haven’t had 
any dinner).  It seems to suit everybody, however, which is greatly to 
its credit.
It suited me to a “T” too, and Harris and I both said it was a good idea 
of George’s; and we said it in a tone that seemed to somehow imply that 
we were surprised that George should have come out so sensible.
The only one who was not struck with the suggestion was Montmorency.  He 
never did care for the river, did Montmorency.
“It’s all very well for you fellows,” he says; “you like it, but I don’t.  
There’s nothing for me to do.  Scenery is not in my line, and I don’t 
smoke.  If I see a rat, you won’t stop; and if I go to sleep, you get 
fooling about with the boat, and slop me overboard.  If you ask me, I 
call the whole thing bally foolishness.”
We were three to one, however, and the motion was carried.
Continue...

This complete e-book of Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) by Jerome Klapka Jerome
is in the public domain. Also see the Jerome K. Jerome Society.
At Amazon: Three Men in a Boat and Three Men on the Bummel
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Three Men in a Boat: To Say Nothing of the Dog (Tor Classics)By Jerome K. JeromeAt Amazon
