


A few days later American troops arrived, and with them came
General Merritt. The Admiral’s Secretary and two officers came to
the Dictatoriat Government and asked that we allow them to occupy our
trenches at Maytubig; from the harbour side of that place right up to
the main road, where they would form a continuation of our lines at
Pasay and Singalong. This I also agreed to on account of the solemn
promises of the Admiral and the trust naturally placed in them owing
to the assistance rendered and recognition of our independence.
Ten days after the Americans occupied the trenches at Maytubig (this
move being well known by the Spaniards who were entrenched at the
Magazine in San Antonio Abad) their outposts, composed of a few men
only, were surprised by the Spaniards, who made a night attack on
them. They had barely time to get out of their beds and fall back
on the centre, abandoning their rifles and six field-guns in their
precipitate retreat.
The firing being distinctly heard, our troops immediately rushed to
the assistance of our friends and allies, repulsing the Spaniards and
recapturing the rifles and field-guns, which I ordered to be returned
to the Americans as a token of our good-will and friendship.
General Noriel was opposed to this restitution, alleging that the arms
did not belong to the Americans since the Filipino troops captured
them from the Spaniards. But I paid no attention to the reasonable
opposition of my General and gave imperative instructions that they
be returned to the Americans, showing thereby clearly and positively
the good-will of the Filipinos. The said rifles and field-guns, with
a large quantity of ammunition, was therefore restored to those who
were then our allies, notwithstanding the fact of General Noriel’s
brigade capturing them at a cost of many lives of our compatriots.
Later on more American reinforcements arrived and again Admiral Dewey,
through his Secretary, asked for more trenches for their troops,
averring that those which we had given up to them before were
insufficient. We at once agreed and their lines were then extended
up to Pasay.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
