


At this juncture the Admiral suddenly changed the topic of conversation
and asked–"Why don’t the people in Manila rise against the Spaniards
as their countrymen in the provinces have done? Is it true that they
accept the autonomy offered by General Augustin with a representative
Assembly? Is the report which has reached me true, that a Filipino
Commission has been sent from Manila to propose to you the acceptance
of that autonomy coupled with a recognition of your rank of General,
as well as recognition of the rank held by your companions?”
“The people of Manila,” I answered, “are quiet because they have
no arms and because as merchants and landlords they fear that their
valuable properties and money in the banks will be confiscated by the
Spaniards if they rise up and begin burning and destroying the property
of others. On this account they had ostensibly accepted autonomy,
not because that was what they wanted but more as a means of deceiving
the Spaniards and being allowed to live in peace; but I am confident
that all the Filipinos in Manila are for independence, as will be
proved the very day our troops capture Manila. At that time I fully
expect the people of Manila will join with us in raising loud cheers
for the Independence of the Philippines, making fresh demonstrations
of loyalty to our Government.”
I also told him it was true that a Mixed Commission had arrived and
in the name of General Augustin and Archbishop Nozaleda made certain
proposals; but they made known to us their intention to adhere to our
Cause. The members of the Commission said the Spaniards instructed them
to say they came motu propio [2] without being formally appointed
or ’coached’ by the Spanish authorities in what they should say,
representing, on the contrary, that they were faithful interpreters
of the sentiment of the people of Manila and that they had good
reason for believing that if I was willing to accept autonomyGeneral Augustin and Archbishop Nozaleda would recognize my rank
of General, and that of my companions, would give me the $1,000,000
indemnity agreed upon at Biak-na-bató and still unpaid, as well as
liberal rewards for and salaries to the members of a popular Assembly
promises which the Commissioners did not put any faith in, though some
of them held the opinion that the money should be accepted because
it would reduce the funds of the Spanish Government and also because
the money had been wrung from Filipinos. The Commissioners, I added,
left after assuring me that the people in Manila would rise against
the Spaniards if supplied with arms, and that the best thing I could
do was to make an attack on Manila at the places they pointed out as
being the weakest parts of the Spanish defense and consequently the
easiest to overcome.
I thanked the Commission for their loyalty and straightforwardness,
told them they would be given an escort to take them safely back to
the Spanish lines, and that when they got back they should inform
those who had sent them that they were not received because they were
not duly accredited and that even if they had brought credentials
according to what they had seen and heard from the Revolutionists
Don Emilio Aguinaldo would certainly not consider, much less accept,
their proposals respecting autonomy because the Filipino people had
sufficient experience to govern themselves, that they are tired of
being victimised and subjected to gross abuses by a foreign nation
under whose domination they have no wish to continue to live, but
rather wish for their independence. Therefore the Spaniards might
prepare to defend their sovereignty, for the Filipino Army would
vigorously assault the city and with unflagging zeal prosecute the
siege until Manila was captured.
I also told the Commissioners to tell Archbishop Nozaleda that he was
abusing the privileges and authority of his exalted position; that
such conduct was at variance with the precepts of His Holiness the
Pope, and if he failed to rectify matters I would throw light on the
subject in a way which would bring shame and disgrace upon him. I added
that I knew he and General Augustin had commissioned four Germans and
five Frenchmen to disguise themselves and assassinate me in the vain
hope that once I am disposed of the people of the Philippines would
calmly submit to the sovereignty of Spain, which was a great mistake,
for were I assassinated, the inhabitants of the Philippines would
assuredly continue the struggle with greater vigor than ever. Other
men would come forward to avenge my death. Lastly I recommended
the Commissioners to tell the people in Manila to go on with their
trades and industries and be perfectly at ease about our Government,
whose actions were guided in the paths of rectitude and justice, and
that since there were no more Friars to corrupt the civic virtues,
the Filipino Government was now endeavouring to demonstrate its
honesty of purpose before the whole world. There was therefore no
reason why they should not go on with their business as usual and
should not think of leaving Manila and coming into the Camp, where
the resources were limited, where already more were employed than was
necessary to meet the requirements of the Government and the Army,
and where, too, the lack of arms was sorely felt.
The Commissioners asked me what conditions the United States would
impose and what benefits they would confer on the Filipinos, to which
I replied that is was difficult to answer that question in view of the
secret I was in honour bound to keep in respect of the terms of the
Agreement, contenting myself by saying that they could learn a good
deal by carefully observing the acts, equivalent to the exercise of
sovereign rights, of the Dictatorial Government, and especially the
occular demonstrations of such rights on the waters of the harbour.
These statements, which were translated by my interpreter, Sr. Leyba,
made such an impression on the Admiral that he interrupted,
asking–"Why did you reveal our secret?” Do you mean that you do not
intend to keep inviolate our well understood silence and watchword?
I said in reply that I had revealed nothing of the secret connected
with him and the Consul.
The Admiral then thanked me for my cautiousness, bid we good-by and
left with General Anderson, after requesting me to refrain from
assaulting Manila because, he said, they were studying a plan to
take the Walled City with their troops, leaving the suburbs for the
Filipino forces.
He advised me, nevertheless, to study other plans of taking the city
in conjunction with their forces, which I agreed to do.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
