


Vain indeed became these hope when news arrived that Admiral Dewey
had acted and was continuing to act against the Revolutionary
Government by order of His Excellency Mr. McKinley, who, prompted
by the “Imperialist” party, had decided to annex the Philippines,
granting, in all probability, concessions to adventurers to exploit
the immense natural wealth lying concealed under our virgin soil.
This news was received in the Revolutionary camp like a thunderbolt out
of a clear sky. Some cursed the hour and the day we treated verbally
with the Americans; some denounced the ceding of the suburbs, while
others again were of opinion that a Commission should be sent to
General Otis to draw from him clear and positive declarations on the
situation, drawing up a treaty of amity and commerce if the United
States recognize our independence or at once commence hostilities if
the States refused.
In this crisis I advised moderation and prudence, for I still had
confidence in the justice and rectitude of United States Congress,
which, I believed, would not approve the designs of the Imperialist
party and would give heed to the declarations of Admiral Dewey, who,
in the capacity of an exalted Representative of the United States in
these Islands concerted and covenanted with me and the people of the
Philippines recognition of our independence.
In fact in no other way was such a serious matter to be regarded,
for if America entrusted to Admiral Dewey the honour of her forces in
such a distant region, surely the Filipinos might equally place their
trust in the word of honour of such a polished, chivalrous gentleman
and brave sailor, in the firm belief, of course, that the great and
noble American people would neither reject his decision nor expose
to ridicule the illustrious conqueror of the Spanish fleet.
In the same way the not less known and notorious circumstances, that
the American Commanders who came soon after the echoes of the Admiral’s
victory reached their native shores, namely, Generals Merritt, Anderson
and Otis, proclaimed to the people of the Philippines that America did
not come to conquer territories, but to liberate its inhabitants from
the oppression of Spanish Sovereignty. I would therefore also expose
to universal ridicule and contempt the honour of these Commanders
if the United States, by repudiating their official and public acts,
attempts to annex these islands by conquest.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
