


I returned to the McCulloch to give directions for the landing
of the luggage and war materials which I brought over with me
from Hongkong. On my way to the McCulloch I met several of my
old associates in the 1896 revolution who had come over from Bataan
province. To these friends I gave two letters directing the people
of that province and Zambales to rise against the Spaniards and
vigorously attack them.
Before returning to the Arsenal and when near the landing place
I came across several bancas [large open boats] loaded with
revolutionists of Kawit (my birth-place) who told me they had been
looking out for me for about two weeks, the Americans having announced
that I would soon return to the islands. The feeling of joy which
I experienced on the occasion of this reunion with my own kith and
kin–people who had stood shoulder to shoulder with me in the desperate
struggles of the 1896-97 revolution–is simply indescribable. Words
fail to express my feelings–joy mingled with sadness and strong
determination to accomplish the salvation, the emancipation, of my
beloved countrymen. Hardly had I set foot in the Naval Headquarters
at Cavite, at 4 o’clock in the afternoon, than I availed myself of
the opportunity to give these faithful adherents orders similar to
those despatched to Bataan and Zambales.
I was engaged the whole of that night with my companions drawing up
orders and circulars for the above mentioned purpose.
We were also kept very busy replying to letters which were pouring
in from all sides asking for news respecting the reported return of
myself to the islands and requesting definite instructions regarding
a renewal of hostilities against the Spaniards.
That the invisible, albeit irresistible, hand of Providence was
guiding every movement and beneficently favouring all efforts to rid
the country of the detestable foreign yoke is fairly evidenced by the
rapid sequence of events above recorded, for in no other way can one
account for the wonderful celebrity with which news of my projected
return spread far and wide.
Sixty-two Volunteers, organized and armed by the Spaniards with
Mausers and Remingtons, from San Roque and Caridad, placed themselves
under my orders. At first the Americans apprehended some danger from
the presence of this armed force, which was promptly placed on guard
at the entrance to the Arsenal. When I heard of this I went down and
gave them orders to occupy Dalajican, thereby preventing the Spaniards
from carrying out their intention to approach Cavite by that route.
When the Americans were informed of what I had done they were
reassured, and orders were given to the Captain of the Petrel to
hand over to me the 62 rifles and ammunition which Admiral Dewey had
kindly promised. About 10 a.m. the Petrel’s launch landed the arms
and ammunition in question at the Arsenal and no time was lost in
distributing the arms among the men who were by this time coming in
ever increasing numbers to offer their services to me and expressing
their willingness to be armed and assigned for duty at the outposts
and on the firing line.
During the evening of the 20th May the old Revolutionary officer
Sr. Luciano San Miguel (now a General in command of a Brigade)
came to me and asked for orders, which were given to him to effect
the uprising of the provinces of Manila, Laguna, Batangas, Tayabas,
Bulakan, Morong, Pampanga, Tarlak, Newva Ecija and other northern
provinces. He left the same night to execute the orders.
During the 21st, 22nd and 23rd and subsequent days of that month my
headquarters were simply besieged by my countrymen, who poured into
Cavite from all sides to offer their services in the impending struggle
with the Spaniards. To such an extent, indeed, were my quarters in the
Arsenal invaded that I soon found it necessary to repair to another
house in the town, leaving the place entirely at the disposal of the
U.S. Marines, who were then in charge of and guarding Cavite Arsenal.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
