


Our troops saw the American forces landing on the sea shore near the
Luneta and Paseo de Santa Lucia, calling the attention of everybody to
the fact that the Spanish soldiers in the city forts were not firing
on them (the Americans), a mystery that was cleared up at sunset
when details of the capitulation of Manila, by General Jaudenes in
accordance with terms of an agreement with General Merritt, became
public property–a capitulation which the American Generals reserved
for their own benefit and credit in contravention of the agreement
arrived at with Admiral Dewey in the arrangement of plans for the
final combined assault on and capture of Manila by the allied forces,
American and Filipino.
Some light was thrown upon this apparently inexplicable conduct of the
American Commanders by the telegrams which I received during that day
from General Anderson, who wired me from Maitubig asking me to issue
orders forbidding our troops to enter Manila, a request which I did
not comply with because it was not in conformity with the agreement,
and it was, moreover, diametrically opposed to the high ends of the
Revolutionary Government, that after going to the trouble of besieging
Manila for two months and a half, sacrificing thousands of lives and
millions of material interests, it should be supposed such sacrifices
were made with any other object in view than the capture of Manila
and the Spanish garrison which stubbornly defended the city.
But General Merritt, persistent in his designs, begged me not only
through the Admiral but also through Major Bell to withdraw my
troops from the suburbs to (as it was argued) prevent the danger
of conflict which is always to be looked for in the event of dual
military occupation; also by so doing to avoid bringing ridicule upon
the American forces; offering, at the same time, in three letters,
to negotiate after his wishes were complied with. To this I agreed,
though neither immediately nor at one time, but making our troops
retire gradually up to the blockhouses in order that the whole of the
inhabitants of Manila should witness the proceedings of our troops
and amicability toward our American allies.
Up to that time, and in fact right up to the time when the Americans
openly commenced hostilities against us, I entertained in my soul
strong hopes that the American Commanders would make absolute with
their Government the verbal agreement made and entered into with the
Leader of the Philippine Revolution, notwithstanding the indications
to the contrary which were noticeable in their conduct, especially
in respect of the conduct of Admiral Dewey, who, without any reason
or justification, one day in the month of October seized all our
steamers and launches.
Being informed of this strange proceeding, and at the time when the
Revolutionary Government had its headquarters in Malolos, I despatched
a Commission to General Otis to discuss the matter with him. General
Otis gave the Commissioners a letter of recommendation to the Admiral
to whom he referred them; but the Admiral declined to receive the
Commission notwithstanding General Otis’s recommendation.
Notwithstanding the procedure of the American Commanders, so contrary
to the spirit of all the compacts and antecedents above mentioned,
I continued to maintain a friendly attitude towards them, sending
a Commission to General Merritt to bid him farewell on the eve of
his departure for Paris. In his acknowledgement of his courtesy
General Merritt was good enough to say that he would advocate the
Filipino Cause in the United States. In the same manner I sent to
Admiral Dewey a punal [5] in a solid silver scabbard and a walking
stick of the very best cane with gold handle engraved by the most
skilful silversmiths as a souvenir and mark of our friendship. This
the Admiral accepted, thereby in some measure relieving my feelings
and the anxiety of my compatriots constituting the Revolutionary
Government, whose hearts were again filled with pleasant hopes of a
complete understanding with Admiral Dewey.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
