


The next day (8th May, 1898), just when we were distributing arms to
the revolutionists of Kawit, in the above mentioned district a column,
composed of over 270 Spanish Naval Infantry, appeared in sight. They
were sent out by the Spanish General, Sr. Peña, for the purpose of
seizing the said consignment of arms.
Then it was that the first engagement of the Revolution of 1898 (which
may be rightly styled a continuation of the campaign of 1896-97) took
place. The battle raged from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., when the Spaniards ran
out of ammunition and surrendered, with all their arms, to the Filipino
Revolutionists, who took their prisoners to Cavite. In commemoration
of this glorious achievement I hoisted our national flag in presence
of a great crowd, who greeted it with tremendous applause and loud,
spontaneous and prolonged cheers for “Independent Philippines” and for
“the generous nation"–the United States of America. Several officers
and Marines from the American fleet who witnessed the ceremony evinced
sympathy with the Filipino cause by joining in the natural and popular
rejoicings of the people.
This glorious triumph was merely the prelude to a succession of
brilliant victories, and when the 31st May came–the date fixed for
general uprising of the whole of the Philippines–the people rose as
one man to crush the power of Spain.
The second triumph was effected in Binakayan, at a place known as
Polvorin, where the Spanish garrison consisting of about 250 men
was attacked by our raw levvies and surrendered in a few hours,
their stock of ammunition being completely exhausted.
I again availed myself of the opportunity to hoist our national flag
and did so from an upper story of the Polvorin facing the sea,
with the object of causing the sacred insignia of our Liberty and
Independence to be seen fluttering in the breeze by the warships,
representing all the great and civilized nations of the world, which
were congregated in the harbour observing the providential evolution
going on in the Philippines after upwards of three hundred years of
Spanish domination.
Scarcely had another hour elapsed before another flag was seen flying
over the steeple of the Church at Bakoor–which is also in full view
of vessels in the harbour–being the signal of another triumph of
our troops over the Spanish forces which held that town. The garrison
consisted of about 300 men, who surrendered to the Revolutionary Army
when their ammunition was exhausted.
And so the Revolution progressed, triumph following triumph in quick
succession, evidencing the power, resolution and ability of the
inhabitants of the Philippines to rid themselves of any foreign yoke
and exist as an independent State, as I affirmed to Admiral Dewey and
in respect of which he and several American Commanders and officers
warmly congratulated me, specially mentioning the undeniable triumphs
of the Philippine Army as demonstrated and proved by the great number
of prisoners we brought into Cavite from all parts of Luzon.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
