


In conformity with my orders issued on the 1st of September, all
Philippine vessels hoisted the national flag, the Marines of the
Filipino flotilla being the first to execute that order. Our little
flotilla consisted of some eight Spanish steam launches (which had been
captured) and five vessels of greater dimensions, namely, the Taaleño,
Baldyan, Taal, Bulucan, and Purisima Concepcion. These vessels were
presented to the Philippine Government by their native owners and were
converted by us, at our Arsenal, into gunboats, 8 and 9 centimetre
guns, taken from the sunken Spanish warships, being mounted on board.
Ah! what a beautiful, inspiring joyous sight that flag was fluttering
in the breeze from the topmasts of our vessels, side by side,
as it were, with the ensigns of other and greater nations, among
whose mighty warships our little cruisers passed to and fro dipping
their colours, the ensign of Liberty and Independence! With what
reverence and adoration it was viewed as it suddenly rose in its
stately loneliness crowning our victories, and, as it were, smiling
approvingly upon the undisciplined Philippine Army in the moment of
its triumphs over the regular forces of the Spanish Government! One’s
heart swells and throbs again with the emotions of extreme delight;
the soul is filled with pride, and the goal of patriotism seems
well-nigh reached in the midst of such a magnificent spectacle!
At the end of June I called on Admiral Dewey, who, after complimenting
me on the rapid triumphs of the Philippine Revolution, told me
he had been asked by the German and French Admirals why he allowed
the Filipinos to display on their vessels a flag that was not
recognized. Admiral Dewey said his reply to the French and German
Admirals was–with his knowledge and consent the Filipinos used that
flag, and, apart from this, he was of opinion that in view of the
courage and steadfastness of purpose displayed in the war against
the Spaniards the Filipinos deserved the right to use their flag.
I thereupon expressed to the Admiral my unbounded gratitude for such
unequivocal protection, and on returning to the shore immediately
ordered the Philippine flotilla to convey troops to the other provinces
of Luzon and to the Southern islands, to wage war against the Spaniards
who garrisoned them.
Continue...

This eBook of “True Version of the Philippine Revolution” by Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
