


After we had been a few weeks on shore, and had begun to feel
broken into the regularity of our life, its monotony was
interrupted by the arrival of two vessels from the windward.
We were sitting at dinner in our little room, when we heard the cry
of “Sail ho!”  This, we had learned, did not always signify a vessel,
but was raised whenever a woman was seen coming down from the town;
or a squaw, or an ox-cart, or anything unusual, hove in sight upon
the road; so we took no notice of it.  But it soon became so loud
and general from all parts of the beach, that we were led to go
to the door; and there, sure enough, were two sails coming round
the point, and leaning over from the strong north-west wind,
which blows down the coast every afternoon.  The headmost was a
ship, and the other, a brig.  Everybody was alive on the beach,
and all manner of conjectures were abroad.  Some said it was the
Pilgrim, with the Boston ship, which we were expecting; but we soon
saw that the brig was not the Pilgrim, and the ship with her stump
top-gallant masts and rusty sides, could not be a dandy Boston
Indiaman.  As they drew nearer, we soon discovered the high poop
and top-gallant forecastle, and other marks of the Italian ship Rosa,
and the brig proved to be the Catalina, which we saw at Santa Barbara,
just arrived from Valparaiso.  They came to anchor, moored ship,
and commenced discharging hides and tallow.  The Rosa had purchased
the house occupied by the Lagoda, and the Catalina took the other
spare one between ours and the Ayacucho’s, so that, now, each one
was occupied, and the beach, for several days, was all alive.
The Catalina had several Kanakas on board, who were immediately
besieged by the others, and carried up to the oven, where they had
a long pow-wow, and a smoke.  Two Frenchmen, who belonged to the
Rosa’s crew, came in, every evening, to see Nicholas; and from them
we learned that the Pilgrim was at San Pedro, and was the only other
vessel now on the coast.  Several of the Italians slept on shore at
their hide-house; and there, and at the tent in which the Fazio’s
crew lived, we had some very good singing almost every evening.
The Italians sang a variety of songs–barcarollas, provincial airs,
etc.; in several of which I recognized parts of our favorite operas
and sentimental songs.  They often joined in a song, taking all the
different parts; which produced a fine effect, as many of them had good
voices, and all seemed to sing with spirit and feeling.  One young
man, in particular, had a falsetto as clear as a clarionet.
The greater part of the crews of the vessels came ashore every
evening, and we passed the time in going about from one house to
another, and listening to all manner of languages.  The Spanish was
the common ground upon which we all met; for every one knew more or
less of that.  We had now, out of forty or fifty, representatives
from almost every nation under the sun: two Englishmen, three Yankees,
two Scotchmen, two Welshmen, one Irishman, three Frenchmen (two of
whom were Normans, and the third from Gascony,) one Dutchman,
one Austrian, two or three Spaniards, (from old Spain,) half a
dozen Spanish-Americans and half-breeds, two native Indians from
Chili and the Island of Chiloe, one Negro, one Mulatto, about twenty
Italians, from all parts of Italy, as many more Sandwich Islanders,
one Otaheitan, and one Kanaka from the Marquesas Islands.
The night before the vessels were ready to sail, all the
Europeans united and had an entertainment at the Rosa’s hide-house,
and we had songs of every nation and tongue.  A German gave us
“Och! mein lieber Augustin!” the three Frenchmen roared through the
Marseilles Hymn; the English and Scotchmen gave us “Rule Britannia,"
and “Wha’ll be King but Charlie?” the Italians and Spaniards screamed
through some national affairs, for which I was none the wiser;
and we three Yankees made an attempt at the “Star-spangled Banner."
After these national tributes had been paid, the Austrian gave us
a very pretty little love-song, and the Frenchmen sang a spirited
thing called “Sentinelle! O prenez garde a vous!” and then
followed the melange which might have been expected.  When I
left them, the aguardiente and annisou was pretty well in their
heads, and they were all singing and talking at once, and their
peculiar national oaths were getting as plenty as pronouns.
The next day, the two vessels got under weigh for the windward,
and left us in quiet possession of the beach.  Our numbers were
somewhat enlarged by the opening of the new houses, and the society
of the beach a little changed.  In charge of the Catalina’s house,
was an old Scotchman, who, like most of his countrymen, had a pretty
good education, and, like many of them, was rather pragmatical,
and had a ludicrously solemn conceit.  He employed his time in
taking care of his pigs, chickens, turkeys, dogs, etc., and in
smoking his long pipe.  Everything was as neat as a pin in the
house, and he was as regular in his hours as a chronometer, but as
he kept very much by himself, was not a great addition to our
society.  He hardly spent a cent all the time he was on the beach,
and the others said he was no shipmate.  He had been a petty officer
on board the British frigate Dublin, Capt. Lord James Townshend,
and had great ideas of his own importance.  The man in charge
of the Rosa’s house was an Austrian by birth, but spoke, read,
and wrote four languages with ease and correctness.  German was his
native tongue, but being born near the borders of Italy, and having
sailed out of Genoa, the Italian was almost as familiar to him as
his own language.  He was six years on board of an English man-of-war,
where he learned to speak our language with ease, and also to read
and write it.  He had been several years in Spanish vessels,
and had acquired that language so well, that he could read any
books in it.  He was between forty and fifty years of age, and was
a singular mixture of the man-of-war’s-man and Puritan.  He talked
a great deal about propriety and steadiness, and gave good advice
to the youngsters and Kanakas, but seldom went up to the town,
without coming down “three sheets in the wind.”  One holyday, he
and old Robert (the Scotchman from the Catalina) went up to the
town, and got so cozy, talking over old stories and giving one
another good advice, that they came down double-backed, on a horse,
and both rolled off into the sand as soon as the horse stopped.
This put an end to their pretensions, and they never heard the last
of it from the rest of the men.  On the night of the entertainment
at the Rosa’s house, I saw old Schmidt, (that was the Austrian’s name)
standing up by a hogshead, holding on by both hands, and calling out
to himself–"Hold on, Schmidt! hold on, my good fellow, or you’ll
be on your back!”  Still, he was an intelligent, good-natured old
fellow, and had a chest-full of books, which he willingly lent
me to read.  In the same house with him was a Frenchman and an
Englishman; the latter a regular-built “man-of-war Jack;” a thorough
seaman; a hearty, generous fellow; and, at the same time, a drunken,
dissolute dog.  He made it a point to get drunk once a fortnight,
(when he always managed to sleep on the road, and have his money
stolen from him,) and to battle the Frenchman once a week.
These, with a Chilian, and a half a dozen Kanakas, formed the
addition to our company.
In about six weeks from the time when the Pilgrim sailed, we had
got all the hides which she left us cured and stowed away;
and having cleared up the ground, and emptied the vats, and set
everything in order, had nothing more to do until she should come
down again, but to supply ourselves with wood.  Instead of going
twice a week for this purpose, we determined to give one whole
week to getting wood, and then we should have enough to last us
half through the summer.  Accordingly, we started off every morning,
after an early breakfast, with our hatchets in hand, and cut wood
until the sun was over the point,–which was our only mark of time,
as there was not a watch on the beach–and then came back to dinner,
and after dinner, started off again with our hand-cart and ropes,
and carted and “backed” it down, until sunset.  This, we kept up for
a week, until we had collected several cords,–enough to last us for
six or eight weeks–when we “knocked off" altogether, much to my joy;
for, though I liked straying in the woods, and cutting, very well,
yet the backing the wood for so great a distance, over an uneven
country, was, without exception, the hardest work I had ever done.
I usually had to kneel down and contrive to heave the load, which
was well strapped together, upon my back, and then rise up and
start off with it up the hills and down the vales, sometimes through
thickets,–the rough points sticking into the skin, and tearing the
clothes, so that, at the end of the week, I had hardly a whole shirt
to my back.
We were now through all our work, and had nothing more to do until
the Pilgrim should come down again.  We had nearly got through
our provisions too, as well as our work; for our officer had
been very wasteful of them, and the tea, flour, sugar, and molasses,
were all gone.  We suspected him of sending them up to the town;
and he always treated the squaws with molasses, when they came
down to the beach.  Finding wheat-coffee and dry bread rather
poor living, we dubbed together, and I went up to the town on
horseback with a great salt-bag behind the saddle, and a few reáls
in my pocket, and brought back the bag full of onions, pears, beans,
water-melons, and other fruits; for the young woman who tended
the garden, finding that I belonged to the American ship, and that
we were short of provisions, put in a double portion.  With these
we lived like fighting-cocks for a week or two, and had, besides,
what the sailors call “a blow-out on sleep;” not turning out in the
morning until breakfast was ready.  I employed several days in
overhauling my chest, and mending up all my old clothes, until I
had got everything in order–patch upon patch, like a sand-barge’s
mainsail.  Then I took hold of Bowditch’s Navigator, which I had
always with me.  I had been through the greater part of it, and now
went carefully through it, from beginning to end working out most
of the examples.  That done, and there being no signs of the Pilgrim,
I made a descent upon old Schmidt, and borrowed and read all the
books there were upon the beach.  Such a dearth was there of these
latter articles, that anything, even a little child’s story-book,
or the half of a shipping calendar, appeared like a treasure.
I actually read a jest-book through, from beginning to end, in one
day, as I should a novel, and enjoyed it very much.  At last,
when I thought that there were no more to be got, I found, at the
bottom of old Schmidt’s chest, “Mandeville, a Romance, by Godwin,
in five volumes.”  This I had never read, but Godwin’s name was enough,
and after the wretched trash I had devoured, anything bearing the name
of a distinguished intellectual man, was a prize indeed.  I bore it off,
and for two days I was up early and late, reading with all my might,
and actually drinking in delight.  It is no extravagance to say that
it was like a spring in a desert land.
From the sublime to the ridiculous–so with me, from Mandeville
to hide-curing, was but a step; for
Wednesday, July 18th, brought us the brig Pilgrim from the windward.
As she came in, we found that she was a good deal altered in her
appearance.  Her short top-gallant masts were up; her bowlines all
unrove (except to the courses); the quarter boom-irons off her lower
yards; her jack-cross-trees sent down; several blocks got rid of;
running-rigging rove in new places; and numberless other changes
of the same character.  Then, too, there was a new voice giving orders,
and a new face on the quarter-deck,–a short, dark-complexioned man,
in a green jacket and a high leather cap.  These changes, of course,
set the whole beach on the qui-vive, and we were all waiting for the
boat to come ashore, that we might have things explained.  At length,
after the sails were furled and the anchor carried out, the boat
pulled ashore, and the news soon flew that the expected ship had
arrived at Santa Barbara, and that Captain T––- had taken command
of her, and her captain, Faucon, had taken the Pilgrim, and was the
green-jacketed man on the quarter-deck.  The boat put directly off
again, without giving us time to ask any more questions, and we were
obliged to wait till night, when we took a little skiff, that lay on
the beach, and paddled off.  When I stepped aboard, the second mate
called me aft, and gave me a large bundle, directed to me, and marked
“Ship Alert.”  This was what I had longed for, yet I refrained from
opening it until I went ashore.  Diving down into the forecastle,
I found the same old crew, and was really glad to see them again.
Numerous inquiries passed as to the new ship, the latest news from
Boston, etc., etc.  S––- had received letters from home, and nothing
remarkable had happened.  The Alert was agreed on all hands to be a
fine ship, and a large one: “Larger than the Rosa"–"Big enough to
carry off all the hides in California"–"Rail as high as a man’s
head"–"A crack ship"–"A regular dandy,” etc., etc.  Captain
T––- took command of her, and she went directly up to Monterey;
from thence she was to go to San Francisco, and probably would not
be in San Diego under two or three months.  Some of the Pilgrim’s
crew found old ship-mates aboard of her, and spent an hour or two
in her forecastle, the evening before she sailed.  They said her
decks were as white as snow–holystoned every morning, like a
man-of-war’s; everything on board “shipshape and Bristol fashion;"
a fine crew, three mates, a sailmaker and carpenter, and all complete.
“They’ve got a man for mate of that ship, and not a bloody sheep
about decks!"–"A mate that knows his duty, and makes everybody
do theirs, and won’t be imposed upon either by captain or crew."
After collecting all the information we could get on this point,
we asked something about their new captain.  He had hardly been
on board long enough for them to know much about him, but he had
taken hold strong, as soon as he took command;–sending down the
top-gallant masts, and unreeving half the rigging, the very first
day.
Having got all the news we could, we pulled ashore; and as soon as
we reached the house, I, as might be supposed, proceeded directly
to opening my bundle, and found a reasonable supply of duck,
flannel shirts, shoes, etc., and, what was still more valuable,
a packet of eleven letters.  These I sat up nearly all the night
to read, and put them carefully away, to be read and re-read again
and again at my leisure.  Then came a half a dozen newspapers,
the last of which gave notice of Thanksgiving, and of the clearance
of “ship Alert, Edward H. Faucon, master, for Callao and California,
by Bryant, Sturgis & Co.”  No one has ever been on distant voyages,
and after a long absence received a newspaper from home, who cannot
understand the delight that they give one.  I read every part of them
–the houses to let; things lost or stolen; auction sales, and all.
Nothing carries you so entirely to a place, and makes you feel so
perfectly at home, as a newspaper.  The very name of “Boston Daily
Advertiser” “sounded hospitably upon the ear.”
The Pilgrim discharged her hides, which set us at work again,
and in a few days we were in the old routine of dry hides–wet
hides–cleaning–beating, etc.  Captain Faucon came quietly up to
me, as I was at work, with my knife, cutting the meat from a dirty
hide, asked me how I liked California, and repeated–"Tityre, tu
patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi.”  Very apropos, thought I, and,
at the same time, serves to show that you understand Latin.
However, a kind word from a captain is a thing not to be slighted;
so I answered him civilly, and made the most of it.
Saturday, July 11th.  The Pilgrim set sail for the windward, and left
us to go on in our old way.  Having laid in such a supply of wood,
and the days being now long, and invariably pleasant, we had a
good deal of time to ourselves.  All the duck I received from home,
I soon made up into trowsers and frocks, and displayed, every Sunday,
a complete suit of my own make, from head to foot, having formed
the remnants of the duck into a cap.  Reading, mending, sleeping,
with occasional excursions into the bush, with the dogs, in search
of coati, hares, and rabbits, or to encounter a rattlesnake, and now
and then a visit to the Presidio, filled up our spare time after
hide-curing was over for the day.  Another amusement, which we
sometimes indulged in, was “burning the water” for craw-fish.
For this purpose, we procured a pair of grains, with a long staff
like a harpoon, and making torches with tarred rope twisted round a
long pine stick, took the only boat on the beach, a small skiff,
and with a torch-bearer in the bow, a steersman in the stern, and one
man on each side with the grains, went off, on dark nights, to burn
the water.  This is fine sport.  Keeping within a few rods of the
shore, where the water is not more than three or four feet deep,
with a clear sandy bottom, the torches light everything up so that one
could almost have seen a pin among the grains of sand.  The craw-fish
are an easy prey, and we used soon to get a load of them.  The other
fish were more difficult to catch, yet we frequently speared a number
of them, of various kinds and sizes.  The Pilgrim brought us down
a supply of fish-hooks, which we had never had before, on the beach,
and for several days we went down to the Point, and caught a
quantity of cod and mackerel.  On one of these expeditions, we saw
a battle between two Sandwich Islanders and a shark.  “Johnny"
had been playing about our boat for some time, driving away the
fish, and showing his teeth at our bait, when we missed him, and in
a few moments heard a great shouting between two Kanakas who were
fishing on the rock opposite to us: “E hana hana make i ka ia nui!"
“E pii mai Aikane!” etc., etc.; and saw them pulling away on a stout
line, and “Johnny Shark” floundering at the other end.  The line
soon broke; but the Kanakas would not let him off so easily,
and sprang directly into the water after him.  Now came the tug of
war.  Before we could get into deep water, one of them seized him
by the tail, and ran up with him upon the beach; but Johnny
twisted round, turning his head under his body, and, showing his
teeth in the vicinity of the Kanaka’s hand, made him let go and
spring out of the way.  The shark now turned tail and made the
best of his way, by flapping and floundering, toward deep water;
but here again, before he was fairly off, the other Kanaka seized
him by the tail, and made a spring towards the beach, his companion
at the same time paying away upon him with stones and a large stick.
As soon, however, as the shark could turn, he was obliged to let go
his hold; but the instant he made toward deep water, they were both
behind him, watching their chance to seize him.  In this way the
battle went on for some time, the shark, in a rage, splashing and
twisting about, and the Kanakas, in high excitement, yelling at the
top of their voices; but the shark at last got off, carrying away a
hook and liner and not a few severe bruises.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
