


It is usual, in voyages round the Cape from the Pacific, to keep
to the eastward of the Falkland Islands; but as it had now set in
a strong, steady, and clear south-wester, with every prospect of
its lasting, and we had had enough of high latitudes, the captain
determined to stand immediately to the northward, running inside
the Falkland Islands.  Accordingly, when the wheel was relieved at
eight o’clock, the order was given to keep her due north, and all
hands were turned up to square away the yards and make sail.
In a moment, the news ran through the ship that the captain was
keeping her off, with her nose straight for Boston, and Cape Horn
over her taffrail.  It was a moment of enthusiasm.  Every one was
on the alert, and even the two sick men turned out to lend a hand
at the halyards.  The wind was now due south-west, and blowing
a gale to which a vessel close hauled could have shown no more
than a single close-reefed sail; but as we were going before it,
we could carry on.
Accordingly, hands were sent aloft, and a reef shaken out of the
top-sails, and the reefed foresail set.  When we came to masthead
the topsail yards, with all hands at the halyards, we struck up
“Cheerily, men,” with a chorus which might have been heard half-way
to Staten Land.  Under her increased sail, the ship drove on through
the water.  Yet she could bear it well; and the captain sang out from
the quarter-deck–"Another reef out of that fore-topsail, and give
it to her!”  Two hands sprang aloft; the frozen reef-points and
earings were cast adrift, the halyards manned, and the sail gave
out her increased canvas to the gale.  All hands were kept on
deck to watch the effect of the change.  It was as much as she
could well carry, and with a heavy sea astern, it took two men
at the wheel to steer her.  She flung the foam from her bows;
the spray breaking aft as far as the gangway.  She was going at
a prodigious rate.
Still, everything held.  Preventer braces were reeved and hauled
taught; tackles got upon the backstays; and each thing done to
keep all snug and strong.  The captain walked the deck at a rapid
stride, looked aloft at the sails, and then to windward; the mate
stood in the gangway, rubbing his hands, and talking aloud to the
ship–"Hurrah, old bucket! the Boston girls have got hold of the
tow-rope!” and the like; and we were on the forecastle, looking
to see how the spars stood it, and guessing the rate at which
she was going,–when the captain called out–"Mr. Brown, get up
the topmast studding-sail!  What she can’t carry she may drag!"
The mate looked a moment; but he would let no one be before him
in daring.
He sprang forward–"Hurrah, men! rig out the topmast studding-sail
boom!  Lay aloft, and I’ll send the rigging up to you!"–We sprang
aloft into the top; lowered a girt-line down, by which we hauled
up the rigging; rove the tacks and halyards; ran out the boom and
lashed it fast, and sent down the lower halyards, as a preventer.
It was a clear starlight night, cold and blowing; but everybody
worked with a will.  Some, indeed, looked as though they thought
the “old man” was mad, but no one said a word.  We had had a new
topmast studding-sail made with a reef in it,–a thing hardly
ever heard of, and which the sailors had ridiculed a good deal,
saying that when it was time to reef a studding-sail, it was time
to take it in.  But we found a use for it now; for, there being
a reef in the topsail, the studding-sail could not be set without
one in it also.  To be sure, a studding-sail with reefed topsails
was rather a new thing; yet there was some reason in it, for if
we carried that away, we should lose only a sail and a boom;
but a whole topsail might have carried away the mast and all.
While we were aloft, the sail had been got out, bent to the yard,
reefed, and ready for hoisting.  Waiting for a good opportunity,
the halyards were manned and the yard hoisted fairly up to the
block; but when the mate came to shake the catspaw out of the
downhaul, and we began to boom-end the sail, it shook the ship
to her centre.  The boom buckled up and bent like a whip-stick,
and we looked every moment to see something go; but, being of
the short, tough upland spruce, it bent like whalebone, and nothing
could break it.  The carpenter said it was the best stick he had
ever seen.  The strength of all hands soon brought the tack to
the boom-end, and the sheet was trimmed down, and the preventer
and the weather brace hauled taught to take off the strain.
Every rope-yarn seemed stretched to the utmost, and every thread
of canvas; and with this sail added to her, the ship sprang through
the water like a thing possessed.  The sail being nearly all forward,
it lifted her out of the water, and she seemed actually to jump from
sea to sea.  From the time her keel was laid, she had never been so
driven; and had it been life or death with every one of us, she could
not have borne another stitch of canvas.
Finding that she would bear the sail, the hands were sent below,
and our watch remained on deck.  Two men at the wheel had as much
as they could do to keep her within three points of her course,
for she steered as wild as a young colt.  The mate walked the deck,
looking at the sails, and then over the side to see the foam fly
by her, slapping his hands upon his thighs and talking to the
ship–"Hurrah, you jade, you’ve got the scent!–you know where
you’re going!”  And when she leaped over the seas, and almost
out of the water, and trembled to her very keel, the spars
and masts snapping and creaking,–"There she goes!–There she
goes,–handsomely!–as long as she cracks she holds!"–while we
stood with the rigging laid down fair for letting go, and ready
to take in sail and clear away, if anything went.  At four bells
we hove the log, and she was going eleven knots fairly; and had it
not been for the sea from aft which sent the ship home, and threw
her continually off her course, the log would have shown her to
have been going much faster.  I went to the wheel with a young
fellow from the Kennebec, who was a good helmsman; and for two
hours we had our hands full.  A few minutes showed us that our
monkey-jackets must come off; and, cold as it was, we stood in
our shirt-sleeves, in a perspiration; and were glad enough to have
it eight bells, and the wheel relieved.  We turned-in and slept
as well as we could, though the sea made a constant roar under
her bows, and washed over the forecastle like a small cataract.
At four o’clock, we were called again.  The same sail was still on
the vessel, and the gale, if there was any change, had increased
a little.  No attempt was made to take the studding-sail in;
and, indeed, it was too late now.  If we had started anything
toward taking it in, either tack or halyards, it would have blown
to pieces, and carried something away with it.  The only way now was
to let everything stand, and if the gale went down, well and good;
if not, something must go–the weakest stick or rope first–and
then we could get it in.  For more than an hour she was driven on
at such a rate that she seemed actually to crowd the sea into a
heap before her; and the water poured over the spritsail yard as
it would over a dam.  Toward daybreak the gale abated a little,
and she was just beginning to go more easily along, relieved of
the pressure, when Mr. Brown, determined to give her no respite,
and depending upon the wind’s subsiding as the sun rose, told us
to get along the lower studding-sail.  This was an immense sail,
and held wind enough to last a Dutchman a week,–hove-to.  It was
soon ready, the boom topped up, preventer guys rove, and the idlers
called up to man the halyards; yet such was still the force of the
gale, that we were nearly an hour setting the sail; carried away the
outhaul in doing it, and came very near snapping off the swinging
boom.  No sooner was it set than the ship tore on again like one
that was mad, and began to steer as wild as a hawk.  The men at
the wheel were puffing and blowing at their work, and the helm was
going hard up and hard down, constantly.  Add to this, the gale
did not lessen as the day came on, but the sun rose in clouds.
A sudden lurch threw the man from the weather wheel across the deck
and against the side.  The mate sprang to the wheel, and the man,
regaining his feet, seized the spokes, and they hove the wheel up
just in time to save her from broaching to; though nearly half
the studding-sail went under water; and as she came to, the boom
stood up at an angle of forty five degrees.  She had evidently
more on her than she could bear; yet it was in vain to try to
take it in–the clewline was not strong enough; and they were
thinking of cutting away, when another wide yaw and a come-to,
snapped the guys, and the swinging boom came in, with a crash,
against the lower rigging.  The outhaul block gave way, and the
topmast studding-sail boom bent in a manner which I never before
supposed a stick could bend.  I had my eye on it when the guys
parted, and it made one spring and buckled up so as to form nearly
a half circle, and sprang out again to its shape.
The clewline gave way at the first pull; the cleat to which the
halyards were belayed was wrenched off, and the sail blew round
the spritsail yards and head guys, which gave us a bad job to
get it in.
A half hour served to clear all away, and she was suffered to drive
on with her topmast studding-sail set, it being as much as she could
stagger under. 
During all this day and the next night, we went on under the same
sail, the gale blowing with undiminished force; two men at the wheel
all the time; watch and watch, and nothing to do but to steer and
look out for the ship, and be blown along;–until the noon of the
next day–
Sunday, July 24th, when we were in latitude 50° 27’ S., longitude
62° 13’ W., having made four degrees of latitude in the last
twenty-four hours.  Being now to northward of the Falkland Islands,
the ship was kept off, north-east, for the equator; and with her
head for the equator, and Cape Horn over her taffrail, she went
gloriously on; every heave of the sea leaving the Cape astern,
and every hour bringing us nearer to home, and to warm weather.
Many a time, when blocked up in the ice, with everything dismal
and discouraging about us, had we said,–if we were only fairly
round, and standing north on the other side, we should ask for
no more:–and now we had it all, with a clear sea, and as much
wind as a sailor could pray for.  If the best part of the voyage
is the last part, surely we had all now that we could wish.
Every one was in the highest spirits, and the ship seemed as
glad as any of us at getting out of her confinement.  At each
change of the watch, those coming on deck asked those going
below–"How does she go along?” and got for answer, the rate,
and the customary addition–"Aye! and the Boston girls have had hold
of the tow-rope all the watch, and can’t haul half the slack in!"
Each day the sun rose higher in the horizon, and the nights grew
shorter; and at coming on deck each morning, there was a sensible
change in the temperature.  The ice, too, began to melt from off
the rigging and spars, and, except a little which remained in the
tops and round the hounds of the lower masts, was soon gone.  As we
left the gale behind us, the reefs were shaken out of the topsails,
and sail made as fast as she could bear it; and every time all hands
were sent to the halyards, a song was called for, and we hoisted
away with a will.
Sail after sail was added, as we drew into fine weather; and in
one week after leaving Cape Horn, the long topgallant masts were
got up, topgallant and royal yards crossed, and the ship restored
to her fair proportions.
The Southern Cross we saw no more after the first night; the
Magellan Clouds settled lower and lower in the horizon; and so
great was our change of latitude each succeeding night, that we
sank some constellation in the south, and raised another in the
northern horizon.
Sunday, July 31st.  At noon we were in lat. 36° 41’ S., long.
38° 08’ W.; having traversed the distance of two thousand miles,
allowing for changes of course, in nine days.  A thousand miles
in four days and a half!–This is equal to steam.
Soon after eight o’clock, the appearance of the ship gave evidence
that this was the first Sunday we had yet had in fine weather.
As the sun came up clear, with the promise of a fair, warm day,
and, as usual on Sunday, there was no work going on, all hands
turned-to upon clearing out the forecastle.  The wet and soiled
clothes which had accumulated there during the past month, were
brought up on deck; the chests moved; brooms, buckets of water,
swabs, scrubbing-brushes, and scrapers carried down, and applied,
until the forecastle floor was as white as chalk, and everything
neat and in order.  The bedding from the berths was then spread on
deck, and dried, and aired; the deck-tub filled with water; and a
grand washing begun of all the clothes which were brought up.
Shirts, frocks, drawers, trowsers, jackets, stockings, of every
shape and color, wet and dirty–many of them mouldy from having
been lying a long time wet in a foul corner–these were all washed
and scrubbed out, and finally towed overboard for half an hour;
and then made fast in the rigging to dry.  Wet boots and shoes
were spread out to dry in sunny places on deck; and the whole
ship looked like a back yard on a washing day.  After we had
done with our clothes, we began upon our own persons.  A little
fresh water, which we had saved from our allowance, was put in
buckets, and with soap and towels, we had what sailors call
a fresh-water wash.  The same bucket, to be sure, had to go
through several hands, and was spoken for by one after another,
but as we rinsed off in salt water, pure from the ocean, and the
fresh was used only to start the accumulated grime and blackness
of five weeks, it was held of little consequence.
We soaped down and scrubbed one another with towels and pieces
of canvas, stripping to it; and then, getting into the head,
threw buckets of water upon each other.  After this, came shaving,
and combing, and brushing; and when, having spent the first part of
the day in this way, we sat down on the forecastle, in the afternoon,
with clean duck trowsers, and shirts on, washed, shaved, and combed,
and looking a dozen shades lighter for it, reading, sewing, and
talking at our ease, with a clear sky and warm sun over our heads,
a steady breeze over the larboard quarter, studding-sails out alow
and aloft, and all the flying kites aboard;–we felt that we had
got back into the pleasantest part of a sailor’s life.  At sundown
the clothes were all taken down from the rigging–clean and dry–and
stowed neatly away in our chests; and our southwesters, thick boots,
guernsey frocks, and other accompaniments of bad weather, put out
of the way, we hoped, for the rest of the voyage, as we expected
to come upon the coast early in the autumn.
Notwithstanding all that has been said about the beauty of a
ship under full sail, there are very few who have ever seen
a ship, literally, under all her sail.  A ship coming in or
going out of port, with her ordinary sails, and perhaps two of
three studding-sails, is commonly said to be under full sail;
but a ship never has all her sail upon her, except when she has
a light, steady breeze, very nearly, but not quite, dead aft,
and so regular that it can be trusted, and is likely to last
for some time.  Then, with all her sails, light and heavy, and
studding-sails, on each side, alow and aloft, she is the most
glorious moving object in the world.  Such a sight, very few,
even some who have been at sea a great deal, have ever beheld;
for from the deck of your own vessel you cannot see her, as you
would a separate object.
One night, while we were in these tropics, I went out to the end
of the flying-jib-boom, upon some duty, and, having finished it,
turned round, and lay over the boom for a long time, admiring the
beauty of the sight before me.  Being so far out from the deck,
I could look at the ship, as at a separate vessel;–and there rose
up from the water, supported only by the small black hull, a pyramid
of canvas, spreading out far beyond the hull, and towering up almost,
as it seemed in the indistinct night air, to the clouds.  The sea
was as still as an inland lake; the light trade-wind was gently and
steadily breathing from astern; the dark blue sky was studded with
the tropical stars; there was no sound but the rippling of the water
under the stem; and the sails were spread out, wide and high;–the
two lower studding-sails stretching, on each side, far beyond the deck;
the topmast studding-sails, like wings to the topsails; the top-gallant
studding-sails spreading fearlessly out above them; still higher,
the two royal studding-sails, looking like two kites flying from
the same string; and, highest of all, the little skysail, the apex
of the pyramid, seeming actually to touch the stars, and to be
out of reach of human hand.  So quiet, too, was the sea, and so
steady the breeze, that if these sails had been sculptured marble,
they could not have been more motionless.  Not a ripple upon the
surface of the canvas; not even a quivering of the extreme edges
of the sail–so perfectly were they distended by the breeze.
I was so lost in the sight, that I forgot the presence of the
man who came out with me, until he said, (for he, too, rough old
man-of-war’s-man as he was, had been gazing at the show,) half to
himself, still looking at the marble sails–"How quietly they do
their work!”
The fine weather brought work with it; as the ship was to be put in
order for coming into port.  This may give a landsman some notion
of what is done on board ship.–All the first part of a passage is
spent in getting a ship ready for sea, and the last part in getting
her ready for port.  She is, as sailors say, like a lady’s watch,
always out of repair.  The new, strong sails, which we had up off
Cape Horn, were to be sent down, and the old set, which were still
serviceable in fine weather, to be bent in their place; all the
rigging to be set up, fore and aft; the masts stayed; the standing
rigging to be tarred down; lower and topmast rigging rattled down,
fore and aft; the ship scraped, inside and out, and painted;
decks varnished; new and neat knots, seizings and coverings
to be fitted; and every part put in order, to look well to the
owner’s eye, on coming into Boston.  This, of course, was a long
matter; and all hands were kept on deck at work for the whole of
each day, during the rest of the voyage.  Sailors call this hard
usage; but the ship must be in crack order, and “we’re homeward
bound” was the answer to everything.
We went on for several days, employed in this way, nothing remarkable
occurring; and, at the latter part of the week, fell in with the
south-east trades, blowing about east-south-east, which brought
them nearly two points abaft our beam.  These blew strong and
steady, so that we hardly started a rope, until we were beyond
their latitude.  The first day of “all hands,” one of those little
incidents occurred, which are nothing in themselves, but are great
matters in the eyes of a ship’s company, as they serve to break the
monotony of a voyage, and afford conversation to the crew for days
afterwards.  These small matters, too, are often interesting, as they
show the customs and state of feeling on shipboard.
In merchant vessels, the captain gives his orders as to the ship’s
work, to the mate, in a general way, and leaves the execution of
them, with the particular ordering, to him.  This has become so fixed
a custom, that it is like a law, and is never infringed upon by a wise
master, unless his mate is no seaman; in which case, the captain must
often oversee things for himself.  This, however, could not be said
of our chief mate; and he was very jealous of any encroachment upon
the borders of his authority.
On Monday morning, the captain told him to stay the fore-topmast
plumb.  He accordingly came forward, turned all hands to, with
tackles on the stays and back-stays, coming up with the seizings,
hauling here, belaying there, and full of business, standing between
the knightheads to sight the mast,–when the captain came forward,
and also began to give orders.  This made confusion, and the mate,
finding that he was all aback, left his place and went aft, saying to
the captain–
“If you come forward, sir, I’ll go aft.  One is enough on the forecastle.” 
This produced a reply, and another fierce answer; and the words flew,
fists were doubled up, and things looked threateningly. 
“I’m master of this ship.” 
“Yes, sir, and I’m mate of her, and know my place!  My place is
forward, and yours is aft!” 
“My place is where I choose!  I command the whole ship; and you
are mate only so long as I choose!” 
“Say the word, Capt. T., and I’m done!  I can do a man’s work
aboard!  I didn’t come through the cabin windows!  If I’m not
mate, I can be man,” etc., etc.
This was all fun for us, who stood by, winking at each other, and
enjoying the contest between the higher powers.  The captain took
the mate aft; and they had a long talk, which ended in the mate’s
returning to his duty.  The captain had broken through a custom,
which is a part of the common-law of a ship, and without reason;
for he knew that his mate was a sailor, and needed no help from him;
and the mate was excusable for being angry.  Yet he was wrong, and
the captain right.  Whatever the captain does is right, ipso facto,
and any opposition to it is wrong, on board ship; and every officer
and man knows this when he signs the ship’s articles.
It is a part of the contract.  Yet there has grown up in merchant
vessels a series of customs, which have become a well understood
system, and have almost the force of prescriptive law.  To be sure,
all power is in the captain, and the officers hold their authority
only during his will; and the men are liable to be called upon for
any service; yet, by breaking in upon these usages, many difficulties
have occurred on board ship, and even come into courts of justice,
which are perfectly unintelligible to any one not acquainted with the
universal nature and force of these customs.  Many a provocation has
been offered, and a system of petty oppression pursued towards men,
the force and meaning of which would appear as nothing to strangers,
and doubtless do appear so to many “’long-shore” juries and judges.
The next little diversion, was a battle on the forecastle one
afternoon, between the mate and the steward.  They had been on
bad terms the whole voyage; and had threatened a rupture several
times.  This afternoon, the mate asked him for a tumbler of water,
and he refused to get it for him, saying that he waited upon
nobody but the captain: and here he had the custom on his side.
But in answering, he left off “the handle to the mate’s name."
This enraged the mate, who called him a “black soger;” and at it
they went, clenching, striking, and rolling over and over; while
we stood by, looking on, and enjoying the fun.  The darky tried
to butt him, but the mate got him down, and held him, the steward
singing out, “Let me go, Mr. Brown, or there’ll be blood spilt!"
In the midst of this, the captain came on deck, separated them,
took the steward aft, and gave him half a dozen with a rope’s end.
The steward tried to justify himself; but he had been heard to talk
of spilling blood, and that was enough to earn him his flogging;
and the captain did not choose to inquire any further.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
