


The next day being Sunday, which is the liberty-day among merchantmen,
when it is usual to let a part of the crew go ashore, the sailors had
depended upon a day on land, and were already disputing who should
ask to go, when, upon being called in the morning, we were turned-to
upon the rigging, and found that the topmast, which had been sprung,
was to come down, and a new one to go up, and top-gallant and royal-masts,
and the rigging to be set up.  This was too bad.  If there is anything that
irritates sailors and makes them feel hardly used, it is being deprived
of their Sabbath.  Not that they would always, or indeed generally,
spend it religiously, but it is their only day of rest.  Then, too,
they are often necessarily deprived of it by storms, and unavoidable
duties of all kinds, that to take it from them when lying quietly
and safely in port, without any urgent reason, bears the more hardly.
The only reason in this case was, that the captain had determined to
have the custom-house officers on board on Monday, and wished to have
his brig in order.  Jack is a slave aboard ship; but still he has
many opportunities of thwarting and balking his master.  When there
is danger, or necessity, or when he is well used, no one can work
faster than he; but the instant he feels that he is kept at work
for nothing, no sloth could make less headway.  He must not refuse
his duty, or be in any way disobedient, but all the work that an
officer gets out of him, he may be welcome to.  Every man who has
been three months at sea knows how to “work Tom Cox’s traverse"–
“three turns round the long-boat, and a pull at the scuttled-butt."
This morning everything went in this way.  “Sogering” was the order
of the day.  Send a man below to get a block, and he would capsize
everything before finding it, then not bring it up till an officer
had called him twice, and take as much time to put things in order
again.  Marline-spikes were not to be found; knives wanted a prodigious
deal of sharpening, and, generally, three or four were waiting round
the grindstone at a time.  When a man got to the mast-head, he would
come slowly down again to get something which he had forgotten;
and after the tackles were got up, six men would pull less than
three who pulled “with a will.”  When the mate was out of sight,
nothing was done.  It was all uphill work; and at eight o’clock,
when we went to breakfast, things were nearly where they were
when we began.
During our short meal, the matter was discussed.  One proposed
refusing to work; but that was mutiny, and of course was rejected
at once.  I remember, too, that one of the men quoted “Father
Taylor,” (as they call the seamen’s preacher at Boston,) who told
them that if they were ordered to work on Sunday, they must not
refuse their duty, and the blame would not come upon them.  After
breakfast, it leaked out, through the officers, that if we would get
through our work soon, we might have a boat in the afternoon and
go fishing.  This bait was well thrown, and took with several who
were fond of fishing; and all began to find that as we had one thing
to do, and were not to be kept at work for the day, the sooner we
did it, the better.
Accordingly, things took a new aspect; and before two o’clock this
work, which was in a fair way to last two days, was done; and five of
us went a fishing in the jolly-boat, in the direction of Point Pinos;
but leave to go ashore was refused.  Here we saw the Loriotte, which
sailed with us from Santa Barbara, coming slowly in with a light
sea-breeze, which sets in towards afternoon, having been becalmed
off the point all the first part of the day.  We took several fish
of various kinds, among which cod and perch abounded, and F––-,
(the ci-devant second mate,) who was of our number, brought up with
his hook a large and beautiful pearl-oyster shell.  We afterwards
learned that this place was celebrated for shells, and that a small
schooner had made a good voyage, by carrying a cargo of them to
the United States.
We returned by sun-down, and found the Loriotte at anchor,
within a cable’s length of the Pilgrim.  The next day we were
“turned-to” early, and began taking off the hatches, overhauling
the cargo, and getting everything ready for inspection.  At eight,
the officers of the customs, five in number, came on board,
and began overhauling the cargo, manifest, etc.
The Mexican revenue laws are very strict, and require the whole
cargo to be landed, examined, and taken on board again; but our
agent, Mr. R––-, had succeeded in compounding with them for the
two last vessels, and saving the trouble of taking the cargo ashore.
The officers were dressed in the costume which we found prevailed
through the country.  A broad-brimmed hat, usually of a black or
dark-brown color, with a gilt or figured band round the crown, and
lined inside with silk; a short jacket of silk or figured calico,
(the European skirted body-coat is never worn;) the shirt open in the
neck; rich waistcoat, if any; pantaloons wide, straight, and long,
usually of velvet, velveteen, or broadcloth; or else short breeches
and white stockings.  They wear the deer-skin shoe, which is of a
dark-brown color, and, (being made by Indians,) usually a good deal
ornamented.  They have no suspenders, but always wear a sash round
the waist, which is generally red, and varying in quality with the
means of the wearer.  Add to this the never-failing cloak, and you
have the dress of the Californian.  This last garment, the cloak, is
always a mark of the rank and wealth of the owner.  The “gente de razón,"
or aristocracy, wear cloaks of black or dark blue broadcloth, with as
much velvet and trimmings as may be; and from this they go down to the
blanket of the Indian; the middle classes wearing something like a
large table-cloth, with a hole in the middle for the head to go through.
This is often as coarse as a blanket, but being beautifully woven with
various colors, is quite showy at a distance.  Among the Mexicans there is
no working class; (the Indians being slaves and doing all the hard work;)
and every rich man looks like a grandee, and every poor scamp like a
broken-down gentleman.  I have often seen a man with a fine figure,
and courteous manners, dressed in broadcloth and velvet, with a noble
horse completely covered with trappings; without a real in his pocket,
and absolutely suffering for something to eat.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
