


The Three-Fingered Tramp.
Broad-shouldered, beetle-browed, brutal and lazy was Bill Hennard, son
of a prosperous settler. He had inherited a fine farm, but he was
as lazy as he was strong, and had soon run through his property and
followed the usual course from laziness to crime. Bill had seen the
inside of more than one jail. He was widely known in the adjoining
township of Emolan; many petty thefts were traced to him, and it was
openly stated that but for the help of a rich and clever confederate
he would certainly be in the penitentiary. It was darkly hinted,
further, that this confederate was a well-to-do Sangerite who had many
farms and a wife and son and a little daughter, and his first name was
William, and his second name Ra–– “But never mind; and don’t for the
world say I told you.” Oh, it’s easy to get rich–if you know how. Of
course, these rumours never reached the parties chiefly concerned.
Hennard had left Downey’s Dump the evening before, and avoiding the
roads, had struck through the woods, to visit his partner, with
important matters to arrange–very important for Hennard. He was much
fuddled when he left Downey’s, the night was cloudy, and consequently
he had wandered round and round till he was completely lost. He slept
under a tree (a cold, miserable sleep it was), and in the sunless
morning he set out with little certainty to find his “pal.” After
some time he stumbled on the trail that led him to the boys’ camp. He
was now savage with hunger and annoyance, and reckless with bottle
assistance, for he carried a flask. No longer avoiding being seen, he
walked up to the teepee just as Little Beaver was frying meat for the
noonday meal he expected to eat alone. At the sound of footsteps Yan
turned, supposing that one of his companions had come back, but there
instead was a big, rough-looking tramp.
[Illustration: “Well, sonny, cookin’ dinner?"]
“Well, sonny, cookin’ dinner? I’ll be glad to j’ine ye,” he said with
an unpleasant and fawning smile.
His manner was as repulsive as it could be, though he kept the form of
politeness.
“Where’s your folks, sonny?”
“Haven’t any–here,” replied Yan, in some fear, remembering now the
tramps of Glenyan.
“H-m–all alone–camped all alone, are ye?”
“The other fellers are away till the afternoon.”
“Wall, how nice. Glad to know it. I’ll trouble you to hand me that
stick,” and now the tramp’s manner changed from fawning to command, as
he pointed to Yan’s bow hanging unstrung.
“That’s my bow!” replied Yan, in fear and indignation.
“I won’t tell ye a second time–hand me that stick, or I’ll
spifflicate ye.”
Yan stood still. The desperado strode forward, seized the bow, and
gave him two or three blows on the back and legs.
“Now, you young Pup, get me my dinner, and be quick about it, or I’ll
break yer useless neck.”
Yan now realized that he had fallen into the power of the worst enemy
of the harmless camper, and saw too late the folly of neglecting
Raften’s advice to have a big Dog in camp. He glanced around and would
have run, but the tramp was too quick for him and grabbed him by the
collar. “Oh, no you don’t; hold on, sonny. I’ll fix you so you’ll do
as you’re told.” He cut the bowstring from its place, and violently
throwing Yan down, he tied his feet so that they had about eighteen
inches’ play.
“Now rush around and get my dinner; I’m hungry. An’ don’t you spile it
in the cooking or I’ll use the gad on you; an’ if you holler or cut
that cord I’ll kill ye. See that?” and he got out an ugly-looking
knife.
Tears of fear and pain ran down Yan’s face as he limped about to obey
the brute’s orders.
“Here, you move a little faster!” and the tramp turned from poking the
fire with the bow to give another sounding blow. If he had looked down
the trail he would have seen a small tow-topped figure that turned and
scurried away at the sound.
Yan was trained to bear punishment, but the tyrant seemed careless of
even his life.
“Are you going to kill me?” he burst out, after another attack for
stumbling in his shackles.
“Don’t know but I will when I’ve got through with ye,” replied the
desperado with brutal coolness. “I’ll take some more o’ that meat–an’
don’t you let it burn, neither. Where’s the sugar for the coffee? I’ll
get a bigger club if ye don’t look spry,” and so the tramp was served
with his meal. “Now bring me some tobaccer.”
Yan hobbled into the teepee and reached down Sam’s tobacco bag.
“Here, what’s that box? Bring that out here,” and the tramp pointed to
the box in which they kept some spare clothes. Yan obeyed in fear and
trembling. “Open it.”
“I can’t. It’s locked, and Sam has the key.”
“He has, has he? Well, I have a key that will open it,” and so he
smashed the lid with the axe; then he went through the pockets, got
Yan’s old silver watch and chain, and in Sam’s trousers pocket he got
two dollars.
“Ha! That’s just what I want, sonny,” and the tramp put them in his
own pockets. “’Pears to me the fire needs a little wood,” he remarked,
as his eye fell on Yan’s quiverful of arrows, and he gave that a kick
that sent many of them into the blaze.
“Now, sonny, don’t look at me quite so hard, like you was taking
notes, or I may have to cut your throat and put you in the swamp hole
to keep ye from telling tales.”
Yan was truly in terror of his life now.
“Bring me the whetstone,” the tyrant growled, “an’ some more coffee."
Yan did so. The tramp began whetting his long knife, and Yan saw
two things that stuck in his memory: first, the knife, which was of
hunting pattern, had a brass Deer on the handle; second, the hand that
grasped it had only three fingers.
“What’s that other box in there?”
“That’s–that’s–only our food box.”
“You lie to me, will ye?” and again the stick descended. “Haul it
out.”
“I can’t.”
“Haul it out or I’ll choke ye.”
Yan tried, but it was too heavy.
“Get out, you useless Pup!” and the tramp walked into the teepee and
gave Yan a push that sent him headlong out on the ground.
The boy was badly bruised, but saw his only chance. The big knife was
there. He seized it, cut the cord on his legs, flung the knife afar
in the swamp and ran like a Deer. The tramp rushed out of the teepee
yelling and cursing. Yan might have gotten away had he been in good
shape, but the tramp’s cruelty really had crippled him, and the brute
was rapidly overtaking him. As he sped down the handiest, the south
trail, he sighted in the trees ahead a familiar figure, and yelling
with all his remaining strength, “Caleb! Caleb!! Caleb Clark!!!” he
fell swooning in the grass.
There is no mistaking the voice of dire distress. Caleb hurried up,
and with one impulse he and the tramp grappled in deadly struggle.
Turk was not with his master, and the tramp had lost his knife, so it
was a hand-to-hand conflict. A few clinches, a few heavy blows, and
it was easy to see who must win. Caleb was old and slight. The tramp,
strong, heavy-built, and just drunk enough to be dangerous, was too
much for him, and after a couple of rounds the Trapper fell writhing
with a foul blow. The tramp felt again for his knife, swore savagely,
looked around for a club, found only a big stone, and would have done
no one knows what, when there was a yell from behind, another big man
crashed down the trail, and the tramp faced William Raften, puffing
and panting, with Guy close behind. The stone meant for Caleb he
hurled at William, who dodged it, and now there was an even fight. Had
the tramp had his knife it might have gone hard with Raften, but fist
to fist the farmer had the odds. His old-time science turned the
day, and the desperado went down with a crusher “straight from the
shoulder.”
It seemed a veritable battle-field–three on the ground and Raften,
red-faced and puffing, but sturdy and fearless, standing in utter
perplexity.
“Phwhat the divil does it all mane?”
“I’ll tell you, Mr. Raften,” chirped in Guy, as he stole from his safe
shelter.
“Oh, ye’re here, are ye, Guy? Go and git a rope at camp–quick now,"
as the tramp began to move.
As soon as the rope came Raften tied the fellow’s arms safely.
“’Pears to me Oi’ve sane that hand befoore,” remarked Raften, as the
three fingers caught his eye.
Yan was now sitting up, gazing about in a dazed way. Raften went over
to his old partner and said: “Caleb, air ye hurrt? It’s me–it’s Bill
Raften. Air ye hurrt?”
Caleb rolled his eyes and looked around.
Yan came over now and knelt down. “Are you hurt, Mr. Clark?”
He shook his head and pointed to his chest.
“He’s got his wind knocked out,” Raften explained; “he’ll be all right
in a minute or two. Guy, bring some wather.”
Yan told his story and Guy supplied an important chapter. He had
returned earlier than expected, and was near to camp, when he heard
the tramp beating Yan. His first impulse to run home to his puny
father was replaced with the wiser one to go for brawny Mr. Raften.
The tramp was now sitting up and grumbling savagely.
“Now, me foine feller,” said William. “We’ll take ye back to camp for
a little visit before we take ye to the ’Pen.’ A year in the cooler
will do ye moore good, Oi’m thinkin’, than anny other tratement. Here,
Guy, you take the end av the rope and fetch the feller to camp, while
I help Caleb.”
Guy was in his glory. The tramp was forced to go ahead; Guy followed,
jerking the rope and playing Horse, shouting, “Ch’–ch’–ch’–get
up, Horsey,” while William helped old Caleb with a gentleness that
recalled a time long ago when Caleb had so helped him after a falling
tree had nearly killed him in the woods.
At camp they found Sam. He was greatly astonished at the procession,
for he knew nothing of the day’s events, and fearfully disappointed he
was on learning what he had missed.
Caleb still looked white and sick when they got him to the fire, and
Raften said, “Sam, go home and get your mother to give you a little
brandy.”
“You don’t need to go so far,” said Yan, “for that fellow has a bottle
in his pocket.”
“I wouldn’t touch a dhrap of annything he has, let alone give it to a
sick friend,” was William’s reply.
So Sam went for the brandy and was back with it in half an hour.
“Here now, Caleb,” said William, “drink that now an’ ye’ll feel
better,” and as he offered the cup he felt a little reviving glow of
sympathy for his former comrade.
When Sam went home that morning it was with a very clear purpose.
He had gone straight to his mother and told all he knew about the
revolver and the misunderstanding with Caleb, and they two had had a
long, unsatisfactory interview with the father. Raften was brutal and
outspoken as usual. Mrs. Raften was calm and clear-witted. Sam was
shrewd. The result was a complete defeat for William–a defeat that he
would not acknowledge; and Sam came back to camp disappointed for the
time being, but now to witness the very thing he had been striving
for–his father and the Trapper reconciled; deadly enemies two hours
ago, but now made friends through a fight. Though overpowered in
argument, Raften’s rancour was not abated, but rather increased toward
the man he had evidently misused, until the balance was turned by the
chance of his helping that man in a time of direst straits.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
