


Tanning Skins and Making Moccasins
Sam had made a find. A Calf had been killed and its skin hung limp on
a beam in the barn. His father allowed him to carry this off, and now
he appeared with a “fresh Buffalo hide to make a robe.”
“I don’t know how the Injuns dress their robes,” he explained,
“but Caleb does, and he’ll tell you, and, of course, I’ll pay no
attention.”
The old Trapper had nothing to do, and the only bright spots in his
lonely life, since his own door was shut in his face, were visits
to the camp. These had become daily, so it was taken as a matter of
course when, within an hour after Sam’s return, he “happened round.”
“How do the Indians tan furs and robes?” Yan asked at once.
“Wall, different ways–”
But before he could say more Hawkeye reappeared and shouted:
“Say, boys, Paw’s old Horse died!” and he grinned joyfully, merely
because he was the bearer of news.
“Sappy, you grin so much your back teeth is gettin’ sunburned,” and
the Head Chief eyed him sadly.
“Well, it’s so, an’ I’m going to skin out his tail for a scalp. I bet
I’ll be the Injunest one of the crowd.”
“Why don’t you skin the hull thing, an’ I’ll show you how to make lots
of Injun things of the hide,” Caleb added, as he lighted his pipe.
“Will you help me?
“It’s same as skinnin a Calf. I’ll show you where to get the sewing
sinew after the hide’s off.”
So the whole camp went to Burns’s field. Guy hung back and hid when he
saw his father there drawing the dead Horse away with the plough team.
“Good-day, Jim,” was Caleb’s greeting, for they were good friends.
“Struck hard luck with the Horse?”
“No! Not much. Didn’t cost nothing; got him for boot in a swap. Glad
he’s dead, for he was foundered.”
“We want his skin, if you don’t.”
“You’re welcome to the hull thing.”
“Well, just draw it over by the line fence we’ll bury what’s left when
we’re through.”
“All right. You hain’t seen that durn boy o’ mine, have you?”
“Why, yes; I seen him not long ago,” said Sam. “He was p’inting right
for home then.”
“H-m. Maybe I’ll find him at the house.”
“Maybe you will.” Then Sam added under his breath, “I don’t think.”
So Burns left them, and a few minutes later Guy sneaked out of the
woods to take a secondary part in the proceedings.
Caleb showed them how to split the skin along the under side of each
leg and up the belly. It was slow work skinning, but not so unpleasant
as Yan feared, since the animal was fresh.
Caleb did the most of the work; Sam and Yan helped. Guy assisted with
reminiscences of his own Calf-skinning and with suggestions drawn from
his vast experiences.
When the upper half of the skin was off, Caleb remarked: “Don’t
believe we can turn him over, and when the Injuns didn’t have a Horse
at hand to turn over the Buffalo they used to cut the skin in two down
the line of the back. I guess we better do that. We’ve got all the
rawhide we need, anyhow.”
So they cut off the half they had skinned, took the tail and the mane
for “scalps,” and then Caleb sent Yan for the axe and a pail.
He cut out a lump of liver and the brains of the Horse. “That,” said
he, “is for tanning, an’ here is where the Injun woman gits her sewing
thread.”
He made a deep cut alongside the back bone from the middle of the back
to the loin, then forcing his fingers under a broad band of whitish
fibrous tissue, he raised it up, working and cutting till it ran down
to the hip bone and forward to the ribs. This sewing sinew was about
four inches wide, very thin, and could easily be split again and again
till it was like fine thread.
“There,” he said, “is a hank o’ thread. Keep that. It’ll dry up, but
can be split at any time, and soaking in warm water for twenty minutes
makes it soft and ready for use. Usually, when she’s sewing, the squaw
keeps a thread soaking in her mouth to be ready. Now we’ve got a Horse
skin and a Calfskin I guess we better set up a tan-yard.”
“Well, how do you tan furs, Mr. Clark?”
“Good many different ways. Sometimes just scrape and scrape till I get
all the grease and meat off the inside, then coat it with alum and
salt and leave it rolled up for a couple of days till the alum has
struck through and made the skin white at the roots of the hair, then
when this is half dry pull and work it till it is all soft.
“But the Injuns don’t have alum and salt, and they make a fine tan out
of the liver and brains, like I’m going to do with this.”
“Well, I want to do it the Indian way.”
“All right, you take the brains and liver of your Calf.”
“Why not some of the Horse brains and liver?”
“Oh, I dunno. They never do it that way that I’ve seen. Seems like it
went best with its own brains.”
“Now,” remarked the philosophical Woodpecker, “I call that a wonderful
provision of nature, always to put Calf brains and liver into a
Calfskin, and just enough to tan it.”
“First thing always is to clean your pelt, and while you do that I’ll
put the Horsehide in the mud to soak off the hair.” He put it in the
warm mud to soak there a couple of days, just as he had done the
Calfskin for the drum-heads, then came to superintend the dressing of
the Buffalo “robe.”
Sam first went home for the Calf brains and liver, then he and Yan
scraped the skin till they got out a vast quantity of grease, leaving
the flesh side bluish-white and clammy, but not greasy to the touch.
The liver of the Calf was boiled for an hour and then mashed up with
the raw brains into a tanning “dope” or mash and spread on the flesh
side of the hide, which was doubled, rolled up and put in a cool place
for two days. It was then opened out, washed clean in the brook and
hung till nearly dry. Then Caleb cut a hardwood stake to a sharp edge
and showed Yan how to pull and work the hide over the edge till it was
all soft and leathery.
The treatment of the Horsehide was the same, once the hair was
removed, but the greater thickness needed a longer soaking in the “tan
dope.”
After two days the Trapper scraped it clean and worked it on the
sharp-edged stake. It soon began to look like leather, except in one
or two spots. On examining these he said:
“H-m, Tanning didn’t strike right through every place. So he buttered
it again with the mash and gave it a day more; then worked it as
before over the angle of the pole till it was soft and fibrous.
“There,” said he, “that’s Injun tan leather. I have seen it done by
soaking the hide for a few days in liquor made by boiling Hemlock or
Balsam bark in water till it’s like brown ink, but it ain’t any better
than that. Now it needs one thing more to keep it from hardening after
being wet. It has to be smoked.”
So he made a smoke fire by smothering a clear fire with rotten wood;
then fastening the Horsehide into a cone with a few wooden pins, he
hung it in the dense smoke for a couple of hours, first one side out,
then the other till it was all of a rich smoky-tan colour and had the
smell so well known to those who handle Indian leather.
“There it is; that’s Injun tan, an’ I hope you see that elbow grease
is the main thing in tannin’.”
“Now, will you show us how to make moccasins and war-shirts?” asked
Little Beaver, with his usual enthusiasm.
“Well, the moccasins is easy, but I won’t promise about the
war-shirts. That’s pretty much a case of following the pattern of your
own coat, with the front in one piece, but cut down just far enough
for your head to go through, instead of all the way, and fixed with
tie-strings at the throat and fringes at the seams and at the bottom;
it hain’t easy to do. But any one kin larn to make moccasins. There is
two styles of them–that is, two main styles. Every Tribe has its own
make, and an Injun can tell what language another speaks as soon as
he sees his footgear. The two best known are the Ojibwa, with soft
sole–sole and upper all in one, an’ a puckered instep–that’s what
Ojibwa means–’puckered moccasin.’ The other style is the one most
used in the Plains. You see, they have to wear a hard sole, ’cause the
country is full of cactus and thorns as well as sharp stones.”
“I want the Sioux style. We have copied their teepee and war
bonnet–and the Sioux are the best Indians, anyway.”
“Or the worst, according to what side you’re on,” was Caleb’s reply.
But he went on: “Sioux Injuns are Plains Injuns and wear a hard sole.
Let’s see, now. I’ll cut you a pair.”
“No, make them for me. It’s my Horse,” said Guy.
“No, you don’t. Your Paw give that to me.” Caleb’s tone said plainly
that Guy’s laziness had made a bad impression, so he had to stand
aside while Yan was measured. Caleb had saved a part of the hide
untanned though thoroughly cleaned. This was soaked in warm water till
soft. Yan’s foot was placed on it and a line drawn around the foot
for a guide; this when cut out made the sole of one moccasin (A, cut
below), and by turning it underside up it served as pattern to cut the
other.
Now Caleb measured the length of the foot and added one inch, and
the width across the instep, adding half an inch, and with these as
greatest length and breadth cut out a piece of soft leather (B). Then
in this he made the cut a b on the middle line one way and c
d on the middle line the other way. A second piece the reverse of
this was cut, and next a piece of soft leather for inside tongue (C)
was sewn to the large piece (B), so that the edge a b of C was
fast to a b of B. A second piece was sewn to the other leather
(B reversed).
“Them’s your vamps for uppers. Now’s the time to bead ’em if you want
to.”
“Don’t know how.”
“Well, I can’t larn you that; that’s a woman’s work. But I kin show
you the pattern of the first pair I ever wore; I ain’t likely to
forget ’em, for I killed the Buffalo myself and seen the hull making."
He might have added that he subsequently married the squaw, but he did
not.
“There’s about the style” [D]. “Them three-cornered red and white
things all round is the hills where the moccasins was to carry me
safely; on the heel is a little blue pathway with nothing in it: that
is behind–it’s past. On the instep is three red, white and blue
pathways where the moccasin was to take me: they’re ahead–in the
future. Each path has lots of things in it, mostly changes and trails,
an’ all three ends in an Eagle feather–that stands for an honour. Ye
kin paint them that way after they’re made. Well, now, we’ll sew on
the upper with a good thick strand of sinew in the needle–or if you
have an awl you kin do without a needle on a pinch–and be sure to
bring the stitches out the edge of the sole instead of right through,
then they don’t wear off. That’s the way.” [E.]
So they worked away, clumsily, while Guy snickered and sizzled, and
Sam suggested that Si Lee would make a better squaw than both of them.
The sole as well as the upper being quite soft allowed them to turn
the moccasin inside out as often as they liked–and they did like; it
seemed necessary to reverse it every few minutes. But at length the
two pieces were fastened together all around, the seam gap at the heel
was quickly sewn up, four pairs of lace holes were made (_a, b, c,
d, in D), and an eighteen-inch strip of soft leather run through
them for a lace.
Now Yan painted the uppers with his Indian paints in the pattern that
Caleb had suggested, and the moccasins were done.
A squaw would have made half a dozen good pairs while Yan and Caleb
made the one poor pair, but she would not have felt so happy about it.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
