


I trust that they who have followed me to the end of my narrative,
will not refuse to carry their attention a little farther, to the
concluding remarks which I here present to them.
This chapter is written after the lapse of a considerable time since
the end of my voyage, and after a return to my former pursuits;
and in it I design to offer those views of what may be done for
seamen, and of what is already doing, which I have deduced from
my experiences, and from the attention which I have since gladly
given to the subject.
The romantic interest which many take in the sea, and in those
who live upon it, may be of use in exciting their attention to
this subject, though I cannot but feel sure that all who have
followed me in my narrative must be convinced that the sailor has
no romance in his every-day life to sustain him, but that it is
very much the same plain, matter-of-fact drudgery and hardship,
which would be experienced on shore.  If I have not produced
this conviction, I have failed in persuading others of what my
own experience has most fully impressed upon myself.
There is a witchery in the sea, its songs and stories, and in the
mere sight of a ship, and the sailor’s dress, especially to a young
mind, which has done more to man navies, and fill merchantmen, than
all the press-gangs of Europe.  I have known a young man with such
a passion for the sea, that the very creaking of a block stirred up
his imagination so that he could hardly keep his feet on dry ground;
and many are the boys, in every seaport, who are drawn away, as by an
almost irresistible attraction, from their work and schools, and hang
about the decks and yards of vessels, with a fondness which, it is
plain, will have its way.  No sooner, however, has the young sailor
begun his new life in earnest, than all this fine drapery falls off,
and he learns that it is but work and hardship, after all.  This is
the true light in which a sailor’s life is to be viewed; and if
in our books, and anniversary speeches, we would leave out much
that is said about “blue water,” “blue jackets,” “open hearts,"
“seeing God’s hand on the deep,” and so forth, and take this up
like any other practical subject, I am quite sure we should do full
as much for those we wish to benefit.  The question is, what can
be done for sailors, as they are,–men to be fed, and clothed,
and lodged, for whom laws must be made and executed, and who are
to be instructed in useful knowledge, and, above all, to be brought
under religious influence and restraint?  It is upon these topics
that I wish to make a few observations.
In the first place, I have no fancies about equality on board ship,
It is a thing out of the question, and certainly, in the present
state of mankind, not to be desired.  I never knew a sailor who
found fault with the orders and ranks of the service; and if I
expected to pass the rest of my life before the mast, I would not
wish to have the power of the captain diminished an iota.  It is
absolutely necessary that there should be one head and one voice,
to control everything, and be responsible for everything.  There are
emergencies which require the instant exercise of extreme power.
These emergencies do not allow of consultation; and they who would
be the captain’s constituted advisers might be the very men over
whom he would be called upon to exert his authority.  It has been
found necessary to vest in every government, even the most democratic,
some extraordinary, and, at first sight, alarming powers; trusting in
public opinion, and subsequent accountability to modify the exercise
of them.  These are provided to meet exigencies, which all hope
may never occur, but which yet by possibility may occur, and if
they should, and there were no power to meet them instantly,
there would be an end put to the government at once.  So it is with
the authority of the shipmaster.  It will not answer to say that he
shall never do this and that thing, because it does not seem always
necessary and advisable that it should be done.  He has great cares
and responsibilities; is answerable for everything; and is subject
to emergencies which perhaps no other man exercising authority
among civilized people is subject to.  Let him, then, have powers
commensurate with his utmost possible need; only let him be held
strictly responsible for the exercise of them.  Any other course
would be injustice, as well as bad policy. 
In the treatment of those under his authority, the captain
is amenable to the common law, like any other person.  He is
liable at common law for murder, assault and battery, and other
offences; and in addition to this, there is a special statute of
the United States which makes a captain or other officer liable
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, and to
a fine not exceeding a thousand dollars, for inflicting any
cruel punishment upon, withholding food from, or in any other
way maltreating a seaman.  This is the state of the law on the
subject; while the relation in which the parties stand, and the
peculiar necessities, excuses, and provocations arising from
that relation, are merely circumstances to be considered in each
case.  As to the restraints upon the master’s exercise of power,
the laws themselves seem, on the whole, to be sufficient.  I do
not see that we are in need, at present, of more legislation on
the subject.  The difficulty lies rather in the administration
of the laws; and this is certainly a matter that deserves great
consideration, and one of no little embarrassment.
In the first place, the courts have said that public policy requires
the power of the master and officers should be sustained.  Many lives
and a great amount of property are constantly in their hands, for which
they are strictly responsible.  To preserve these, and to deal justly
by the captain, and not lay upon him a really fearful responsibility,
and then tie up his hands, it is essential that discipline should
be supported.  In the second place, there is always great allowance
to be made for false swearing and exaggeration by seamen, and for
combinations among them against their officers; and it is to be
remembered that the latter have often no one to testify on their
side.  These are weighty and true statements, and should not be lost
sight of by the friends of seamen.  On the other hand, sailors make
many complaints, some of which are well founded.
On the subject of testimony, seamen labor under a difficulty full as
great as that of the captain.  It is a well-known fact, that they are
usually much better treated when there are passengers on board. 
The presence of passengers is a restraint upon the captain,
not only from his regard to their feelings and to the estimation
in which they may hold him, but because he knows they will be
influential witnesses against him if he is brought to trial.
Though officers may sometimes be inclined to show themselves off
before passengers, by freaks of office and authority, yet cruelty
they would hardly dare to be guilty of.  It is on long and distant
voyages, where there is no restraint upon the captain, and none
but the crew to testify against him, that sailors need most the
protection of the law.  On such voyages as these, there are many
cases of outrageous cruelty on record, enough to make one heartsick,
and almost disgusted with the sight of man; and many, many more,
which have never come to light, and never will be known, until the
sea shall give up its dead.  Many of these have led to mutiny and
piracy,–stripe for stripe, and blood for blood.  If on voyages of
this description the testimony of seamen is not to be received in
favor of one another, or too great a deduction is made on account
of their being seamen, their case is without remedy; and the captain,
knowing this, will be strengthened in that disposition to tyrannize
which the possession of absolute power, without the restraints of
friends and public opinion, is too apt to engender.
It is to be considered, also, that the sailor comes into court
under very different circumstances from the master.  He is thrown
among landlords, and sharks of all descriptions; is often led to
drink freely; and comes upon the stand unaided, and under a certain
cloud of suspicion as to his character and veracity.  The captain,
on the other hand, is backed by the owners and insurers, and has
an air of greater respectability; though, after all, he may have
but a little better education than the sailor, and sometimes,
(especially among those engaged in certain voyages that I could
mention) a very hackneyed conscience.
These are the considerations most commonly brought up on the
subject of seamen’s evidence; and I think it cannot but be obvious
to every one that here, positive legislation would be of no manner
of use.  There can be no rule of law regulating the weight to be
given to seamen’s evidence.  It must rest in the mind of the judge
and jury; and no enactment or positive rule of court could vary the
result a hair, in any one case.  The effect of a sailor’s testimony
in deciding a case must depend altogether upon the reputation of
the class to which he belongs, and upon the impression he himself
produces in court by his deportment, and by those infallible marks
of character which always tell upon a jury.
In fine, after all the well-meant and specious projects that have
been brought forward, we seem driven back to the belief, that the
best means of securing a fair administration of the laws made for
the protection of seamen, and certainly the only means which can
create any important change for the better, is the gradual one of
raising the intellectual and religious character of the sailor,
so that as an individual and as one of a class, he may, in the
first instance, command the respect of his officers, and if any
difficulty should happen, may upon the stand carry that weight
which an intelligent and respectable man of the lower class almost
always does with a jury.  I know there are many men who, when a
few cases of great hardship occur, and it is evident that there
is an evil somewhere, think that some arrangement must be made,
some law passed, or some society got up, to set all right at once.
On this subject there can be no call for any such movement; on the
contrary, I fully believe that any public and strong action would
do harm, and that we must be satisfied to labor in the less easy
and less exciting task of gradual improvement, and abide the issue
of things working slowly together for good.
Equally injudicious would be any interference with the economy
of the ship.  The lodging, food, hours of sleep, etc., are all
matters which, though capable of many changes for the better,
must yet be left to regulate themselves.  And I am confident that
there will be, and that there is now a gradual improvement in all
such particulars.  The forecastles of most of our ships are small,
black, and wet holes, which few landsmen would believe held a crew
of ten or twelve men on a voyage of months or years; and often,
indeed in most cases, the provisions are not good enough to make
a meal anything more than a necessary part of a day’s duty;(1)
–––––––-
1. I am not sure that I have stated, in the course of my narrative,
the manner in which sailors eat, on board ship.  There are neither
tables, knives, forks, nor plates, in a forecastle; but the kid
(a wooden tub, with iron hoops) is placed on the floor and the
crew sit round it, and each man cuts for himself with the common
jack-knife or sheath-knife, that he carries about him.  They drink
their tea out of tin pots, holding little less than a quart each.
These particulars are not looked upon as hardships, and, indeed,
may be considered matters of choice.  Sailors, in our merchantmen,
furnish their own eating utensils, as they do many of the instruments
which they use in the ship’s work, such as knives, palms and needles,
marline-spikes, rubbers, etc. And considering their mode of life
in other respects, the little time they would have for laying and
clearing away a table with its apparatus, and the room it would take
up in a forecastle, as well as the simple character of their meals,
consisting generally of only one piece of meat,–it is certainly
a convenient method, and, as the kid and pans are usually kept
perfectly clean, a neat and simple one.  I had supposed these
things to be generally known, until I heard, a few months ago,
a lawyer of repute, who has had a good deal to do with marine
cases, ask a sailor upon the stand whether the crew had “got up
from table” when a certain thing happened.
–––––––-
and on the score of sleep, I fully believe that the lives of
merchant seamen are shortened by the want of it.  I do not refer
to those occasions when it is necessarily broken in upon; but,
for months, during fine weather, in many merchantmen, all hands
are kept, throughout the day, and, then, there are eight hours on
deck for one watch each night.  Thus it is usually the case that
at the end of a voyage, where there has been the finest weather,
and no disaster, the crew have a wearied and worn-out appearance.
They never sleep longer than four hours at a time, and are seldom
called without being really in need of more rest.  There is no one
thing that a sailor thinks more of as a luxury of life on shore,
than a whole night’s sleep.  Still, all these things must be left
to be gradually modified by circumstances.
Whenever hard cases occur, they should be made known, and masters
and owners should be held answerable, and will, no doubt, in time,
be influenced in their arrangements and discipline by the increased
consideration in which sailors are held by the public.
It is perfectly proper that the men should live in a different
part of the vessel from the officers; and if the forecastle is made
large and comfortable, there is no reason why the crew should not
live there as well as in any other part.  In fact, sailors prefer
the forecastle.  It is their accustomed place, and in it they are
out of the sight and hearing of their officers.
As to their food and sleep, there are laws, with heavy penalties,
requiring a certain amount of stores to be on board, and safely
stowed; and, for depriving the crew unnecessarily of food or
sleep, the captain is liable at common law, as well as under
the statute before referred to.  Farther than this, it would
not be safe to go.
The captain must be the judge when it is necessary to keep his
crew from their sleep; and sometimes a retrenching, not of the
necessaries, but of some of the little niceties of their meals,
as, for instance, duff on Sunday, may be a mode of punishment,
though I think generally an injudicious one.
I could not do justice to this subject without noticing one part
of the discipline of a ship, which has been very much discussed
of late, and has brought out strong expressions of indignation from
many,–I mean the infliction of corporal punishment.  Those who have
followed me in my narrative will remember that I was witness to an
act of great cruelty inflicted upon my own shipmates; and indeed
I can sincerely say that the simple mention of the word flogging,
brings up in me feelings which I can hardly control.  Yet, when the
proposition is made to abolish it entirely and at once; to prohibit
the captain from ever, under any circumstances, inflicting corporal
punishment; I am obliged to pause, and, I must say, to doubt
exceedingly the expediency of making any positive enactment which
shall have that effect.  If the design of those who are writing
on this subject is merely to draw public attention to it, and to
discourage the practice of flogging, and bring it into disrepute,
it is well; and, indeed, whatever may be the end they have in view,
the mere agitation of the question will have that effect, and,
so far, must do good.  Yet I should not wish to take the command
of a ship to-morrow, running my chance of a crew, as most masters
must, and know, and have my crew know, that I could not, under any
circumstances, inflict even moderate chastisement.  I should trust
that I might never have to resort to it; and, indeed, I scarcely
know what risk I would not run, and to what inconvenience I would
not subject myself, rather than do so.  Yet not to have the power of
holding it up in terrorem, and indeed of protecting myself, and all
under my charge, by it, if some extreme case should arise, would be
a situation I should not wish to be placed in myself, or to take
the responsibility of placing another in.
Indeed, the difficulties into which masters and officers are
liable to be thrown, are not sufficiently considered by many
whose sympathies are easily excited by stories, frequent enough,
and true enough of outrageous abuse of this power.  It is to
be remembered that more than three-fourths of the seamen in our
merchant vessels are foreigners.  They are from all parts of the
world.  A great many from the north of Europe, beside Frenchmen,
Spaniards, Portuguese, Italians, men from all parts of the
Mediterranean, together with Lascars, Negroes, and, perhaps worst
of all, the off-casts of British men-of-war, and men from our own
country who have gone to sea because they could not be permitted
to live on land.
As things now are, many masters are obliged to sail without knowing
anything of their crews, until they get out at sea.  There may be
pirates or mutineers among them; and one bad man will often infect
all the rest; and it is almost certain that some of them will be
ignorant foreigners, hardly understanding a word of our language,
accustomed all their lives to no influence but force, and perhaps
nearly as familiar with the use of the knife as with that of the
marline-spike.  No prudent master, however peaceably inclined,
would go to sea without his pistols and handcuffs.  Even with
such a crew as I have supposed, kindness and moderation would be
the best policy, and the duty of every conscientious man; and the
administering of corporal punishment might be dangerous, and of
doubtful use.  But the question is not, what a captain ought
generally to do, but whether it shall be put out of the power of
every captain, under any circumstances, to make use of, even
moderate, chastisement.  As the law now stands, a parent may
correct moderately his child, and the master his apprentice;
and the case of the shipmaster has been placed upon the same
principle.  The statutes, and the common law as expounded in the
decisions of courts, and in the books of commentators, are express
and unanimous to this point, that the captain may inflict moderate
corporal chastisement, for a reasonable cause.  If the punishment
is excessive, or the cause not sufficient to justify it, he is
answerable; and the jury are to determine, by their verdict in
each case, whether, under all the circumstances, the punishment
was moderate, and for a justifiable cause.
This seems to me to be as good a position as the whole subject
can be left in.  I mean to say, that no positive enactment, going
beyond this, is needed, or would be a benefit either to masters
or men, in the present state of things.  This again would seem to
be a case which should be left to the gradual working of its own
cure.  As seamen improve, punishment will become less necessary;
and as the character of officers is raised, they will be less
ready to inflict it; and, still more, the infliction of it upon
intelligent and respectable men, will be an enormity which will
not be tolerated by public opinion, and by juries, who are the
pulse of the body politic.  No one can have a greater abhorrence
of the infliction of such punishment than I have, and a stronger
conviction that severity is bad policy with a crew; yet I would
ask every reasonable man whether he had not better trust to the
practice becoming unnecessary and disreputable; to the measure
of moderate chastisement and a justifiable cause being better
understood, and thus, the act becoming dangerous, and in course
of time to be regarded as an unheard-of barbarity–than to take
the responsibility of prohibiting it, at once, in all cases,
and in what ever degree, by positive enactment?
There is, however, one point connected with the administration of
justice to seamen, to which I wish seriously to call the attention
of those interested in their behalf, and, if possible, also of
some of those concerned in that administration.  This is, the
practice which prevails of making strong appeals to the jury in
mitigation of damages, or to the judge, after a verdict has been
rendered against a captain or officer, for a lenient sentence,
on the grounds of their previous good character, and of their
being poor, and having friends and families depending upon them
for support.  These appeals have been allowed a weight which is
almost incredible, and which, I think, works a greater hardship
upon seamen than any one other thing in the laws, or the execution
of them.  Notwithstanding every advantage the captain has over the
seaman in point of evidence, friends, money, and able counsel,
it becomes apparent that he must fail in his defence.  An appeal
is then made to the jury, if it is a civil action, or to the judge
for a mitigated sentence, if it is a criminal prosecution, on the two
grounds I have mentioned.  The same form is usually gone through in
every case.  In the first place, as to the previous good character of
the party.  Witnesses are brought from the town in which he resides,
to testify to his good character, and to his unexceptionable conduct
when on shore.  They say that he is a good father, or husband, or son,
or neighbor, and that they never saw in him any signs of a cruel
or tyrannical disposition.  I have even known evidence admitted
to show the character he bore when a boy at school.  The owners
of the vessel, and other merchants, and perhaps the president of
the insurance company, are then introduced; and they testify to
his correct deportment, express their confidence in his honesty,
and say that they have never seen anything in his conduct to
justify a suspicion of his being capable of cruelty or tyranny.
This evidence is then put together, and great stress is laid upon
the extreme respectability of those who give it.  They are the
companions and neighbors of the captain, it is said,–men who know
him in his business and domestic relations, and who knew him in
his early youth.  They are also men of the highest standing in the
community, and who, as the captain’s employers, must be supposed
to know his character.  This testimony is then contrasted with
that of some half dozen obscure sailors, who, the counsel will
not forget to add, are exasperated against the captain because
he has found it necessary to punish them moderately, and who
have combined against him, and if they have not fabricated a
story entirely, have at least so exaggerated it, that little
confidence can be placed in it.
The next thing to be done is to show to the court and jury that the
captain is a poor man, and has a wife and family, or other friends,
depending upon him for support; that if he is fined, it will only be
taking bread from the mouths of the innocent and helpless, and laying
a burden upon them which their whole lives will not be able to work
off; and that if he is imprisoned, the confinement, to be sure,
he will have to bear, but the distress consequent upon the cutting
him off from his labor and means of earning his wages, will fall
upon a poor wife and helpless children, or upon an infirm parent.
These two topics, well put, and urged home earnestly, seldom fail
of their effect.
In deprecation of this mode of proceeding, and in behalf of men
who I believe are every day wronged by it, I would urge a few
considerations which seem to me to be conclusive. 
First, as to the evidence of the good character the captain sustains
on shore.  It is to be remembered that masters of vessels have usually
been brought up in a forecastle; and upon all men, and especially upon
those taken from lower situations, the conferring of absolute power is
too apt to work a great change.  There are many captains whom I know
to be cruel and tyrannical men at sea, who yet, among their friends,
and in their families, have never lost the reputation they bore in
childhood.  In fact, the sea-captain is seldom at home, and when
he is, his stay is short, and during the continuance of it he is
surrounded by friends who treat him with kindness and consideration,
and he has everything to please, and at the same time to restrain
him.  He would be a brute indeed, if, after an absence of months
or years, during his short stay, so short that the novelty and
excitement of it has hardly time to wear off, and the attentions
he receives as a visitor and stranger hardly time to slacken,–if,
under such circumstances, a townsman or neighbor would be justified
in testifying against his correct and peaceable deportment.  With
the owners of the vessel, also, to which he is attached, and among
merchants and insurers generally, he is a very different man from what
he may be at sea, when his own master, and the master of everybody
and everything about him.  He knows that upon such men, and their
good opinion of him, he depends for his bread.  So far from their
testimony being of any value in determining what his conduct would
be at sea, one would expect that the master who would abuse and
impose upon a man under his power, would be the most compliant
and deferential to his employers at home.
As to the appeal made in the captain’s behalf on the ground of
his being poor and having persons depending upon his labor for
support, the main and fatal objection to it is, that it will
cover every case of the kind, and exempt nearly the whole body
of masters and officers from the punishment the law has provided
for them.  There are very few, if any masters or other officers of
merchantmen in our country, who are not poor men, and having either
parents, wives, children, or other relatives, depending mainly or
wholly upon their exertions for support in life.  Few others follow
the sea for subsistence.  Now if this appeal is to have weight with
courts in diminishing the penalty the law would otherwise inflict,
is not the whole class under a privilege which will, in a degree,
protect it in wrong-doing?  It is not a thing that happens now and
then.  It is the invariable appeal, the last resort, of counsel,
when everything else has failed.  I have known cases of the most
flagrant nature, where after every effort has been made for the
captain, and yet a verdict rendered against him, and all other
hope failed, this appeal has been urged, and with such success
that the punishment has been reduced to something little more
than nominal, the court not seeming to consider that it might be
made in almost every such case that could come before them.  It is
a little singular, too, that it seems to be confined to cases
of shipmasters and officers.  No one ever heard of a sentence,
for an offence committed on shore, being reduced by the court
on the ground of the prisoner’s poverty, and the relation in
which he may stand to third persons.  On the contrary, it had
been thought that the certainty that disgrace and suffering will
be brought upon others as well as himself, is one of the chief
restraints upon the criminally disposed.  Besides, this course
works a peculiar hardship in the case of the sailor.  For if
poverty is the point in question, the sailor is the poorer of the
two; and if there is a man on earth who depends upon whole limbs
and an unbroken spirit for support, it is the sailor.  He, too,
has friends to whom his hard earnings may be a relief, and whose
hearts will bleed at any cruelty or indignity practised upon him.
Yet I never knew this side of the case to be once adverted to in
these arguments addressed to the leniency of the court, which are
now so much in vogue; and certainly they are never allowed a moment’s
consideration when a sailor is on trial for revolt, or for an injury
done to an officer.  Notwithstanding the many difficulties which
lie in a seaman’s way in a court of justice, presuming that they
will be modified in time, there would be little to complain of,
were it not for these two appeals.
It is no cause of complaint that the testimony of seamen against
their officers is viewed with suspicion, and that great allowance is
made for combinations and exaggeration.  On the contrary, it is the
judge’s duty to charge the jury on these points strongly.  But there
is reason for objection, when, after a strict cross-examination of
witnesses, after the arguments of counsel, and the judge’s charge,
a verdict is found against the master, that the court should allow
the practice of hearing appeals to its lenity, supported solely by
evidence of the captain’s good conduct when on shore, (especially
where the case is one in which no evidence but that of sailors could
have been brought against the accused), and then, on this ground,
and on the invariable claims of the wife and family, be induced
to cut down essentially the penalty imposed by a statute made
expressly for masters and officers of merchantmen, and for no
one else.
There are many particulars connected with the manning of vessels,
the provisions given to crews, and the treatment of them while at
sea, upon which there might be a good deal said; but as I have,
for the most part, remarked upon them as they came up in the course
of my narrative, I will offer nothing further now, except on the
single point of the manner of shipping men.  This, it is well
known, is usually left entirely to the shipping-masters, and is
a cause of a great deal of difficulty, which might be remedied
by the captain, or owner, if he has any knowledge of seamen,
attending to it personally.  One of the members of the firm to
which our ship belonged, Mr. S––-, had been himself a master of
a vessel, and generally selected the crew from a number sent down
to him from the shipping-office.  In this way he almost always
had healthy, serviceable, and respectable men; for any one who
has seen much of sailors can tell pretty well at first sight,
by a man’s dress, countenance, and deportment, what he would
be on board ship.  This same gentleman was also in the habit of
seeing the crew together, and speaking to them previously to their
sailing.  On the day before our ship sailed, while the crew were
getting their chests and clothes on board, he went down into the
forecastle and spoke to them about the voyage, the clothing they
would need, the provision he had made for them, and saw that they
had a lamp and a few other conveniences.  If owners or masters
would more generally take the same pains, they would often save
their crews a good deal of inconvenience, beside creating a sense
of satisfaction and gratitude, which makes a voyage begin under
good auspices, and goes far toward keeping up a better state of
feeling throughout its continuance.
It only remains for me now to speak of the associated public efforts
which have been making of late years for the good of seamen: a far
more agreeable task than that of finding fault, even where fault
there is.  The exertions of the general association, called the
American Seamen’s Friend Society, and of the other smaller
societies throughout the Union, have been a true blessing
to the seaman; and bid fair, in course of time, to change the
whole nature of the circumstances in which he is placed, and give
him a new name, as well as a new character.  These associations
have taken hold in the right way, and aimed both at making the
sailor’s life more comfortable and creditable, and at giving him
spiritual instruction.  Connected with these efforts, the spread of
temperance among seamen, by means of societies, called, in their own
nautical language, Windward-Anchor Societies, and the distribution
of books; the establishment of Sailors’ Homes, where they can be
comfortably and cheaply boarded, live quietly and decently, and be
in the way of religious services, reading and conversation; also the
institution of Savings Banks for Seamen; the distribution of tracts
and Bibles;–are all means which are silently doing a great work for
this class of men.  These societies make the religious instruction
of seamen their prominent object.  If this is gained, there is no
fear but that all other things necessary will be added unto them.
A sailor never becomes interested in religion, without immediately
learning to read, if he did not know how before; and regular habits,
forehandedness (if I may use the word) in worldly affairs, and hours
reclaimed from indolence and vice, which follow in the wake of the
converted man, make it sure that he will instruct himself in the
knowledge necessary and suitable to his calling.  The religious
change is the great object.  If this is secured, there is no fear
but that knowledge of things of the world will come in fast enough.
With the sailor, as with all other men in fact, the cultivation of the
intellect, and the spread of what is commonly called useful knowledge,
while religious instruction is neglected, is little else than changing
an ignorant sinner into an intelligent and powerful one.  That sailor
upon whom, of all others, the preaching of the Cross is least likely
to have effect, is the one whose understanding has been cultivated,
while his heart has been left to its own devices.  I fully believe that
those efforts which have their end in the intellectual cultivation of
the sailor; in giving him scientific knowledge; putting it in his
power to read everything, without securing, first of all, a right
heart which shall guide him in judgment; in giving him political
information, and interesting him in newspapers;–an end in the
furtherance of which he is exhibited at ladies’ fairs and public
meetings, and complimented for his gallantry and generosity,–are
all doing a harm which the labors of many faithful men cannot undo.
The establishment of Bethels in most of our own seaports, and in
many foreign ports frequented by our vessels, where the gospel is
regularly preached and the opening of “Sailors’ Homes,” which I have
before mentioned, where there are usually religious services and other
good influences, are doing a vast deal in this cause.  But it is to be
remembered that the sailor’s home is on the deep.  Nearly all his life
must be spent on board ship; and to secure a religious influence there,
should be the great object.  The distribution of Bibles and tracts
into cabins and forecastles, will do much toward this.  There is
nothing which will gain a sailor’s attention sooner, and interest
him more deeply, than a tract, especially one which contains a
story.  It is difficult to engage their attention in mere essays
and arguments, but the simplest and shortest story, in which home
is spoken of, kind friends, a praying mother or sister, a sudden
death, and the like, often touches the heart of the roughest and
most abandoned.  The Bible is to the sailor a sacred book.  It may
lie in the bottom of his chest, voyage after voyage; but he never
treats it with positive disrespect.  I never knew but one sailor
who doubted its being the inspired word of God; and he was one
who had received an uncommonly good education, except that he had
been brought up without any early religious influence.  The most
abandoned man of our crew, one Sunday morning, asked one of the
boys to lend him his Bible.  The boy said he would, but was afraid
he would make sport of it.  “No!” said the man, “I don’t make sport
of God Almighty.”  This is a feeling general among sailors, and is
a good foundation for religious influence.
A still greater gain is made whenever, by means of a captain who
is interested in the eternal welfare of those under his command,
there can be secured the performance of regular religious exercises,
and the exertion, on the side of religion, of that mighty influence which
a captain possesses for good, or for evil.  There are occurrences at sea
which he may turn to great account,–a sudden death, the apprehension
of danger, or the escape from it, and the like; and all the calls
for gratitude and faith.  Besides, this state of thing alters the
whole current of feeling between the crew and their commander.
His authority assumes more of the parental character; and kinder
feelings exist.  Godwin, though an infidel, in one of his novels,
describing the relation in which a tutor stood to his pupil, says
that the conviction the tutor was under, that he and his ward were
both alike awaiting a state of eternal happiness or misery, and that
they must appear together before the same judgment-seat, operated so
upon his naturally morose disposition, as to produce a feeling of
kindness and tenderness toward his ward, which nothing else could
have caused.  Such must be the effect upon the relation of master
and common seaman.
There are now many vessels sailing under such auspices, in which
great good is done.  Yet I never happened to fall in with one of
them.  I did not hear a prayer made, a chapter read in public,
nor see anything approaching to a religious service, for two
years and a quarter.  There were, in the course of the voyage,
many incidents which made, for the time, serious impressions upon
our minds, and which might have been turned to our good; but there
being no one to use the opportunity, and no services, the regular
return of which might have kept something of the feeling alive
in us, the advantage of them was lost, to some, perhaps, forever.
The good which a single religious captain may do can hardly be
calculated.  In the first place, as I have said, a kinder state
of feeling exists on board the ship.  There is no profanity allowed;
and the men are not called by any opprobrious names, which is a great
thing with sailors.  The Sabbath is observed.  This gives the men a
day of rest, even if they pass it in no other way.  Such a captain,
too, will not allow a sailor on board his ship to remain unable to
read his Bible and the books given to him; and will usually instruct
those who need it, in writing, arithmetic, and navigation; since he
has a good deal of time on his hands, which he can easily employ in
such a manner.  He will also have regular religious services; and,
in fact, by the power of his example, and, where it can judiciously
be done, by the exercise of his authority, will give a character
to the ship and all on board.  In foreign ports, a ship is known
by her captain; for, there being no general rules in the merchant
service, each master may adopt a plan of his own.  It is to be
remembered, too, that there are, in most ships, boys of a tender
age, whose characters for life are forming, as well as old men,
whose lives must be drawing toward a close.  The greater part of
sailors die at sea; and when they find their end approaching,
if it does not, as is often the case, come without warning,
they cannot, as on shore, send for a clergyman, or some religious
friend, to speak to them of that hope in a Saviour, which they
have neglected, if not despised, through life; but if the little
hull does not contain such an one within its compass, they must
be left without human aid in their great extremity.  When such
commanders and such ships, as I have just described, shall become
more numerous, the hope of the friends of seamen will be greatly
strengthened; and it is encouraging to remember that the efforts
among common sailors will soon raise up such a class; for those of
them who are brought under these influences will inevitably be the
ones to succeed to the places of trust and authority.  If there is
on earth an instance where a little leaven may leaven the whole
lump, it is that of the religious shipmaster.
It is to the progress of this work among seamen that we must look
with the greatest confidence for the remedying of those numerous
minor evils and abuses that we so often hear of.  It will raise
the character of sailors, both as individuals and as a class.
It will give weight to their testimony in courts of justice,
secure better usage to them on board ship, and add comforts to
their lives on shore and at sea.  There are some laws that can
be passed to remove temptation from their way and to help them
in their progress; and some changes in the jurisdiction of the
lower courts, to prevent delays, may, and probably will, be made.
But, generally speaking, more especially in things which concern
the discipline of ships, we had better labor in this great work,
and view with caution the proposal of new laws and arbitrary
regulations, remembering that most of those concerned in the
making of them must necessarily be little qualified to judge
of their operation.
Without any formal dedication of my narrative to that body of men,
of whose common life it is intended to be a picture, I have yet
borne them constantly in mind during its preparation.  I cannot
but trust that those of them, into whose hands it may chance to
fall, will find in it that which shall render any professions of
sympathy and good wishes on my part unnecessary.  And I will take
the liberty, on parting with my reader, who has gone down with us
to the ocean, and “laid his hand upon its mane,” to commend to his
kind wishes, and to the benefit of his efforts, that class of men
with whom, for a time, my lot was cast.  I wish the rather to do
this, since I feel that whatever attention this book may gain,
and whatever favor it may find, I shall owe almost entirely to
that interest in the sea, and those who follow it, which is so
easily excited in us all.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
