


Monday, Feb. 1st.  After having been in port twenty-one days,
we sailed for San Pedro, where we arrived on the following day,
having gone “all fluking,” with the weather clew of the mainsail
hauled up, the yards braced in a little, and the lower studding-sails
just drawing; the wind hardly shifting a point during the passage. 
Here we found the Ayacucho and the Pilgrim, which last we had not
seen since the 11th of September,–nearly five months; and I really
felt something like an affection for the old brig which had been my
first home, and in which I had spent nearly a year, and got the
first rough and tumble of a sea life.  She, too, was associated,
in my mind with Boston, the wharf from which we sailed, anchorage
in the stream, leave-taking, and all such matters, which were now
to me like small links connecting me with another world, which I
had once been in, and which, please God, I might yet see again. 
I went on board the first night, after supper; found the old
cook in the galley, playing upon the fife which I had given him,
as a parting present; had a hearty shake of the hand from him;
and dove down into the forecastle, where were my old ship-mates,
the same as ever, glad to see me; for they had nearly given us up
as lost, especially when they did not find us in Santa Barbara. 
They had been at San Diego last, had been lying at San Pedro
nearly a month, and had received three thousand hides from the
pueblo.  These were taken from her the next day, which filled
us up, and we both got under weigh on the 4th, she bound up to
San Francisco again, and we to San Diego, where we arrived on
the 6th. 
We were always glad to see San Diego; it being the depot, and a
snug little place, and seeming quite like home, especially to
me, who had spent a summer there.  There was no vessel in port,
the Rosa having sailed for Valparaiso and Cadiz, and the Catalina
for Callao, nearly a month before.  We discharged our hides, and in
four days were ready to sail again for the windward; and, to our
great joy–for the last time!  Over thirty thousand hides had
been already collected, cured, and stowed away in the house,
which, together with what we should collect, and the Pilgrim
would bring down from San Francisco, would make out her cargo. 
The thought that we were actually going up for the last time,
and that the next time we went round San Diego point it would
be “homeward bound,” brought things so near a close, that we
felt as though we were just there, though it must still be the
greater part of a year before we could see Boston. 
I spent one evening, as had been my custom, at the oven with the
Sandwich Islanders; but it was far from being the usual noisy,
laughing time.  It has been said, that the greatest curse to each
of the South Sea islands, was the first man who discovered it;
and every one who knows anything of the history of our commerce
in those parts, knows how much truth there is in this; and that
the white men, with their vices, have brought in diseases before
unknown to the islanders, and which are now sweeping off the native
population of the Sandwich Islands, at the rate of one fortieth of
the entire population annually.  They seem to be a doomed people. 
The curse of a people calling themselves Christian, seems to follow
them everywhere; and even here, in this obscure place, lay two
young islanders, whom I had left strong, active young men, in the
vigor of health, wasting away under a disease, which they would
never have known but for their intercourse with Christianized Mexico
and people from Christian America.  One of them was not so ill; and
was moving about, smoking his pipe, and talking, and trying to keep
up his spirits; but the other, who was my friend, and Aikane–Hope,
was the most dreadful object I had ever seen in my life: his eyes
sunken and dead, his cheeks fallen in against his teeth, his hands
looking like claws; a dreadful cough, which seemed to rack his whole
shattered system, a hollow whispering voice, and an entire inability
to move himself.  There he lay, upon a mat, on the ground, which was
the only floor of the oven, with no medicine, no comforts, and no
one to care for, or help him, but a few Kanakas, who were willing
enough, but could do nothing.  The sight of him made me sick,
and faint.  Poor fellow!  During the four months that I lived
upon the beach, we were continually together, both in work, and
in our excursions in the woods, and upon the water.  I really
felt a strong affection for him, and preferred him to any of my
own countrymen there; and I believe there was nothing which he
would not have done for me.  When I came into the oven he looked
at me, held out his hand, and said, in a low voice, but with a
delightful smile, “Aloha, Aikane!  Aloha nui!”  I comforted him
as well as I could, and promised to ask the captain to help him
from the medicine-chest, and told him I had no doubt the captain
would do what he could for him, as he had worked in our employ for
several years, both on shore and aboard our vessels on the coast.
I went aboard and turned into my hammock, but I could not sleep.
Thinking, from my education, that I must have some knowledge of
medicine, the Kanakas had insisted upon my examining him carefully;
and it was not a sight to be forgotten.  One of our crew, an old
man-of-war’s man, of twenty years’ standing, who had seen sin
and suffering in every shape, and whom I afterwards took to
see Hope, said it was dreadfully worse than anything he had
ever seen, or even dreamed of.  He was horror-struck, as his
countenance showed; yet he had been among the worst cases in
our naval hospitals.  I could not get the thought of the poor
fellow out of my head all night; his horrible suffering, and his
apparently inevitable, horrible end. 
The next day I told the captain of Hope’s state, and asked him
if he would be so kind as to go and see him. 
“What? a d––d Kanaka?” 
“Yes, sir,” said I; “but he has worked four years for our vessels,
and has been in the employ of our owners, both on shore and aboard.” 
“Oh! he be d––d!” said the captain, and walked off. 
This same man died afterwards of a fever on the deadly coast of
Sumatra; and God grant he had better care taken of him in his
sufferings, than he ever gave to any one else!  Finding nothing
was to be got from the captain, I consulted an old shipmate, who
had much experience in these matters, and got from him a recipe,
which he always kept by him.  With this I went to the mate, and told
him the case.  Mr. Brown had been entrusted with the general care of
the medicine-chest, and although a driving fellow, and a taught hand
in a watch, he had good feelings, and was always inclined to be kind
to the sick.  He said that Hope was not strictly one of the crew,
but as he was in our employ when taken sick, he should have the
medicines; and he got them and gave them to me, with leave to go
ashore at night.  Nothing could exceed the delight of the Kanakas,
when I came bringing the medicines.  All their terms of affection
and gratitude were spent upon me, and in a sense wasted, (for I
could not understand half of them,) yet they made all known by
their manner.  Poor Hope was so much revived at the bare thought
of anything’s being done for him, that he was already stronger
and better.  I knew he must die as he was, and he could but die
under the medicines, and any chance was worth running.  An oven,
exposed to every wind and change of weather, is no place to take
calomel; but nothing else would do, and strong remedies must be
used, or he was gone.  The applications, internal and external,
were powerful, and I gave him strict directions to keep warm
and sheltered, telling him it was his only chance for life.
Twice, after this, I visited him, having only time to run up,
while waiting in the boat.  He promised to take his medicines
regularly until we returned, and insisted upon it that he was
doing better.
We got under weigh on the 10th, bound up to San Pedro, and had
three days of calm and head winds, making but little progress.
On the fourth, we took a stiff south-easter, which obliged us
to reef our topsails.  While on the yard, we saw a sail on the
weather bow, and in about half an hour, passed the Ayacucho,
under double-reefed topsails, beating down to San Diego.
Arrived at San Pedro on the fourth day, and came-to in the old
place, a league from shore, with no other vessel in port, and the
prospect of three weeks, or more, of dull life, rolling goods up
a slippery hill, carrying hides on our heads over sharp stones,
and, perhaps, slipping for a south-easter.
There was but one man in the only house here, and him I shall
always remember as a good specimen of a California ranger.
He had been a tailor in Philadelphia, and getting intemperate
and in debt, he joined a trapping party and went to the Columbia
river, and thence down to Monterey, where he spent everything,
left his party, and came to the Pueblo de los Angelos, to work
at his trade.  Here he went dead to leeward among the pulperias,
gambling rooms, etc., and came down to San Pedro, to be moral by
being out of temptation.  He had been in the house several weeks,
working hard at his trade, upon orders which he had brought with him,
and talked much of his resolution, and opened his heart to us about
his past life.  After we had been here some time, he started off
one morning, in fine spirits, well dressed, to carry the clothes
which he had been making to the pueblo, and saying he would bring
back his money and some fresh orders the next day.  The next day
came, and a week passed, and nearly a fortnight, when, one day,
going ashore, we saw a tall man, who looked like our friend the
tailor, getting out of the back of an Indian’s cart, which had
just come down from the pueblo. He stood for the house, but we bore
up after him; when finding that we were overhauling him, he hove-to
and spoke us.  Such a sight I never saw before.  Barefooted, with an
old pair of trowsers tied round his waist by a piece of green hide,
a soiled cotton shirt, and a torn Indian hat; “cleaned out,” to the
last reál, and completely “used up.”  He confessed the whole matter;
acknowledged that he was on his back; and now he had a prospect of a
fit of the horrors for a week, and of being worse than useless for
months.  This is a specimen of the life of half of the Americans
and English who are adrift over the whole of California.  One of
the same stamp was Russell, who was master of the hide-house
at San Diego, while I was there, and afterwards turned away
for his misconduct.  He spent his own money and nearly all
the stores among the half-bloods upon the beach, and being
turned away, went up to the Presidio, where he lived the life
of a desperate “loafer,” until some rascally deed sent him off
“between two days,” with men on horseback, dogs, and Indians in
full cry after him, among the hills.  One night, he burst into our
room at the hide-house, breathless, pale as a ghost, covered with
mud, and torn by thorns and briers, nearly naked, and begged for
a crust of bread, saying he had neither eaten nor slept for three
days.  Here was the great Mr. Russell, who a month before was “Don
Tomàs,” “Capitán de la playa,” “Maéstro de la casa,” etc., etc.,
begging food and shelter of Kanakas and sailors.  He staid with
us till he gave himself up, and was dragged off to the calabozo.
Another, and a more amusing specimen, was one whom we saw at San
Francisco.  He had been a lad on board the ship California, in one
of her first voyages, and ran away and commenced Ranchéro, gambling,
stealing horses, etc. He worked along up to San Francisco, and was
living on a rancho near there, while we were in port.  One morning,
when we went ashore in the boat, we found him at the landing-place,
dressed in California style,–a wide hat, faded velveteen trowsers,
and a blanket cloak thrown over his shoulders–and wishing to go off
in the boat, saying he was going to paseár with our captain a little.
We had many doubts of the reception he would meet with; but he
seemed to think himself company for any one.  We took him aboard,
landed him at the gangway, and went about our work, keeping an eye
upon the quarter-deck, where the captain was walking.  The lad
went up to him with the most complete assurance, and raising his
hat, wished him a good afternoon.  Captain T––- turned round,
looked at him from head to foot, and saying coolly, “Hallo! who
the h–- are you?” kept on his walk.  This was a rebuff not to
be mistaken, and the joke passed about among the crew by winks
and signs, at different parts of the ship.  Finding himself
disappointed at headquarters, he edged along forward to the mate,
who was overseeing some work on the forecastle, and tried to begin
a yarn; but it would not do. The mate had seen the reception he
had met with aft, and would have no cast-off company.  The second
mate was aloft, and the third mate and myself were painting the
quarter-boat, which hung by the davits, so he betook himself to
us; but we looked at one another, and the officer was too busy
to say a word.  From us, he went to one and another of the crew,
but the joke had got before him, and he found everybody busy and
silent.  Looking over the rail a few moments afterward, we saw him
at the galley-door talking to the cook.  This was a great comedown,
from the highest seat in the synagogue to a seat in the galley with
the black cook.  At night, too, when supper was called, he stood in
the waist for some time, hoping to be asked down with the officers,
but they went below, one after another, and left him.  His next
chance was with the carpenter and sail-maker, and he lounged round
the after hatchway until the last had gone down.  We had now had
fun enough out of him, and taking pity on him, offered him a pot
of tea, and a cut at the kid, with the rest, in the forecastle.
He was hungry, and it was growing dark, and he began to see that
there was no use in playing the caballero any longer, and came
down into the forecastle, put into the “grub” in sailor’s style,
threw off all his airs, and enjoyed the joke as much as any one;
for a man must take a joke among sailors.  He gave us the whole
account of his adventures in the country,–roguery and all–and
was very entertaining.  He was a smart, unprincipled fellow, was at
the bottom of most of the rascally doings of the country, and gave
us a great deal of interesting information in the ways of the world
we were in.
Saturday, Feb. 13th.  Were called up at midnight to slip for
a violent north-easter, for this rascally hole of San Pedro is
unsafe in every wind but a south-wester, which is seldom known
to blow more than once in a half century.  We went off with a
flowing sheet, and hove-to under the lee of Catalina island,
where we lay three days, and then returned to our anchorage. 
Tuesday, Feb. 23d.  This afternoon, a signal was made from the
shore, and we went off in the gig, and found the agent’s clerk,
who had been up to the pueblo, waiting at the landing-place, with a
package under his arm, covered with brown papers and tied carefully
with twine.  No sooner had we shoved off than he told us there was
good news from Santa Barbara.  “What’s that?” said one of the crew;
“has the bloody agent slipped off the hooks?  Has the old bundle of
bones got him at last?"–"No; better than that.  The California
has arrived.”  Letters, papers, news, and, perhaps,–friends, on
board!  Our hearts were all up in our mouths, and we pulled away
like good fellows; for the precious packet could not be opened
except by the captain.  As we pulled under the stern, the clerk
held up the package, and called out to the mate, who was leaning
over the taffrail, that the California had arrived. 
“Hurrah!” said the mate, so as to be heard fore and aft;
“California come, and news from Boston!” 
Instantly there was a confusion on board which no one could account
for who has not been in the same situation.  All discipline seemed
for a moment relaxed. 
“What’s that, Mr. Brown?” said the cook, putting his head out of
the galley–"California come?” 
“Aye, aye! you angel of darkness, and there’s a letter for you
from Bullknop ’treet, number two-two-five–green door and brass
knocker!” 
The packet was sent down into the cabin, and every one waited
to hear of the result.  As nothing came up, the officers began
to feel that they were acting rather a child’s part, and turned
the crew to again and the same strict discipline was restored,
which prohibits speech between man and man, while at work on
deck; so that, when the steward came forward with letters for
the crew, each man took his letters, carried them below to his
chest, and came up again immediately; and not a letter was read
until we had cleared up decks for the night. 
An overstrained sense of manliness is the characteristic of
seafaring men, or, rather, of life on board ship.  This often
gives an appearance of want of feeling, and even of cruelty.
From this, if a man comes within an ace of breaking his neck
and escapes, it is made a joke of; and no notice must be taken
of a bruise or cut; and any expression of pity, or any show of
attention, would look sisterly, and unbecoming a man who has to
face the rough and tumble of such a life.  From this, too, the sick
are neglected at sea, and whatever sailors may be ashore, a sick
man finds little sympathy or attention, forward or aft. A man, too,
can have nothing peculiar or sacred on board ship; for all the nicer
feelings they take pride in disregarding, both in themselves and
others.  A thin-skinned man could not live an hour on ship-board.
One would be torn raw unless he had the hide of an ox. A moment of
natural feeling for home and friends, and then the frigid routine
of sea-life returned.  Jokes were made upon those who showed any
interest in the expected news, and everything near and dear was
made common stock for rude jokes and unfeeling coarseness, to which
no exception could be taken by any one.
Supper, too, must be eaten before the letters were read; and when,
at last, they were brought out, they all got round any one who had
a letter, and expected to have it read aloud, and have it all in
common.  If any one went by himself to read, it was–"Fair play,
there; and no skulking!”  I took mine and went into the sailmaker’s
berth, where I could read it without interruption.  It was dated
August, just a year from the time I had sailed from home; and every
one was well, and no great change had taken place.  Thus, for one
year, my mind was set at ease, yet it was already six months from
the date of the letter, and what another year would bring to pass,
who could tell?  Every one away from home thinks that some great
thing must have happened, while to those at home there seems to
be a continued monotony and lack of incident. 
As much as my feelings were taken up by my own intelligence
from home, I could not but be amused by a scene in the steerage. 
The carpenter had been married just before leaving Boston, and
during the voyage had talked much about his wife, and had to bear
and forbear, as every man, known to be married, must, aboard ship;
yet the certainty of hearing from his wife by the first ship, seemed
to keep up his spirits.  The California came, the packet was brought
on board; no one was in higher spirits than he; but when the letters
came forward, there was none for him.  The captain looked again,
but there was no mistake.  Poor “Chips,” could eat no supper. 
He was completely down in the mouth.  “Sails” (the sailmaker)
tried to comfort him, and told him he was a bloody fool to give
up his grub for any woman’s daughter, and reminded him that he
had told him a dozen times that he’d never see or hear from his
wife again. 
“Ah!” said “Chips,” “you don’t know what it is to have a wife, and"–
“Don’t I?” said Sails; and then came, for the hundredth time, the story
of his coming ashore at New York, from the Constellation frigate,
after a cruise of four years round the Horn,–being paid off with
over five hundred dollars,–marrying, and taking a couple of rooms
in a four-story house,–furnishing the rooms, (with a particular
account of the furniture, including a dozen flag-bottomed chairs,
which he always dilated upon, whenever the subject of furniture was
alluded to,)–going off to sea again, leaving his wife half-pay,
like a fool,–coming home and finding her “off, like Bob’s horse,
with nobody to pay the reckoning;” furniture gone,–flag-bottomed
chairs and all;–and with it, his “long togs,” the half-pay,
his beaver hat, white linen shirts, and everything else.  His wife
he never saw, or heard of, from that day to this, and never wished
to.  Then followed a sweeping assertion, not much to the credit of
the sex, if true, though he has Pope to back him.  “Come, Chips,
cheer up like a man, and take some hot grub!  Don’t be made a fool
of by anything in petticoats!  As for your wife, you’ll never see
her again; she was ’up keeleg and off’ before you were outside of
Cape Cod.  You hove your money away like a fool; but every man
must learn once, just as I did; so you’d better square the yards
with her, and make the best of it.” 
This was the best consolation “Sails” had to offer, but it did not
seem to be just the thing the carpenter wanted; for, during several
days, he was very much dejected, and bore with difficulty the jokes
of the sailors, and with still more difficulty their attempts at
advice and consolation, of most of which the sailmaker’s was a
good specimen. 
Thursday, Feb. 25th.  Set sail for Santa Barbara, where we arrived
on Sunday, the 28th.  We just missed of seeing the California, for she
had sailed three days before, bound to Monterey, to enter her cargo and
procure her license, and thence to San Francisco, etc. Captain Arthur
left files of Boston papers for Captain T––-, which, after they had
been read and talked over in the cabin, I procured from my friend
the third mate.  One file was of all the Boston Transcripts for
the month of August, 1835, and the rest were about a dozen Daily
Advertisers and Couriers, of different dates.  After all, there is
nothing in a strange land like a newspaper from home.  Even a letter,
in many respects, is nothing, in comparison with it.  It carries you
back to the spot, better than anything else.  It is almost equal to
clairvoyance.  The names of the streets, with the things advertised,
are almost as good as seeing the signs; and while reading “Boy lost!” 
one can almost hear the bell and well-known voice of “Old Wilson,"
crying the boy as “strayed, stolen, or mislaid!”  Then there was
the Commencement at Cambridge, and the full account of the
exercises at the graduating of my own class.  A list of all
those familiar names, (beginning as usual with Abbot, and ending
with W., ) which, as I read them over, one by one, brought up their
faces and characters as I had known them in the various scenes of
college life.  Then I imagined them upon the stage, speaking their
orations, dissertations, colloquies, etc., with the gestures and
tones of each, and tried to fancy the manner in which each would
handle his subject, *****, handsome, showy, and superficial; *****,
with his strong head, clear brain, cool self-possession; *****,
modest, sensitive, and underrated; *****, the mouth-piece of the
debating clubs, noisy, vaporous, and democratic; and so following. 
Then I could see them receiving their A. Bs. from the dignified,
feudal-looking President, with his “auctoritate mihi commissâ,"
and walking off the stage with their diplomas in their hands;
while upon the very same day, their classmate was walking up
and down California beach with a hide upon his head. 
Every watch below, for a week, I pored over these papers, until I was
sure there could be nothing in them that had escaped my attention,
and was ashamed to keep them any longer. 
Saturday, March 5th.  This was an important day in our almanac,
for it was on this day that we were first assured that our voyage
was really drawing to a close.  The captain gave orders to have
the ship ready for getting under weigh; and observed that there
was a good breeze to take us down to San Pedro.  Then we were not
going up to windward.  Thus much was certain, and was soon known,
fore and aft; and when we went in the gig to take him off, he shook
hands with the people on the beach, and said that he never expected
to see Santa Barbara again.  This settled the matter, and sent a
thrill of pleasure through the heart of every one in the boat. 
We pulled off with a will, saying to ourselves (I can speak for
myself at least)–"Good-by, Santa Barbara!–This is the last pull
here–No more duckings in your breakers, and slipping from your
cursed south-easters!”  The news was soon known aboard, and put
life into everything when we were getting under weigh.  Each one
was taking his last look at the mission, the town, the breakers
on the beach, and swearing that no money would make him ship to
see them again; and when all hands tallied on to the cat-fall,
the chorus of “Time for us to go!” was raised for the first time,
and joined in, with full swing, by everybody.  One would have thought
we were on our voyage home, so near did it seem to us, though there
were yet three months for us on the coast. 
We left here the young Englishman, George Marsh, of whom I have
before spoken, who was wrecked upon the Pelew Islands.  He left us
to take the berth of second mate on board the Ayacucho, which was
lying in port.  He was well qualified for this, and his education
would enable him to rise to any situation on board ship.  I felt
really sorry to part from him.  There was something about him which
excited my curiosity; for I could not, for a moment, doubt that he
was well born, and, in early life, well bred.  There was the latent
gentleman about him, and the sense of honor, and no little of the
pride, of a young man of good family.  The situation was offered
him only a few hours before we sailed; and though he must give up
returning to America, yet I have no doubt that the change from a
dog’s berth to an officer’s, was too agreeable to his feelings to
be declined.  We pulled him on board the Ayacucho, and when he left
the boat he gave each of its crew a piece of money, except myself,
and shook hands with me, nodding his head, as much as to say,–"We
understand one another,” and sprang on board.  Had I known, an hour
sooner, that he was to leave us, I would have made an effort to get
from him the true history of his early life.  He knew that I had
no faith in the story which he told the crew, and perhaps, in the
moment of parting from me, probably forever, he would have given me
the true account.  Whether I shall ever meet him again, or whether
his manuscript narrative of his adventures in the Pelew Islands,
which would be creditable to him and interesting to the world,
will ever see the light, I cannot tell.  His is one of those cases
which are more numerous than those suppose, who have never lived
anywhere but in their own homes, and never walked but in one line
from their cradles to their graves.  We must come down from our
heights, and leave our straight paths, for the byways and low
places of life, if we would learn truths by strong contrasts;
and in hovels, in forecastles, and among our own outcasts in
foreign lands, see what has been wrought upon our fellow-creatures
by accident, hardship, or vice.
Two days brought us to San Pedro, and two days more (to our
no small joy) gave us our last view of that place, which was
universally called the hell of California, and seemed designed,
in every way, for the wear and tear of sailors.  Not even the last
view could bring out one feeling of regret.  No thanks, thought I,
as we left the sandy shores in the distance, for the hours I have
walked over your stones, barefooted, with hides on my head;–for
the burdens I have carried up your steep, muddy hill;  for the
duckings in your surf; and for the long days and longer nights
passed on your desolate hill, watching piles of hides, hearing
the sharp bark of your eternal coati, and the dismal hooting of
your owls. 
As I bade good-by to each successive place, I felt as though one
link after another were struck from the chain of my servitude.
Having kept close in shore, for the land-breeze, we passed the
mission of San Juan Campestráno the same night, and saw distinctly,
by the bright moonlight, the hill which I had gone down by a pair of
halyards in search of a few paltry hides.  “Forsan et haec olim,"
thought I, and took my last look of that place too.  And on the
next morning we were under the high point of San Diego.  The flood
tide took us swiftly in, and we came-to, opposite our hide-house,
and prepared to get everything in trim for a long stay.  This was
our last port.  Here we were to discharge everything from the ship,
clean her out, smoke her, take in our hides, wood, water, etc.,
and set sail for Boston.  While all this was doing, we were to
lie still in one place, and the port was a safe one, and there
was no fear of south-easters.  Accordingly, having picked out
a good berth, in the stream, with a good smooth beach opposite,
for a landing-place and within two cables’ length of our hide-house,
we moored ship, unbent all the sails, sent down the top-gallant
yards and all the studding-sail booms, and housed the top-gallant
masts.  The boats were then hove out, and all the sails, spare spars,
the stores, the rigging not rove, and, in fact, everything which
was not in daily use, sent ashore, and stowed away in the house.
Then went all our hides and horns, and we left hardly anything
in the ship but her ballast, and this we made preparation to
heave out, the next day.  At night, after we had knocked off,
and were sitting round in the forecastle, smoking and talking
and taking sailor’s pleasure, we congratulated ourselves upon
being in that situation in which we had wished ourselves every
time we had come into San Diego.  “If we were only here for the
last time,” we had often said, “with our top-gallant masts housed
and our sails unbent!"–and now we had our wish.  Six weeks, or
two months, of the hardest work we had yet seen, was before us,
and then–"Good-by to California!”
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
