


Caleb’s Philosophy
The tracks of Mink appeared from time to time on Yan’s creekside mud
albums, and at length another of these tireless watchers, placed at
the Wakan Rock, reported to him that Mink as well as Skunks came there
now for a nightly feast.
The Mink was a large one, judging by the marks, and Caleb was asked to
help in trapping it.
“How do you trap Mink, Mr. Clark?” was the question.
“Don’t trap ’em at all this time o’ year, for they’re no good till
October,” was the answer.
“Well, how do you trap them when they are in season?”
“Oh, different ways.”
It was slow work, but Yan kept on and at length got the old man going.
“Airly days we always used a deadfall for Mink. That’s made like this,
with a bird or a Partridge head for bait. That kills him sure, sudden
and merciful. Then if it’s cold weather he freezes and keeps O.K.
till you come around to get him; but in warm weather lots o’ pelts are
spoiled by being kept too long, so ye have to go round pretty often
to save all you kill. Then some one brought in them new-fangled steel
traps that catches them by the foot and holds them for days and days,
some times, till they jest starve to death or chaw their foot off to
get free. I mind once I ketched a Mink with only two legs left. He had
been in a steel trap twice before and chawed off his leg to get
away. Them traps save the trapper going round so often, but they’re
expensive, and heavy to carry, and you have got to be awful
hard-hearted before ye kin use ’em. I tell ye, when I thought of all
the sufferin’ that Mink went through it settled me for steel traps.
Since then, says I, if ye must trap, use a deadfall or a ketchalive,
one or other; no manglin’ an’ tormentin’ for days. I tell ye that thar
new Otter trap that grabs them in iron claws ought to be forbid by
law; it ain’t human.
“Same way about huntin’. Huntin’s great sport, an’ it can’t be bad,
’cause I can’t for the life of me see that it makes men bad. ’Pears
to me men as hunt is humaner than them as is above it; as for the
cruelty–wall, we know that no wild animal dies easy abed. They all
get killed soon or late, an’ if it’s any help to man to kill them I
reckon he has as good a right to do it as Wolves an’ Wildcats. It
don’t hurt any more–yes, a blame sight less–to be killed by a rifle
ball than to be chawed by Wolves. The on’y thing I says is don’t do
it cruel–an’ don’t wipe out the hull bunch. If ye never kill a thing
that’s no harm to ye ’live an’ no good to ye dead nor more than the
country kin stand, ’pears to me ye won’t do much harm, an’ ye’ll have
a lot o’ real fun to think about afterward.
“But I mind a feller from Europe, some kind o’ swell, that I was
guidin’ out West. He had crippled a Deer so it couldn’t get away. Then
he sat down to eat lunch right by, and every few moments he’d fire a
shot into some part or another, experimentin’ an’ aimin’ not to kill
it for awhile. I heard the shootin’ an’ blattin’, an when I come up I
tell ye it set my blood a-boilin’. I called him some names men don’t
like, an’ put that Deer out o’ pain quick as I could pull trigger.
That bu’st up our party–I didn’t want no more o’ him. He come pretty
near lyin’ by the Deer that day. It makes me hot yet when I think of
it.
“If he’d shot that Deer down runnin’ an’ killed it as quick as he
could it wouldn’t ’a’ suffered more than if it had been snagged a
little, ’cause bullets of right weight numb when they hit. The Deer
wouldn’t have suffered more than he naturally would at his finish,
maybe less, an’ he’d ’a’ suffered it at a time when he could be some
good to them as hunted him. An’ these yer new repeatin’ guns is a
curse. A feller knows he has lots of shot and so blazes away into a
band o’ Deer as long as he can see, an lots gets away crippled, to
suffer an’ die; but when a feller has only one shot he’s going to
place it mighty keerful. Ef it’s sport ye want, get a single-shot
rifle, ef it’s destruction, get a Gatling-gun.
“Sport’s good, but I’m agin this yer wholesale killin’ an’ cruelty.
Steel traps, light-weight bullets an’ repeatin’ guns ain’t human. I
tell ye it’s them as makes all the sufferin’.”
This was a long speech for Caleb, but it was really less connected
than here given. Yan had to keep him going with occasional questions.
This he followed up.
“What do you think about bows and arrows, Mr. Clark?”
“I wouldn’t like to use them on big game like Bear and Deer, but I’d
be glad if shotguns was done away with and small game could be killed
only with arrows. They are either sure death or clear miss. There’s no
cripples to get away and die. You can’t fire an arrow into a flock of
birds and wipe out one hundred, like you can with one of them blame
scatterguns. It’s them things that is killing off all the small game.
Some day they’ll invent a scattergun that is a pump repeater like them
new rifles, and when every fool has one they’ll wonder where all the
small game has gone to.
“No, sir, I’m agin them. Bows and arrows is less destructful an’ calls
for more Woodcraft an’ give more sport–that is, for small game.
Besides, they don’t make that awful racket, an’ you know who is the
party that owns the shot, for every arrow is marked.”
Yan was sorry that Caleb did not indorse the arrow for big game, too.
The Trapper was well started now; he seemed ready enough with
information to-day, and Yan knew enough to “run the rapids on the
freshet.”
“How do you make a ketchalive?”
“What for?”
“Oh, Mink.”
“They ain’t fit to catch now, and the young ones need the mothers.”
“I wouldn’t keep it. I only want to make a drawing.”
“Guess that won’t harm it if you don’t keep it too long. Have ye any
boards? We used to chop the whole thing out of a piece of Balsam wood
or White Pine, but the more stuff ye find ready-made the easier it is.
Now I’ll show you how to make a ketchalive if ye’ll promise me never
to miss a day going to it while it is set.”
The boys did not understand how any one could miss a day in visiting a
place of so much interest, and readily promised.
So they made a ketchalive, or box-trap, two feet long, using hay wire
to make a strong netting at one end.
“Now,” said the trapper, “that will catch Mink, Muskrat, Skunk,
Rabbit–’most anything, ’cording to where you put it and how you bait
it.”
“Seems to me the Wakan Rock will be a good place to try.”
So the trap was baited with a fish head firmly lashed on the wire
trigger.
In the morning, as Yan approached, he saw that it was sprung. A
peculiar whining and scratching came from it and he shouted in great
excitement: “Boys, boys, I’ve got him! I’ve got the Mink!”
They seized the trap and held it cautiously up for the sunlight to
shine through the bars, and there saw to their disgust that they had
captured only the old gray Cat. As soon as the lid was raised she
bounded away, spitting and hissing, no doubt to hurry home to tell the
Kittens that it was all right, although she had been away so long.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
