


Our place of destination had been Monterey, but as we were to the
northward of it when the wind hauled a-head, we made a fair wind
for San Francisco.  This large bay, which lies in latitude 37° 58’,
was discovered by Sir Francis Drake, and by him represented to
be (as indeed it is) a magnificent bay, containing several good
harbors, great depth of water, and surrounded by a fertile and
finely wooded country.  About thirty miles from the mouth of the
bay, and on the south-east side, is a high point, upon which the
presidio is built.  Behind this, is the harbor in which trading
vessels anchor, and near it, the mission of San Francisco, and a
newly begun settlement, mostly of Yankee Californians, called Yerba
Buena, which promises well.  Here, at anchor, and the only vessel,
was a brig under Russian colors, from Asitka, in Russian America,
which had come down to winter, and to take in a supply of tallow
and grain, great quantities of which latter article are raised
in the missions at the head of the bay.  The second day after
our arrival, we went on board the brig, it being Sunday, as a
matter of curiosity; and there was enough there to gratify it.
Though no larger than the Pilgrim, she had five or six officers,
and a crew of between twenty and thirty; and such a stupid and
greasy-looking set, I certainly never saw before.  Although it
was quite comfortable weather, and we had nothing on but straw
hats, shirts, and duck trowsers, and were barefooted, they had,
every man of them, double-soled boots, coming up to the knees,
and well greased; thick woolen trowsers, frocks, waistcoats,
pea-jackets, woolen caps, and everything in true Nova Zembla
rig; and in the warmest days they made no change.  The clothing
of one of these men would weigh nearly as much as that of half
our crew.  They had brutish faces, looked like the antipodes of
sailors, and apparently dealt in nothing but grease.  They lived
upon grease; eat it, drank it, slept in the midst of it, and their
clothes were covered with it.  To a Russian, grease is the greatest
luxury.  They looked with greedy eyes upon the tallow-bags as they
were taken into the vessel, and, no doubt, would have eaten one up
whole, had not the officer kept watch over it.  The grease seemed
actually coming through their pores, and out in their hair, and on
their faces.  It seems as if it were this saturation which makes
them stand cold and rain so well.  If they were to go into a warm
climate, they would all die of the scurvy.
The vessel was no better than the crew.  Everything was in the oldest
and most inconvenient fashion possible; running trusses on the yards,
and large hawser cables, coiled all over the decks, and served and
parcelled in all directions.  The topmasts, top-gallant masts and
studding-sail booms were nearly black for want of scraping, and
the decks would have turned the stomach of a man-of-war’s-man.
The galley was down in the forecastle; and there the crew lived,
in the midst of the steam and grease of the cooking, in a place
as hot as an oven, and as dirty as a pigsty.  Five minutes in
the forecastle was enough for us, and we were glad to get into the
open air.  We made some trade with them, buying Indian curiosities,
of which they had a great number; such as bead-work, feathers of
birds, fur moccasins, etc.  I purchased a large robe, made of the
skins of some animals, dried and sewed nicely together, and covered
all over on the outside with thick downy feathers, taken from the
breasts of various birds, and arranged with their different colors,
so as to make a brilliant show.
A few days after our arrival, the rainy season set in, and,
for three weeks, it rained almost every hour, without cessation.
This was bad for our trade, for the collecting of hides is managed
differently in this port from what it is in any other on the coast.
The mission of San Francisco near the anchorage, has no trade at
all, but those of San José, Santa Clara, and others, situated on
large creeks or rivers which run into the bay, and distant between
fifteen and forty miles from the anchorage, do a greater business
in hides than any in California.  Large boats, manned by Indians,
and capable of carrying nearly a thousand hides apiece, are attached
to the missions, and sent down to the vessels with hides, to bring
away goods in return.  Some of the crews of the vessels are obliged
to go and come in the boats, to look out for the hides and goods.
These are favorite expeditions with the sailors, in fine weather;
but now to be gone three or four days, in open boats, in constant
rain, without any shelter, and with cold food, was hard service.
Two of our men went up to Santa Clara in one of these boats,
and were gone three days, during all which time they had a
constant rain, and did not sleep a wink, but passed three long
nights, walking fore and aft the boat, in the open air.  When they
got on board, they were completely exhausted, and took a watch
below of twelve hours.  All the hides, too, that came down in the
boats, were soaked with water, and unfit to put below, so that we
were obliged to trice them up to dry, in the intervals of sunshine
or wind, upon all parts of the vessel.  We got up tricing-lines
from the jib-boom-end to each arm of the fore yard, and thence to
the main and cross-jack yard-arms.  Between the tops, too, and the
mast-heads, from the fore to the main swifters, and thence to the
mizen rigging, and in all directions athwartships, tricing-lines
were run, and strung with hides.  The head stays and guys, and the
spritsail-yard, were lined, and, having still more, we got out the
swinging booms, and strung them and the forward and after guys,
with hides.  The rail, fore and aft, the windlass, capstan, the
sides of the ship, and every vacant place on deck, were covered
with wet hides, on the least sign of an interval for drying.
Our ship was nothing but a mass of hides, from the cat-harpins
to the water’s edge, and from the jib-boom-end to the taffrail.
One cold, rainy evening, about eight o’clock, I received orders to
get ready to start for San José at four the next morning, in one of
these Indian boats, with four days’ provisions.  I got my oil-cloth
clothes, south-wester, and thick boots all ready, and turned into
my hammock early, determined to get some sleep in advance, as the
boat was to be alongside before daybreak.  I slept on till all hands
were called in the morning; for, fortunately for me, the Indians,
intentionally, or from mistaking their orders, had gone off alone
in the night, and were far out of sight.  Thus I escaped three or
four days of very uncomfortable service.
Four of our men, a few days afterwards, went up in one of the
quarter-boats to Santa Clara, to carry the agent, and remained
out all night in a drenching rain, in the small boat, where there
was not room for them to turn round; the agent having gone up to
the mission and left the men to their fate, making no provision
for their accommodation, and not even sending them anything
to eat.  After this, they had to pull thirty miles, and when
they got on board, were so stiff that they could not come up
the gangway ladder.  This filled up the measure of the agent’s
unpopularity, and never after this could he get anything done by
any of the crew; and many a delay and vexation, and many a good
ducking in the surf, did he get to pay up old scores, or “square
the yards with the bloody quill-driver.”
Having collected nearly all the hides that were to be procured,
we began our preparations for taking in a supply of wood and water,
for both of which, San Francisco is the best place on the coast.
A small island, situated about two leagues from the anchorage,
called by us “Wood Island,” and by the Spaniards “Isle de los
Angelos,” was covered with trees to the water’s edge; and to
this, two of our crew, who were Kennebec men, and could handle
an axe like a plaything, were sent every morning to cut wood,
with two boys to pile it up for them.  In about a week, they had
cut enough to last us a year, and the third mate, with myself
and three others, were sent over in a large, schooner-rigged,
open launch, which we had hired of the mission, to take in the
wood, and bring it to the ship.  We left the ship about noon, but,
owing to a strong head wind, and a tide, which here runs four or
five knots, did not get into the harbor, formed by two points of
the island, where the boats lie, until sundown.  No sooner had we
come-to, than a strong south-easter, which had been threatening
us all day, set in, with heavy rain and a chilly atmosphere.
We were in rather a bad situation: an open boat, a heavy rain,
and a long night; for in winter, in this latitude, it was dark
nearly fifteen hours.  Taking a small skiff which we had brought
with us, we went ashore, but found no shelter, for everything was
open to the rain, and collecting a little wood, which we found by
lifting up the leaves and brush, and a few muscles, we put aboard
again, and made the best preparations in our power for passing
the night.  We unbent the mainsail, and formed an awning with it
over the after part of the boat, made a bed of wet logs of wood,
and, with our jackets on, lay down, about six o’clock, to sleep.
Finding the rain running down upon us, and our jackets getting wet
through, and the rough, knotty-logs, rather indifferent couches,
we turned out; and taking an iron pan which we brought with us,
we wiped it out dry, put some stones around it, cut the wet bark
from some sticks, and striking a light, made a small fire in the
pan.  Keeping some sticks near, to dry, and covering the whole
over with a roof of boards, we kept up a small fire, by which
we cooked our muscles, and eat them, rather for an occupation
than from hunger.  Still, it was not ten o’clock, and the night
was long before us, when one of the party produced an old pack
of Spanish cards from his monkey-jacket pocket, which we hailed
as a great windfall; and keeping a dim, flickering light by our
fagots, we played game after game, till one or two o’clock, when,
becoming really tired, we went to our logs again, one sitting up
at a time, in turn, to keep watch over the fire.  Toward morning,
the rain ceased, and the air became sensibly colder, so that we found
sleep impossible, and sat up, watching for daybreak.  No sooner
was it light than we went ashore, and began our preparations for
loading our vessel.  We were not mistaken in the coldness of the
weather, for a white frost was on the ground, a thing we had never
seen before in California, and one or two little puddles of fresh
water were skimmed over with a thin coat of ice.  In this state
of the weather and before sunrise, in the grey of the morning,
we had to wade off, nearly up to our hips in water, to load
the skiff with the wood by armsfull.  The third mate remained
on board the launch, two more men staid in the skiff, to load
and manage it, and all the water-work, as usual, fell upon the
two youngest of us; and there we were, with frost on the ground,
wading forward and back, from the beach to the boat, with armsfull
of wood, barefooted, and our trowsers rolled up.  When the skiff
went off with her load, we could only keep our feet from freezing
by racing up and down the beach on the hard sand, as fast as we
could go.  We were all day at this work, and towards sundown,
having loaded the vessel as deep as she would bear, we hove up
our anchor, and made sail, beating out the bay.  No sooner had
we got into the large bay, than we found a strong tide setting
us out to seaward, a thick fog which prevented our seeing the
ship, and a breeze too light to set us against the tide; for we
were as deep as a sand-barge.  By the utmost exertions, we saved
ourselves from being carried out to sea, and were glad to reach the
leewardmost point of the island, where we came-to, and prepared
to pass another night, more uncomfortable than the first, for we
were loaded up to the gunwale, and had only a choice among logs
and sticks for a resting-place.  The next morning, we made sail at
slack water, with a fair wind, and got on board by eleven o’clock,
when all hands were turned-to, to unload and stow away the wood,
which took till night.
Having now taken in all our wood, the next morning a water-party
was ordered off with all the casks.  From this we escaped, having
had a pretty good siege with the wooding.  The water-party were
gone three days, during which time they narrowly escaped being
carried out to sea, and passed one day on an island, where one
of them shot a deer, great numbers of which overrun the islands
and hills of San Francisco Bay.
While not off, on these wood and water parties, or up the rivers
to the missions, we had very easy times on board the ship.  We were
moored, stem and stern, within a cable’s length of the shore, safe
from south-easters, and with very little boating to do; and as it
rained nearly all the time, awnings were put over the hatchways,
and all hands sent down between decks, where we were at work,
day after day, picking oakum, until we got enough to caulk the ship
all over, and to last the whole voyage.  Then we made a whole suit
of gaskets for the voyage home, a pair of wheel-ropes from strips
of green hide, great quantities of spun-yarn, and everything else
that could be made between decks.  It being now mid-winter and
in high latitude, the nights were very long, so that we were not
turned-to until seven in the morning, and were obliged to knock
off at five in the evening, when we got supper; which gave us
nearly three hours before eight bells, at which time the watch
was set.
As we had now been about a year on the coast, it was time to think
of the voyage home; and knowing that the last two or three months
of our stay would be very busy ones, and that we should never have
so good an opportunity to work for ourselves as the present, we all
employed our evenings in making clothes for the passage home, and more
especially for Cape Horn.  As soon as supper was over and the kids
cleared away, and each one had taken his smoke, we seated ourselves
on our chests round the lamp, which swung from a beam, and each one
went to work in his own way, some making hats, others trowsers,
others jackets, etc., etc.; and no one was idle.  The boys who
could not sew well enough to make their own clothes, laid up grass
into sinnet for the men, who sewed for them in return.  Several of
us clubbed together and bought a large piece of twilled cotton,
which we made into trowsers and jackets, and giving them several
coats of linseed oil, laid them by for Cape Horn.  I also sewed
and covered a tarpaulin hat, thick and strong enough to sit down
upon, and made myself a complete suit of flannel under-clothing,
for bad weather.  Those who had no south-wester caps, made them,
and several of the crew made themselves tarpaulin jackets and
trowsers, lined on the inside with flannel.  Industry was the order
of the day, and every one did something for himself; for we knew
that as the season advanced, and we went further south, we should
have no evenings to work in.
Friday, December 25th.  This day was Christmas; and as it rained
all day long, and there were no hides to take in, and nothing
especial to do, the captain gave us a holiday, (the first we had
had since leaving Boston,) and plum duff for dinner.  The Russian
brig, following the Old Style, had celebrated their Christmas
eleven days before; when they had a grand blow-out and (as our
men said) drank, in the forecastle, a barrel of gin, ate up a
bag of tallow, and made a soup of the skin.
Sunday, December 27th.  We had now finished all our business at
this port, and it being Sunday, we unmoored ship and got under
weigh, firing a salute to the Russian brig, and another to the
Presidio, which were both answered.  The commandant of the Presidio,
Don Gaudaloupe Villego, a young man, and the most popular, among the
Americans and English, of any man in California, was on board when
we got under weigh.  He spoke English very well, and was suspected
of being favorably inclined to foreigners.
We sailed down this magnificent bay with a light wind, the tide,
which was running out, carrying us at the rate of four or five
knots.  It was a fine day; the first of entire sunshine we had
had for more than a month.  We passed directly under the high
cliff on which the Presidio is built, and stood into the middle
of the bay, from whence we could see small bays, making up into
the interior, on every side; large and beautifully-wooded islands;
and the mouths of several small rivers.  If California ever becomes
a prosperous country, this bay will be the centre of its prosperity.
The abundance of wood and water, the extreme fertility of its shores,
the excellence of its climate, which is as near to being perfect as
any in the world, and its facilities for navigation, affording the
best anchoring-grounds in the whole western coast of America,
all fit it for a place of great importance; and, indeed, it has
attracted much attention, for the settlement of “Yerba Buena,"
where we lay at anchor, made chiefly by Americans and English,
and which bids fair to become the most important trading place on
the coast, at this time began to supply traders, Russian ships,
and whalers, with their stores of wheat and frijoles.
The tide leaving us, we came to anchor near the mouth of the bay,
under a high and beautifully sloping hill, upon which herds of
hundreds and hundreds of red deer, and the stag, with his high
branching antlers, were bounding about, looking at us for a moment,
and then starting off, affrighted at the noises which we made for
the purpose of seeing the variety of their beautiful attitudes
and motions.
At midnight, the tide having turned, we hove up our anchor and
stood out of the bay, with a fine starry heaven above us,–the
first we had seen for weeks and weeks.  Before the light northerly
winds, which blow here with the regularity of trades, we worked
slowly along, and made Point Año Nuevo, the northerly point of
the Bay of Monterey, on Monday afternoon.  We spoke, going in,
the brig Diana, of the Sandwich Islands, from the North-west Coast,
last from Asitka.  She was off the point at the same time with us,
but did not get in to the anchoring-ground until an hour or two
after us.  It was ten o’clock on Tuesday morning when we came
to anchor.  The town looked just as it did when I saw it last,
which was eleven months before, in the brig Pilgrim.  The pretty
lawn on which it stands, as green as sun and rain could make it;
the pine wood on the south; the small river on the north side;
the houses, with their white plastered sides and red-tiled roofs,
dotted about on the green; the low, white presidio, with its soiled,
tri-colored flag flying, and the discordant din of drums and trumpets
for the noon parade; all brought up the scene we had witnessed here
with so much pleasure nearly a year before, when coming from a
long voyage, and our unprepossessing reception at Santa Barbara.
It seemed almost like coming to a home.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
