


The Long Swamp
The union of the tribes, however, was far from complete. Blackhawk was
inclined to be turbulent. He was heavier than Beaver. He could not
understand how that slighter, younger boy could throw him, and he
wished to try again. Now Yan was growing stronger every day. He was
quick and of very wiry build. In the first battle, which was entirely
fisty, he was worsted; on the try-over, which cost him such an effort,
he had arranged “a rough-and-tumble,” as they called it, and had
won chiefly by working his only trick. But now Blackhawk was not
satisfied, and while he did not care to offer another deadly
challenge, by way of a feeler he offered, some days after the peace,
to try a friendly throw for scalps.
“Fists left out!” Just what Beaver wanted, and the biggest boy was
sent flying. “If any other Boiler would like to try I’d be pleased
to oblige him,” said Yan, just a little puffed up, as he held up the
second scalp he had won from Blackhawk.
Much to his surprise, Bluejay, the city boy, accepted, and he was
still more surprised when the city boy sent him down in the
dust.
“Best out of three!” shouted Woodpecker quickly, in the interest of
his friend, taking advantage of an unwritten law that when it is not
stated to be in one try, usually called “sudden death,” it is “best
two out of three” that counts.
Yan knew now that he had found a worthy foe. He dodged, waiting for an
opening–gripped–locked–and had him on the hip, he thought, but the
city boy squirmed in time, yielding instead of resisting, and both
went down tight-gripped. For a minute it was doubtful.
“Go it, Yan.”
“Give it to him, Bluejay.”
But Yan quickly threw out one leg, got a little purchase, and turned
the city boy on his back.
“Hooray for Little Beaver!”
“One try more! So far even!” cried Blackhawk.
They closed again, but Yan was more than ever careful. The city boy
was puffing hard. The real trial was over and Cy went down quite
easily.
“Three cheers for Little Beaver!” A fourth scalp was added to his
collection, and Sam patted him on the back, while Bluejay got out a
pocket mirror and comb and put his hair straight.
But this did not help out in the matter of leadership, and when the
Medicine Man heard of the continued deadlock he said:
“Boys, you know when there is a doubt about who is to lead the only
way is for all Chiefs to resign and have a new election.” The boys
acted on this suggestion but found another deadlock. Little Beaver
refused to be put up. Woodpecker got three votes, Blackhawk four, and
Guy one (his own), and the Sangers refused to stand by the decision.
“Let’s wait till after the ’hard trip’–that will show who is the real
Chief–then have a new election,” suggested Little Beaver, with an eye
to Woodpecker’s interest, for this hard trip was one that had been
promised them by Caleb–a three-days’ expedition in the Long Swamp.
This swamp was a wild tract, ten miles by thirty, that lay a dozen
miles north of Sanger. It was swampy only in parts, but the dry places
were mere rocky ridges, like islands in the bogs. The land on these
was worthless and the timber had been ruined by fire, so Long Swamp
continued an uninhabited wilderness.
There was said to be a few Deer on the hardwood ridges. Bears and Lynx
were occasionally seen, and Wolves had been heard in recent winters.
Of course there were Foxes, Grouse and Northern Hare. The streams were
more or less choked with logs, but were known to harbour a few Beavers
and an occasional Otter. There were no roads for summer use, only
long, dim openings across the bogs, known as winter trails and timber
roads. This was the region that the boys proposed to visit under
Caleb’s guidance.
Thus at last they were really going on an “Indian trip"–to explore
the great unknown, with every probability of adventure.
At dawn Yan tapped the tom-tom. It sang a high and vibrant note, in
guarantee of a sunny day.
They left camp at seven in the morning, and after three hours’ tramp
they got to the first part of the wilderness, a great tract of rocky
land, disfigured with blackened trees and stumps, but green in places
with groves of young Poplars or quaking Aspen.
The Indians were very ready to camp now, but the Medicine Man said,
“No; better keep on till we find water.” In another mile they reached
the first stretch of level Tamarack bog and a welcome halt for lunch
was called. “Camp!” shouted the leader, and the Indians ran each to do
his part. Sam got wood for the fire and Blackhawk went to seek water,
and with him was Blue jay, conspicuous in a high linen collar and
broad cuffs, for Caleb unfortunately had admitted that he once saw an
Indian Chief in high hat and stand-up collar.
Beaver was just a little disappointed to see the Medicine Man light
the fire with a match. He wanted it all in truly Indian style, but the
Trapper remarked, “Jest as well to have some tinder and a thong along
when you’re in the woods, but matches is handier than rubbing-sticks.”
Blackhawk and Bluejay returned with two pails of dirty, tepid, swampy
water.
“Why, that’s all there is!” was their defense.
“Yan, you go and show them how to get good water,” said Caleb, so
the Second Sanger Chief, remembering his training, took the axe and
quickly made a wooden digger, then went to the edge of the swamp, and
on the land twenty feet from the bog he began to dig a hole in the
sandy loam. He made it two feet across and sunk it down three feet.
The roily water kept oozing in all around, and Bluejay was scornful.
“Well, I’d rather have what we got.” Beaver dug on till there was a
foot of dirty water in the hole. Then he took a pail and bailed it all
out as fast as possible, left it to fill, bailed it out a second time,
and ten minutes later cautiously dipped out with a cup a full pail of
crystal-clear cold water, and thus the Boilers learned how to make an
Indian well and get clear water out of a dirty puddle.
After their simple meal of tea, bread and meat Caleb told his plan.
“You never get the same good of a trip if you jest wander off; better
have a plan–something to do; and do it without a guide if ye want
adventures. Now eight is too many to travel together; you’d scare
everything with racket and never see a livin’ thing. Better divide in
parties. I’ll stay in camp and get things ready for the night.”
Thus the leaders, Sam and Yan, soon found themselves paired with
Guy and Peetweet. Wes felt bound to take care of his little cousin
Char-less.
Bluejay, finding himself the odd man, decided to stay with Caleb,
especially as the swamp evidently was without proper footpaths.
“Now,” said Caleb, “northwest of here there is a river called the
Beaver, that runs into Black River. I want one of you to locate that.
It’s thirty or forty feet wide and easy to know, for it’s the only big
stream in the swamp. Right north there is an open stretch of plain,
with a little spring creek, where there’s a band of Injuns camped.
Somewhere northeast they say there’s a tract of Pine bush not burned
off, and there is some Deer there. None of the places is ten miles
away except, maybe, the Injuns’ camp. I want ye to go scoutin’ and
report. You kin draw straws to say who goes where.”
So the straws were marked and drawn. Yan drew the timber hunt. He
would rather have had the one after the Indians. Sam had to seek the
river, and Wesley the Indian camp. Caleb gave each of them a few
matches and this parting word:
“I’ll stay here till you come back. I’ll keep up a fire, and toward
sundown I’ll make a smoke with rotten wood and grass so you kin find
your way back. Remember, steer by the sun; keep your main lines of
travel; don’t try to remember trees and mudholes; and if you get lost,
you make two smokes well apart and stay right there and holler
every once in awhile; some one will be sure to come.”
So about eleven o’clock the boys set out eagerly. As they were going
Blackhawk called to the others, “First to carry out his job wins a
grand coup!”
“Let the three leaders stake their scalps,” said the Woodpecker.
“All right. First winner home gets a scalp from each of the others and
saves his own.”
“Say, boys, you better take along; your hull outfit, some grub an’
your blankets,” was the Medicine Man’s last suggestion. “You may have
to stay out all night.”
Yan would rather have had Sam along, but that couldn’t be, and
Peetweet proved a good fellow, though rather slow. They soon left the
high ground and came to the bog–flat and seemingly endless and with a
few tall Tamaracks. There were some Cedar-birds catching Flies on
the tall tree-tops, and a single Flycatcher was calling out:
“_Whoit–whoit–whoit!_” Yan did not know until long after that
it was the Olive-side. A Sparrow-hawk sailed over, and later a Bald
Eagle with a Sparrow-hawk in hot and noisy pursuit. But the most
curious thing was the surface of the bog. The spongy stretch of moss
among the scattering Tamaracks was dotted with great masses of Pitcher
Plant, and half concealed by the curious leaves were thousands of
Droseræ, or fly-eating plants, with their traps set to secure their
prey.
The bog was wonderful, but very bad walking. The boys sank knee-deep
in the soft moss, and as they went farther, steering only by the sun,
they found the moss sank till their feet reached the water below and
they were speedily wet to the knees. Yan cut for each a long pole to
carry in the hand; in case the bog gave way this would save them from
sinking. After two miles of this Peetweet wanted to go back, but was
scornfully suppressed by Little Beaver.
Shortly afterward they came to a sluggish little stream in the bog
with a peculiar red-and-yellow scum along its banks. It was deep and
soft-bottomed. Yan tried it with the pole–did not dare to wade, so
they walked along its course till they found a small tree lying from
bank to bank, then crossed on this. Half a mile farther on the bog got
dryer, and a mass of green ahead marked one of the islands of high
land. Over this they passed quickly, keeping the northwest course.
They now had a succession of small bogs and large islands. The sun was
hot here and Peetweet was getting tired. He was thirsty, too, and
persisted in drinking the swamp water whenever he found a hole.
“Say, Peetweet, you’ll suffer for that if you don’t quit; that water
isn’t fit to drink unless you boil it.”
But Peetweet complained of burning thirst and drank recklessly. After
two hours’ tramp he was very tired and wanted to turn back. Yan sought
a dry island and then gathered sticks for a fire, but found all
the matches they had were soaking wet with wading through the bog.
Peetweet was much upset by this, not on account of fire now, but in
case they should be out all night.
“You wait and see what an Indian does,” said Little Beaver. He sought
for a dried Balsam Fir, cut the rubbing-sticks, made a bow of a
slightly bent branch, and soon had a blazing fire, to Peter’s utter
amazement, for he had never seen the trick of making a fire by
rubbing-sticks.
After drinking some tea and eating a little, Pete felt more
encouraged.
“We have travelled more than six miles now, I reckon,” said the Chief;
“an hour longer and we shall be in sight of the forest if there is
one,” and Yan led off across swamps more or less open and islands of
burned timber.
Pete began to be appalled by the distance they were putting between
them and their friends. “What if we should get lost? They never could
find us.”
“We won’t get lost,” said Yan in some impatience; “and if we did, what
of it? We have only to keep on straight north or south for four or
five hours and we reach some kind of a settlement.”
After an hour’s tramp northeast they came to an island with a tall
tree that had branches right to the ground. Yan climbed up. A vast
extent of country lay all about him–open flat bogs and timber
islands, and on far ahead was a long, dark mass of solid
ever-green–surely the forest he sought. Between him and it he saw
water sparkling.
“Oh, Pete, you ought to be up here,” he shouted joyfully; “it’s worth
the climb to see this view.”
“I’d rather see our own back-yard,” grumbled Pete.
Yan came down, his face aglow with pleasure, and exclaimed: “It’s
close to, now! I saw the Pine woods. Just off there.”
“How far?”
“Oh, a couple of miles, at most.”
“That’s what you have been saying all along.”
“Well, I saw it this time; and there is water out there. I saw that,
too.”
He tramped on, and in half an hour they came to the water, a deep,
clear, slow stream, fringed with scrub willows, covered with
lily-pads, and following the middle of a broad, boggy flat. Yan had
looked for a pond, and was puzzled by the stream. Then it struck him.
“Caleb said there was only one big stream through this swamp. This
must be it. This is Beaver River.”
The stream was barely forty feet across, but it was clearly out of the
question to find a pole for a bridge, so Yan stripped off, put all his
things in a bundle, and throwing them over, swam after them. Pete had
to come now or be left.
As they were dressing on the northern side there was a sudden loud
“_Bang–swish!” A torrent of water was thrown in the air, with
lily-pads broken from their mooring, the water pattered down, the
wavelets settled, and the boys stood in astonishment to see what
strange animal had made this disturbance; but nothing more of it was
seen, and the mystery remained unsolved.
Then Yan heard a familiar ’Quack!_” down the stream. He took his
bow and arrow, while Pete sat gloomily on a hummock. As soon as he
peered through the rushes in a little bay he saw three Mallard close
at hand. He waited till two were in line, then fired, killing one
instantly, and the others flew away. The breeze wafted it within reach
of a stick, and he seized it and returned in triumph to Pete, but
found him ready to cry. “I want to go home!” he said miserably. The
sight of the Mallard cheered him a little, and Yan said: “Come now,
Pete, don’t spoil everything, there’s a good fellow. Brace up, and if
I don’t show you the Pine woods in twenty minutes I’ll turn and take
you home.”
As soon as they got to the next island they saw the Pine wood–a solid
green bank not half a mile away, and the boys gave a little cheer, and
felt, no doubt, as Mungo Park did when first he sighted the Niger. In
fifteen minutes they were walking in its dry and delightful aisles.
“Now we’ve won,” said Yan, “whatever the others do, and all that
remains is to get back.”
“I’m awfully tired,” said Pete; “let’s rest awhile.”
Yan looked at his watch. “It’s four o’clock. I think we’d better camp
for the night.”
“Oh, no; I want to go home. It looks like rain.”
It certainly did, but Yan replied, “Well, let’s eat first.” He delayed
as much as possible so as to compel the making of a camp, and the rain
came unexpectedly, before he even had a fire. Yet to his own delight
and Peter’s astonishment he quickly made a rubbing-stick fire, and
they hung up their wet clothes about it. Then he dug an Indian well
and took lots of time in the preparation, so it was six o’clock before
they began to eat, and seven when finished–evidently too late to move
out even though the rain seemed to be over. So Yan collected firewood,
made a bed of Fir boughs and a windbreak of bushes and bark. The
weather was warm, and with the fire and two blankets they passed a
comfortable night. They heard their old friend the Horned Owl, a Fox
barked his querulous ’Yap-yurr!_” close at hand, and once or
twice they were awakened by rustling footsteps in the leaves, but
slept fairly well.
At dawn Yan was up. He made a fire and heated some water for tea. They
had very little bread left, but the Mallard was untouched.
Yan cleaned it, rolled it in wet clay, hid it in the ashes and covered
it with glowing coals. This is an Indian method of cooking, but Yan
had not fully mastered it. In half an hour he opened his clay pie and
found the Duck burned on one side and very raw on the other. Part of
it was good, however, so he called his companion to breakfast. Pete
sat up white-faced and miserable, evidently a sick boy. Not only had
he caught cold, but he was upset by the swamp water he had taken. He
was paying the penalty of his indiscretion. He ate a little and drank
some tea, then felt better, but clearly was unable to travel that day.
Now for the first time Yan felt a qualm of fear. Separated by a dozen
miles of swamp from all help, what could he do with a sick boy? He
barked a small dead tree with a knife, then on the smooth surface
wrote with a pencil, “Yan Yeoman and Pete Boyle camped here August 10,
18–”
He made Pete comfortable by the fire, and, looking for tracks, he
found that during the night two Deer had come nearly into the camp;
then he climbed a high tree and scanned the southern horizon for a
smoke sign. He saw none there, but to the northwest, beyond some
shining yellow hills, he discovered a level plain dotted over with
black Fir clumps; from one of these smoke went up, and near it were
two or three white things like teepees.
Yan hurried down to tell Pete the good news, but when he confessed
that it was two miles farther from home Pete had no notion of going
to the Indian camp; so Yan made a smoke fire, and knife-blazing the
saplings on two sides as he went, he set out alone for the Indian
camp. Getting there in half an hour, he found two log shanties and
three teepees. As he came near he had to use a stick to keep off the
numerous Dogs. The Indians proved shy, as usual, to White visitors.
Yan made some signs that he had learned from Caleb. Pointing to
himself, he held up two fingers–meaning that he was two. Then he
pointed to the Pine woods and made sign of the other lying down, and
added the hungry sign by pressing in his stomach with the edges of the
hands, meaning “I am cut in two here.” The Chief Indian offered him
a Deer-tongue, but did not take further interest. Yan received it
thankfully, made a hasty sketch of the camp, and returned to find Pete
much better, but thoroughly alarmed at being so long alone. He was
able and anxious now to go back. Yan led off, carrying all the things
of the outfit, and his comrade followed slowly and peevishly. When
they came to the river, Pete held back in fear, believing that the
loud noise they had heard was made by some monster of the deep, who
would seize them.
Yan was certain it could be only an explosion of swamp gas, and forced
Pete to swim across by setting the example. What the cause really was
they never learned.
They travelled very fast now for a time. Pete was helped by the
knowledge that he was really going home. A hasty lunch of Deer-tongue
delayed them but little. At three they sighted Caleb’s smoke signal,
and at four they burst into camp with yells of triumph.
Caleb fired off his revolver, and Turk bayed his basso profundo
full-cry Fox salute. All the others had come back the night before.
Sam said he had “gone ten mile and never got a sight of that blamed
river.” Guy swore they had gone forty miles, and didn’t believe there
was any such river.
“What kind o’ country did you see?”
“Nothin’ but burned land and rocks.”
“H-m, you went too far west–was runnin’ parallel with Beaver River.”
“Now, Blackhawk, give an account of yourself to Little Beaver,” said
Woodpecker. “Did you two win out?”
“Well,” replied the Boiler Chief, “if Hawkeye travelled forty miles,
we must have gone sixty. We pointed straight north for three hours and
never saw a thing but bogs and islands of burned timber–never a sign
of a plain or of Indians. I don’t believe there are any.”
“Did you see any sandhills?” asked Little Beaver.
“No.”
“Then you didn’t get within miles of it.”
Now he told his own story, backed by Pete, and he was kind enough to
leave out all about Peetweet’s whimpering. His comrade responded
to this by giving a glowing account of Yan’s Woodcraft, especially
dwelling on the feat of the rubbing-stick fire in the rain, and when
they finished Caleb said:
“Yan, you won, and you more than won, for you found the green timber
you went after, you found the river Sam went after, an’ the Injuns
Wesley went after. Sam and Wesley, hand over your scalps.”
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
