


Monday, Nov. 19th.  This was a black day in our calendar.  At seven
o’clock in the morning, it being our watch below, we were aroused
from a sound sleep by the cry of “All hands ahoy! a man overboard!"
This unwonted cry sent a thrill through the heart of every one,
and hurrying on deck we found the vessel hove flat aback, with all
her studding-sails set; for the boy who was at the helm left it to
throw something overboard, and the carpenter, who was an old sailor,
knowing that the wind was light, put the helm down and hove her aback.
The watch on deck were lowering away the quarter-boat, and I got on
deck just in time to heave myself into her as she was leaving the side;
but it was not until out upon the wide Pacific, in our little boat,
that I knew whom we had lost.  It was George Ballmer, a young English
sailor, who was prized by the officers as an active lad and willing
seaman, and by the crew as a lively, hearty fellow, and a good shipmate.
He was going aloft to fit a strap round the main top-mast-head,
for ringtail halyards, and had the strap and block, a coil of halyards
and a marline-spike about his neck.  He fell from the starboard futtock
shrouds, and not knowing how to swim, and being heavily dressed, with all
those things round his neck, he probably sank immediately.  We pulled
astern, in the direction in which he fell, and though we knew that there
was no hope of saving him, yet no one wished to speak of returning, and we
rowed about for nearly an hour, without the hope of doing anything,
but unwilling to acknowledge to ourselves that we must give him up.
At length we turned the boat’s head and made towards the vessel.
Death is at all times solemn, but never so much so as at sea.  A man
dies on shore; his body remains with his friends, and “the mourners go
about the streets;” but when a man falls overboard at sea and is lost,
there is a suddenness in the event, and a difficulty in realizing it,
which give to it an air of awful mystery.  A man dies on shore–you
follow his body to the grave, and a stone marks the spot.  You are
often prepared for the event.  There is always something which helps
you to realize it when it happens, and to recall it when it has passed.
A man is shot down by your side in battle, and the mangled body remains
an object, and a real evidence; but at sea, the man is near you–
at your side–you hear his voice, and in an instant he is gone, and
nothing but a vacancy shows his loss.  Then, too, at sea–to use
a homely but expressive phrase–you miss a man so much.  A dozen
men are shut up together in a little bark, upon the wide, wide sea,
and for months and months see no forms and hear no voices but their
own, and one is taken suddenly from among them, and they miss him
at every turn.  It is like losing a limb.  There are no new faces
or new scenes to fill up the gap.  There is always an empty berth
in the forecastle, and one man wanting when the small night watch
is mustered.  There is one less to take the wheel, and one less to
lay out with you upon the yard.  You miss his form, and the sound
of his voice, for habit had made them almost necessary to you, and
each of your senses feels the loss.
All these things make such a death peculiarly solemn, and the effect
of it remains upon the crew for some time.  There is more kindness
shown by the officers to the crew, and by the crew to one another.
There is more quietness and seriousness.  The oath and the loud
laugh are gone.  The officers are more watchful, and the crew go
more carefully aloft.  The lost man is seldom mentioned, or is
dismissed with a sailor’s rude eulogy–"Well, poor George is gone!
His cruise is up soon!  He knew his work, and did his duty, and was
a good shipmate.”  Then usually follows some allusion to another world,
for sailors are almost all believers; but their notions and opinions
are unfixed and at loose ends.  They say,–"God won’t be hard upon
the poor fellow,” and seldom get beyond the common phrase which seems
to imply that their sufferings and hard treatment here will excuse
them hereafter,–"To work hard, live hard, die hard, and go to hell
after all, would be hard indeed!”  Our cook, a simple-hearted old
African, who had been through a good deal in his day, and was rather
seriously inclined, always going to church twice a day when on shore,
and reading his Bible on a Sunday in the galley, talked to the crew
about spending their Sabbaths badly, and told them that they might
go as suddenly as George had, and be as little prepared.
Yet a sailor’s life is at best, but a mixture of a little good with
much evil, and a little pleasure with much pain.  The beautiful is
linked with the revolting, the sublime with the commonplace, and the
solemn with the ludicrous.
We had hardly returned on board with our sad report, before an
auction was held of the poor man’s clothes.  The captain had first,
however, called all hands aft and asked them if they were satisfied
that everything had been done to save the man, and if they thought
there was any use in remaining there longer.  The crew all said that
it was in vain, for the man did not know how to swim, and was very
heavily dressed.  So we then filled away and kept her off to her course.
The laws regulating navigation make the captain answerable for the
effects of a sailor who dies during the voyage, and it is either a law
or a universal custom, established for convenience, that the captain
should immediately hold an auction of his things, in which they are
bid off by the sailors, and the sums which they give are deducted from
their wages at the end of the voyage.  In this way the trouble and
risk of keeping his things through the voyage are avoided, and the
clothes are usually sold for more than they would be worth on shore.
Accordingly, we had no sooner got the ship before the wind, than
his chest was brought up upon the forecastle, and the sale began.
The jackets and trowsers in which we had seen him dressed but a few
days before, were exposed and bid off while the life was hardly out
of his body, and his chest was taken aft and used as a store-chest,
so that there was nothing left which could be called his.  Sailors have
an unwillingness to wear a dead man’s clothes during the same voyage,
and they seldom do so unless they are in absolute want.
As is usual after a death, many stories were told about George.
Some had heard him say that he repented never having learned to swim,
and that he knew that he should meet his death by drowning.  Another
said that he never knew any good to come of a voyage made against
the will, and the deceased man shipped and spent his advance and
was afterwards very unwilling to go, but not being able to refund,
was obliged to sail with us.  A boy, too, who had become quite
attached to him, said that George talked to him during most of
the watch on the night before, about his mother and family at home,
and this was the first time that he had mentioned the subject during
the voyage.
The night after this event, when I went to the galley to get a light,
I found the cook inclined to be talkative, so I sat down on the spars,
and gave him an opportunity to hold a yarn.  I was the more inclined
to do so, as I found that he was full of the superstitions once more
common among seamen, and which the recent death had waked up in his mind.
He talked about George’s having spoken of his friends, and said he
believed few men died without having a warning of it, which he supported
by a great many stories of dreams, and the unusual behavior of men before
death.  From this he went on to other superstitions, the Flying Dutchman,
etc., and talked rather mysteriously, having something evidently on his mind.
At length he put his head out of the galley and looked carefully about to
see if any one was within hearing, and being satisfied on that point, asked
me in a low tone–
“I say! you know what countryman ’e carpenter be?”
“Yes,” said I; “he’s a German.”
“What kind of a German?” said the cook.
“He belongs to Bremen,” said I.
“Are you sure o’ dat?” said he.
I satisfied him on that point by saying that he could speak no
language but the German and English.
“I’m plaguy glad o’ dat,” said the cook.  “I was mighty ’fraid he was a
Fin.  I tell you what, I been plaguy civil to that man all the voyage.”
I asked him the reason of this, and found that he was fully possessed
with the notion that Fins are wizards, and especially have power over
winds and storms.  I tried to reason with him about it, but he had the
best of all arguments, that from experience, at hand, and was not to
be moved.  He had been in a vessel at the Sandwich Islands, in which
the sail-maker was a Fin, and could do anything he was of a mind to.
This sail-maker kept a junk bottle in his berth, which was always just
half full of rum, though he got drunk upon it nearly every day.  He had
seen him sit for hours together, talking to this bottle, which he stood
up before him on the table.  The same man cut his throat in his berth,
and everybody said he was possessed.
He had heard of ships, too, beating up the gulf of Finland against
a head wind, and having a ship heave in sight astern, overhaul and
pass them, with as fair a wind as could blow, and all studding-sails
out, and find she was from Finland.
“Oh ho!” said he; “I’ve seen too much of them men to want to see ’em
’board a ship.  If they can’t have their own way, they’ll play the
d–-l with you.”
As I still doubted, he said he would leave it to John, who was the
oldest seaman aboard, and would know, if anybody did.  John, to be
sure, was the oldest, and at the same time the most ignorant, man
in the ship; but I consented to have him called.  The cook stated
the matter to him, and John, as I anticipated, sided with the cook,
and said that he himself had been in a ship where they had a head
wind for a fortnight, and the captain found out at last that one
of the men, whom he had had some hard words with a short time before,
was a Fin, and immediately told him if he didn’t stop the head wind
he would shut him down in the fore peak, and would not give him
anything to eat.  The Fin held out for a day and a half, when he
could not stand it any longer, and did something or other which
brought the wind round again, and they let him up.
“There,” said the cook, “what do you think o’ dat?”
I told him I had no doubt it was true, and that it would have been
odd if the wind had not changed in fifteen days, Fin or no Fin.
“Oh,” says he, “go ’way!  You think, ’cause you been to college,
you know better than anybody.  You know better than them as ’as
seen it with their own eyes.  You wait till you’ve been to sea as
long as I have, and you’ll know.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
