


The Deer Hunt
That evening they had a feast and turned in to sleep at the usual
hour. The night passed without special alarm. Once about daylight
Sappy called them, saying he believed there was a Bear outside, but
he had a trick of grinding his teeth in his sleep, and the other boys
told him that was the Bear he heard.
Yan went around to the mud albums and got some things he could
not make out and a new mark that gave him a sensation. He drew it
carefully. It was evidently the print of a small sharp hoof. This was
what he had hungered for so long. He shouted, “Sam–Sam–Sapwood, come
here; here’s a Deer track.”
The boys shouted back, “Ah, what you givin’ us now!” “Call off your
Dog!” and so forth.
But Yan persisted. The boys were so sure it was a trick that they
would not go for some time, then the sun had risen high, shining
straight down on the track instead of across, so it became very dim.
Soon the winds, the birds and the boys themselves helped to wipe it
out. But Yan had his drawing, and persisted in spite of the teasing
that it was true.
At length Guy said aside to Sam: “Seems to me a feller that hunts
tracks so terrible serious ought to see the critter some time.
’Tain’t right to let him go on sufferin’. I think he ought to
see that Deer. We ought to help him.” Here he winked a volley or two
and made signs for Sam to take Yan away.
This was easily done.
“Let’s see if your Deer went out by the lower mud album.” So they
walked down that way, while Guy got an old piece of sacking, stuffed
it with grass, and, hastily tying it in the form of a Deer’s head,
stuck it on a stick. He put in two flat pieces of wood for ears, took
charcoal and made two black spots for eyes and one for a nose, then
around each he drew a ring of blue clay from the bed of the brook.
This soon dried and became white. Guy now set up this head in the
bushes, and when all was ready he ran swiftly and silently through the
wood to find Sam and Yan. He beckoned vigorously and called under
his voice: “Sam–Yan–a Deer! Here’s that there Deer that made them
tracks, I believe.”
Guy would have failed to convince Yan if Sam had not looked so much
interested. They ran back to the teepee, got their bows and arrows,
then, guided by Guy, who, however, kept back, they crawled to where he
had seen the Deer.
“There–there, now, ain’t he a Deer? There–see him move!”
Yan’s first feeling was a most exquisite thrill of pleasure. It was
like the uplift of joy he had had the time he got his book, but was
stronger. The savage impulse to kill came quickly, and his bow was in
his hand, but he hesitated.
“Shoot! Shoot!” said Sam and Guy.
Yan wondered why they did not shoot. He turned, and in spite of
his agitation he saw that they were making fun of him. He glanced at
the Deer again, moved up a little closer and saw the trick.
Then they hooted aloud. Yan was a little crestfallen. Oh, it had been
such an exquisite feeling! The drop was long and hard, but he rallied
quickly.
“I’ll shoot your Deer for you,” he said, and sent an arrow close under
it.
“Well, I kin beat that,” and Sam and Guy both fired. Sam’s arrow stuck
in the Deer’s nose. At that he gave a yell; then all shot till the
head was stuck full of arrows, and they returned to the teepee to
get dinner. They were still chaffing Yan about the Deer when he said
slowly to Guy:
“Generally you are not so smart as you think you are, but this time
you’re smarter. You’ve given me a notion.”
So after dinner he got a sack about three feet long and stuffed it
full of dry grass; then he made a small sack about two and a half feet
long and six inches thick, but with an elbow in it and pointed at one
end. This he also stuffed with hay and sewed with a bone needle to the
big sack. Next he cut four sticks of soft pine for legs and put them
into the four corners of the big sack, wrapping them with bits of
sacking to be like the rest. Then he cut two ears out of flat sticks;
painted black eyes and nose with a ring of white around each, just as
Sappy had done, but finally added a black spot on each side of the
body, and around that a broad gray hand. Now he had completed what
every one could see was meant for a Deer.
The other boys helped a little, but not did cease to chaff him.
“Who’s to be fooled this time?” asked Guy.
“You,” was the answer.
“I’ll bet you’ll get buck fever the first time you come across it,"
chuckled the Head Chief.
“Maybe I will, but you’ll all have a chance. Now you fellers stay here
and I’ll hide the Deer. Wait till I come back.”
So Yan ran off northward with the dummy, then swung around to the east
and hid it at a place quite out of the line that he first took. He
returned nearly to where he came out, shouting “Ready!”
Then the hunters sallied forth fully armed, and Yan explained: “First
to find it counts ten and has first shot. If he misses, next one can
walk up five steps and shoot; if he misses, next walks five steps
more, and so on until the Deer is hit. Then all the shooting must be
done from the place where that arrow was fired. A shot in the heart
counts ten; in the gray counts five; that’s a body wound–and a hit
outside of that counts one–that’s a scratch. If the Deer gets away
without a shot in the heart, then I count twenty-five, and the first
one to find it is Deer for next hunt–twelve shots each is the limit.”
The two hunters searched about for a long time. Sam made disparaging
remarks about the trail this Deer did not leave, and Guy
sneaked and peaked in every thicket.
Sappy was not an athlete nor an intellectual giant, but his little
piggy eyes were wonderfully sharp and clear.
“I see him,” he yelled presently, and pointed out the place
seventy-five yards away where he saw one ear and part of the head.
“Tally ten for Sappy,” and Yan marked it down.
Guy was filled with pride at his success. He made elaborate
preparation to shoot, remarking, “I could ’a’ seen it twicet as
far–if–if–if–it was–if I had a fair chance.”
He drew his bow and left fly. The arrow went little more than half
way. So Sam remarked, “Five steps up I kin go. It don’t say nothing
about how long the steps?”
“No.”
“Well, here goes,” and he began the most wonderful Kangaroo hops that
he could do. He covered about thirty feet in those five steps, and by
swerving a little aside he got a good view of the Deer. He was now
less than sixty-five yards away. He fired and missed. Now Guy had the
right to walk up five steps. He also missed. Finally at thirty yards
Sam sent an arrow close past a tree, deep in the Deer’s gray flank.
“Bully shot! Body wound! Count five for the Great War Chief. All
shooting from this spot now,” said Yan, “and I don’t know why I
shouldn’t shoot as well as the others.”
“Coz you’re the Deer and that’d be suicide,” was Sam’s objection. “But
it’s all right. You won’t hit.”
The objection was not sustained, and Yan tried his luck also. Two or
three shots in the brown of the Deer’s haunch, three or four into the
tree that stood half way between, but nearly in line, a shot or two
into the nose, then “Hooray!” a shot from Guy right into the Deer’s
heart put an end to the chase. Now they went up to draw and count the
arrows.
Guy was ahead with a heart shot, ten, a body wound, five, and a
scratch, one, that’s sixteen, with ten more for finding it–twenty-six
points. Sam followed with two body wounds and two scratches–twelve
points, and Yan one body wound and five scratches–ten points. The
Deer looked like an old Porcupine when they came up to it, and Guy,
bursting with triumph, looked like a young Emperor.
“I tell you it takes me to larn you fellers to Deer hunt. I’ll bet
I’ll hit him in the heart first thing next time.”
“I’ll bet you won’t, coz you’ll be Deer and can’t shoot till we both
have.”
Guy thought this the finest game he had ever played. He pranced away
with the dummy on his back, scheming as he went to make a puzzle for
the others. He hid the Deer in a dense thicket east of the camp, then
sneaked around to the west of the camp and yelled “Ready!” They had a
long, tedious search and had to give it up.
“Now what to do? Who counts?” asked the Woodpecker.
“When Deer escapes it counts twenty-five,” replied the inventer of the
game; and again Guy was ahead.
“This is the bulliest game I ever seen” was his ecstatic remark.
“Seems to me there’s something wrong; that Deer ought to have a
trail.”
“That’s so,” assented Yan. “Wonder if he couldn’t drag an old root!”
“If there was snow it’d be easy.”
“I’ll tell you, Sam; we’ll tear up paper and leave a paper trail.”
“Now you’re talking.” So all ran to camp. Every available scrap of
wrapping paper was torn up small and put in a “scent bag.”
Since no one found the Deer last time, Guy had the right to hide it
again.
He made a very crooked trail and a very careful hide, so that the boys
nearly walked onto the Deer before they saw it about fifteen yards
away. Sam scored ten for the find. He fired and missed. Yan now
stepped up his five paces and fired so hastily that he also missed.
Guy now had a shot at it at five yards, and, of course, hit the Deer
in the heart. This succession of triumphs swelled his head nearly to
the bursting point, and his boasting passed all bounds. But it now
became clear that there must be a limit to the stepping up. So the new
rule was made, “No stepping up nearer than fifteen paces.”
The game grew as they followed it. Its resemblance to real hunting was
very marked. The boys found that they could follow the trail, or sweep
the woods with their eyes as they pleased, and find the game, but the
wisest way was a combination. Yan was too much for the trail, Sam
too much for the general lookout, but Guy seemed always in luck. His
little piglike eyes took in everything, and here at length he found a
department in which he could lead. It looked as though little pig-eyed
Guy was really cut out for a hunter. He made a number of very clever
hidings of the Deer. Once he led the trail to the pond, then, across,
and right opposite he put the Deer in full view, so that they saw it
at once in the open; they were obliged either to shoot across the
pond, or step farther away round the edge, or step into the deep
water, and again Guy scored. It was found necessary to bar hiding the
Deer on a ridge and among stones, because in one case arrows which
missed were lost in the bushes and in the other they were broken.
They played this game so much that they soon found a new difficulty.
The woods were full of paper trails, and there was no means of
deciding which was the old and which the new. This threatened to end
the fun altogether. But Yan hit on the device of a different colour
of paper. This gave them a fresh start, but their supply was limited.
There was paper everywhere in the woods now, and it looked as though
the game was going to kill itself, when old Caleb came to pay them a
visit. He always happened round as though it was an accident, but the
boys were glad to see him, as he usually gave some help.
“Ye got some game, I see,” and the old man’s eye twinkled as he noted
the dummy, now doing target duty on the forty-yard range. “Looks like
the real thing. Purty good–purty good.” He chuckled as he learned
about the Deer hunt, and a sharp observer might have discerned a
slight increase of interest when he found that it was not Sam Raften
that was the “crack” hunter.
“Good fur you, Guy Burns. Me an’ your Paw hev hunted Deer together on
this very crik many a time.”
When he learned the difficulty about the scent, he said “Hm,” and
puffed at his pipe for awhile in silence. Then at length:
“Say, Yan, why don’t you and Guy get a bag o’ wheat or Injun corn for
scent: that’s better than paper, an’ what ye lay to-day is all clared
up by the birds and Squirrels by to-morrow.”
“Bully!” shouted Sam. (He had not been addressed at all, but he was
not thin-skinned.) Within ten minutes he had organized another “White
massacree"–that is, a raid on the home barn, and in half an hour he
returned with a peck of corn.
“Now, lemme be Deer,” said Caleb. “Give me five minutes’ start, then
follow as fast as ye like. I’ll show ye what a real Deer does.”
He strode away bearing the dummy, and in five minutes as they set out
on the trail he came striding back again. Oh, but that seemed a long
run. The boys followed the golden corn trail–a grain every ten feet
was about all they needed now, they were so expert. It was a straight
run for a time, then it circled back till it nearly cut itself again
(at X, page 298). The boys thought it did so, and claimed the right to
know, as on a real Deer trail you could tell. So Caleb said, “No, it
don’t cut the old trail.” Where, then, did it go? After beating about,
Sam said that the trail looked powerful heavy, like it might be
double.
“Bet I know,” said Guy. “He’s doubled back,” which was exactly what he
did do, though Caleb gave no sign. Yan looked back on the trail and
found where the new one had forked. Guy gave no heed to the ground
once he knew the general directions. He ran ahead (toward Y), so did
Sam, but Guy glanced back to Yan on the trail to make sure of the
line.
They had not gone far beyond the nearest bushes before Yan found
another quirk in the trail. It doubled back at Z. He unravelled the
double, glanced around, and at O he plainly saw the Deer lying on
its side in the grass. He let off a triumphant yell, “Yi, yi, yi,
Deer!” and the others came running back just in time to see Yan
send an arrow straight into its heart.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
