


After speaking the Carolina, on the 21st August, nothing occurred
to break the monotony of our life until
Friday, September 5th, when we saw a sail on our weather (starboard)
beam.  She proved to be a brig under English colors, and passing
under our stern, reported herself as forty-nine days from Buenos Ayres,
bound to Liverpool.  Before she had passed us, “sail ho!” was cried again,
and we made another sail, far on our weather bow, and steering athwart our
hawse.  She passed out of hail, but we made her out to be an hermaphrodite
brig, with Brazilian colors in her main rigging.  By her course, she must
have been bound from Brazil to the south of Europe, probably Portugal.
Sunday, Sept. 7th.  Fell in with the north-east trade winds.
This morning we caught our first dolphin, which I was very eager to see.
I was disappointed in the colors of this fish when dying.  They were
certainly very beautiful, but not equal to what has been said of them.
They are too indistinct.  To do the fish justice, there is nothing more
beautiful than the dolphin when swimming a few feet below the surface,
on a bright day.  It is the most elegantly formed, and also the quickest
fish, in salt water; and the rays of the sun striking upon it, in its
rapid and changing motions, reflected from the water, make it look
like a stray beam from a rainbow.
This day was spent like all pleasant Sabbaths at sea.  The decks are
washed down, the rigging coiled up, and everything put in order;
and throughout the day, only one watch is kept on deck at a time.
The men are all dressed in their best white duck trowsers, and red
or checked shirts, and have nothing to do but to make the necessary
changes in the sails.  They employ themselves in reading, talking,
smoking, and mending their clothes.  If the weather is pleasant,
they bring their work and their books upon deck, and sit down upon
the forecastle and windlass.  This is the only day on which these
privileges are allowed them.  When Monday comes, they put on their
tarry trowsers again, and prepare for six days of labor.
To enhance the value of the Sabbath to the crew, they are allowed on
that day a pudding, or, as it is called, a “duff.”  This is nothing
more than flour boiled with water, and eaten with molasses.  It is
very heavy, dark, and clammy, yet it is looked upon as a luxury,
and really forms an agreeable variety with salt beef and pork.
Many a rascally captain has made friends of his crew by allowing
them duff twice a week on the passage home.
On board some vessels this is made a day of instruction and of
religious exercises; but we had a crew of swearers, from the
captain to the smallest boy; and a day of rest, and of something
like quiet, social enjoyment, was all that we could expect.
We continued running large before the north-east trade winds for
several days, until Monday–
September 22d; when, upon coming on deck at seven bells in the
morning, we found the other watch aloft throwing water upon the
sails; and looking astern, we saw a small clipper-built brig with
a black hull heading directly after us.  We went to work immediately,
and put all the canvas upon the brig which we could get upon her,
rigging out oars for studding-sail yards; and continued wetting
down the sails by buckets of water whipped up to the mast-head,
until about nine o’clock, when there came on a drizzling rain.
The vessel continued in pursuit, changing her course as we changed
ours, to keep before the wind.  The captain, who watched her with
his glass, said that she was armed, and full of men, and showed no
colors.  We continued running dead before the wind, knowing that
we sailed better so, and that clippers are fastest on the wind.
We had also another advantage.  The wind was light, and we spread
more canvas than she did, having royals and sky-sails fore and aft,
and ten studding-sails; while she, being an hermaphrodite brig, had
only a gaff topsail, aft.  Early in the morning she was overhauling
us a little, but after the rain came on and the wind grew lighter,
we began to leave her astern.  All hands remained on deck throughout
the day, and we got our arms in order; but we were too few to have
done anything with her, if she had proved to be what we feared.
Fortunately there was no moon, and the night which followed was
exceedingly dark, so that by putting out all the lights and altering
our course four points, we hoped to get out of her reach.  We had no
light in the binnacle, but steered by the stars, and kept perfect
silence through the night.  At daybreak there was no sign of anything
in the horizon, and we kept the vessel off to her course.
Wednesday, October 1st.  Crossed the equator in long. 24° 24’ W.
I now, for the first time, felt at liberty, according to the old
usage, to call myself a son of Neptune, and was very glad to be
able to claim the title without the disagreeable initiation which
so many have to go through.  After once crossing the line you can
never be subjected to the process, but are considered as a son of
Neptune, with full powers to play tricks upon others.  This ancient
custom is now seldom allowed, unless there are passengers on board,
in which case there is always a good deal of sport.
It had been obvious to all hands for some time that the second mate,
whose name was F––-, was an idle, careless fellow, and not much of
a sailor, and that the captain was exceedingly dissatisfied with him.
The power of the captain in these cases was well known, and we all
anticipated a difficulty.  F––- (called Mr. by virtue of his office)
was but half a sailor, having always been short voyages and remained at
home a long time between them.  His father was a man of some property,
and intended to have given his son a liberal education; but he, being
idle and worthless, was sent off to sea, and succeeded no better there;
for, unlike many scamps, he had none of the qualities of a sailor–
he was “not of the stuff that they make sailor of.”  He was one of that
class of officers who are disliked by their captain and despised by the
crew.  He used to hold long yarns with the crew, and talk about the
captain, and play with the boys, and relax discipline in every way.
This kind of conduct always makes the captain suspicious, and is never
pleasant, in the end, to the men; they preferring to have an officer
active, vigilant, and distant as may be, with kindness.  Among other bad
practices, he frequently slept on his watch, and having been discovered
asleep by the captain, he was told that he would be turned off duty if
he did it again.  To prevent it in every way possible, the hen-coops
were ordered to be knocked up, for the captain never sat down on deck
himself, and never permitted an officer to do so.
The second night after crossing the equator, we had the watch from
eight till twelve, and it was “my helm” for the last two hours.
There had been light squalls through the night, and the captain
told Mr. F––-, who commanded our watch, to keep a bright look-out.
Soon after I came to the helm, I found that he was quite drowsy,
and at last he stretched himself on the companion and went fast asleep.
Soon afterwards, the captain came very quietly on deck, and stood
by me for some time looking at the compass.  The officer at length
became aware of the captain’s presence, but pretending not to know it,
began humming and whistling to himself, to show that he was not asleep,
and went forward, without looking behind him, and ordered the main
royal to be loosed.  On turning round to come aft, he pretended
surprise at seeing the master on deck.  This would not do.
The captain was too “wide awake” for him, and beginning upon him
at once, gave him a grand blow-up, in true nautical style–"You’re
a lazy, good-for-nothing rascal; you’re neither man, boy, soger,
nor sailor! you’re no more than a thing aboard a vessel! you don’t
earn your salt! you’re worse than a Mahon soger!” and other still
more choice extracts from the sailor’s vocabulary.  After the poor
fellow had taken the harangue, he was sent into his state-room,
and the captain stood the rest of the watch himself.
At seven bells in the morning, all hands were called aft and told
that F––- was no longer an officer on board, and that we might
choose one of our own number for second mate.  It is usual for the
captain to make this offer, and it is very good policy, for the
crew think themselves the choosers and are flattered by it, but have
to obey, nevertheless.  Our crew, as is usual, refused to take the
responsibility of choosing a man of whom we would never be able
to complain, and left it to the captain.  He picked out an active
and intelligent young sailor, born near the Kennebee, who had been
several Canton voyages, and proclaimed him in the following manner:
“I choose Jim Hall–he’s your second mate.  All you’ve got to do is,
to obey him as you would me; and remember that he is Mr. Hall."
F––- went forward into the forecastle as a common sailor, and lost
the handle to his name, while young fore-mast Jim became Mr. Hall,
and took up his quarters in the land of knives and forks and tea-cups.
Sunday, October 5th.  It was our morning watch; when, soon after the
day began to break, a man on the forecastle called out, “Land ho!"
I had never heard the cry before, and did not know what it meant,
(and few would suspect what the words were, when hearing the strange
sound for the first time,) but I soon found, by the direction of
all eyes, that there was land stretching along our weather beam.
We immediately took in studding-sails and hauled our wind, running in
for the land.  This was done to determine our longitude; for by the
captain’s chronometer we were in 25º W., but by his observations we
were much farther, and he had been for some time in doubt whether
it was his chronometer or his sextant which was out of order.
This land-fall settled the matter, and the former instrument was
condemned, and becoming still worse, was never afterwards used.
As we ran in towards the coast, we found that we were directly off
the port of Pernambuco, and could see with the telescope the roofs
of the houses, and one large church, and the town of Olinda.  We ran
along by the mouth of the harbor, and saw a full-rigged brig going in.
At two, P.M., we again kept off before the wind, leaving the land on
our quarter, and at sun-down, it was out of sight.  It was here that
I first saw one of those singular things called catamarans.  They are
composed of logs lashed together upon the water; have one large sail,
are quite fast, and, strange as it may seem, are trusted as good
sea boats.  We saw several, with from one to three men in each,
boldly putting out to sea, after it had become almost dark. 
The Indians go out in them after fish, and as the weather is
regular in certain seasons, they have no fear.  After taking a
new departure from Olinda, we kept off on our way to Cape Horn.
We met with nothing remarkable until we were in the latitude of the
river La Plata.  Here there are violent gales from the south-west,
called Pomperos, which are very destructive to the shipping in the
river, and are felt for many leagues at sea.  They are usually
preceded by lightning.  The captain told the mates to keep a bright
look-out, and if they saw lightning at the south-west, to take in
sail at once.  We got the first touch of one during my watch on deck.
I was walking in the lee gangway, and thought that I saw lightning
on the lee bow.  I told the second mate, who came over and looked
out for some time.  It was very black in the south-west, and in
about ten minutes we saw a distinct flash.  The wind, which had
been south-east, had now left us, and it was dead calm.  We sprang
aloft immediately and furled the royals and top-gallant-sails,
and took in the flying jib, hauled up the mainsail and trysail,
squared the after yards, and awaited the attack.  A huge mist
capped with black clouds came driving towards us, extending over
that quarter of the horizon, and covering the stars, which shone
brightly in the other part of the heavens.  It came upon us at
once with a blast, and a shower of hail and rain, which almost
took our breath from us.  The hardiest was obliged to turn his back.
We let the halyards run, and fortunately were not taken aback.
The little vessel “paid off” from the wind, and ran on for some
time directly before it, tearing through the water with everything
flying.  Having called all hands, we close-reefed the topsails and
trysail, furled the courses and job, set the fore-top-mast staysail,
and brought her up nearly to her course, with the weather braces
hauled in a little, to ease her.
This was the first blow, that I had seen, which could really be
called a gale.  We had reefed our topsails in the Gulf Stream, and
I thought it something serious, but an older sailor would have thought
nothing of it.  As I had now become used to the vessel and to my duty,
I was of some service on a yard, and could knot my reef-point as
well as anybody.  I obeyed the order to lay(1) aloft with the rest,
–––––––––––––––
1. This word “lay,” which is in such general use on board ship,
   being used in giving orders instead of “go"; as “Lay forward!"
   “Lay aft!” “Lay aloft!” etc., I do not understand to be the
   neuter verb, lie, mispronounced, but to be the active verb lay,
   with the objective case understood; as “Lay yourselves forwards!"
   “Lay yourselves aft!” etc.
–––––––––––––––
and found the reefing a very exciting scene; for one watch reefed the
fore-topsail, and the other the main, and every one did his utmost to
get his topsail hoisted first.  We had a great advantage over the
larboard watch, because the chief mate never goes aloft, while our
new second mate used to jump into the rigging as soon as we began to
haul out the reef-tackle, and have the weather earing passed before
there was a man upon the yard.  In this way we were almost always
able to raise the cry of “Haul out to leeward” before them, and having
knotted our points, would slide down the shrouds and back-stays,
and sing out at the topsail halyards to let it be known that we were
ahead of them.  Reefing is the most exciting part of a sailor’s duty.
All hands are engaged upon it, and after the halyards are let go,
there is no time to be lost–no “sogering,” or hanging back, then.
If one is not quick enough, another runs over him.  The first on the
yard goes to the weather earing, the second to the lee, and the next
two to the “dog’s ears;” while the others lay along into the bunt,
just giving each other elbow-room.  In reefing, the yard-arms
(the extremes of the yards) are the posts of honor; but in furling,
the strongest and most experienced stand in the slings, (or, middle
of the yard,) to make up the bunt.  If the second mate is a smart
fellow, he will never let any one take either of these posts from him;
but if he is wanting either in seamanship, strength, or activity,
some better man will get the bunt and earings from him; which
immediately brings him into disrepute.
We remained for the rest of the night, and throughout the next day,
under the same close sail, for it continued to blow very fresh;
and though we had no more hail, yet there was a soaking rain,
and it was quite cold and uncomfortable; the more so, because we
were not prepared for cold weather, but had on our thin clothes.
We were glad to get a watch below, and put on our thick clothing,
boots, and south-westers.  Towards sun-down the gale moderated
a little, and it began to clear off in the south-west.  We shook
our reefs out, one by one, and before midnight had top-gallant
sails upon her.
We had now made up our minds for Cape Horn and cold weather,
and entered upon every necessary preparation.
Tuesday, Nov. 4th.  At day-break, saw land upon our larboard quarter.
There were two islands, of different size but of the same shape;
rather high, beginning low at the water’s edge, and running with
a curved ascent to the middle.  They were so far off as to be of
a deep blue color, and in a few hours we sank them in the north-east.
These were the Falkland Islands.  We had run between them and the
main land of Patagonia.  At sun-set the second mate, who was at
the masthead, said that he saw land on the starboard bow.  This must
have been the island of Staten Land; and we were now in the region
of Cape Horn, with a fine breeze from the northward, top-mast and
top-gallant studding-sails set, and every prospect of a speedy and
pleasant passage round.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
