


White-Man’s Woodcraft
Blackhawk was the introducer of a new game which he called “judging.”
“How far is it from here to that tree?” he would ask, and when each
had written down his guess they would measure, and usually it was
Woodpecker or Blackhawk that came nearest to the truth. Guy still held
the leadership “for far sight,” for which reason he suggested that
game whenever a change of amusement was wanted.
Yan, following up Blackhawk’s suggestion, brought in the new game of
“White-man’s Woodcraft.”
“Can you,” asked he, “tell a Dog’s height by its track?”
“No; nor you nor any one else,” was the somewhat scornful reply.
“Oh, yes, I can. Take the length in inches of his forefoot track,
multiply it by 8, and that gives his height at the shoulder. You try
it and you’ll see. A little Dog has a 2-1/4-inch foot and stands about
18 inches, a Sheep Dog with a 3-inch track stands 24 inches, and a
Mastiff or any big Dog with a 4-inch track gives 30 to 32 inches.”
“You mean every Dog is 8 feet high?” drawled Sam, doubtfully, but Yan
went on. “And you can tell his weight, too, by the track. You multiply
the width of his forefoot in inches by the length, and multiply that
by 5, and that gives pretty near his weight in pounds. I tried old
Cap. His foot is 3-1/2 by 3; that equals 10-1/2, multiplied by 5
equals 52-1/2 pounds: just about right.”
“I’ll bet I seen a Dog at the show that that wouldn’t work on,"
drawled Sam. “He was as long as my two arms, he had feet as big as a
young Bear, an’ he wasn’t any higher than a brick. He was jest about
the build of a Caterpiller, only he didn’t have but four legs at the
far ends. They was so far apart he couldn’t keep step. He looked like
he was raised under a bureau. I think when they was cutting down so on
his legs they might have give him more of them; a row in the middle
would ’a’ been ’bout right.”
“Yes, I know him. That’s a Dachshund. But you can’t reckon on freaks;
nothing but straight Dog. It works on wild animals, too–that is, on
Wolves and Foxes and maybe other things,” then changing the subject
Beaver continued:
“Can you tell the height of a tree by its shadow?”
“Never thought of that. How do you do it?”
“Wait till your own shadow is the same length as yourself–that is,
about eight in the morning or four in the afternoon–then measure the
tree’s shadow. That gives its length.”
“You’d have to wait all day to work that, and you can’t do it at all
in the woods or on a dull day,” objected Blackhawk. “I’d rather do it
by guess.”
“I’ll bet my scalp against yours I can tell the height of that
tree right now without climbing it, and get closer than you can by
guessing,” said Little Beaver.
“No, I won’t bet scalps on that–but I’ll bet who’s to wash the
dishes.”
“All right. To the top of that tree, how much is it?”
“Better not take the top, ’cause we can’t get there to measure it, but
say that knot,” was the rejoinder. “Here, Woodpecker, you be judge.”
“No, I want to be in this guessing. The loser takes the next turn of
dishwashing for each of the others.”
So Blackhawk studied the knot carefully and wrote down his
guess–Thirty-eight feet.
Sam said, “Blackhawk! Ground’s kind of uneven. I’d like to know the
exact spot under the tree that you’d measure to. Will you mark it with
a peg?”
So Blackhawk went over and put in a white peg, at the same time
unwittingly giving Woodpecker what he wanted–a gauge, for he knew
Blackhawk was something more than five feet high; judging then as he
stood there Sam wrote down Thirty-five feet.
Now it was Yan’s turn to do it by “White-man’s Woodcraft,” as he
called it. He cut a pole exactly ten feet long, and choosing the
smoothest ground, he walked about twenty yards from the tree, propped
the pole upright, then lay down so that his eye was level with the
tree base and in line with the top of the pole and the knot on the
tree. A peg marked the spot.
Now he measured from this “eye peg” to the foot of the pole; it was 31
feet. Then from the eye peg to the peg under the tree; it was 87 feet.
Since the 10-foot pole met the line at 31 feet, then 31 is to 10 as 87
is to the tree–or 28 feet. Now one of the boys climbed and measured
the height of the knot. It was 29 feet, and Yan had an easy victory.
“Here, you close guessers, do you want another try, and I’ll give you
odds this time, if you come within ten feet you’ll win. I want only
two feet to come and go on.”
“All right. Pick your trees.”
“’Tisn’t a tree this time, but the distance across that pond, from
this peg (H, in diagram) to that little Hemlock (D). You put down your
guesses and I’ll show you another trick.”
Sam studied it carefully and wrote Forty feet. Wes put down
Forty-five.
“Here, I want to be in this. I’ll show you fellers how,” exclaimed Guy
in his usual scornful manner, and wrote down Fifty feet.
“Let’s all try it for scalps,” said Char-less, but this was ruled
too unimportant for scalps, and again the penalty of failure was
dishwashing, so the other boys came and put down their guesses close
to that of their Chief–Forty-four, Forty-six and Forty-nine feet.
“Now we’ll find out exactly,” and Little Beaver, with an air of calm
superiority, took three straight poles of exactly the same length and
pegged them together in a triangle, leaving the pegs sticking up. He
placed this triangle on the bank at A B C, sighting the line
A B for the little Hemlock D, and put three pegs in the
ground exactly under the three pegs where the triangle was; moved the
triangle to E F G and placed it so that F G should line
with A C and E G with D. Now A G D also must be an equilateral
triangle; therefore, according to arithmetic, the line D H must be
seven-eighths of A G. A G was easily measured–70 feet. Seven-eighths
of 70 equals 61-1/4 feet. The width of the pond–they measured it with
tape line–was found to be 60 feet, so Yan was nearest, but Guy claimed
that 50 feet was within 10 feet of it, which was allowed. Thus there
were two winners–two who escaped dishwashing; and Hawkeye’s bragging
became insufferable. He never again got so close in a guess, but no
number of failures could daunt him after such a success.
Sam was interested in the White-man’s Woodcraft chiefly on Yan’s
account, but Blackhawk was evidently impressed with the study itself,
and said:
“Little Beaver, I’ll give you one more to do. Can you measure how far
apart those two trees are on that bank, without crossing?”
“Yes,” said Yan; “easily.” So he cut three poles 6, 8 and 10 feet long
and pegged them together in a triangle (in diagram). “Now,” said he,
“_A B C is a right angle; it must be, when the legs of the
triangle are 6, 8 and 10; that’s a law.”
He placed this on the shore, the side A B pointing to the inner
side of the first tree, and the side B C as nearly as possible
parallel with the line between the two trees. Then he put in a stake
at B, another at C, and continued this line toward K. Now he
slid his triangle along this till the side G F pointed to E, and
the side H G in line with C B. The distance from D to E, of
course, is equal to B G, which can be measured, and again the tape
line showed Yan to be nearly right.
This White-man’s Woodcraft was easy for him, and he volunteered to
teach the other Indians, but they thought it looked “too much like
school.” They voted him a coup on finding how well he could do
it. But when Raften heard of it he exclaimed in wonder and admiration,
“My, but that’s mightiful!” and would not be satisfied till the
coup was made a grand coup.
“Say, Beaver,” said Woodpecker sadly, harking back, “if a Dog’s front
foot is 3-1/2 inches long and 3 inches wide, what colour is the end of
his tail?”
“White,” was the prompt reply; “’cause a Dog with feet that size and
shape is most likely to be a yaller Dog, and a yaller Dog always has
some white hairs in the end of his tail.”
“Well, this ’un hadn’t, ’cause his tail was cut off in the days of his
youth!”
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
