


After a few days, finding the trade beginning to slacken, we
hove our anchor up, set our topsails, ran the stars and stripes
up to the peak, fired a gun, which was returned from the Presidio,
and left the little town astern, running out of the bay, and
bearing down the coast again, for Santa Barbara.  As we were now
going to leeward, we had a fair wind and a plenty of it.  After
doubling Point Pinos, we bore up, set studding-sails alow and aloft,
and were walking off at the rate of eight or nine knots, promising
to traverse in twenty-four hours the distance which we were nearly
three weeks in traversing on the passage up.  We passed Point
Conception at a flying rate, the wind blowing so that it would have
seemed half a gale to us, if we had been going the other way and
close hauled.  As we drew near the islands off Santa Barbara, it
died away a little but we came-to at our old anchoring-ground in
less than thirty hours from the time of leaving Monterey.
Here everything was pretty much as we left it–the large bay without
a vessel in it; the surf roaring and rolling in upon the beach;
the white mission; the dark town and the high, treeless mountains.
Here, too, we had our south-easter tacks aboard again,–slip-ropes,
buoy-ropes, sails furled with reefs in them, and rope-yarns for gaskets.
We lay here about a fortnight, employed in landing goods and taking
off hides, occasionally, when the surf was not high; but there did
not appear to be one-half the business doing here that there was
in Monterey.  In fact, so far as we were concerned, the town might
almost as well have been in the middle of the Cordilleras.  We lay
at a distance of three miles from the beach, and the town was nearly
a mile farther; so that we saw little or nothing of it.  Occasionally
we landed a few goods, which were taken away by Indians in large,
clumsy ox-carts, with the yoke on the ox’s neck instead of under it,
and with small solid wheels.  A few hides were brought down, which we
carried off in the California style.  This we had now got pretty well
accustomed to; and hardened to also; for it does require a little
hardening even to the toughest.
The hides are always brought down dry, or they would not be received.
When they are taken from the animal, they have holes cut in the ends,
and are staked out, and thus dried in the sun without shrinking.
They are then doubled once, lengthwise, with the hair side usually in,
and sent down, upon mules or in carts, and piled above highwater mark;
and then we rake them upon our heads, one at a time, or two, if they
are small, and wade out with them and throw them into the boat,
which as there are no wharves, we are usually kept anchored by a
small kedge, or keelek, just outside of the surf.  We all provided
ourselves with thick Scotch caps, which would be soft to the head,
and at the same time protect it; for we soon found that however it
might look or feel at first the “head-work” was the only system for
California.  For besides that the seas, breaking high, often obliged
us to carry the hides so, in order to keep them dry, we found that,
as they were very large and heavy, and nearly as stiff as boards,
it was the only way that we could carry them with any convenience
to ourselves.  Some of the crew tried other expedients, saying that
they looked too much like West India negroes; but they all came to
it at last.  The great art is in getting them on the head.  We had
to take them from the ground, and as they were often very heavy,
and as wide as the arms could stretch and easily taken by the wind,
we used to have some trouble with them.  I have often been laughed
at myself, and joined in laughing at others, pitching themselves
down in the sand, trying to swing a large hide upon their heads,
or nearly blown over with one in a little gust of wind.  The captain
made it harder for us, by telling us that it was “California fashion"
to carry two on the head at a time; and as he insisted upon it,
and we did not wish to be outdone by other vessels, we carried two
for the first few months; but after falling in with a few other
“hide-droghers,” and finding that they carried only one at a time we
“knocked off” the extra one, and thus made our duty somewhat easier.
After we had got our heads used to the weight, and had learned the
true California style of tossing a hide, we could carry off two or
three hundred in a short time, without much trouble; but it was
always wet work, and, if the beach was stony, bad for our feet;
for we, of course, always went barefooted on this duty, as no shoes
could stand such constant wetting with salt water.  Then, too, we
had a long pull of three miles, with a loaded boat, which often
took a couple of hours.
We had now got well settled down into our harbor duties, which,
as they are a good deal different from those at sea, it may be
well enough to describe.  In the first place, all hands are called
at daylight, or rather–especially if the days are short–before
daylight, as soon as the first grey of the morning.  The cook makes
his fire in the galley; the steward goes about his work in the cabin;
and the crew rig the head pump, and wash down the decks.  The chief
mate is always on deck, but takes no active part, all the duty coming
upon the second mate, who has to roll up his trowsers and paddle about
decks barefooted, like the rest of the crew.  The washing, swabbing,
squilgeeing, etc., lasts, or is made to last, until eight o’clock,
when breakfast is ordered, fore and aft.  After breakfast, for which
half an hour is allowed, the boats are lowered down, and made fast
astern, or out to the swinging booms, by ges-warps, and the crew
are turned-to upon their day’s work.  This is various, and its
character depends upon circumstances.  There is always more or
less of boating, in small boats; and if heavy goods are to be
taken ashore, or hides are brought down to the beach for us,
then all hands are sent ashore with an officer in the long boat.
Then there is always a good deal to be done in the hold: goods to
be broken out; and cargo to be shifted, to make room for hides,
or to keep the trim of the vessel.  In addition to this, the usual
work upon the rigging must be done.  There is a good deal of the
latter kind of work which can only be done when the vessel is in
port;–and then everything must be kept taught and in good order;
spun-yarn made; chafing gear repaired; and all the other ordinary
work.  The great difference between sea and harbor duty is in the
division of time.  Instead of having a watch on deck and a watch
below, as at sea, all hands are at work together, except at meal
times, from daylight till dark; and at night an “anchor-watch” is
kept, which consists of only two at a time; the whole crew taking
turns.  An hour is allowed for dinner, and at dark, the decks are
cleared up; the boats hoisted; supper ordered; and at eight, the
lights put out, except in the binnacle, where the glass stands;
and the anchor-watch is set.  Thus, when at anchor, the crew have
more time at night, (standing watch only about two hours,) but have
no time to themselves in the day; so that reading, mending clothes,
etc., has to be put off until Sunday, which is usually given.
Some religious captains give their crews Saturday afternoons
to do their washing and mending in, so that they may have their
Sundays free.  This is a good arrangement, and does much toward
creating the preference sailors usually show for religious vessels.
We were well satisfied if we got Sunday to ourselves, for, if any
hides came down on that day, as was often the case when they were
brought from a distance, we were obliged to bring them off, which
usually took half a day; and as we now lived on fresh beef, and ate
one bullock a week, the animal was almost always brought down on
Sunday, and we had to go ashore, kill it, dress it, and bring it
aboard, which was another interruption.   Then, too, our common
day’s work was protracted and made more fatiguing by hides coming
down late in the afternoon, which sometimes kept us at work in
the surf by star-light, with the prospect of pulling on board,
and stowing them all away, before supper.
But all these little vexations and labors would have been nothing,
–they would have been passed by as the common evils of a sea-life,
which every sailor, who is a man, will go through without complaint,
–were it not for the uncertainty, or worse than uncertainty,
which hung over the nature and length of our voyage.  Here we were,
in a little vessel, with a small crew, on a half-civilized coast,
at the ends of the earth, and with a prospect of remaining an
indefinite period, two or three years at the least.  When we left
Boston we supposed that it was to be a voyage of eighteen months,
or two years, at most; but upon arriving on the coast, we learned
something more of the trade, and found that in the scarcity of
hides, which was yearly greater and greater, it would take us a
year, at least, to collect our own cargo, beside the passage out
and home; and that we were also to collect a cargo for a large ship
belonging to the same firm, which was soon to come on the coast,
and to which we were to act as tender.  We had heard rumors of
such a ship to follow us, which had leaked out from the captain
and mate, but we passed them by as mere “yarns,” till our arrival,
when they were confirmed by the letters which we brought from
the owners to their agent.  The ship California, belonging to the
same firm, had been nearly two years on the coast; had collected 
a full cargo, and was now at San Diego, from which port she was
expected to sail in a few weeks for Boston; and we were to collect
all the hides we could, and deposit them at San Diego, when the new
ship, which would carry forty thousand, was to be filled and sent
home; and then we were to begin anew, and collect our own cargo.
Here was a gloomy prospect before us, indeed.  The California had
been twenty months on the coast, and the Lagoda, a smaller ship,
carrying only thirty-one or thirty-two thousand, had been two years
getting her cargo; and we were to collect a cargo of forty thousand
beside our own, which would be twelve or fifteen thousand; and hides
were said to be growing scarcer.  Then, too, this ship, which had
been to us a worse phantom than any flying Dutchman, was no phantom,
or ideal thing, but had been reduced to a certainty; so much so that
a name was given her, and it was said that she was to be the Alert,
a well-known India-man, which was expected in Boston in a few months,
when we sailed.  There could be no doubt, and all looked black enough.
Hints were thrown out about three years and four years;–the older
sailors said they never should see Boston again, but should lay their
bones in California; and a cloud seemed to hang over the whole voyage.
Besides, we were not provided for so long a voyage, and clothes, and
all sailors’ necessaries, were excessively dear–three or four hundred
per cent. advance upon the Boston prices.  This was bad enough
for them; but still worse was it for me, who did not mean to be a
sailor for life; having intended only to be gone eighteen months or
two years.  Three or four years would make me a sailor in every
respect, mind and habits, as well as body–nolens volens; and would
put all my companions so far ahead of me that college and a profession
would be in vain to think of; and I made up my mind that, feel as I
might, a sailor I must be, and to be master of a vessel, must be the
height of my ambition.
Beside the length of the voyage, and the hard and exposed life,
we were at the ends of the earth; on a coast almost solitary; in a
country where there is neither law nor gospel, and where sailors are
at their captain’s mercy, there being no American consul, or any
one to whom a complaint could be made.  We lost all interest in
the voyage; cared nothing about the cargo, which we were only
collecting for others; began to patch our clothes; and felt as
though we were fixed beyond all hope of change.
In addition to, and perhaps partly as a consequence of, this state
of things, there was trouble brewing on board the vessel.  Our mate
(as the first mate is always called, par excellence) was a worthy
man;–a more honest, upright, and kind-hearted man I never saw;
but he was too good for the mate of a merchantman.  He was not the
man to call a sailor a “son of a b–-h,” and knock him down with a
handspike.  He wanted the energy and spirit for such a voyage as ours,
and for such a captain.  Captain T––- was a vigorous, energetic
fellow.  As sailors say, “he hadn’t a lazy bone in him.”  He was
made of steel and whalebone.  He was a man to “toe the mark,"
and to make every one else step up to it.  During all the time that
I was with him, I never saw him sit down on deck.  He was always
active and driving; severe in his discipline, and expected the same
of his officers.  The mate not being enough of a driver for him, and
being perhaps too easy with the crew, he was dissatisfied with him,
became suspicious that discipline was getting relaxed, and began
to interfere in everything.  He drew the reins taughter; and as,
in all quarrels between officers, the sailors side with the one who
treats them best, he became suspicious of the crew.  He saw that
everything went wrong–that nothing was done “with a will;” and in
his attempt to remedy the difficulty by severity, he made everything
worse.  We were in every respect unfortunately situated.  Captain,
officers, and crew, entirely unfitted for one another; and every
circumstance and event was like a two-edged sword, and cut both
ways.  The length of the voyage, which made us dissatisfied, made
the captain, at the same time, feel the necessity of order and strict
discipline; and the nature of the country, which caused us to feel that
we had nowhere to go for redress, but were entirely at the mercy of
a hard master, made the captain feel, on the other hand, that he
must depend entirely upon his own resources.  Severity created
discontent, and signs of discontent provoked severity.  Then, too,
ill-treatment and dissatisfaction are no “linimenta laborum;” and many
a time have I heard the sailors say that they should not mind the
length of the voyage, and the hardships, if they were only kindly
treated, and if they could feel that something was done to make
things lighter and easier.  We felt as though our situation was
a call upon our superiors to give us occasional relaxations,
and to make our yoke easier.  But the contrary policy was pursued.
We were kept at work all day when in port; which, together with a
watch at night, made us glad to turn-in as soon as we got below.
Thus we got no time for reading, or–which was of more importance
to us–for washing and mending our clothes.  And then, when we
were at sea, sailing from port to port, instead of giving us
“watch and watch,” as was the custom on board every other vessel
on the coast, we were all kept on deck and at work, rain or
shine, making spun-yarn and rope, and at other work in good
weather, and picking oakum, when it was too wet for anything
else.  All hands were called to “come up and see it rain,” and kept
on deck hour after hour in a drenching rain, standing round the
deck so far apart as to prevent our talking with one another, with
our tarpaulins and oil-cloth jackets on, picking old rope to pieces,
or laying up gaskets and robands.  This was often done, too, when
we were lying in port with two anchors down, and no necessity for
more than one man on deck as a look-out.  This is what is called
“hazing” a crew, and “working their old iron up.”
While lying at Santa Barbara, we encountered another south-easter;
and, like the first, it came on in the night; the great black
clouds coming round from the southward, covering the mountain,
and hanging down over the town, appearing almost to rest upon
the roofs of the houses.  We made sail, slipped our cable, cleared
the point, and beat about, for four days, in the offing, under close
sail, with continual rain and high seas and winds.  No wonder,
thought we, they have no rain in the other seasons, for enough
seemed to have fallen in those four days to last through a common
summer.  On the fifth day it cleared up, after a few hours, as is
usual, of rain coming down like a four hours’ shower-bath, and
we found ourselves drifted nearly ten leagues from the anchorage;
and having light head winds, we did not return until the sixth
day.  Having recovered our anchor, we made preparations for getting
under weigh to go down to leeward.  We had hoped to go directly
to San Diego, and thus fall in with the California before she sailed
for Boston; but our orders were to stop at an intermediate port
called San Pedro, and as we were to lie there a week or two, and
the California was to sail in a few days, we lost the opportunity.
Just before sailing, the captain took on board a short, red-haired,
round-shouldered, vulgar-looking fellow, who had lost one eye,
and squinted with the other, and introducing him as Mr. Russell,
told us that he was an officer on board.  This was too bad.  We had
lost overboard, on the passage, one of the best of our number,
another had been taken from us and appointed clerk, and thus
weakened and reduced, instead of shipping some hands to make
our work easier, he had put another officer over us, to watch
and drive us.  We had now four officers, and only six in the
forecastle.  This was bringing her too much down by the stern
for our comfort.
Leaving Santa Barbara, we coasted along down, the country
appearing level or moderately uneven, and, for the most part, sandy
and treeless; until, doubling a high, sandy point, we let go our
anchor at a distance of three or three and a half miles from shore.
It was like a vessel, bound to Halifax, coming to anchor on the
Grand Banks; for the shore being low, appeared to be at a greater
distance than it actually was, and we thought we might as well
have staid at Santa Barbara, and sent our boat down for the hides.
The land was of a clayey consistency, and, as far as the eye could
reach, entirely bare of trees and even shrubs; and there was no
sign of a town,–not even a house to be seen.  What brought us
into such a place, we could not conceive.  No sooner had we come
to anchor, than the slip-rope, and the other preparations for
south-easters, were got ready; and there was reason enough for it,
for we lay exposed to every wind that could blow, except the north-west,
and that came over a flat country with a range of more than a
league of water.  As soon as everything was snug on board, the
boat was lowered, and we pulled ashore, our new officer, who had
been several times in the port before, taking the place of steersman.
As we drew in, we found the tide low, and the rocks and stones,
covered with kelp and sea-weed, lying bare for the distance of
nearly an eighth of a mile.  Picking our way barefooted over these,
we came to what is called the landing-place, at high-water mark.
The soil was as it appeared at first, loose and clayey, and except
the stalks of the mustard plant, there was no vegetation.  Just in
front of the landing, and immediately over it, was a small hill,
which, from its being not more than thirty or forty feet high, we had
not perceived from our anchorage.  Over this hill we saw three men
coming down, dressed partly like sailors and partly like Californians;
one of them having on a pair of untanned leather trowsers and a red
baize shirt.  When they came down to us, we found that they were
Englishmen, and they told us that they had belonged to a small
Mexican brig which had been driven ashore here in a south-easter,
and now lived in a small house just over the hill.  Going up
this hill with them, we saw, just behind it, a small, low building,
with one room, containing a fire-place, cooking apparatus, etc., and
the rest of it unfinished, and used as a place to store hides and
goods.  This, they told us, was built by some traders in the Pueblo,
(a town about thirty miles in the interior, to which this was the
port,) and used by them as a storehouse, and also as a lodging place
when they came down to trade with the vessels.  These three men
were employed by them to keep the house in order, and to look out
for the things stored in it.  They said that they had been there
nearly a year; had nothing to do most of the time, living upon beef,
hard bread, and frijoles (a peculiar kind of bean very abundant in
California).  The nearest house, they told us, was a Rancho,
or cattle-farm, about three miles off; and one of them went up,
at the request of our officer, to order a horse to be sent down,
with which the agent, who was on board, might go up to the Pueblo.
From one of them, who was an intelligent English sailor, I learned
a good deal, in a few minutes’ conversation, about the place, its
trade, and the news from the southern ports.  San Diego, he said,
was about eighty miles to the leeward of San Pedro; that they had
heard from there, by a Mexican who came up on horseback, that
the California had sailed for Boston, and that the Lagoda, which
had been in San Pedro only a few weeks before, was taking in her
cargo for Boston.  The Ayacucho was also there, loading for Callao,
and the little Loriotte, which had run directly down from Monterey,
where we left her.  San Diego, he told me, was a small, snug place,
having very little trade, but decidedly the best harbor on the coast,
being completely land-locked, and the water as smooth as a duck-pond.
This was the depot for all the vessels engaged in the trade; each one
having a large house there, built of rough boards, in which they
stowed their hides, as fast as they collected them in their trips
up and down the coast, and when they had procured a full cargo,
spent a few weeks there, taking it in, smoking ship, supplying
wood and water, and making other preparations for the voyage home.
The Lagoda was now about this business.  When we should be about it,
was more than I could tell; two years, at least, I thought to myself.
I also learned, to my surprise, that the desolate-looking place we
were in was the best place on the whole coast for hides.  It was the
only port for a distance of eighty miles, and about thirty miles in
the interior was a fine plane country, filled with herds of cattle,
in the centre of which was the Pueblo de los Angelos–the largest
town in California–and several of the wealthiest missions; to all
of which San Pedro was the sea-port.
Having made our arrangements for a horse to take the agent to
the Pueblo the next day, we picked our way again over the green,
slippery rocks, and pulled aboard.  By the time we reached the
vessel, which was so far off that we could hardly see her, in the
increasing darkness, the boats were hoisted up, and the crew at
supper.  Going down into the forecastle, eating our supper, and
lighting our cigars and pipes, we had, as usual, to tell all we had
seen or heard ashore.  We all agreed that it was the worst place
we had seen yet, especially for getting off hides, and our lying off
at so great a distance looked as though it was bad for south-easters.
After a few disputes as to whether we should have to carry our
goods up the hill, or not, we talked of San Diego, the probability
of seeing the Lagoda before she sailed, etc., etc.
The next day we pulled the agent ashore, and he went up to
visit the Pueblo and the neighboring missions; and in a few days,
as the result of his labors, large ox-carts, and droves of mules,
loaded with hides, were seen coming over the flat country.
We loaded our long-boat with goods of all kinds, light and heavy,
and pulled ashore.  After landing and rolling them over the stones
upon the beach, we stopped, waiting for the carts to come down the
hill and take them; but the captain soon settled the matter by ordering
us to carry them all up to the top, saying that, that was “California
fashion.” So what the oxen would not do, we were obliged to do.
The hill was low, but steep, and the earth, being clayey and wet
with the recent rains, was but bad holding-ground for our feet.
The heavy barrels and casks we rolled up with some difficulty,
getting behind and putting our shoulders to them; now and then
our feet slipping, added to the danger of the casks rolling back
upon us.  But the greatest trouble was with the large boxes of
sugar.  These, we had to place upon oars, and lifting them up rest
the oars upon our shoulders, and creep slowly up the hill with the
gait of a funeral procession.  After an hour or two of hard work,
we got them all up, and found the carts standing full of hides,
which we had to unload, and also to load again with our own goods;
the lazy Indians, who came down with them, squatting down on their
hams, looking on, doing nothing, and when we asked them to help us,
only shaking their heads, or drawling out “no quiero.”
Having loaded the carts, we started up the Indians, who went
off, one on each side of the oxen, with long sticks, sharpened at
the end, to punch them with.  This is one of the means of saving
labor in California;–two Indians to two oxen.  Now, the hides
were to be got down; and for this purpose, we brought the boat
round to a place where the hill was steeper, and threw them down,
letting them slide over the slope.  Many of them lodged, and we
had to let ourselves down and set them agoing again; and in this
way got covered with dust, and our clothes torn.  After we had
got them all down, we were obliged to take them on our heads,
and walk over the stones, and through the water, to the boat.
The water and the stones together would wear out a pair of shoes
a day, and as shoes were very scarce and very dear, we were compelled
to go barefooted.  At night, we went on board, having had the hardest
and most disagreeable day’s work that we had yet experienced.
For several days, we were employed in this manner, until we had
landed forty or fifty tons of goods, and brought on board about
two thousand hides; when the trade began to slacken, and we were
kept at work, on board, during the latter part of the week,
either in the hold or upon the rigging.  On Thursday night,
there was a violent blow from the northward, but as this was
off-shore, we had only to let go our other anchor and hold on.
We were called up at night to send down the royal-yards.  It was
as dark as a pocket, and the vessel pitching at her anchors,
I went up to the fore, and my friend S––-, to the main,
and we soon had them down “ship-shape and Bristol fashion,"
for, as we had now got used to our duty aloft, everything above
the cross-trees was left to us, who were the youngest of the crew,
except one boy.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
