


The next Sunday was Easter Sunday, and as there had been no
liberty at San Pedro, it was our turn to go ashore and misspend
another Sabbath.  Soon after breakfast, a large boat, filled with
men in blue jackets, scarlet caps, and various colored under-clothes,
bound ashore on liberty, left the Italian ship, and passed under
our stern; the men singing beautiful Italian boat-songs, all the way,
in fine, full chorus.  Among the songs I recognized the favorite
“O Pescator dell’ onda.”  It brought back to my mind pianofortes,
drawing-rooms, young ladies singing, and a thousand other things
which as little befitted me, in my situation, to be thinking upon.
Supposing that the whole day would be too long a time to spend
ashore, as there was no place to which we could take a ride,
we remained quietly on board until after dinner.  We were then
pulled ashore in the stern of the boat, and, with orders to be on
the beach at sundown, we took our way for the town.  There,
everything wore the appearance of a holyday.  The people were
all dressed in their best; the men riding about on horseback among
the houses, and the women sitting on carpets before the doors.
Under the piazza of a “pulperia,” two men were seated, decked out
with knots of ribbons and bouquets, and playing the violin and
the Spanish guitar.  These are the only instruments, with the
exception of the drums and trumpets at Monterey that I ever heard in
California; and I suspect they play upon no others, for at a great
fandango at which I was afterwards present, and where they mustered
all the music they could find, there were three violins and two
guitars, and no other instrument.  As it was now too near the middle
of the day to see any dancing and hearing that a bull was expected
down from the country, to be baited in the presidio square, in the
course of an hour or two we took a stroll among the houses.
Inquiring for an American who, we had been told, had married in the
place, and kept a shop, we were directed to a long, low building,
at the end of which was a door, with a sign over it, in Spanish.
Entering the shop, we found no one in it, and the whole had an
empty, deserted appearance.  In a few minutes the man made his
appearance, and apologized for having nothing to entertain us with,
saying that he had had a fandango at his house the night before,
and the people had eaten and drunk up everything.
“Oh yes!” said I, “Easter holydays?”
“No!” said he, with a singular expression to his face; “I had a
little daughter die the other day, and that’s the custom of the
country.”
Here I felt a little strangely, not knowing what to say, or whether
to offer consolation or no, and was beginning to retire, when he
opened a side door and told us to walk in.  Here I was no less
astonished; for I found a large room, filled with young girls,
from three or four years of age up to fifteen and sixteen, dressed
all in white, with wreaths of flowers on their heads, and bouquets
in their hands.  Following our conductor through all these girls,
who were playing about in high spirits, we came to a table, at the
end of the room, covered with a white cloth, on which lay a coffin,
about three feet long, with the body of his child.  The coffin was
lined on the outside with white cloth, and on the inside with white
satin, and was strewed with flowers.  Through an open door we saw,
in another room, a few elderly people in common dresses; while
the benches and tables thrown up in a corner, and the stained walls,
gave evident signs of the last night’s “high go.”  Feeling, like
Garrick, between tragedy and comedy, an uncertainty of purpose
and a little awkwardness, I asked the man when the funeral would
take place, and being told that it would move toward the mission
in about an hour, took my leave.
To pass away the time, we took horses and rode down to the
beach, and there found three or four Italian sailors, mounted, and
riding up and down, on the hard sand, at a furious rate.  We joined
them, and found it fine sport.  The beach gave us a stretch of a mile
or more, and the horses flew over the smooth, hard sand, apparently
invigorated and excited by the salt sea-breeze, and by the continual
roar and dashing of the breakers.  From the beach we returned to
the town, and finding that the funeral procession had moved, rode
on and overtook it, about half-way to the mission.  Here was as
peculiar a sight as we had seen before in the house; the one looking
as much like a funeral procession as the other did like a house of
mourning.  The little coffin was borne by eight girls, who were
continually relieved by others, running forward from the procession
and taking their places.  Behind it came a straggling company of
girls, dressed as before, in white and flowers, and including, I should
suppose by their numbers, nearly all the girls between five and fifteen
in the place.  They played along on the way, frequently stopping
and running all together to talk to some one, or to pick up a flower,
and then running on again to overtake the coffin.  There were a few
elderly women in common colors; and a herd of young men and boys,
some on foot and others mounted, followed them, or walked or rode
by their side, frequently interrupting them by jokes and questions.
But the most singular thing of all was, that two men walked,
one on each side of the coffin, carrying muskets in their hands,
which they continually loaded, and fired into the air.  Whether
this was to keep off the evil spirits or not, I do not know.
It was the only interpretation that I could put upon it.
As we drew near the mission, we saw the great gate thrown open,
and the pádre standing on the steps, with a crucifix in hand.
The mission is a large and deserted-looking place, the out-buildings
going to ruin, and everything giving one the impression of decayed
grandeur.  A large stone fountain threw out pure water, from four
mouths, into a basin, before the church door; and we were on the
point of riding up to let our horses drink, when it occurred to us
that it might be consecrated, and we forbore.  Just at this moment,
the bells set up their harsh, discordant clang; and the procession
moved into the court.  I was anxious to follow, and see the ceremony,
but the horse of one of my companions had become frightened, and
was tearing off toward the town; and having thrown his rider, and
got one of his feet caught in the saddle, which had slipped, was fast
dragging and ripping it to pieces.  Knowing that my shipmate
could not speak a word of Spanish, and fearing that he would get
into difficulty, I was obliged to leave the ceremony and ride after
him.  I soon overtook him, trudging along, swearing at the horse,
and carrying the remains of the saddle, which he had picked up
on the road.  Going to the owner of the horse, we made a settlement
with him, and found him surprisingly liberal.  All parts of
the saddle were brought back, and, being capable of repair, he was
satisfied with six reáls.  We thought it would have been a few
dollars.  We pointed to the horse, which was now half way up one
of the mountains; but he shook his head, saying, “No importe!"
and giving us to understand that he had plenty more.
Having returned to the town, we saw a great crowd collected in
the square before the principal pulperia, and riding up, found that
all these people–men, women, and children–had been drawn together
by a couple of bantam cocks.  The cocks were in full tilt,
springing into one another, and the people were as eager, laughing
and shouting, as though the combatants had been men.  There had
been a disappointment about the bull; he had broken his bail, and
taken himself off, and it was too late to get another; so the people
were obliged to put up with a cock-fight.  One of the bantams having
been knocked in the head, and had an eye put out, he gave in, and
two monstrous prize-cocks were brought on.  These were the object
of the whole affair; the two bantams having been merely served up
as a first course, to collect the people together.  Two fellows came
into the ring holding the cocks in their arms, and stroking them,
and running about on all fours, encouraging and setting them on.
Bets ran high, and, like most other contests, it remained for some
time undecided.  They both showed great pluck, and fought probably
better and longer than their masters would have done.  Whether,
in the end, it was the white or the red that beat, I do not recollect;
but, whichever it was, he strutted off with the true veni-vidi-vici look,
leaving the other lying panting on his beam-ends.
This matter having been settled, we heard some talk about “caballos"
and “carrera” and seeing the people all streaming off in one direction,
we followed, and came upon a level piece of ground, just out of
the town, which was used as a race-course.  Here the crowd soon
became thick again; the ground was marked off; the judges stationed;
and the horses led up to one end.  Two fine-looking old gentlemen
–Don Carlos and Don Domingo, so called–held the stakes, and all
was now ready.  We waited some time, during which we could just see
the horses twisting round and turning, until, at length, there
was a shout along the lines, and on they came–heads stretched
out and eyes starting;–working all over, both man and beast.
The steeds came by us like a couple of chain-shot–neck and neck;
and now we could see nothing but their backs, and their hind hoofs
flying in the air.  As fast as the horses passed, the crowd broke
up behind them, and ran to the goal.  When we got there, we found
the horses returning on a slow walk, having run far beyond the mark,
and heard that the long, bony one had come in head and shoulders
before the other.  The riders were light-built men; had handkerchiefs
tied round their heads; and were bare-armed and bare-legged.
The horses were noble-looking beasts, not so sleek and combed as
our Boston stable-horses, but with fine limbs, and spirited eyes.
After this had been settled, and fully talked over, the crowd
scattered again and flocked back to the town.
Returning to the large pulperia, we found the violin and guitar
screaming and twanging away under the piazza, where they had
been all day.  As it was now sundown, there began to be some
dancing.  The Italian sailors danced, and one of our crew exhibited
himself in a sort of West India shuffle, much to the amusement of
the bystanders, who cried out, “Bravo!” “Otra vez!” and “Vivan
los marineros!” but the dancing did not become general, as the
women and the “gente de razón” had not yet made their appearance.
We wished very much to stay and see the style of dancing; but,
although we had had our own way during the day, yet we were,
after all, but ’foremast Jacks; and having been ordered to be on the
beach by sundown, did not venture to be more than an hour behind
the time; so we took our way down.  We found the boat just pulling
ashore through the breakers, which were running high, there having
been a heavy fog outside, which, from some cause or other, always
brings on, or precedes a heavy sea.  Liberty-men are privileged
from the time they leave the vessel until they step on board again;
so we took our places in the stern sheets, and were congratulating
ourselves upon getting off dry, when a great comber broke fore and
aft the boat, and wet us through and through, filling the boat
half full of water.  Having lost her buoyancy by the weight of the
water, she dropped heavily into every sea that struck her, and by
the time we had pulled out of the surf into deep water, she was but
just afloat, and we were up to our knees.  By the help of a small
bucket and our hats, we bailed her out, got on board, hoisted the
boats, eat our supper, changed our clothes, gave (as is usual) the
whole history of our day’s adventures to those who had staid on
board, and having taken a night-smoke, turned-in.  Thus ended
our second day’s liberty on shore.
On Monday morning, as an offset to our day’s sport, we were all
set to work “tarring down” the rigging.  Some got girt-lines up
for riding down the stays and back-stays, and others tarred the
shrouds, lifts, etc., laying out on the yards, and coming down
the rigging.  We overhauled our bags and took out our old tarry
trowsers and frocks, which we had used when we tarred down before,
and were all at work in the rigging by sunrise.  After breakfast,
we had the satisfaction of seeing the Italian ship’s boat go ashore,
filled with men, gaily dressed, as on the day before, and singing
their barcarollas.  The Easter holydays are kept up on shore during
three days; and being a Catholic vessel, the Crew had the advantage
of them.  For two successive days, while perched up in the rigging,
covered with tar and engaged in our disagreeable work, we saw these
fellows going ashore in the morning, and coming off again at night,
in high spirits.  So much for being Protestants.  There’s no danger
of Catholicism’s spreading in New England; Yankees can’t afford the
time to be Catholics.  American shipmasters get nearly three weeks
more labor out of their crews, in the course of a year, than the
masters of vessels from Catholic countries.  Yankees don’t keep
Christmas, and ship-masters at sea never know when Thanksgiving
comes, so Jack has no festival at all.
About noon, a man aloft called out “Sail ho!” and looking round,
we saw the head sails of a vessel coming round the point.  As she
drew round, she showed the broadside of a full-rigged brig, with
the Yankee ensign at her peak.  We ran up our stars and stripes, and,
knowing that there was no American brig on the coast but ourselves,
expected to have news from home.  She rounded-to and let go her
anchor, but the dark faces on her yards, when they furled the sails,
and the Babel on deck, soon made known that she was from the Islands.
Immediately afterwards, a boat’s crew came aboard, bringing her skipper,
and from them we learned that she was from Oahu, and was engaged in
the same trade with the Ayacucho, Loriotte, etc., between the coast,
the Sandwich Islands, and the leeward coast of Peru and Chili.
Her captain and officers were Americans, and also a part of her crew;
the rest were Islanders.  She was called the Catalina, and, like all
the others vessels in that trade, except the Ayacucho, her papers
and colors were from Uncle Sam.  They, of course, brought us no news,
and we were doubly disappointed, for we had thought, at first,
it might be the ship which we were expecting from Boston.
After lying here about a fortnight, and collecting all the hides the
place afforded, we set sail again for San Pedro.  There we found
the brig which we had assisted in getting off lying at anchor,
with a mixed crew of Americans, English, Sandwich Islanders,
Spaniards, and Spanish Indians; and, though much smaller than we,
yet she had three times the number of men; and she needed them,
for her officers were Californians.  No vessels in the world
go so poorly manned as American and English; and none do so well.
A Yankee brig of that size would have had a crew of four men,
and would have worked round and round her.  The Italian ship had a
crew of thirty men; nearly three times as many as the Alert, which
was afterwards on the coast, and was of the same size; yet the Alert
would get under weigh and come-to in half the time, and get two
anchors, while they were all talking at once–jabbering like a parcel
of “Yahoos,” and running about decks to find their cat-block.
There was only one point in which they had the advantage over us,
and that was in lightening their labors in the boats by their songs.
The Americans are a time and money saving people, but have not yet,
as a nation, learned that music may be “turned to account.”  We pulled
the long distances to and from the shore, with our loaded boats,
without a word spoken, and with discontented looks, while they not
only lightened the labor of rowing, but actually made it pleasant
and cheerful, by their music.  So true is it, that–
“For the tired slave, song lifts the languid oar,
  And bids it aptly fall, with chime
That beautifies the fairest shore,
  And mitigates the harshest clime.”
We lay about a week in San Pedro, and got under weigh for San Diego,
intending to stop at San Juan, as the south-easter season was
nearly over, and there was little or no danger.
This being the spring season, San Pedro, as well as all the other
open ports upon the coast, was filled with whales, that had come in
to make their annual visit upon soundings.  For the first few days
that we were here and at Santa Barbara, we watched them with
great interest–calling out “there she blows!” every time we saw the
spout of one breaking the surface of the water; but they soon became
so common that we took little notice of them.  They often “broke"
very near us; and one thick, foggy night, during a dead calm, while
I was standing anchor-watch, one of them rose so near, that he
struck our cable, and made all surge again.  He did not seem to like
the encounter much himself, for he sheered off, and spouted at a
good distance.  We once came very near running one down in the
gig, and should probably have been knocked to pieces and blown
sky-high.  We had been on board the little Spanish brig, and were
returning, stretching out well at our oars, the little boat going like a
swallow; our backs were forward, (as is always the case in pulling,)
and the captain, who was steering, was not looking ahead, when, all
at once, we heard the spout of a whale directly ahead.  “Back water!
back water, for your lives!” shouted the captain; and we backed
our blades in the water and brought the boat to in a smother of
foam.  Turning our heads, we saw a great, rough, hump-backed whale,
slowly crossing our fore foot, within three or four yards of the
boat’s stem.  Had we not backed water just as we did, we should
inevitably have gone smash upon him, striking him with our stem
just about amidships.  He took no notice of us, but passed slowly on,
and dived a few yards beyond us, throwing his tail high in the air.
He was so near that we had a perfect view of him and as may be
supposed, had no desire to see him nearer.  He was a disgusting
creature; with a skin rough, hairy, and of an iron-grey color.
This kind differs much from the sperm, in color and skin, and is said
to be fiercer.  We saw a few sperm whales; but most of the whales
that come upon the coast are fin-backs, hump-backs, and right-whales,
which are more difficult to take, and are said not to give oil
enough to pay for the trouble.  For this reason whale-ships do not
come upon the coast after them.  Our captain, together with Captain
Nye of the Loriotte, who had been in a whale-ship, thought of
making an attempt upon one of them with two boats’ crews, but
as we had only two harpoons and no proper lines, they gave it up.
During the months of March, April, and May, these whales appear in
great numbers in the open ports of Santa Barbara, San Pedro, etc.,
and hover off the coast, while a few find their way into the
close harbors of San Diego and Monterey.  They are all off again
before midsummer, and make their appearance on the “off-shore
ground.”  We saw some fine “schools” of sperm whales, which are
easily distinguished by their spout, blowing away, a few miles to
windward, on our passage to San Juan.
Coasting along on the quiet shore of the Pacific, we came to anchor,
in twenty fathoms’ water, almost out at sea, as it were, and directly
abreast of a steep hill which overhung the water, and was twice as
high as our royal-mast-head.  We had heard much of this place, from
the Lagoda’s crew, who said it was the worst place in California.
The shore is rocky, and directly exposed to the south-east, so that
vessels are obliged to slip and run for their lives on the first
sign of a gale; and late as it was in the season, we got up our
slip-rope and gear, though we meant to stay only twenty-four hours.
We pulled the agent ashore, and were ordered to wait for him,
while he took a circuitous way round the hill to the mission,
which was hidden behind it.  We were glad of the opportunity to
examine this singular place, and hauling the boat up and making
her well fast, took different directions up and down the beach,
to explore it.
San Juan is the only romantic spot in California.  The country
here for several miles is high table-land, running boldly to the shore,
and breaking off in a steep hill, at the foot of which the waters of the
Pacific are constantly dashing.  For several miles the water washes
the very base of the hill, or breaks upon ledges and fragments of
rocks which run out into the sea.  Just where we landed was a small
cove, or “bight,” which gave us, at high tide, a few square feet of
sand-beach between the sea and the bottom of the hill.  This was
the only landing-place.  Directly before us, rose the perpendicular
height of four or five hundred feet.  How we were to get hides down,
or goods up, upon the table-land on which the mission was situated,
was more than we could tell.  The agent had taken a long circuit,
and yet had frequently to jump over breaks, and climb up steep
places, in the ascent.  No animal but a man or monkey could get up
it.  However, that was not our look-out; and knowing that the agent
would be gone an hour or more, we strolled about, picking up shells,
and following the sea where it tumbled in, roaring and spouting,
among the crevices of the great rocks.  What a sight, thought I, must
this be in a south-easter! The rocks were as large as those of Nahant
or Newport, but, to my eye, more grand and broken.  Beside, there
was a grandeur in everything around, which gave almost a solemnity
to the scene: a silence and solitariness which affected everything!
Not a human being but ourselves for miles; and no sound heard but
the pulsations of the great Pacific! and the great steep hill rising
like a wall, and cutting us off from all the world, but the “world of
waters!”  I separated myself from the rest and sat down on a rock,
just where the sea ran in and formed a fine spouting horn.
Compared with the plain, dull sand-beach of the rest of the coast,
this grandeur was as refreshing as a great rock in a weary land.
It was almost the first time that I had been positively alone–free
from the sense that human beings were at my elbow, if not talking
with me–since I had left home.  My better nature returned strong
upon me.  Everything was in accordance with my state of feeling,
and I experienced a glow of pleasure at finding that what of poetry
and romance I ever had in me, had not been entirely deadened by the
laborious and frittering life I had led.  Nearly an hour did I sit,
almost lost in the luxury of this entire new scene of the play in
which I had been so long acting, when I was aroused by the distant
shouts of my companions, and saw that they were collecting together,
as the agent had made his appearance, on his way back to our
boat.
We pulled aboard, and found the long-boat hoisted out, and nearly
laden with goods; and after dinner, we all went on shore in the
quarter-boat, with the long-boat in tow.  As we drew in, we found
an ox-cart and a couple of men standing directly on the brow of the
hill; and having landed, the captain took his way round the hill,
ordering me and one other to follow him.  We followed, picking our
way out, and jumping and scrambling up, walking over briers and
prickly pears, until we came to the top.  Here the country stretched
out for miles as far as the eye could reach, on a level, table surface;
and the only habitation in sight was the small white mission of San
Juan Capistrano, with a few Indian huts about it, standing in a
small hollow, about a mile from where we were.  Reaching the brow
of the hill where the cart stood, we found several piles of hides,
and Indians sitting round them.  One or two other carts were coming
slowly on from the mission, and the captain told us to begin and
throw the hides down.  This, then, was the way they were to be got
down: thrown down, one at a time, a distance of four hundred
feet! This was doing the business on a great scale.  Standing on
the edge of the hill and looking down the perpendicular height,
the sailors,
–"That walk upon the beach,
Appeared like mice; and our tall anchoring bark
Diminished to her cock; her cock a buoy
Almost too small for sight.”
Down this height we pitched the hides, throwing them as far out
into the air as we could; and as they were all large, stiff,
and doubled, like the cover of a book, the wind took them, and they
swayed and eddied about, plunging and rising in the air, like a kite
when it has broken its string.  As it was now low tide, there was
no danger of their falling into the water, and as fast as they came
to ground, the men below picked them up, and taking them on their
heads, walked off with them to the boat.  It was really a picturesque
sight: the great height; the scaling of the hides; and the continual
walking to and fro of the men, who looked like mites, on the beach!
This was the romance of hide-droghing!
Some of the hides lodged in cavities which were under the bank and
out of our sight, being directly under us; but by sending others down
in the same direction, we succeeded in dislodging them.  Had they
remained there, the captain said he should have sent on board for
a couple of pairs of long halyards, and got some one to have gone
down for them.  It was said that one of the crew of an English brig
went down in the same way, a few years before.  We looked over,
and thought it would not be a welcome task, especially for a few
paltry hides; but no one knows what he can do until he is called
upon; for, six months afterwards, I went down the same place by
a pair of top-gallant studding-sail halyards, to save a half a
dozen hides which had lodged there.
Having thrown them all down, we took our way back again,
and found the boat loaded and ready to start.  We pulled off;
took the hides all aboard; hoisted in the boats; hove up our anchor;
made sail; and before sundown, were on our way to San Diego.
Friday, May 8th, 1835.  Arrived at San Diego.  Here we found the
little harbor deserted.  The Lagoda, Ayacucho, Loriotte, and all,
had left the coast, and we were nearly alone.  All the hide-houses
on the beach, but ours, were shut up, and the Sandwich Islanders,
a dozen or twenty in number, who had worked for the other vessels and
been paid off when they sailed, were living on the beach, keeping up
a grand carnival.  A Russian discovery-ship which had been in this
port a few years before, had built a large oven for baking bread,
and went away, leaving it standing.  This, the Sandwich Islanders
took possession of, and had kept, ever since, undisturbed.  It was
big enough to hold six or eight men–that is, it was as large as
a ship’s forecastle; had a door at the side, and a vent-hole at
top.  They covered it with Oahu mats, for a carpet; stopped up the
vent-hole in bad weather, and made it their head-quarters.  It was
now inhabited by as many as a dozen or twenty men, who lived there
in complete idleness–drinking, playing cards, and carousing in
every way.  They bought a bullock once a week, which kept them
in meat, and one of them went up to the town every day to get
fruit, liquor, and provisions.  Besides this, they had bought
a cask of ship-bread, and a barrel of flour from the Lagoda,
before she sailed.  There they lived, having a grand time,
and caring for nobody.  Captain T––- was anxious to get
three or four of them to come on board the Pilgrim, as we were
so much diminished in numbers; and went up to the oven and spent
an hour or two trying to negotiate with them.  One of them,–a
finely built, active, strong and intelligent fellow,– who was
a sort of king among them, acted as spokesman.  He was called
Mannini,–or rather, out of compliment to his known importance
and influence, Mr. Mannini–and was known all over California.
Through him, the captain offered them fifteen dollars a month,
and one month’s pay in advance; but it was like throwing pearls
before swine, or rather, carrying coals to Newcastle.  So long
as they had money, they would not work for fifty dollars a month,
and when their money was gone, they would work for ten.
“What do you do here, Mr. Mannini?"(1) said the captain.
–––––––––––––––
1. The letter i in the Sandwich Island language is sounded
   like e in the English.
–––––––––––––––
“Oh, we play cards, get drunk, smoke–do anything we’re a mind to.”
“Don’t you want to come aboard and work?”
“Aole! aole make make makou i ka hana.  Now, got plenty money;
no good, work.  Mamule, money pau–all gone.  Ah! very good, work!–
maikai, hana hana nui!”
“But you’ll spend all your money in this way,” said the captain.
“Aye! me know that.  By-’em-by money pau–all gone; then Kanaka work plenty.”
This was a hopeless case, and the captain left them, to wait
patiently until their money was gone.
We discharged our hides and tallow, and in about a week were
ready to set sail again for the windward.  We unmoored, and got
everything ready, when the captain made another attempt upon the
oven.  This time he had more regard to the “mollia tempora fandi,"
and succeeded very well.  He got Mr. Mannini in his interest, and
as the shot was getting low in the locker, prevailed upon him and
three others to come on board with their chests and baggage, and
sent a hasty summons to me and the boy to come ashore with our
things, and join the gang at the hide-house.  This was unexpected
to me; but anything in the way of variety I liked; so we got ready,
and were pulled ashore.  I stood on the beach while the brig got
under weigh, and watched her until she rounded the point, and
then went up to the hide-house to take up my quarters for a few
months.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
