


From the latitude of the West Indies, until we got inside the Bermudas,
where we took the westerly and south-westerly winds, which blow
steadily off the coast of the United States early in the autumn,
we had every variety of weather, and two or three moderate gales,
or, as sailors call them, double-reef-topsail breezes, which came
on in the usual manner, and of which one is a specimen of all.–A
fine afternoon; all hands at work, some in the rigging, and others
on deck; a stiff breeze, and ship close upon the wind, and skysails
brailed down.–Latter part of the afternoon, breeze increases, ship
lies over to it, and clouds look windy.  Spray begins to fly over
the forecastle, and wets the yarns the boys are knotting;–ball
them up and put them below.–Mate knocks off work and clears up
decks earlier than usual, and orders a man who has been employed
aloft to send the royal halyards over to windward, as he comes
down.  Breast backstays hauled taught, and tackle got upon the
martingale back-rope.–One of the boys furls the mizen royal.–Cook
thinks there is going to be “nasty work,” and has supper ready
early.–Mate gives orders to get supper by the watch, instead of
all hands, as usual.–While eating supper, hear the watch on deck
taking in the royals.–Coming on deck, find it is blowing harder,
and an ugly head sea is running.–Instead of having all hands on the
forecastle in the dog watch, smoking, singing, and telling yarns,
one watch goes below and turns-in, saying that it’s going to be an
ugly night, and two hours’ sleep is not to be lost.
Clouds look black and wild; wind rising, and ship working hard
against a heavy sea, which breaks over the forecastle, and washes
aft through the scuppers.  Still, no more sail is taken in, for the
captain is a driver, and, like all drivers, very partial to his
top-gallant sails.  A top-gallant sail, too, makes the difference
between a breeze and a gale.  When a top-gallant sail is on a ship,
it is only a breeze, though I have seen ours set over a reefed
topsail, when half the bowsprit was under water, and it was up
to a man’s knees in the scuppers.  At eight bells, nothing is said
about reefing the topsails, and the watch go below, with orders to
“stand by for a call.”  We turn-in, growling at the “old man” for
not reefing the topsails when the watch was changed, but putting
it off so as to call all hands, and break up a whole watch below.
Turn-in “all standing,” and keep ourselves awake, saying there is
no use in going asleep to be waked up again.–Wind whistles on
deck, and ship works hard, groaning and creaking, and pitching
into a heavy head sea, which strikes against the bows, with a
noise like knocking upon a rock.–The dim lamp in the forecastle
swings to and fro, and things “fetch away” and go over to
leeward.–"Doesn’t that booby of a second mate ever mean to
take in his top-gallant sails?–He’ll have the sticks out of
her soon,” says old Bill, who was always growling, and, like
most old sailors, did not like to see a ship abused.–By-and-by
an order is given–"Aye, aye, sir!” from the forecastle;–rigging
is heaved down on deck;–the noise of a sail is heard fluttering
aloft, and the short, quick cry which sailors make when hauling
upon clewlines.–"Here comes his fore-top-gallant sail in!"–We
are wide awake, and know all that’s going on as well as if we were
on deck.–A well-known voice is heard from the mast-head singing out
the officer of the watch to haul taught the weather brace.–"Hallo!
There’s S––- aloft to furl the sail!"–Next thing, rigging is
heaved down directly over our heads, and a long-drawn cry and a
rattling of hanks announce that the flying-jib has come in.–The
second mate holds on to the main top-gallant sail until a heavy
sea is shipped, and washes over the forecastle as though the
whole ocean had come aboard; when a noise further aft shows
that that sail, too, is taking in.  After this, the ship is
more easy for a time; two bells are struck, and we try to get a
little sleep.  By-and-by, bang, bang, bang, on the scuttle–"All
ha-a-ands, a ho-o-y!"–We spring out of our berths, clap on a
monkey-jacket and southwester, and tumble up the ladder.–Mate
up before us, and on the forecastle, singing out like a roaring
bull; the captain singing out on the quarter-deck, and the second
mate yelling, like a hyena, in the waist.  The ship is lying over
half upon her beam-ends; lee scuppers under water, and forecastle
all in a smother of foam.–Rigging all let go, and washing about
decks; topsail yards down upon the caps, and sails flapping and
beating against the masts; and starboard watch hauling out the
reef-tackles of the main topsail.  Our watch haul out the fore,
and lay aloft and put two reefs into it, and reef the foresail,
and race with the starboard watch, to see which will mast-head its
topsail first.  All hands tally-on to the main tack, and while some
are furling the jib, and hoisting the staysail, we mizen-topmen
double-reef the mizen topsail and hoist it up.  All being made fast
–"Go below, the watch!” and we turn-in to sleep out the rest of the
time, which is perhaps an hour and a half.  During all the middle,
and for the first part of the morning watch, it blows as hard as
ever, but toward daybreak it moderates considerably, and we shake
a reef out of each topsail, and set the top-gallant sails over
them and when the watch come up, at seven bells, for breakfast,
shake the other reefs out, turn all hands to upon the halyards,
get the watch-tackle upon the top-gallant sheets and halyards,
set the flying-jib, and crack on to her again.
Our captain had been married only a few weeks before he left Boston;
and, after an absence of over two years, it may be supposed he was
not slow in carrying sail.  The mate, too, was not to be beaten by
anybody; and the second mate, though he was afraid to press sail,
was afraid as death of the captain, and being between two fears,
sometimes carried on longer than any of them.  We snapped off three
flying-jib booms in twenty-four hours, as fast as they could be
fitted and rigged out; sprung the spritsail yard; and made nothing
of studding-sail booms.  Beside the natural desire to get home,
we had another reason for urging the ship on.  The scurvy had begun
to show itself on board.  One man had it so badly as to be disabled
and off duty, and the English lad, Ben, was in a dreadful state,
and was daily growing worse.  His legs swelled and pained him so
that he could not walk; his flesh lost its elasticity, so that if
it was pressed in, it would not return to its shape; and his gums
swelled until he could not open his mouth.  His breath, too, became
very offensive; he lost all strength and spirit; could eat nothing;
grew worse every day; and, in fact, unless something was done for
him, would be a dead man in a week, at the rate at which he was
sinking.  The medicines were all, or nearly all, gone; and if we had
had a chest-full, they would have been of no use; for nothing but
fresh provisions and terra firma has any effect upon the scurvy.
This disease is not so common now as formerly; and is attributed
generally to salt provisions, want of cleanliness, the free
use of grease and fat (which is the reason of its prevalence
among whalemen,) and, last of all, to laziness.  It never could
have been from the latter cause on board our ship; nor from the
second, for we were a very cleanly crew, kept our forecastle in
neat order, and were more particular about washing and changing
clothes than many better-dressed people on shore.  It was probably
from having none but salt provisions, and possibly from our having
run very rapidly into hot weather, after having been so long in
the extremest cold.
Depending upon the westerly winds, which prevail off the coast in
the autumn, the captain stood well to the westward, to run inside
of the Bermudas, and in the hope of falling in with some vessel
bound to the West Indies or the Southern States.  The scurvy had
spread no farther among the crew, but there was danger that it
might; and these cases were bad ones.
Sunday, Sept. 11th.  Lat. 30° 04’ N., long. 63° 23’ W.; the Bermudas
bearing north-north-west, distant one hundred and fifty miles.
The next morning, about ten o’clock, “Sail ho!” was cried on deck;
and all hands turned up to see the stranger.  As she drew nearer,
she proved to be an ordinary-looking hermaphrodite brig, standing
south-south-east; and probably bound out, from the Northern States,
to the West Indies; and was just the thing we wished to see.
She hove-to for us, seeing that we wished to speak her; and we
ran down to her; boom-ended our studding-sails; backed our main
topsail, and hailed her–"Brig, ahoy!"–"Hallo!"–"Where are you
from, pray?"–"From New York, bound to Curaçoa."–"Have you any
fresh provisions to spare?"–"Aye, aye! plenty of them!”  We
lowered away the quarter-boat, instantly; and the captain and
four hands sprang in, and were soon dancing over the water,
and alongside the brig.  In about half an hour, they returned
with half a boat-load of potatoes and onions, and each vessel
filled away, and kept on her course.  She proved to be the brig
Solon, of Plymouth, from the Connecticut river, and last from New
York, bound to the Spanish Main, with a cargo of fresh provisions,
mules, tin bake-pans, and other notions.  The onions were genuine
and fresh; and the mate of the brig told the men in the boat, as he
passed the bunches over the side, that the girls had strung them
on purpose for us the day he sailed.  We had supposed, on board,
that a new president had been chosen, the last winter, and, just
as we filled away, the captain hailed and asked who was president
of the United States.  They answered, Andrew Jackson; but thinking
that the old General could not have been elected for a third time,
we hailed again, and they answered–Jack Downing; and left us to
correct the mistake at our leisure.
It was just dinner-time when we filled away; and the steward,
taking a few bunches of onions for the cabin, gave the rest to us,
with a bottle of vinegar.  We carried them forward, stowed them
away in the forecastle, refusing to have them cooked, and ate
them raw, with our beef and bread.  And a glorious treat they
were.  The freshness and crispness of the raw onion, with the
earthy taste, give it a great relish to one who has been a long
time on salt provisions.
We were perfectly ravenous after them.  It was like a scent
of blood to a hound.  We ate them at every meal, by the dozen;
and filled our pockets with them, to eat in our watch on deck;
and the bunches, rising in the form of a cone, from the largest
at the bottom, to the smallest, no larger than a strawberry,
at the top, soon disappeared.
The chief use, however, of the fresh provisions, was for the men
with the scurvy.  One of them was able to eat, and he soon brought
himself to, by gnawing upon raw potatoes; but the other, by this time,
was hardly able to open his mouth; and the cook took the potatoes raw,
pounded them in a mortar, and gave him the juice to drink.  This
he swallowed, by the tea-spoonful at a time, and rinsed it about
his gums and throat.  The strong earthy taste and smell of this
extract of the raw potato at first produced a shuddering through
his whole frame, and after drinking it, an acute pain, which ran
through all parts of his body; but knowing, by this, that it was
taking strong hold, he persevered, drinking a spoonful every hour
or so, and holding it a long time in his mouth; until, by the
effect of this drink, and of his own restored hope, (for he had
nearly given up, in despair) he became so well as to be able to
move about, and open his mouth enough to eat the raw potatoes and
onions pounded into a soft pulp.  This course soon restored his
appetite and strength; and in ten days after we spoke the Solon,
so rapid was his recovery, that, from lying helpless and almost
hopeless in his berth, he was at the mast-head, furling a royal.
With a fine south-west wind, we passed inside of the Bermudas;
and notwithstanding the old couplet, which was quoted again and
again by those who thought we should have one more touch of a
storm before our voyage was up,–
“If the Bermudas let you pass,
You must beware of Hatteras–”
we were to the northward of Hatteras, with good weather, and beginning
to count, not the days, but the hours, to the time when we should be
at anchor in Boston harbor.
Our ship was in fine order, all hands having been hard at work
upon her from daylight to dark, every day but Sunday, from the
time we got into warm weather on this side the Cape. 
It is a common notion with landsmen that a ship is in her finest
condition when she leaves port to enter upon her voyage; and that
she comes home, after a long absence,
“With over-weathered ribs and ragged sails;
Lean, rent and beggared by the strumpet wind.” 
But so far from that, unless a ship meets with some accident, or
comes upon the coast in the dead of winter, when work cannot be
done upon the rigging, she is in her finest order at the end of
the voyage.  When she sails from port, her rigging is generally
slack; the masts need staying; the decks and sides are black and
dirty from taking in cargo; riggers’ seizings and overhand knots
in place of nice seamanlike work; and everything, to a sailor’s
eye, adrift.
But on the passage home, the fine weather between the tropics is
spent in putting the ship into the neatest order.  No merchant vessel
looks better than an Indiaman, or a Cape Horn-er, after a long voyage;
and many captains and mates will stake their reputation for seamanship
upon the appearance of their ship when she hauls into the dock.
All our standing rigging, fore and aft, was set up and tarred;
the masts stayed; the lower and top-mast rigging rattled down,
(or up, as the fashion now is;) and so careful were our officers
to keep the rattlins taught and straight, that we were obliged
to go aloft upon the ropes and shearpoles with which the rigging
was swifted in; and these were used as jury rattlins until we got
close upon the coast.  After this, the ship was scraped, inside and
out, decks, masts, booms and all; a stage being rigged outside,
upon which we scraped her down to the water-line; pounding the
rust off the chains, bolts and fastenings.  Then, taking two days
of calm under the line, we painted her on the outside, giving her
open ports in her streak, and finishing off the nice work upon the
stern, where sat Neptune in his car, holding his trident, drawn
by sea-horses; and re-touched the gilding and coloring of the
cornucopia which ornamented her billet-head.  The inside was then
painted, from the skysail truck to the waterways–the yards black;
mast-heads and tops, white; monkey-rail, black, white, and yellow;
bulwarks, green; plank-shear, white; waterways, lead color, etc.,
etc. The anchors and ring-bolts, and other iron work, were blackened
with coal-tar; and the steward kept at work, polishing the brass
of the wheel, bell, capstan, etc.  The cabin, too, was scraped,
varnished, and painted; and the forecastle scraped and scrubbed;
there being no need of paint and varnish for Jack’s quarters.
The decks were then scraped and varnished, and everything useless
thrown overboard; among which the empty tar barrels were set on
fire and thrown overboard, on a dark night, and left blazing
astern, lighting up the ocean for miles.  Add to all this labor,
the neat work upon the rigging;–the knots, flemish-eyes, splices,
seizings, coverings, pointings, and graftings, which show a ship in
crack order.  The last preparation, and which looked still more
like coming into port, was getting the anchors over the bows,
bending the cables, rowsing the hawsers up from between decks,
and overhauling the deep-sea-lead-line.
Thursday, September 15th.  This morning the temperature and
peculiar appearance of the water, the quantities of gulf-weed
floating about, and a bank of clouds lying directly before
us, showed that we were on the border of the Gulf Stream.
This remarkable current, running north-east, nearly across
the ocean, is almost constantly shrouded in clouds, and is the
region of storms and heavy seas.  Vessels often run from a clear
sky and light wind, with all sail, at once into a heavy sea and
cloudy sky, with double-reefed topsails.  A sailor told me that
on a passage from Gibraltar to Boston, his vessel neared the
Gulf Stream with a light breeze, clear sky, and studding-sails
out, alow and aloft; while, before it, was a long line of heavy,
black clouds, lying like a bank upon the water, and a vessel coming
out of it, under double-reefed topsails, and with royal yards sent
down.  As they drew near, they began to take in sail after sail,
until they were reduced to the same condition; and, after twelve
or fourteen hours of rolling and pitching in a heavy sea, before a
smart gale, they ran out of the bank on the other side, and were in
fine weather again, and under their royals and skysails.  As we drew
into it, the sky became cloudy, the sea high, and everything had the
appearance of the going off, or the coming on, of a storm.  It was
blowing no more than a stiff breeze; yet the wind, being north-east,
which is directly against the course of the current, made an ugly,
chopping sea, which heaved and pitched the vessel about, so that
we were obliged to send down the royal yards, and to take in our
light sails.  At noon, the thermometer, which had been repeatedly
lowered into the water, showed the temperature to be seventy;
which was considerably above that of the air,–as is always
the case in the centre of the Stream.  A lad who had been at
work at the royal mast-head, came down upon the deck, and took
a turn round the long-boat; and looking very pale, said he was
so sick that he could stay aloft no longer, but was ashamed to
acknowledge it to the officer.  He went up again, but soon gave
out and came down, and leaned over the rail, “as sick as a lady
passenger.”
He had been to sea several years, and had, he said, never been
sick before.  He was made so by the irregular, pitching motion
of the vessel, increased by the height to which he had been above
the hull, which is like the fulcrum of the lever.  An old sailor,
who was at work on the top-gallant yard, said he felt disagreeably
all the time, and was glad, when his job was done, to get down
into the top, or upon the deck.  Another hand was sent to the
royal mast-head, who staid nearly an hour, but gave up.  The work
must be done, and the mate sent me.  I did very well for some time,
but began at length to feel very unpleasantly, though I had never
been sick since the first two days from Boston, and had been in all
sorts of weather and situations.  Still, I kept my place, and did
not come down, until I had got through my work, which was more
than two hours.  The ship certainly never acted so badly before.
She was pitched and jerked about in all manner of ways; the sails
seeming to have no steadying power over her.  The tapering points
of the masts made various curves and angles against the sky overhead,
and sometimes, in one sweep of an instant, described an arc of more
than forty-five degrees, bringing up with a sudden jerk which made
it necessary to hold on with both hands, and then sweeping off,
in another long, irregular curve.  I was not positively sick,
and came down with a look of indifference, yet was not unwilling
to get upon the comparative terra firma of the deck.  A few hours
more carried us through, and when we saw the sun go down, upon our
larboard beam, in the direction of the continent of North America,
we had left the bank of dark, stormy clouds astern, in the twilight.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
