


The first day we passed at sea was the Sabbath.  As we were just from
port, and there was a great deal to be done on board, we were kept at
work all day, and at night the watches were set, and everything put
into sea order.  When we were called aft to be divided into watches,
I had a good specimen of the manner of a sea captain.  After the
division had been made, he gave a short characteristic speech,
walking the quarter deck with a cigar in his mouth, and dropping
the words out between the puffs.
“Now, my men, we have begun a long voyage.  If we get along well
together, we shall have a comfortable time; if we don’t, we shall
have hell afloat.–All you’ve got to do is to obey your orders and
do your duty like men,–then you’ll fare well enough;–if you don’t,
you’ll fare hard enough,–I can tell you.  If we pull together, you’ll
find me a clever fellow; if we don’t, you’ll find me a bloody rascal.
–That’s all I’ve got to say.–Go below, the larboard watch!”
I being in the starboard or second mate’s watch, had the opportunity
of keeping the first watch at sea.  S––-, a young man, making, like
myself, his first voyage, was in the same watch, and as he was the
son of a professional man, and had been in a counting-room in Boston,
we found that we had many friends and topics in common.  We talked
these matters over,–Boston, what our friends were probably doing,
our voyage, etc., until he went to take his turn at the look-out,
and left me to myself.  I had now a fine time for reflection.  I felt
for the first time the perfect silence of the sea.  The officer was
walking the quarter deck, where I had no right to go, one or two men
were talking on the forecastle, whom I had little inclination to join,
so that I was left open to the full impression of everything about me.
However much I was affected by the beauty of the sea, the bright stars,
and the clouds driven swiftly over them, I could not but remember that
I was separating myself from all the social and intellectual enjoyments
of life.  Yet, strange as it may seem, I did then and afterwards take
pleasure in these reflections, hoping by them to prevent my becoming
insensible to the value of what I was leaving.
But all my dreams were soon put to flight by an order from the
officer to trim the yards, as the wind was getting ahead; and I
could plainly see by the looks the sailors occasionally cast to
windward, and by the dark clouds that were fast coming up, that we
had bad weather to prepare for, and had heard the captain say that
he expected to be in the Gulf Stream by twelve o’clock.  In a few
minutes eight bells were struck, the watch called, and we went below.
I now began to feel the first discomforts of a sailor’s life.
The steerage in which I lived was filled with coils of rigging,
spare sails, old junk and ship stores, which had not been stowed
away.  Moreover, there had been no berths built for us to sleep in,
and we were not allowed to drive nails to hang our clothes upon.
The sea, too, had risen, the vessel was rolling heavily, and
everything was pitched about in grand confusion.  There was a
complete “hurrah’s nest,” as the sailors say, “everything on top
and nothing at hand.”  A large hawser had been coiled away upon
my chest; my hats, boots, mattress and blankets had all fetched
away and gone over to leeward, and were jammed and broken under
the boxes and coils of rigging.  To crown all, we were allowed
no light to find anything with, and I was just beginning to feel
strong symptoms of sea-sickness, and that listlessness and
inactivity which accompany it.  Giving up all attempts to collect
my things together, I lay down upon the sails, expecting every moment
to hear the cry of “all hands, ahoy,” which the approaching storm would
soon make necessary.  I shortly heard the rain-drops falling on deck,
thick and fast, and the watch evidently had their hands full of work,
for I could hear the loud and repeated orders of the mate, the trampling
of feet, the creaking of blocks, and all the accompaniments of a coming
storm.  In a few minutes the slide of the hatch was thrown back, which
let down the noise and tumult of the deck still louder, the loud cry of
“All hands, ahoy! tumble up here and take in sail,” saluted our ears,
and the hatch was quickly shut again.  When I got upon deck, a new
scene and a new experience were before me.  The little brig was close
hauled upon the wind, and lying over, as it then seemed to me, nearly
upon her beam ends.  The heavy head sea was beating against her bows
with the noise and force almost of a sledge-hammer, and flying over the
deck, drenching us completely through.  The topsail halyards had been
let go, and the great sails filling out and backing against the masts
with a noise like thunder.  The wind was whistling through the rigging,
loose ropes flying about; loud and, to me, unintelligible orders constantly
given and rapidly executed, and the sailors “singing out” at the ropes in
their hoarse and peculiar strains.  In addition to all this, I had not got
my “sea legs on,” was dreadfully sick, with hardly strength enough to hold
on to anything, and it was “pitch dark.”  This was my state when I was
ordered aloft, for the first time, to reef topsails.
How I got along, I cannot now remember.  I “laid out” on the yards and
held on with all my strength.  I could not have been of much service,
for I remember having been sick several times before I left the topsail
yard.  Soon all was snug aloft, and we were again allowed to go below.
This I did not consider much of a favor, for the confusion of everything
below, and that inexpressible sickening smell, caused by the shaking up
of the bilge-water in the hold, made the steerage but an indifferent
refuge from the cold, wet decks.  I had often read of the nautical
experiences of others, but I felt as though there could be none worse
than mine; for in addition to every other evil, I could not but remember
that this was only the first night of a two years’ voyage.  When we were
on deck we were not much better off, for we were continually ordered
about by the officer, who said that it was good for us to be in motion.
Yet anything was better than the horrible state of things below.
I remember very well going to the hatchway and putting my head down,
when I was oppressed by nausea, and always being relieved immediately.
It was as good as an emetic.
This state of things continued for two days.
Wednesday, Aug. 20th.  We had the watch on deck from four till eight,
this morning.  When we came on deck at four o’clock, we found things
much changed for the better.  The sea and wind had gone down, and the
stars were out bright.  I experienced a corresponding change in my
feelings; yet continued extremely weak from my sickness.  I stood in
the waist on the weather side, watching the gradual breaking of the
day, and the first streaks of the early light.  Much has been said of
the sun-rise at sea; but it will not compare with the sun-rise on shore.
It wants the accompaniments of the songs of birds, the awakening hum
of men, and the glancing of the first beams upon trees, hills, spires,
and house-tops, to give it life and spirit.  But though the actual
rise of the sun at sea is not so beautiful, yet nothing will compare
with the early breaking of day upon the wide ocean.
There is something in the first grey streaks stretching along the
eastern horizon and throwing an indistinct light upon the face of
the deep, which combines with the boundlessness and unknown depth
of the sea around you, and gives one a feeling of loneliness,
of dread, and of melancholy foreboding, which nothing else in
nature can give.  This gradually passes away as the light grows
brighter, and when the sun comes up, the ordinary monotonous sea
day begins.
From such reflections as these, I was aroused by the order from
the officer, “Forward there! rig the head-pump!”  I found that no
time was allowed for day-dreaming, but that we must “turn-to” at the
first light.  Having called up the “idlers,” namely carpenter, cook,
steward, etc., and rigged the pump, we commenced washing down the decks.
This operation, which is performed every morning at sea, takes nearly
two hours; and I had hardly strength enough to get through it.  After
we had finished, swabbed down, and coiled up the rigging, I sat down
on the spars, waiting for seven bells, which was the sign for breakfast.
The officer, seeing my lazy posture, ordered me to slush the main-mast,
from the royal-mast-head, down.  The vessel was then rolling a little,
and I had taken no sustenance for three days, so that I felt tempted to
tell him that I had rather wait till after breakfast; but I knew that
I must “take the bull by the horns,” and that if I showed any sign of
want of spirit or of backwardness, that I should be ruined at once.
So I took my bucket of grease and climbed up to the royal-mast-head.
Here the rocking of the vessel, which increases the higher you go
from the foot of the mast, which is the fulcrum of the lever, and the
smell of the grease, which offended my fastidious senses, upset my
stomach again, and I was not a little rejoiced when I got upon the
comparative terra firma of the deck.  In a few minutes seven bells
were struck, the log hove, the watch called, and we went to breakfast.
Here I cannot but remember the advice of the cook, a simple-hearted
African.  “Now,” says he, “my lad, you are well cleaned out; you
haven’t got a drop of your ’long-shore swash aboard of you.  You
must begin on a new tack,–pitch all your sweetmeats overboard,
and turn-to upon good hearty salt beef and sea bread, and I’ll
promise you, you’ll have your ribs well sheathed, and be as hearty
as any of ’em, afore you are up to the Horn.”  This would be good
advice to give to passengers, when they speak of the little niceties
which they have laid in, in case of sea-sickness.
I cannot describe the change which half a pound of cold salt beef
and a biscuit or two produced in me.  I was a new being.  We had
a watch below until noon, so that I had some time to myself;
and getting a huge piece of strong, cold, salt beef from the cook,
I kept gnawing upon it until twelve o’clock.  When we went on deck
I felt somewhat like a man, and could begin to learn my sea duty
with considerable spirit.  At about two o’clock we heard the loud
cry of “sail ho!” from aloft, and soon saw two sails to windward,
going directly athwart our hawse.  This was the first time that
I had seen a sail at sea.  I thought then, and always have since,
that it exceeds every other sight in interest and beauty.  They
passed to leeward of us, and out of hailing distance; but the
captain could read the names on their sterns with the glass.
They were the ship Helen Mar, of New York, and the brig Mermaid,
of Boston.  They were both steering westward, and were bound in for
our “dear native land.”
Thursday, Aug. 21st.  This day the sun rose clear, we had a fine
wind, and everything was bright and cheerful.  I had now got my
sea legs on, and was beginning to enter upon the regular duties
of a sea-life.  About six bells, that is, three o’clock, P.M., we
saw a sail on our larboard bow.  I was very anxious, like every new
sailor, to speak her.  She came down to us, backed her main-top-sail,
and the two vessels stood “head on,” bowing and curvetting at each
other like a couple of war-horses reined in by their riders.  It was
the first vessel that I had seen near, and I was surprised to find
how much she rolled and pitched in so quiet a sea.  She lunged her
head into the sea, and then, her stern settling gradually down, her
huge bows rose up, showing the bright copper, and her stern, and
bresthooks dripping, like old Neptune’s locks, with the brine.
Her decks were filled with passengers who had come up at the cry
of “sail ho,” and who by their dress and features appeared to be
Swiss and French emigrants.  She hailed us at first in French,
but receiving no answer, she tried us in English.  She was the
ship La Carolina, from Havre, for New York.  We desired her to
report the brig Pilgrim, from Boston, for the north-west coast
of America, five days out.  She then filled away and left us to
plough on through our waste of waters.  This day ended pleasantly;
we had got into regular and comfortable weather, and into that
routine of sea-life which is only broken by a storm, a sail,
or the sight of land.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
