


SANGER & SAM
The New Home
Yan was now fourteen years old long-legged, thin, and growing fast The
doctor marked this combination and said: “Send him on a farm for a
year.”
Thus it was that an arrangement was made for Yan to work for his board
at the farmhouse of William Raften of Sanger.
Sanger was a settlement just emerging from the early or backwoods
period.
The recognized steps are, first, the frontier or woods where all
is unbroken forest and Deer abound; next the backwoods where small
clearings appear; then a settlement where the forest and clearings are
about equal and the Deer gone; last, an agricultural district, with
mere shreds of forest remaining.
Thirty years before, Sanger had been “taken up” by a population
chiefly from Ireland, sturdy peasantry for the most part, who brought
with them the ancient feud that has so long divided Ireland–the
bitter quarrel between the Catholics or “Dogans” (why so called none
knew) and Protestants, more usually styled “Prattisons.” The colours
of the Catholics were green and white; of the Protestants orange
and blue; and hence another distinctive name of the latter was
“Orangemen.”
These two factions split the social structure in two vertically. There
were, in addition, several horizontal lines of cleavage which, like
geological seams, ran across both segments.
In those days, the early part of the nineteenth century, the British
Government used to assist desirable persons who wished to emigrate to
Canada from Ireland. This aid consisted of a free ocean passage. Many
who could not convince the Government of their desirability and yet
could raise the money, came with them, paying their regular steerage
rate of $15. These were alike to the outside world, but not to
themselves. Those who paid their way were “passengers,” and were, in
their own opinion, many social worlds above the assisted ones, who
were called “Emmy Grants.” This distinction was never forgotten among
the residents of Sanger.
Yet two other social grades existed. Every man and boy in Sanger was
an expert with the axe; was wonderfully adroit. The familiar phrase,
“He’s a good man,” had two accepted meanings: If obviously applied to
a settler during the regular Saturday night Irish row in the little
town of Downey’s Dump, it meant he was an able man with his fists;
but if to his home life on the farm, it implied that he was unusually
dexterous with the axe. A man who fell below standard was despised.
Since the houses of hewn logs were made by their owners, they
reflected the axemen’s skill. There were two styles of log
architecture; the shanty with corners criss-cross, called hog-pen
finish, and the other, the house with the corners neatly finished,
called dovetail finish. In Sanger it was a social black eye to live in
a house of the first kind. The residents were considered “scrubs” or
“riff-raff” by those whose superior axemanship had provided the
more neatly finished dwelling. A later division crept in among the
“dovetailers” themselves when a brickyard was opened. The more
prosperous settlers put up neat little brick houses. To the surprise
of all, one Phil O’Leary, a poor but prolific Dogan, leaped at once
from a hog-pen log to a fine brick, and caused no end of perplexity
to the ruling society queens, simply paralyzing the social register,
since his nine fat daughters now had claims with the best. Many,
however, whose brick houses were but five years old, denounced the
O’Learys as upstarts and for long witheld all social recognition.
William Raften, as the most prosperous man in the community, was
first to appear in red bricks. His implacable enemy, Char-less (two
syllables) Boyle, egged on by his wife, now also took the red brick
plunge, though he dispensed with masons and laid the bricks himself,
with the help of his seventeen sons. These two men, though Orangemen
both, were deadly enemies, as the wives were social rivals. Raften was
the stronger and richer man, but Boyle, whose father had paid his own
steerage rate, knew all about Raften’s father, and always wound up
any discussion by hurling in Raften’s teeth: “Don’t talk to me, ye
upstart. Everybody knows ye are nothing but a Emmy Grant.” This was
the one fly in the Raften ointment. No use denying it. His father
had accepted a free passage, true, and Boyle had received a free
homestead, but what of that–that counted for nothing. Old Boyle had
been a “PASSENGER,” old Raften an “EMMY GRANT.”
This was the new community that Yan had entered, and the words Dogan
and Prattison, “green” and “orange and blue,” began to loom large,
along with the ideas and animosities they stood for.
The accent of the Sangerite was mixed. First, there was a rich Irish
brogue with many Irish words; this belonged chiefly to the old folks.
The Irish of such men as Raften was quite evident in their speech, but
not strong enough to warrant the accepted Irish spelling of books,
except when the speaker was greatly excited. The young generation
had almost no Irish accent, but all had sifted down to the peculiar
burring nasal whine of the backwoods Canadian.
Mr. and Mrs. Raften met Yan at the station. They had supper together
at the tavern and drove him to their home, where they showed him into
the big dining-room–living-room–kitchen. Over behind the stove was
a tall, awkward boy with carroty hair and small, dark eyes set much
aslant in the saddest of faces. Mrs. Raften said, “Come, Sam, and
shake hands with Yan.” Sam came sheepishly forward, shook hands in a
flabby way, and said, in drawling tones, “How-do,” then retired behind
the stove to gaze with melancholy soberness at Yan, whenever he could
do so without being caught at it. Mr. and Mrs. Raften were attending
to various matters elsewhere, and Yan was left alone and miserable.
The idea of giving up college to go on a farm had been a hard one for
him to accept, but he had sullenly bowed to his father’s command and
then at length learned to like the prospect of getting away from
Bonnerton into the country. After all, it was but for a year, and it
promised so much of joy. Sunday-school left behind. Church reduced to
a minimum. All his life outdoors, among fields and woods–surely this
spelled happiness; but now that he was really there, the abomination
of desolation seemed sitting on all things and the evening was one
of unalloyed misery. He had nothing to tell of, but a cloud of black
despair seemed to have settled for good on the world. His mouth was
pinching very hard and his eyes blinking to keep back the tears when
Mrs. Raften came into the room. She saw at a glance what was wrong.
“He’s homesick,” she said to her husband. “He’ll be all right
to-morrow,” and she took Yan by the hand and led him upstairs to bed.
Twenty minutes later she came to see if he was comfortable. She tucked
the clothes in around him, then, stooping down for a good-night kiss,
she found his face wet with tears. She put her arms about him for a
moment, kissed him several times, and said, “Never mind, you will feel
all right to-morrow,” then wisely left him alone.
Whence came that load of misery and horror, or whither it went, Yan
never knew. He saw it no more, and the next morning he began to
interest himself in his new world.
William Raften had a number of farms all in fine order and clear
of mortgages; and each year he added to his estates. He was sober,
shrewd, even cunning, hated by most of his neighbours because he was
too clever for them and kept on getting richer. His hard side was for
the world and his soft side for his family. Not that he was really
soft in any respect. He had had to fight his life-battle alone,
beginning with nothing, and the many hard knocks had hardened him, but
the few who knew him best could testify to the warm Irish heart that
continued unchanged within him, albeit it was each year farther
from the surface. His manners, even in the house, were abrupt and
masterful. There was no mistaking his orders, and no excuse for not
complying with them. To his children when infants, and to his wife
only, he was always tender, and those who saw him cold and grasping,
overreaching the sharpers of the grain market, would scarcely have
recognized the big, warm-hearted happy-looking father at home an hour
later when he was playing horse with his baby daughter or awkwardly
paying post-graduate court to his smiling wife.
He had little “eddication,” could hardly read, and was therefore
greatly impressed with the value of “book larnin’,” and determined
that his own children should have the “best that money could git in
that line,” which probably meant that they should read fluently. His
own reading was done on Sunday mornings, when he painfully spelled out
the important items in a weekly paper; “important” meant referring
to the produce market or the prize ring, for he had been known and
respected as a boxer, and dearly loved the exquisite details of the
latest bouts. He used to go to church with his wife once a month to
please her, and thought it very unfair therefore that she should take
no interest in his favourite hobby–the manly art.
Although hard and even brutal in his dealings with men, he could not
bear to see an animal ill used. “The men can holler when they’re hurt,
but the poor dumb baste has no protection.” He was the only farmer in
the country that would not sell or shoot a worn-out horse. “The poor
brute has wurruked hard an’ hez airned his kape for the rest av his
days.” So Duncan, Jerry and several others were “retired” and lived
their latter days in idleness, in one case for more than ten years.
Raften had thrashed more than one neighbour for beating a horse, and
once, on interfering, was himself thrashed, for he had the ill-luck to
happen on a prizefighter. But that had no lasting effect on him. He
continued to champion the dumb brute in his own brutal way.
Among the neighbours the perquisites of the boys were the calfskins.
The cows’ milk was needed and the calves of little value, so usually
they were killed when too young for food. The boys did the killing,
making more or less sport of it, and the skins, worth fifty cents
apiece green and twenty-five cents dry, at the tannery, were their
proper pay. Raften never allowed his son to kill the calves. “Oi can’t
kill a poor innocent calf mesilf an’ I won’t hev me boy doin’ it,” he
said. Thus Sam was done out of a perquisite, and did not forget the
grievance.
Mrs. Raften was a fine woman, a splendid manager, loving her home and
her family, her husband’s loyal and ablest supporter, although she
thought that William was sometimes a “leetle hard” on the boys. They
had had a large family, but most of the children had died. Those
remaining were Sam, aged fifteen, and Minnie, aged three.
Yan’s duties were fixed at once. The poultry and half the pigs and
cows were to be his charge. He must also help Sam with various other
chores.
There was plenty to do and clear rules about doing it. But there was
also time nearly every day for other things more in the line of his
tastes; for even if he were hard on the boys in work hours, Raften
saw to it that when they did play they should have a good time. His
roughness and force made Yan afraid of him, and as it was Raften’s
way to say nothing until his mind was fully made up, and then say it
“strong,” Yan was left in doubt as to whether or not he was giving
satisfaction.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
