


A “Massacree” of Palefaces
“Say, fellers, I know where there’s a stavin’ Birch tree–do you want
any bark?”
“Yes, I want some,” said Little Beaver.
“But hold on; I guess we better not, coz it’s right on the edge o’ our
bush, an’ Paw’s still at the turnips.”
“Now if you want a real war party,” said the Head Chief, “let’s
massacree the Paleface settlement up the crick and get some milk.
We’re just out, and I’d like to see if the place has changed any.”
So the boys hid their bows and arrows and headdresses, and, forgetting
to take a pail, they followed in Indian file the blazed trail,
carefully turning in their toes as they went and pointing silently to
the track, making signs of great danger. First they crawled up, under
cover of one of the fences, to the barn. The doors were open and men
working at something. A pig wandered in from the barnyard. Then the
boys heard a sudden scuffle, and a squeal from the pig as it scrambled
out again, and Raften’s voice: “Consarn them pigs! Them boys ought to
be here to herd them.” This was sufficiently alarming to scare the
Warriors off in great haste. They hid in the huge root-cellar and
there held a council of war.
“Here, Great Chiefs of Sanger,” said Yan, “behold I take three straws.
That long one is for the Great Woodpecker, the middle size is for
Little Beaver, and the short thick one with the bump on the end and
a crack on top is Sappy. Now I will stack them up in a bunch and let
them fall, then whichever way they point we must go, for this is Big
Medicine.”
So the straws fell. Sam’s straw pointed nearly to the house, Yan’s a
little to the south of the house, and Guy’s right back home.
“Aha, Sappy, you got to go home; the straw says so.”
“I ain’t goin’ to believe no such foolishness.”
“It’s awful unlucky to go against it.”
“I don’t care, I ain’t goin’ back,” said Guy doggedly.
“Well, my straw says go to the house; that means go scouting for milk,
I reckon.”
Yan’s straw pointed toward the garden, and Guy’s to the residence and
grounds of “J.G. Burns, Esq.”
“I don’t care,” said Sappy, “I ain’t goin’. I am goin’ after some
of them cherries in your orchard, an’ ’twon’t be the first time,
neither.”
“We kin meet by the Basswood at the foot of the lane with whatever
we get,” said the First War Chief, as he sneaked into the bushes and
crawled through the snake fence and among the nettles and manure
heaps on the north side of the barnyard till he reached the woodshed
adjoining the house. He knew where the men were, and he could guess
where his mother was, but he was worried about the Dog. Old Cap might
be on the front doorstep, or he might be prowling at just the wrong
place for the Injun plan. The woodshed butted on the end of the
kitchen. The milk was kept in the cellar, and one window of the cellar
opened into a dark corner of the woodshed. This was easily raised, and
Sam scrambled down into the cool damp cellar. Long rows of milk pans
were in sight on the shelves. He lifted the cover of the one he knew
to be the last put there and drank a deep, long draught with his mouth
down to it, then licked the cream from his lips and remembered that he
had come without a pail. But he knew where to get one. He went
gently up the stairs, avoiding steps Nos. 1 and 7 because they were
“creakers,” as he found out long ago, when he used to ’hook’ maple
sugar from the other side of the house. The door at the top was closed
and buttoned, but he put his jack-knife blade through the crack and
turned the button. After listening awhile and hearing no sound in the
kitchen, he gently opened the squeaky old door. There was no one to
be seen but the baby, sound asleep in her cradle. The outer door was
open, but no Dog lying on the step as usual. Over the kitchen was a
garret entered by a trap-door and a ladder. The ladder was up and the
trap-door open, but all was still. Sam stood over the baby, grunted,
“Ugh, Paleface papoose,” raised his hand as if wielding a war club,
aimed a deadly blow at the sleeping cherub, then stooped and kissed
her rosy mouth so lightly that her pink fists went up to rub it at
once. He now went to the pantry, took a large pie and a tin pail,
then down into the cellar again. He, at first, merely closed the door
behind him and was leaving it so, but remembered that Minnie might
awaken and toddle around till she might toddle into the cellar,
therefore he turned the button so that just a corner showed over the
crack, closed the door and worked with his knife blade on that corner
till the cellar was made as safe as before. He now escaped with his
pie and pail.
Meanwhile his mother’s smiling face beamed out of the dark loft. Then
she came down the ladder. She had seen him come and enter the cellar,
by chance she was in the loft when he reached the kitchen, but she had
kept quiet to enjoy the joke.
Next time the Woodpecker went to the cellar he found a paper with this
on it: ’Notice to hostile Injuns–Next time you massacree this
settlement, bring back the pail, and don’t leave the covers off the
milk pans.”
Yan had followed the fence that ran south of the house. There was
plenty of cover, but he crawled on hands and knees, going right down
on his breast when he came to places more open than the rest. In this
way he had nearly reached the garden when he heard a noise behind and,
turning, he saw Sappy.
“Here, what are you following me for? Your straw pointed the other
way. You ain’t playing fair.”
“Well, I don’t care, I ain’t going home. You fixed it up so my
straw would point that way. It ain’t fair, an’ I won’t do it.”
“You got no right following me.”
“I ain’t following you, but you keep going just the place I want to
go. It’s you following me, on’y keepin’ ahead. I told you I was after
cherries.”
“Well, the cherries are that way and I’m going this way, and I don’t
want you along.”
“You couldn’t get me if you wanted me.”
“Erh––”
“Erh––”
So Sappy went cherryward and Yan waited awhile, then crawled toward
the fruit garden. After twenty or thirty yards more, he saw a gleam of
red, then under it a bright yellow eye glaring at him. He had chanced
on a hen sitting on her nest. He came nearer, she took alarm and ran
away, not clucking, but cackling loudly. There were a dozen eggs of
two different styles, all bright and clean, and the hen’s comb was
bright red. Yan knew hens. This was easy to read: Two stray hens
laying in one nest, and neither of them sitting yet.
“So ho! Straws show which way the hens go.”
He gathered up the eggs into his hat and crawled back toward the tree
where all had to meet.
But before he had gone far he heard a loud barking, then yells for
help, and turned in time to see Guy scramble up a tree while Cap, the
old Collie, barked savagely at him from below. Now that he was in no
danger Sappy had the sense to keep quiet. Yan came back as quickly
as possible. The Dog at once recognized and obeyed him, but
doubtless was much puzzled to make out why he should be pelted back to
the house when he had so nobly done his duty by the orchard.
“Now, you see, maybe next time you’ll do what the medicine straw tells
you. Only for me you’d been caught and fed to the pigs, sure.”
“Only for you I wouldn’t have come. I wasn’t scared of your old Dog,
anyway. Just in about two minutes more I was comin’ down to kick the
stuffin’ out o’ him myself.”
“Perhaps you’d like to go back and do it now. I’ll soon call him.”
“Oh, I hain’t got time now, but some other time–Let’s find Sam.”
So they foregathered at the tree, and laden with their spoils, they
returned gloriously to camp.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
