


There now began to be a decided change in the appearance of things.
The days became shorter and shorter; the sun running lower in its
course each day, and giving less and less heat; and the nights so
cold as to prevent our sleeping on deck; the Magellan Clouds in
sight, of a clear night; the skies looking cold and angry; and,
at times, a long, heavy, ugly sea, setting in from the southwards
told us what we were coming to.  Still, however, we had a fine,
strong breeze, and kept on our way, under as much sail as our
ship would bear.  Toward the middle of the week, the wind hauled
to the southward, which brought us upon a taught bowline, made the
ship meet, nearly head on, the heavy swell which rolled from that
direction; and there was something not at all encouraging in the
manner in which she met it.  Being so deep and heavy, she wanted
the buoyancy which should have carried her over the seas, and she
dropped heavily into them, the water washing over the decks; and
every now and then, when an unusually large sea met her fairly
upon the bows, she struck it with a sound as dead and heavy as
that with which a sledge-hammer falls upon the pile, and took
the whole of it in upon the forecastle, and rising, carried it
aft in the scuppers, washing the rigging off the pins, and carrying
along with it everything which was loose on deck.  She had been
acting in this way all of our forenoon watch below; as we could
tell by the washing of the water over our heads, and the heavy
breaking of the seas against her bows, (with a sound as though
she were striking against a rock,) only the thickness of the
plank from our heads, as we lay in our berths, which are directly
against the bows.  At eight bells, the watch was called, and we
came on deck, one hand going aft to take the wheel, and another
going to the galley to get the grub for dinner.  I stood on the
forecastle, looking at the seas, which were rolling high, as far
as the eye could reach, their tops white with foam, and the body
of them of a deep indigo blue, reflecting the bright rays of the
sun.  Our ship rose slowly over a few of the largest of them,
until one immense fellow came rolling on, threatening to cover
her, and which I was sailor enough to know, by “the feeling of
her” under my feet, she would not rise over.  I sprang upon the
knight-heads, and seizing hold of the fore-stay with my hands,
drew myself upon it.  My feet were just off the stanchion, when
she struck fairly into the middle of the sea, and it washed her
fore and aft, burying her in the water.  As soon as she rose out
of it, I looked aft, and everything forward of the main-mast,
except the long-boat, which was griped and double-lashed down
to the ring-bolts, was swept off clear.  The galley, the pig-sty,
the hen-coop, and a large sheep-pen which had been built upon the
forehatch, were all gone, in the twinkling of an eye–leaving the
deck as clean as a chin new-reaped–and not a stick left, to show
where they had stood.  In the scuppers lay the galley, bottom up,
and a few boards floating about, the wreck of the sheep-pen,–and
half a dozen miserable sheep floating among them, wet through,
and not a little frightened at the sudden change that had come
upon them.  As soon as the sea had washed by, all hands sprung
out of the forecastle to see what had become of the ship and in
a few moments the cook and old Bill crawled out from under the
galley, where they had been lying in the water, nearly smothered,
with the galley over them.  Fortunately, it rested against the
bulwarks, or it would have broken some of their bones.  When the
water ran off, we picked the sheep up, and put them in the long-
boat, got the galley back in its place, and set things a little
to rights; but, had not our ship had uncommonly high bulwarks and
rail, everything must have been washed overboard, not excepting
Old Bill and the cook.
Bill had been standing at the galley-door, with the kid of beef in his
hand for the forecastle mess, when, away he went, kid, beef, and all.
He held on to the kid till the last, like a good fellow, but the beef
was gone, and when the water had run off, we saw it lying high and dry,
like a rock at low tide–nothing could hurt that.  We took the loss
of our beef very easily, consoling ourselves with the recollection
that the cabin had more to lose than we; and chuckled not a little
at seeing the remains of the chicken-pie and pan-cakes floating in
the scuppers.  “This will never do!” was what some said, and every
one felt.  Here we were, not yet within a thousand miles of the
latitude of Cape Horn, and our decks swept by a sea not one half
so high as we must expect to find there.  Some blamed the captain
for loading his ship so deep, when he knew what he must expect;
while others said that the wind was always southwest, off the Cape,
in the winter; and that, running before it, we should not mind the
seas so much.  When we got down into the forecastle, Old Bill, who
was somewhat of a croaker,–having met with a great many accidents
at sea–said that if that was the way she was going to act, we might
as well make our wills, and balance the books at once, and put on
a clean shirt.  “’Vast there, you bloody old owl!  You’re always
hanging out blue lights!  You’re frightened by the ducking you got
in the scuppers, and can’t take a joke!  What’s the use in being
always on the look-out for Davy Jones?”  “Stand by!” says another,
“and we’ll get an afternoon watch below, by this scrape;” but in
this they were disappointed, for at two bells, all hands were
called and set to work, getting lashings upon everything on deck;
and the captain talked of sending down the long top-gallant masts;
but, as the sea went down toward night, and the wind hauled abeam,
we left them standing, and set the studding-sails. 
The next day, all hands were turned-to upon unbending the old
sails, and getting up the new ones; for a ship, unlike people
on shore, puts on her best suit in bad weather.  The old sails
were sent down, and three new topsails, and new fore and main
courses, jib, and fore-topmast staysail, which were made on
the coast, and never had been used, were bent, with a complete
set of new earings, robands and reef-points; and reef-tackles
were rove to the courses, and spilling-lines to the top-sails.
These, with new braces and clew-lines, fore and aft, gave us a
good suit of running rigging.
The wind continued westerly, and the weather and sea less rough
since the day on which we shipped the heavy sea, and we were
making great progress under studding-sails, with our light sails
all set, keeping a little to the eastward of south; for the captain,
depending upon westerly winds off the Cape, had kept so far to the
westward, that though we were within about five hundred miles of
the latitude of Cape Horn, we were nearly seventeen hundred miles
to the westward of it.  Through the rest of the week, we continued
on with a fair wind, gradually, as we got more to the southward,
keeping a more easterly course, and bringing the wind on our
larboard quarter, until–
Sunday, June 26th, when, having a fine, clear day, the captain
got a lunar observation, as well as his meridian altitude, which
made us in lat. 47° 50’ S., long. 113° 49’ W.; Cape Horn bearing,
according to my calculation, E. S. E. 1/2 E., and distant eighteen
hundred miles.
Monday, June 27th.  During the first part of this day, the wind
continued fair, and, as we were going before it, it did not feel
very cold, so that we kept at work on deck, in our common clothes
and round jackets.  Our watch had an afternoon watch below, for the
first time since leaving San Diego, and having inquired of the third
mate what the latitude was at noon, and made our usual guesses as
to the time she would need, to be up with the Horn, we turned-
in, for a nap.  We were sleeping away “at the rates of knots,"
when three knocks on the scuttle, and “All hands ahoy!” started
us from our berths.  What could be the matter?  It did not appear
to be blowing hard, and looking up through the scuttle, we could
see that it was a clear day, overhead; yet the watch were taking
in sail.
We thought there must be a sail in sight, and that we were about
to heave-to and speak her; and were just congratulating ourselves
upon it–for we had seen neither sail nor land since we had
left port–when we heard the mate’s voice on deck, (he turned-in
“all standing,” and was always on deck the moment he was called,)
singing out to the men who were taking in the studding-sails, and
asking where his watch were.  We did not wait for a second call,
but tumbled up the ladder; and there, on the starboard bow, was a
bank of mist, covering sea and sky, and driving directly for us.
I had seen the same before, in my passage round in the Pilgrim,
and knew what it meant, and that there was no time to be lost.
We had nothing on but thin clothes, yet there was not a moment
to spare, and at it we went.
The boys of the other watch were in the tops, taking in the top-
gallant studding-sails, and the lower and topmast studding-sails
were coming down by the run.  It was nothing but “haul down and
clew up,” until we got all the studding-sails in, and the royals,
flying-jib, and mizen top-gallant sail furled, and the ship kept
off a little, to take the squall.  The fore and main top-gallant
sails were still on her, for the “old man” did not mean to be
frightened in broad daylight, and was determined to carry sail
till the last minute.
We all stood waiting for its coming, when the first blast showed
us that it was not be trifled with.  Rain, sleet, snow, and wind,
enough to take our breath from us, and make the toughest turn his
back to windward!  The ship lay nearly over on her beam-ends; the
spars and rigging snapped and cracked; and her top-gallant masts
bent like whip-sticks.  “Clew up the fore and main top-gallant
sails!” shouted the captain, and all hands sprang to the clewlines.
The decks were standing nearly at an angle of forty-five degrees,
and the ship going like a mad steed through the water, the whole
forward part of her in a smother of foam.  The halyards were let
go and the yard clewed down, and the sheets started, and in a few
minutes the sails smothered and kept in by clewlines and buntlines.
–"Furl ’em, sir?” asked the mate.–"Let go the topsail halyards,
fore and aft!” shouted the captain, in answer, at the top of his voice. 
Down came the topsail yards, the reef-tackles were manned and
hauled out, and we climbed up to windward, and sprang into the
weather rigging.  The violence of the wind, and the hail and sleet,
driving nearly horizontally across the ocean, seemed actually
to pin us down to the rigging.  It was hard work making head
against them.  One after another, we got out upon the yards.
And here we had work to do; for our new sails, which had hardly
been bent long enough to get the starch out of them, were as stiff
as boards, and the new earings and reef-points, stiffened with the
sleet, knotted like pieces of iron wire.  Having only our round
jackets and straw hats on, we were soon wet through, and it was
every moment growing colder.  Our hands were soon stiffened and
numbed, which, added to the stiffness of everything else, kept us
a good while on the yard.  After we had got the sail hauled upon
the yard, we had to wait a long time for the weather earing to
be passed; but there was no fault to be found, for French John
was at the earing, and a better sailor never laid out on a yard;
so we leaned over the yard, and beat our hands upon the sail to
keep them from freezing.  At length the word came–"Haul out
to leeward,"–and we seized the reef-points and hauled the band
taught for the lee earing.  “Taught band–Knot away,” and we got
the first reef fast, and were just going to lay down, when–"Two
reefs–two reefs!” shouted the mate, and we had a second reef to
take, in the same way.  When this was fast, we laid down on deck,
manned the halyards to leeward, nearly up to our knees in water,
set the topsail, and then laid aloft on the main topsail yard,
and reefed that sail in the same manner; for, as I have before
stated, we were a good deal reduced in numbers, and, to make
it worse, the carpenter, only two days before, cut his leg with
an axe, so that he could not go aloft.  This weakened us so that
we could not well manage more than one topsail at a time, in such
weather as this, and, of course, our labor was doubled.  From the
main topsail yard, we went upon the main yard, and took a reef in
the mainsail.  No sooner had we got on deck, than–"Lay aloft there,
mizen-top-men, and close-reef the mizen topsail!”  This called me;
and being nearest to the rigging, I got first aloft, and out to
the weather earing.  English Ben was on the yard just after me,
and took the lee earing, and the rest of our gang were soon on
the yard, and began to fist the sail, when the mate considerately
sent up the cook and steward, to help us.  I could now account
for the long time it took to pass the other earings, for, to do
my best, with a strong hand to help me at the dog’s ear, I could
not get it passed until I heard them beginning to complain in the
bunt.  One reef after another we took in, until the sail was close-
reefed, when we went down and hoisted away at the halyards.  In the
mean time, the jib had been furled and the staysail set, and the
ship, under her reduced sail, had got more upright and was under
management; but the two top-gallant sails were still hanging in
the buntlines, and slatting and jerking as though they would take
the masts out of her.  We gave a look aloft, and knew that our work
was not done yet; and, sure enough, no sooner did the mate see that
we were on deck, than–"Lay aloft there, four of you, and furl the
top-gallant sails!” This called me again, and two of us went aloft,
up the fore rigging, and two more up the main, upon the top-gallant
yards.
The shrouds were now iced over, the sleet having formed a crust
or cake round all the standing rigging, and on the weather side
of the masts and yards.  When we got upon the yard, my hands were
so numb that I could not have cast off the knot of the gasket to
have saved my life.  We both lay over the yard for a few seconds,
beating our hands upon the sail, until we started the blood into
our fingers’ ends, and at the next moment our hands were in a
burning heat.  My companion on the yard was a lad, who came out
in the ship a weak, puny boy, from one of the Boston schools,–
“no larger than a spritsail sheet knot,” nor “heavier than a
paper of lamp-black,” and “not strong enough to haul a shad
off a gridiron,” but who was now “as long as a spare topmast,
strong enough to knock down an ox, and hearty enough to eat him."
We fisted the sail together, and after six or eight minutes of hard
hauling and pulling and beating down the sail, which was as stiff
as sheet iron, we managed to get it furled; and snugly furled it
must be, for we knew the mate well enough to be certain that if
it got adrift again, we should be called up from our watch below,
at any hour of the night, to furl it.
I had been on the look-out for a moment to jump below and clap on
a thick jacket and south-wester; but when we got on deck we found
that eight bells had been struck, and the other watch gone below,
so that there were two hours of dog watch for us, and a plenty of
work to do.  It had now set in for a steady gale from the south-west;
but we were not yet far enough to the southward to make a fair wind
of it, for we must give Terra del Fuego a wide berth.  The decks
were covered with snow, and there was a constant driving of sleet.
In fact, Cape Horn had set in with good earnest.  In the midst of
all this, and before it became dark, we had all the studding-sails
to make up and stow away, and then to lay aloft and rig in all the
booms, fore and aft, and coil away the tacks, sheets, and halyards.
This was pretty tough work for four or five hands, in the face of
a gale which almost took us off the yards, and with ropes so stiff
with ice that it was almost impossible to bend them.  I was nearly
half an hour out on the end of the fore yard, trying to coil away
and stop down the topmast studding-sail tack and lower halyards.
It was after dark when we got through, and we were not a little
pleased to hear four bells struck, which sent us below for two
hours, and gave us each a pot of hot tea with our cold beef and
bread, and, what was better yet, a suit of thick, dry clothing,
fitted for the weather, in place of our thin clothes, which were
wet through and now frozen stiff.
This sudden turn, for which we were so little prepared, was as
unacceptable to me as to any of the rest; for I had been troubled
for several days with a slight tooth-ache, and this cold weather,
and wetting and freezing, were not the best things in the world
for it.
I soon found that it was getting strong hold, and running over all
parts of my face; and before the watch was out I went aft to the
mate, who had charge of the medicine-chest, to get something for it. 
But the chest showed like the end of a long voyage, for there was
nothing that would answer but a few drops of laudanum, which must
be saved for any emergency; so I had only to bear the pain as well
as I could.
When we went on deck at eight bells, it had stopped snowing, and
there were a few stars out, but the clouds were still black, and it
was blowing a steady gale.  Just before midnight, I went aloft and
sent down the mizen royal yard, and had the good luck to do it to
the satisfaction of the mate, who said it was done “out of hand
and ship-shape.”  The next four hours below were but little relief
to me, for I lay awake in my berth, the whole time, from the pain
in my face, and heard every bell strike, and, at four o’clock,
turned out with the watch, feeling little spirit for the hard
duties of the day.
Bad weather and hard work at sea can be borne up against very
well, if one only has spirit and health; but there is nothing
brings a man down, at such a time, like bodily pain and want
of sleep.
There was, however, too much to do to allow time to think;
for the gale of yesterday, and the heavy seas we met with a
few days before, while we had yet ten degrees more southing to
make, had convinced the captain that we had something before us
which was not to be trifled with, and orders were given to send
down the long top-gallant masts.  The top-gallant and royal yards
were accordingly struck, the flying jib-boom rigged in, and the
top-gallant masts sent down on deck, and all lashed together by
the side of the long-boat.
The rigging was then sent down and coiled away below, and everything
was made snug aloft.  There was not a sailor in the ship who was not
rejoiced to see these sticks come down; for, so long as the yards
were aloft, on the least sign of a lull, the top-gallant sails were
loosed, and then we had to furl them again in a snow-squall, and shin
up and down single ropes caked with ice, and send royal yards down in
the teeth of a gale coming right from the south pole.  It was an
interesting sight, too, to see our noble ship, dismantled of all
her top-hamper of long tapering masts and yards, and boom pointed
with spear-head, which ornamented her in port; and all that canvas,
which a few days before had covered her like a cloud, from the
truck to the water’s edge, spreading far out beyond her hull on
either side, now gone; and she, stripped, like a wrestler for
the fight.  It corresponded, too, with the desolate character
of her situation;–alone, as she was, battling with storms,
wind, and ice, at this extremity of the globe, and in almost
constant night.
Friday, July 1st.  We were now nearly up to the latitude of Cape
Horn, and having over forty degrees of easting to make, we squared
away the yards before a strong westerly gale, shook a reef out of the
fore-topsail, and stood on our way, east-by-south, with the prospect
of being up with the Cape in a week or ten days.  As for myself,
I had had no sleep for forty-eight hours; and the want of rest,
together with constant wet and cold, had increased the swelling,
so that my face was nearly as large as two, and I found it impossible
to get my mouth open wide enough to eat.  In this state, the steward
applied to the captain for some rice to boil for me, but he only
got a–"No! d–- you! Tell him to eat salt junk and hard bread,
like the rest of them.”  For this, of course, I was much obliged
to him, and in truth it was just what I expected.  However, I did
not starve, for the mate, who was a man as well as a sailor, and
had always been a good friend to me, smuggled a pan of rice into
the galley, and told the cook to boil it for me, and not let the
“old man” see it.  Had it been fine weather, or in port, I should
have gone below and lain by until my face got well; but in such
weather as this, and short-handed as we were, it was not for me
to desert my post; so I kept on deck, and stood my watch and did
my duty as well as I could.
Saturday, July 2nd.  This day the sun rose fair, but it ran too
low in the heavens to give any heat, or thaw out our sails and
rigging; yet the sight of it was pleasant; and we had a steady
“reef topsail breeze” from the westward.  The atmosphere, which had
previously been clear and cold, for the last few hours grew damp,
and had a disagreeable, wet chilliness in it; and the man who came
from the wheel said he heard the captain tell “the passenger” that
the thermometer had fallen several degrees since morning, which he
could not account for in any other way than by supposing that there
must be ice near us; though such a thing had never been heard of
in this latitude, at this season of the year.  At twelve o’clock
we went below, and had just got through dinner, when the cook put
his head down the scuttle and told us to come on deck and see the
finest sight that we had ever seen.  “Where away, cook?” asked
the first man who was up.  “On the larboard bow.”  And there lay,
floating in the ocean, several miles off, an immense, irregular mass,
its top and points covered with snow, and its center of a deep indigo
color.
This was an iceberg, and of the largest size, as one of our men said
who had been in the Northern ocean.  As far as the eye could reach,
the sea in every direction was of a deep blue color, the waves
running high and fresh, and sparkling in the light, and in the
midst lay this immense mountain-island, its cavities and valleys
thrown into deep shade, and its points and pinnacles glittering
in the sun.
All hands were soon on deck, looking at it, and admiring in various
ways its beauty and grandeur.  But no description can give any idea
of the strangeness, splendor, and, really, the sublimity, of the sight. 
Its great size;–for it must have been from two to three miles
in circumference, and several hundred feet in height;–its
slow motion, as its base rose and sank in the water, and its
high points nodded against the clouds; the dashing of the waves
upon it, which, breaking high with foam, lined its base with
a white crust; and the thundering sound of the cracking of
the mass, and the breaking and tumbling down of huge pieces;
together with its nearness and approach, which added a slight
element of fear,–all combined to give to it the character of
true sublimity.  The main body of the mass was, as I have said,
of an indigo color, its base crusted with frozen foam; and as it
grew thin and transparent toward the edges and top, its color
shaded off from a deep blue to the whiteness of snow.
It seemed to be drifting slowly toward the north, so that we kept
away and avoided it.  It was in sight all the afternoon; and when we
got to leeward of it, the wind died away, so that we lay-to quite
near it for a greater part of the night.  Unfortunately, there was
no moon, but it was a clear night, and we could plainly mark the
long, regular heaving of the stupendous mass, as its edges moved
slowly against the stars.  Several times in our watch loud cracks
were heard, which sounded as though they must have run through the
whole length of the iceberg, and several pieces fell down with a
thundering crash, plunging heavily into the sea.  Toward morning,
a strong breeze sprang up, and we filled away, and left it astern,
and at daylight it was out of sight.  The next day, which was
Sunday, July 3d, the breeze continued strong, the air exceedingly
chilly, and the thermometer low.  In the course of the day we saw
several icebergs, of different sizes, but none so near as the
one which we saw the day before.  Some of them, as well as we
could judge, at the distance at which we were, must have been
as large as that, if not larger.  At noon we were in latitude
55° 12’ south, and supposed longitude 89° 5’ west.  Toward night
the wind hauled to the southward, and headed us off our course
a little, and blew a tremendous gale; but this we did not mind,
as there was no rain nor snow, and we were already under close
sail.
Monday, July 4th.  This was “independence day” in Boston.
What firing of guns, and ringing of bells, and rejoicings of
all sorts, in every part of our country!  The ladies (who have
not gone down to Nahant, for a breath of cool air, and sight of
the ocean) walking the streets with parasols over their heads,
and the dandies in their white pantaloons and silk stockings!
What quantities of ice-cream have been eaten, and what quantities
of ice brought into the city from a distance, and sold out by the
lump and the pound!  The smallest of the islands which we saw
today would have made the fortune of poor Jack, if he had had it
in Boston; and I dare say he would have had no objection to being
there with it.  This, to be sure, was no place to keep the fourth
of July.  To keep ourselves warm, and the ship out of the ice,
was as much as we could do.  Yet no one forgot the day; and many
were the wishes, and conjectures, and comparisons, both serious and
ludicrous, which were made among all hands.  The sun shone bright
as long as it was up, only that a scud of black clouds was ever
and anon driving across it.  At noon we were in lat. 54° 27’ S.,
and long. 85° 5’ W., having made a good deal of easting, but having
lost in our latitude by the heading of the wind.  Between daylight
and dark–that is, between nine o’clock and three–we saw thirty-
four ice islands, of various sizes; some no bigger than the hull
of our vessel, and others apparently nearly as large as the one
that we first saw; though, as we went on, the islands became
smaller and more numerous; and, at sundown of this day, a man at
the mast-head saw large fields of floating ice called “field-ice"
at the south-east.  This kind of ice is much more dangerous than
the large islands, for those can be seen at a distance, and kept
away from; but the field-ice, floating in great quantities, and
covering the ocean for miles and miles, in pieces of every size-
-large, flat, and broken cakes, with here and there an island
rising twenty and thirty feet, and as large as the ship’s hull;–
this, it is very difficult to sheer clear of.  A constant look-out
was necessary; for any of these pieces, coming with the heave
of the sea, were large enough to have knocked a hole in the ship,
and that would have been the end of us; for no boat (even if we
could have got one out) could have lived in such a sea; and no man
could have lived in a boat in such weather.  To make our condition
still worse, the wind came out due east, just after sundown, and it
blew a gale dead ahead, with hail and sleet, and a thick fog, so that
we could not see half the length of the ship.  Our chief reliance,
the prevailing westerly gales, was thus cut off; and here we were,
nearly seven hundred miles to the westward of the Cape, with a gale
dead from the eastward, and the weather so thick that we could not
see the ice with which we were surrounded, until it was directly
under our bows.
At four, P. M. (it was then quite dark) all hands were called, and sent
aloft in a violent squall of hail and rain, to take in sail.  We had
now all got on our “Cape Horn rig"–thick boots, south-westers coming
down over our neck and ears, thick trowsers and jackets, and some with
oil-cloth suits over all.  Mittens, too, we wore on deck, but it would
not do to go aloft with them on, for it was impossible to work with
them, and, being wet and stiff, they might let a man slip overboard,
for all the hold he could get upon a rope; so, we were obliged to
work with bare hands, which, as well as our faces, were often cut
with the hail-stones, which fell thick and large.  Our ship was
now all cased with ice,–hull, spars, and standing rigging;–and
the running rigging so stiff that we could hardly bend it so as
to belay it, or, still worse, take a knot with it; and the sails
nearly as stiff as sheet iron.  One at a time, (for it was a long
piece of work and required many hands,) we furled the courses,
mizen topsail, and fore-topmast staysail, and close-reefed the
fore and main topsails, and hove the ship to under the fore,
with the main hauled up by the clewlines and buntlines, and ready
to be sheeted home, if we found it necessary to make sail to get
to windward of an ice island.  A regular look-out was then set,
and kept by each watch in turn, until the morning.  It was a tedious
and anxious night.  It blew hard the whole time, and there was an
almost constant driving of either rain, hail, or snow.  In addition
to this, it was “as thick as muck,” and the ice was all about us.
The captain was on deck nearly the whole night, and kept the
cook in the galley, with a roaring fire, to make coffee for him,
which he took every few hours, and once or twice gave a little to
his officers; but not a drop of anything was there for the crew.
The captain, who sleeps all the daytime, and comes and goes at
night as he chooses, can have his brandy and water in the cabin,
and his hot coffee at the galley; while Jack, who has to stand
through everything, and work in wet and cold, can have nothing
to wet his lips or warm his stomach.
This was a “temperance ship,” and, like too many such ships, the
temperance was all in the forecastle.  The sailor, who only takes
his one glass as it is dealt out to him, is in danger of being drunk;
while the captain, who has all under his hand, and can drink as much
as he chooses, and upon whose self-possession and cool judgment the
lives of all depend, may be trusted with any amount, to drink at
his will.  Sailors will never be convinced that rum is a dangerous
thing, by taking it away from them, and giving it to the officers;
nor that, that temperance is their friend, which takes from them
what they have always had, and gives them nothing in the place of
it.  By seeing it allowed to their officers, they will not be
convinced that it is taken from them for their good; and by
receiving nothing in its place, they will not believe that
it is done in kindness.  On the contrary, many of them look
upon the change as a new instrument of tyranny.  Not that
they prefer rum. I never knew a sailor, in my life, who would
not prefer a pot of hot coffee or chocolate, in a cold night,
to all the rum afloat. They all say that rum only warms them for
a time; yet, if they can get nothing better, they will miss what
they have lost. The momentary warmth and glow from drinking it;
the break and change which is made in a long, dreary watch by
the mere calling all hands aft and serving of it out; and the
simply having some event to look forward to, and to talk about;
give it an importance and a use which no one can appreciate who
has not stood his watch before the mast. On my passage round Cape
Horn before, the vessel that I was in was not under temperance
articles, and grog was served out every middle and morning watch,
and after every reefing of topsails; and though I had never drank
rum before, and never intend to again, I took my allowance then
at the capstan, as the rest did, merely for the momentary warmth
it gave the system, and the change in our feelings and aspect of
our duties on the watch.  At the same time, as I have stated,
there was not a man on board who would not have pitched the rum
to the dogs, (I have heard them say so, a dozen times) for a
pot of coffee or chocolate; or even for our common beverage–
“water bewitched, and tea begrudged,” as it was.(1)
–––––––-
1.  The proportions of the ingredients of the tea that was made for
us (and ours, as I have before stated, was a favorable specimen of
American merchantmen) were, a pint of tea, and a pint and a half
of molasses, to about three gallons of water.
These are all boiled down together in the “coppers,” and before
serving it out, the mess is stirred up with a stick, so as to give
each man his fair share of sweetening and tea-leaves.  The tea
for the cabin is, of course, made in the usual way, in a tea-pot,
and drank with sugar.
–––––––-
The temperance reform is the best thing that ever was undertaken
for the sailor; but when the grog is taken from him, he ought to
have something in its place.  As it is now, in most vessels, it is a
mere saving to the owners; and this accounts for the sudden increase
of temperance ships, which surprised even the best friends of the
cause.  If every merchant, when he struck grog from the list of
the expenses of his ship, had been obliged to substitute as much
coffee, or chocolate, as would give each man a pot-full when he
came off the topsail yard, on a stormy night;–I fear Jack might
have gone to ruin on the old road.(2)  But this is not doubling
–––––––-
(2) I do not wish these remarks, so far as they relate to the
saving of expense in the outfit, to be applied to the owners
of our ship, for she was supplied with an abundance of stores,
of the best kind that are given to seamen;, though the dispensing
of them is necessarily left to the captain, Indeed, so high was
the reputation of “the employ” among men and officers, for the
character and outfit of their vessels, and for their liberality
in conducting their voyages, that when it was known that they had
a ship fitting out for a long voyage, and that hands were to be
shipped at a certain time,–a half hour before the time, as one of
the crew told me, numbers of sailors were steering down the wharf,
hopping over the barrels, like flocks of sheep.
–––––––-
Cape Horn.  Eight hours of the night, our watch was on deck, and
during the whole of that time we kept a bright look-out: one man
on each bow, another in the bunt of the fore yard, the third mate
on the scuttle, one on each quarter, and a man always standing by
the wheel.  The chief mate was everywhere, and commanded the ship
when the captain was below.
When a large piece of ice was seen in our way, or drifting near us,
the word was passed along, and the ship’s head turned one way and
another; and sometimes the yards squared or braced up.  There was
little else to do than to look out; and we had the sharpest eyes in
the ship on the forecastle.  The only variety was the monotonous
voice of the look-out forward–"Another island!"–"Ice ahead!"–
“Ice on the lee bow!"–"Hard up the helm!"–"Keep her off a
little!"–"Stead-y!”
In the meantime, the wet and cold had brought my face into such
a state that I could neither eat nor sleep; and though I stood it
out all night, yet, when it became light, I was in such a state,
that all hands told me I must go below, and lie-by for a day or
two, or I should be laid up for a long time, and perhaps have the
lock-jaw.
When the watch was changed I went into the steerage, and took off
my hat and comforter, and showed my face to the mate, who told me
to go below at once, and stay in my berth until the swelling went
down, and gave the cook orders to make a poultice for me, and said
he would speak to the captain.
I went below and turned-in, covering myself over with blankets
and jackets, and lay in my berth nearly twenty-four hours, half
asleep and half awake, stupid, from the dull pain.  I heard the
watch called, and the men going up and down, and sometimes a
noise on deck, and a cry of “ice,” but I gave little attention
to anything.  At the end of twenty-four hours the pain went down,
and I had a long sleep, which brought me back to my proper state;
yet my face was so swollen and tender, that I was obliged to keep
to my berth for two or three days longer.  During the two days I
had been below, the weather was much the same that it had been,
head winds, and snow and rain; or, if the wind came fair, too foggy,
and the ice too thick, to run.  At the end of the third day the ice
was very thick; a complete fog-bank covered the ship.  It blew a
tremendous gale from the eastward, with sleet and snow, and there
was every promise of a dangerous and fatiguing night.  At dark,
the captain called all hands aft, and told them that not a man was
to leave the deck that night; that the ship was in the greatest
danger; any cake of ice might knock a hole in her, or she might
run on an island and go to pieces.  No one could tell whether she
would be a ship the next morning.  The look-outs were then set,
and every man was put in his station.  When I heard what was the
state of things, I began to put on my clothes to stand it out
with the rest of them, when the mate came below, and looking at
my face, ordered me back to my berth, saying that if we went down,
we should all go down together, but if I went on deck I might lay
myself up for life.  This was the first word I had heard from aft;
for the captain had done nothing, nor inquired how I was, since I
went below.
In obedience to the mate’s orders, I went back to my berth; but a
more miserable night I never wish to spend.  I never felt the curse
of sickness so keenly in my life.  If I could only have been on deck
with the rest, where something was to be done, and seen, and heard;
where there were fellow-beings for companions in duty and danger–but
to be cooped up alone in a black hole, in equal danger, but without the
power to do, was the hardest trial.  Several times, in the course of
the night, I got up, determined to go on deck; but the silence which
showed that there was nothing doing, and the knowledge that I might
make myself seriously ill, for nothing, kept me back.  It was not
easy to sleep, lying, as I did, with my head directly against the
bows, which might be dashed in by an island of ice, brought down
by the very next sea that struck her.  This was the only time I
had been ill since I left Boston, and it was the worst time it
could have happened.  I felt almost willing to bear the plagues
of Egypt for the rest of the voyage, if I could but be well and
strong for that one night.  Yet it was a dreadful night for those
on deck.
A watch of eighteen hours, with wet, and cold, and constant anxiety,
nearly wore them out; and when they came below at nine o’clock for
breakfast, they almost dropped asleep on their chests, and some
of them were so stiff that they could with difficulty sit down.
Not a drop of anything had been given them during the whole time,
(though the captain, as on the night that I was on deck, had his
coffee every four hours,) except that the mate stole a potful of
coffee for two men to drink behind the galley, while he kept a
look-out for the captain.  Every man had his station, and was not
allowed to leave it; and nothing happened to break the monotony
of the night, except once setting the main topsails to run clear
of a large island to leeward, which they were drifting fast upon.
Some of the boys got so sleepy and stupefied, that they actually
fell asleep at their posts; and the young third mate, whose station
was the exposed one of standing on the fore scuttle, was so stiff,
when he was relieved, that he could not bend his knees to get down.
By a constant look-out, and a quick shifting of the helm, as the
islands and pieces came in sight, the ship went clear of everything
but a few small pieces, though daylight showed the ocean covered for
miles.  At daybreak it fell a dead calm, and with the sun, the fog
cleared a little, and a breeze sprung up from the westward, which soon
grew into a gale.  We had now a fair wind, daylight, and comparatively
clear weather; yet, to the surprise of every one, the ship continued
hove-to.  Why does not he run?  What is the captain about? was asked
by every one; and from questions, it soon grew into complaints and
murmurings.  When the daylight was so short, it was too bad to
lose it, and a fair wind, too, which every one had been praying
for.  As hour followed hour, and the captain showed no sign of
making sail, the crew became impatient, and there was a good deal
of talking and consultation together, on the forecastle.  They had
been beaten out with the exposure and hardship, and impatient to
get out of it, and this unaccountable delay was more than they
could bear in quietness, in their excited and restless state.
Some said that the captain was frightened,–completely cowed,
by the dangers and difficulties that surrounded us, and was afraid
to make sail; while others said that in his anxiety and suspense
he had made a free use of brandy and opium, and was unfit for
his duty.  The carpenter, who was an intelligent man, and a
thorough seaman, and had great influence with the crew,
came down into the forecastle, and tried to induce the crew to
go aft and ask the captain why he did not run, or request him,
in the name of all hands, to make sail.  This appeared to be a
very reasonable request, and the crew agreed that if he did not
make sail before noon, they would go aft.  Noon came, and no sail
was made.  A consultation was held again, and it was proposed to
take the ship from the captain and give the command of her to the
mate, who had been heard to say that, if he could have his way,
the ship would have been half the distance to the Cape before
night,–ice or no ice.  And so irritated and impatient had the
crew become, that even this proposition, which was open mutiny,
punishable with state prison, was entertained, and the carpenter
went to his berth, leaving it tacitly understood that something
serious would be done, if things remained as they were many hours
longer.  When the carpenter left, we talked it all over, and I gave
my advice strongly against it.  Another of the men, too, who had
known something of the kind attempted in another ship by a crew
who were dissatisfied with their captain, and which was followed
with serious consequences, was opposed to it.  S––-, who soon
came down, joined us, and we determined to have nothing to do
with it.  By these means, they were soon induced to give it up,
for the present, though they said they would not lie where they
were much longer without knowing the reason.
The affair remained in this state until four o’clock, when an
order came forward for all hands to come aft upon the quarter-
deck.  In about ten minutes they came forward again, and the
whole affair had been blown.  The carpenter, very prematurely,
and without any authority from the crew, had sounded the mate
as to whether he would take command of the ship, and intimated
an intention to displace the captain; and the mate, as in duty
bound, had told the whole to the captain, who immediately sent
for all hands aft.  Instead of violent measures, or, at least,
an outbreak of quarter-deck bravado, threats, and abuse, which
they had every reason to expect, a sense of common danger and
common suffering seemed to have tamed his spirit, and begotten
something like a humane fellow-feeling; for he received the crew
in a manner quiet, and even almost kind.  He told them what he
had heard, and said that he did not believe that they would try
to do any such thing as was intimated; that they had always been
good men,–obedient, and knew their duty, and he had no fault to
find with them; and asked them what they had to complain of–said
that no one could say that he was slow to carry sail, (which was
true enough;) and that, as soon as he thought it was safe and
proper, he should make sail.  He added a few words about their
duty in their present situation, and sent them forward, saying
that he should take no further notice of the matter; but, at the
same time, told the carpenter to recollect whose power he was in,
and that if he heard another word from him he would have cause to
remember him to the day of his death.
This language of the captain had a very good effect upon the crew,
and they returned quietly to their duty. 
For two days more the wind blew from the southward and eastward;
or in the short intervals when it was fair, the ice was too thick
to run; yet the weather was not so dreadfully bad, and the crew had
watch and watch.  I still remained in my berth, fast recovering,
yet still not well enough to go safely on deck.  And I should
have been perfectly useless; for, from having eaten nothing for
nearly a week, except a little rice, which I forced into my mouth
the last day or two, I was as weak as an infant.  To be sick in a
forecastle is miserable indeed.  It is the worst part of a dog’s
life; especially in bad weather.  The forecastle, shut up tight
to keep out the water and cold air;–the watch either on deck,
or asleep in their berths;–no one to speak to;–the pale light of
the single lamp, swinging to and fro from the beam, so dim that
one can scarcely see, much less read by it;–the water dropping
from the beams and carlines, and running down the sides; and the
forecastle so wet, and dark, and cheerless, and so lumbered up
with chests and wet clothes, that sitting up is worse than lying
in the berth!  These are some of the evils.  Fortunately, I needed
no help from any one, and no medicine; and if I had needed help,
I don’t know where I should have found it.  Sailors are willing
enough; but it is true, as is often said–No one ships for nurse
on board a vessel.  Our merchant ships are always under-manned,
and if one man is lost by sickness, they cannot spare another
to take care of him.  A sailor is always presumed to be well,
and if he’s sick, he’s a poor dog.  One has to stand his wheel,
and another his lookout, and the sooner he gets on deck again,
the better.
Accordingly, as soon as I could possibly go back to my duty,
I put on my thick clothes and boots and south-wester, and made
my appearance on deck.  Though I had been but a few days below,
yet everything looked strangely enough.  The ship was cased in
ice,–decks, sides, masts, yards, and rigging.  Two close-reefed
top-sails were all the sail she had on, and every sail and rope
was frozen so stiff in its place, that it seemed as though it
would be impossible to start anything.  Reduced, too, to her top-
masts, she had altogether a most forlorn and crippled appearance.
The sun had come up brightly; the snow was swept off the decks,
and ashes thrown upon them, so that we could walk, for they had
been as slippery as glass.
It was, of course, too cold to carry on any ship’s work, and we had
only to walk the deck and keep ourselves warm.  The wind was still
ahead, and the whole ocean, to the eastward, covered with islands
and field-ice.  At four bells the order was given to square away
the yards; and the man who came from the helm said that the captain
had kept her off to N. N. E.  What could this mean?  Some said that
he was going to put into Valparaiso, and winter, and others that
he was going to run out of the ice and cross the Pacific, and go
home round the Cape of Good Hope.  Soon, however, it leaked out,
and we found that we were running for the straits of Magellan.
The news soon spread through the ship, and all tongues were at
work, talking about it.  No one on board had been through the
straits, but I had in my chest an account of the passage of the
ship A. J. Donelson, of New York, through those straits, a few
years before.
The account was given by the captain, and the representation was
as favorable as possible.  It was soon read by every one on board,
and various opinions pronounced.  The determination of our captain
had at least this good effect; it gave every one something to
think and talk about, made a break in our life, and diverted our
minds from the monotonous dreariness of the prospect before us.
Having made a fair wind of it, we were going off at a good rate,
and leaving the thickest of the ice behind us.  This, at least,
was something.
Having been long enough below to get my hands well warmed and
softened, the first handling of the ropes was rather tough; but a
few days hardened them, and as soon as I got my mouth open wide
enough to take in a piece of salt beef and hard bread, I was all
right again.
Sunday, July 10th.  Lat. 54° 10’, long. 79° 07’.  This was our
position at noon.  The sun was out bright; the ice was all left
behind, and things had quite a cheering appearance.  We brought
our wet pea-jackets and trowsers on deck, and hung them up in
the rigging, that the breeze and the few hours of sun might dry
them a little; and, by the permission of the cook, the galley
was nearly filled with stockings and mittens, hung round to be
dried.  Boots, too, were brought up; and having got a little tar
and slush from below, we gave them a thick coat.  After dinner,
all hands were turned-to, to get the anchors over the bows,
bend on the chains, etc. The fish-tackle was got up, fish-davit
rigged out, and after two or three hours of hard and cold work,
both the anchors were ready for instant use, a couple of kedges
got up, a hawser coiled away upon the fore-hatch, and the deep-sea-
lead-line overhauled and got ready.  Our spirits returned with having
something to do; and when the tackle was manned to bowse the anchor
home, notwithstanding the desolation of the scene, we struck up
“Cheerily ho!” in full chorus.  This pleased the mate, who rubbed
his hands and cried out–"That’s right, my boys; never say die!
That sounds like the old crew!” and the captain came up, on hearing
the song, and said to the passenger, within hearing of the man at
the wheel,–"That sounds like a lively crew.  They’ll have their
song so long as there’re enough left for a chorus!”
This preparation of the cable and anchors was for the passage
of the straits; for, being very crooked, and with a variety of
currents, it is necessary to come frequently to anchor.  This was
not, by any means, a pleasant prospect, for, of all the work that
a sailor is called upon to do in cold weather, there is none so
bad as working the ground-tackle.  The heavy chain cables to be
hauled and pulled about the decks with bare hands; wet hawsers,
slip-ropes, and buoy-ropes to be hauled aboard, dripping in water,
which is running up your sleeves, and freezing; clearing hawse
under the bows; getting under weigh and coming-to, at all hours
of the night and day, and a constant look-out for rocks and sands
and turns of tides;–these are some of the disagreeables of such
a navigation to a common sailor.  Fair or foul, he wants to have
nothing to do with the ground-tackle between port and port.  One of
our hands, too, had unluckily fallen upon a half of an old newspaper
which contained an account of the passage, through the straits, of a
Boston brig, called, I think, the Peruvian, in which she lost every
cable and anchor she had, got aground twice, and arrived at
Valparaiso in distress.  This was set off against the account of
the A. J. Donelson, and led us to look forward with less confidence
to the passage, especially as no one on board had ever been through,
and the captain had no very perfect charts.  However, we were spared
any further experience on the point; for the next day, when we must
have been near the Cape of Pillars, which is the south-west point
of the mouth of the straits, a gale set in from the eastward, with a
heavy fog, so that we could not see half of the ship’s length ahead.
This, of course, put an end to the project, for the present; for a
thick fog and a gale blowing dead ahead are not the most favorable
circumstances for the passage of difficult and dangerous straits.
This weather, too, seemed likely to last for some time, and we
could not think of beating about the mouth of the straits for a
week or two, waiting for a favorable opportunity; so we braced up
on the larboard tack, put the ship’s head due south, and struck
her off for Cape Horn again.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
