


WAR BONNET, TEEPEE AND COUPS
Forty yards and first shot. Well, that’s what the Injuns would call a
’_grand coup,’ and Caleb’s face wore the same pleasant look as
when he made the fire with rubbing-sticks.
“What’s a grand coup?_” asked Little Beaver.
“Oh, I suppose it’s a big deed. The Injuns call a great feat a
’_coup,’ an’ an extra big one a ’grand coup.’ Sounds like
French, an’ maybe ’tis, but the Injuns says it. They had a regular way
of counting their coup, and for each they had the right to an
Eagle feather in their bonnet, with a red tuft of hair on the end for
the extra good ones. At least, they used to. I reckon now they’re
forgetting it all, and any buck Injun wears just any feather he can
steal and stick in his head.”
“What do you think of our head-dresses?” Yan ventured.
’Hm! You ain’t never seen a real one or you wouldn’t go at them that
way at all. First place, the feathers should all be white with black
tips, an’ fastened not solid like that, but loose on a cap of soft
leather. Each feather, you see, has a leather loop lashed on the quill
end for a lace to run through and hold it to the cap, an’ then a
string running through the middle of each feather to hold it–just so.
Then there are ways of marking each feather to show how it was got.
I mind once I was out on a war party with a lot of Santees–that’s a
brand of Sioux–an’ we done a lot o’ sneaking an’ stealing an’ scalped
some of the enemy. Then we set out for home, and when we was still
about thirty miles away we sent on an Injun telegram of good luck. The
leader of our crowd set fire to the grass after he had sent two men
half a mile away on each side to do the same thing, an’ up went three
big smokes. There is always some one watching round an Injun village,
an’ you bet when they seen them three smokes they knowed that we wuz
a-coming back with scalps.
“The hull Council come out to meet us, but not too reckless, coz this
might have been the trick of enemies to surprise them.
“Well, when we got there, maybe there wasn’t a racket. You see, we
didn’t lose a man, and we brung in a hundred horses and seven scalps.
Our leader never said a word to the crowd, but went right up to the
Council teepee. He walked in–we followed. There was the Head Chief
an’ all the Council settin’ smoking. Our leader give the ’How,
an’ then we all ’Howed.’ Then we sat an’ smoked, an’ the Chief
called on our leader for an account of the little trip. He stood up
an’ made a speech.
“’Great Chief and Council of my Tribe,’ says he. ’After we left the
village and the men had purified themselves, we travelled seven days
and came to the Little Muddy River. There we found the track of a
travelling band of Arapaho. In two days we found their camp, but
they were too strong for us, so we hid till night; then I went alone
into their camp and found that some of them were going off on a hunt
next day. As I left I met a lone warrior coming in. I killed him
with my knife. For that I claim a coup; and I scalped him–for
that I claim another coup; an’ before I killed him I slapped his
face with my hand–for this I claim a grand coup; and I brought
his horse away with me–for that I claim another coup. Is it not
so,’ sez he, turning to us, and we all yelled ’How! How! How!_’
For this fellow, ’Whooping Crane,’ was awful good stuff. Then the
Council agreed that he should wear three Eagle feathers, the first
for killing and scalping the enemy in his own camp–that was a grand
coup, and the feather had a tuft of red hair on it an’ a red spot on
the web. The next feather was for slapping the feller’s face first,
which, of course, made it more risky. This Eagle feather had a red
tuft on top an’ a red hand on the web; the one for stealing the horse
had a horseshoe, but no tuft, coz it wasn’t counted A1.
“Then the other Injuns made their claims, an’ we all got some kind of
honours. I mind one feller was allowed to drag a Fox tail at each
heel when he danced, an’ another had ten horseshoe marks on an Eagle
feather for stealing ten horses, an’ I tell you them Injuns were
prouder of them feathers than a general would be of his medals.”
[Illustration: The War Bonnet (See description below)]
    1. The plain white Goose or Turkey feather.
    2. The same, with tip dyed black or painted with indelible ink.
    3. The same, showing ruff of white down lashed on with wax end.
    4. The same, showing leather loop lashed on for the holding lace.
    5. The same, viewed edge on.
    6. The same, with a red flannel cover sewn and lashed on the
    quill. This is a ’coup feather.’
    7. The same, with a tuft of red horsehair lashed on the top to
    mark a ’grand coup_’ and (_a_) a thread through the
    middle of the rib to hold feather in proper place. This feather is
    marked with the symbol of a grand coup in target shooting.
    This symbol may be drawn on an oval piece of paper gummed on the
    top of the feather.
    8. The tip of a feather showing how the red horsehair tuft is
    lashed on with fine waxed thread.
    9. The groundwork of the war bonnet made of any soft leather,
    (_a_) a broad band to go round the head, laced at the joint
    or seam behind; (_b_) a broad tail behind as long as needed
    to hold all the wearer’s feathers; (_c_) two leather thongs
    or straps over the top; (_d_) leather string to tie under the
    chin; (_e_) the buttons, conchas or side ornaments of shells,
    silver, horn or wooden discs, even small mirrors and circles
    of beadwork were used, and sometimes the conchas were left out
    altogether; they may have the owner’s totem on them, usually a
    bunch of ermine tails hung from each side of the bonnet just below
    the concha. A bunch of horsehair will answer as well; (_hh_)
    the holes in the leather for holding the lace of the feather; 24
    feathers are needed for the full bonnet, without the tail, so they
    are put less than an inch apart; (_iii_) the lacing holes on
    the tail: this is as long as the wearer’s feathers call for; some
    never have any tail.
    10. Side view of the leather framework, showing a pattern
    sometimes used to decorate the front.
    11, 12 and 13. Beadwork designs for front band of bonnet; all have
    white grounds. No. 11 (Arapaho) has green band at top and bottom
    with red zigzag. No. 12 (Ogallala) has blue band at top and
    bottom, red triangles; the concha is blue with three white bars
    and is cut off from the band by a red bar. No. 13 (Sioux) has
    narrow band above and broad band below blue, the triangle red, and
    the two little stars blue with yellow centre.
    14. The bases of three feathers, showing how the lace comes out
    of the cap leather, through the eye or loop on the bottom of the
    quill, and in again.
    15. The completed bonnet, showing how the feathers of the crown
    should spread out, also showing the thread that passes through the
    middle of each feather on inner side to hold it in place; another
    thread passes from the point where the two straps (_c in 9)
    join, then down through each feather in the tail.
    The Indians now often use the crown of a soft felt hat for the
    basis of a war bonnet.
    N.B. A much easier way to mark the feather is to stick on it near
    the top an oval of white paper and on this draw the symbol with
    waterproof ink.
[Illustration: Grand Coup for taking Scalp in Enemy’s Camp G.C. for
slapping his face Coup for stealing his Horse]
“My, I wish I could go out there and be with those fellows,” and Yan
sighed as he compared his commonplace lot with all this romantic
splendour.
“Guess you’d soon get sick of it. I know I did,” was the
answer; “forever shooting and killing, never at peace, never more than
three meals ahead of starvation and just as often three meals behind.
No, siree, no more for me.”
“I’d just like to see you start in horse-stealing for honours round
here,” observed Sam, “though I know who’d get the feathers if it was
chicken stealing.”
“Say, Caleb,” said Guy, who, being friendly and of the country, never
thought of calling the old man “Mr. Clark,” “didn’t they give feathers
for good Deer-hunting? I’ll bet I could lick any of them at it if I
had a gun.”
“Didn’t you hear me say first thing that that there shot o’ Yan’s
should score a ’grand coup_’?”
“Oh, shucks! I kin lick Yan any time; that was just a chance shot.
I’ll bet if you give feathers for Deer-hunting I’ll get them all.”
“We’ll take you up on that,” said the oldest Chief, but the next
interrupted:
“Say, boys, we want to play Injun properly. Let’s get Mr. Clark to
show us how to make a real war bonnet. Then we’ll wear only what
feathers we win.”
“Ye mean by scalping the Whites an’ horse-stealing?”
“Oh, no; there’s lots of things we can do–best runner, best Deer
hunter, best swimmer, best shot with bow and arrows.”
“All right.” So they set about questioning Caleb. He soon showed them
how to put a war bonnet together, using, in spite of Yan’s misgivings,
the crown of an old felt hat for the ground work and white goose
quills trimmed and dyed black at the tips for Eagle feathers. But when
it came to the deeds that were to be rewarded, each one had his own
ideas.
“If Sappy will go to the orchard and pick a peck of cherries without
old Cap gettin’ him, I’ll give him a feather with all sorts of
fixin’s on it,” suggested Sam.
“Well, I’ll bet you can’t get a chicken out of our barn ’thout our Dog
gettin’ you, Mr. Smarty.”
“Pooh! I ain’t stealing chickens. Do you take me for a nigger? I’m a
noble Red-man and Head Chief at that, I want you to know, an’ I’ve a
notion to collect that scalp you’re wearin’ now. You know it belongs
to me and Yan,” and he sidled over, rolling his eye and working his
fingers in a way that upset Guy’s composure. “And I tell you a feller
with one foot in the grave should have his thoughts on seriouser
things than chicken-stealing. This yere morbid cravin’ for excitement
is rooinin’ all the young fellers nowadays.”
Yan happened to glance at Caleb. He was gazing off at nothing, but
there was a twinkle in his eye that Yan never before saw there.
“Let’s go to the teepee. It’s too hot out here. Come in, won’t you,
Mr. Clark?”
“Hm. ’Tain’t much cooler in here, even if it is shady,” remarked the
old Trapper. “Ye ought to lift one side of the canvas and get some
air.”
“Why, did the real Injuns do that?”
“I should say they did. There ain’t any way they didn’t turn and twist
the teepee for comfort. That’s what makes it so good. Ye kin live in
it forty below zero an’ fifty ’bove suffocation an’ still be happy.
It’s the changeablest kind of a layout for livin’ in. Real hot weather
the thing looks like a spider with skirts on and held high, an’ I tell
you ye got to know the weather for a teepee. Many a hot night on the
plains I’ve been woke up by hearing ’Tap-tap-tap’ all around me in the
still black night and wondered why all the squaws was working, but
they was up to drop the cover and drive all the pegs deeper, an’
within a half hour there never failed to come up a big storm. How they
knew it was a-comin’ I never could tell. One old woman said a Coyote
told her, an’ maybe that’s true, for they do change their song for
trouble ahead; another said it was the flowers lookin’ queer at
sundown, an’ another had a bad dream. Maybe they’re all true; it comes
o’ watchin’ little things.”
“Do they never get fooled?” asked Little Beaver
’Oncet in awhile, but not near as often as a White-man would.
“I mind once seeing an artist chap, one of them there portygraf
takers. He come out to the village with a machine an’ took some of the
little teepees. Then I said, ’Why don’t you get Bull-calf’s squaw to
put up their big teepee? I tell you that’s a howler.’ So off he goes,
and after dickering awhile he got the squaw to put it up for three
dollars. You bet it was a stunner, sure–all painted red, with green
an’ yaller–animals an’ birds an’ scalps galore. It made that
feller’s eyes bug out to see it. He started in to make some
portygrafs, then was taking another by hand, so as to get the colours,
an’ I bet it would have crowded him to do it, but jest when he got
a-going the old squaw yelled to the other–the Chief hed two of
them–an’ lighted out to take down that there teepee. That artist he
hollered to stop, said he had hired it to stay up an’ a bargain was a
bargain. But the old squaw she jest kept on a-jabberin’ an’ pintin’ at
the west. Pretty soon they had the hull thing down and rolled up an’
that artist a-cussin’ like a cow-puncher. Well, I mind it was a fine
day, but awful hot, an’ before five minutes there come a little dark
cloud in the west, then in ten minutes come a-whoopin’ a regular small
cyclone, an’ it went through that village and wrecked all the teepees
of any size. That red one would surely have gone only for that smart
old squaw.”
[Illustration: Bull-Calf’s Teepee.]
Under Caleb’s directions the breezy side of the cover was now raised a
little, and the shady side much more. This changed the teepee from a
stifling hothouse into a cool, breezy shade.
“An’ when ye want to know which way is the wind, if it’s light, ye wet
your finger so, an’ hold it up. The windy side feels cool at once, and
by that ye can set your smoke-flaps.”
“I want to know about war bonnets,” Yan now put in. “I mean about
things to do to wear feathers–that is, things we can do.”
“Ye kin have races, an’ swimmin’ an bownarrer shootin’. I should say
if you kin send one o’ them arrers two hundred yards that would kill a
Buffalo at twenty feet. I’d think that was pretty good. Yes, I’d call
that way up.”
“What–a grand coup?_”
“Yes, I reckon; an’ if you fell short on’y fifty yards that’d still
kill a Deer, an’ we could call that a coup. If,” continued
Caleb, “you kin hit that old gunny-sack buck plunk in the heart at
fifty yards first shot I’d call that away up; an’ if you hit it at
seventy-five yards in the heart no matter how many tries, I’d call
you a shot. If you kin hit a nine-inch bull’s-eye two out of three at
forty yards every time an’ no fluke, you’d hold your own among Injuns
though I must say they don’t go in much for shooting at a target. They
shoot at ’most anything they see in the woods. I’ve seen the little
copper-coloured kids shooting away at butterflies. Then they have
matches–they try who can have most arrers in the air at one time. To
have five in the air at once is considered good. It means powerful
fast work and far shooting. You got to hold a bunch handy in the left
hand fur that. The most I ever seen one man have up at once was eight.
That was reckoned ’big medicine,’ an’ any one that can keep up seven
is considered swell.”
“Do you know any other things besides bows and arrows that would do?”
“I think that a rubbing-stick fire ought to count,” interrupted Sam.
“I want that in coz Guy can’t do it. Any one who kin do it at all gets
a feather, an’ any one who kin do it in one minute gets a swagger
feather, or whatever you call it; that takes care of Yan and me an’
leaves Guy out in the cold.”
“I’ll bet I kin hunt Deer all round you both, I kin.”
“Oh, shut up, Sappy; we’re tired a-hearing about your Deer hunting.
We’re going to abolish that game.” Then Sam continued, apparently
addressing Caleb, “Do you know any Injun games?”
But Caleb took no notice.
Presently Yan said, “Don’t the Injuns play games, Mr. Clark?
“Well, yes, I kin show you two Injun games that will test your
eyesight.”
“I bet I kin beat any one at it,” Guy made haste to tell. “Why, I seen
that Deer before Yan could–”
“Oh, shut up, Guy,” Yan now exclaimed. A peculiar
sound–"_Wheet–wheet–wheet_"–made Sappy turn. He saw Sam with
an immense knife, whetting it most vigorously and casting a hungry,
fishy glance from time to time to the “yaller moss-tuft” on Guy’s neck.
[Illustration: Archery Coup Feathers Their Special Marks Target Coup
Feather Long-distance Five-in-air-at once]
“Time has came,” he said to nobody in particular.
“You better let me alone,” whined Guy, for that horrible
“_wheet–wheet_” jarred his nerves somehow. He looked toward Yan,
and seeing, as he thought, the suggestion of a smile, he felt
more comfortable, but a glance at Sam dispelled his comfort; the
Woodpecker’s face was absolutely inscrutable and perfectly demoniac
with paint.
“Why don’t you whet up, Little Beaver? Don’t you want your share?"
asked the Head Chief through his teeth.
“I vote we let him wear it till he brags again about his Deer-hunting.
Then off she comes to the bone,” was the reply. “Tell us about the
Injun game, Mr. Clark.”
“I pretty near forget it now, but le’s see. They make two squares on
the ground or on two skins; each one is cut up in twenty-five smaller
squares with lines like that. Then they have, say, ten rings an’ ten
nuts or pebbles. One player takes five rings an’ five nuts an’ sets
them around on the squares of one set, an’ don’t let the other see
till all is ready; then the other turns an’ looks at it while some one
else sings a little song that one of the boys turned into:
  “’Ki yi ya–ki yi yee,
  You think yer smart as ye kin be,
  You think yer awful quick to see
  But yer not too quick for me,
  Ki yi ya–ki yi yee.’
“Then the first square is covered with a basket or anything and the
second player must cover the other skin with counters just the same
from memory. For every counter he gets on the right square he counts
one, and loses one for each on the wrong square.”
“I’ll bet I kin––” Guy began, but Sam’s hand gripped his moss-tuft.
“Here, you let me alone. I ain’t bragging. I’m only telling the simple
truth.”
“Ugh! Better tell some simple lies, then–much safer,” said the Great
Woodpecker, with horrid calm and meaning. “If ever I lift that scalp
you’ll catch cold and die, do ye know it?”
Again Yan could see that Caleb had to look far away to avoid taking an
apparent interest.
“There’s another game. I don’t know as it’s Injun, but it’s the kind
o’ game where an Injun could win. They first made two six-inch
squares of white wood or card, then on each they made rings like a
target or squares like the quicksight game, or else two Rabbits the
same on each. One feller takes six spots of black, half an inch
across, an’ sticks them on one, scattering anyhow, an’ sets it up a
hundred yards off; another feller takes same number of spots an’ the
other Rabbit an’ walks up till he can see to fix his Rabbit the same.
If he kin do it at seventy-five yards he’s a swell; if he kin do it at
sixty yards he’s away up, but less than fifty yards is no good. I seen
the boys have lots o’ fun out o’ it. They try to fool each other every
way, putting one spot right on another or leaving some off. It’s a
sure ’nough test of good eyes.”
“I’ll bet–” began Sappy again, but a loud savage “Grrrr” from
Sam, who knew perfectly well what was coming, put a stop to the bet,
whatever it was.
“There was two other Injun tests of eyes that I mind now. Some old
Buck would show the youngsters the Pleiades–them’s the little stars
that the Injuns call the Bunch–an’ ask ’How many kin you see?’ Some
could sho’ly see five or six an’ some could make out seven. Them as
sees seven is mighty well off for eyes. Ye can’t see the Pleiades
now–they belong to the winter nights; but you kin see the Dipper the
hull year round, turning about the North Star. The Injuns call this
the ’Broken Back,’ an’ I’ve heard the old fellers ask the boys: ’You
see the Old Squaw–that’s the star, second from the end, the one at
the bend of the handle–well, she has a papoose on her back. Kin you
see the papoose?’ an’ sure enough, when my eyes was real good I could
see the little baby star tucked in by the big un. It’s a mighty good
test of eyes if you kin see that.”
“Eh–” began Guy.
But “Grrrrrrrrr” from Sam stopped him in time. Again Caleb’s eyes
wandered afar. Then he stepped out of the teepee and Yan heard him
mutter, “Consarn that whelp, he makes me laugh spite o’ myself."
He went off a little way into the woods and presently called “Yan!
Guy! Come here.” All three ran out. “Talking about eyes, what’s
that?” An opening in the foliage gave a glimpse of the distant
Burns’s clover field. “Looks like a small Bear.”
“Woodchuck! That’s our Woodchuck! That’s the ole sinner that throwed
Paw off’n the mower. Where’s my bone-arrer?” and Guy went for his
weapons.
The boys ran for the fence of the clover field, going more cautiously
as they came near. Still the old Woodchuck heard something and sat up
erect on his haunches. He was a monster, and out on the smooth clover
field he did look like a very small Bear. His chestnut breast was
curiously relieved by his unusually gray back and head.
“Paw says it’s his sins as turned his head gray. He’s a hoary headed
sinner, an’ he ain’t repented o’ none o’ them so far, but I’mafter him now.”
“Hold on! Start even!” said Sam, seeing that Guy was prepared to
shoot.
So all drew together, standing in a row like an old picture of the
battle of Crecy. The arrows scattered about the Woodchuck. Most went
much too far, none went near because he was closer than they had
supposed, but he scuttled away into his hole, there, no doubt, to plan
a new trap for the man with the mower.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
