


Sunday, Oct. 11th.  Set sail this morning for the leeward; passed
within sight of San Pedro, and, to our great joy, did not come
to anchor, but kept directly on to San Diego, where we arrived
and moored ship on.
Thursday, Oct. 15th.  Found here the Italian ship La Rosa, from
the windward, which reported the brig Pilgrim at San Francisco,
all well.  Everything was as quiet here as usual.  We discharged
our hides, horns, and tallow, and were ready to sail again on the
following Sunday.  I went ashore to my old quarters, and found the
gang at the hide-house going on in the even tenor of their way,
and spent an hour or two, after dark, at the oven, taking a whiff
with my old Kanaka friends, who really seemed glad to see me again,
and saluted me as the Aikane of the Kanakas.  I was grieved to find
that my poor dog Bravo was dead.  He had sickened and died suddenly,
the very day after I sailed in the Alert.
Sunday was again, as usual, our sailing day, and we got under weigh
with a stiff breeze, which reminded us that it was the latter part
of the autumn, and time to expect south-easters once more.  We beat
up against a strong head wind, under reefed top-sails, as far as San
Juan, where we came to anchor nearly three miles from the shore,
with slip-ropes on our cables, in the old south-easter style
of last winter.  On the passage up, we had an old sea captain
on board, who had married and settled in California, and had
not been on salt water for more than fifteen years.  He was
astonished at the changes and improvements that had been made
in ships, and still more at the manner in which we carried sail;
for he was really a little frightened; and said that while we had
top-gallant sails on, he should have been under reefed topsails.
The working of the ship, and her progress to windward, seemed to
delight him, for he said she went to windward as though she were
kedging.
Tuesday, Oct. 20th.  Having got everything ready, we set the
agent ashore, who went up to the mission to hasten down the
hides for the next morning.  This night we had the strictest
orders to look out for south-easters; and the long, low clouds
seemed rather threatening.  But the night passed over without
any trouble, and early the next morning, we hove out the long-boat
and pinnace, lowered away the quarter-boats, and went ashore to
bring off our hides.  Here we were again, in this romantic spot;
a perpendicular hill, twice the height of the ship’s mast-head,
with a single circuitous path to the top, and long sand beach at
its base, with the swell of the whole Pacific breaking high upon
it, and our hides ranged in piles on the overhanging summit.
The captain sent me, who was the only one of the crew that had
ever been there before, to the top, to count the hides and pitch
them down.  There I stood again, as six months before, throwing
off the hides, and watching them, pitching and scaling, to the
bottom, while the men, dwarfed by the distance, were walking to
and fro on the beach, carrying the hides, as they picked them up,
to the distant boats, upon the tops of their heads.  Two or three
boat-loads were sent off, until, at last, all were thrown down,
and the boats nearly loaded again; when we were delayed by a dozen
or twenty hides which had lodged in the recesses of the hill, and
which we could not reach by any missiles, as the general line of
the side was exactly perpendicular, and these places were caved
in, and could not be seen or reached from the top.  As hides are
worth in Boston twelve and a half cents a pound, and the captain’s
commission was two per cent, he determined not to give them up;
and sent on board for a pair of top-gallant studding-sail halyards,
and requested some one of the crew to go to the top, and come down
by the halyards.  The older sailors said the boys, who were light
and active, ought to go, while the boys thought that strength and
experience were necessary.  Seeing the dilemma, and feeling myself
to be near the medium of these requisites, I offered my services,
and went up, with one man to tend the rope, and prepared for the
descent.
We found a stake fastened strongly into the ground, and apparently
capable of holding my weight, to which we made one end of the
halyards well fast, and taking the coil, threw it over the brink.
The end, we saw, just reached to a landing-place, from which the
descent to the beach was easy.  Having nothing on but shirt,
trowsers, and hat, the common sea-rig of warm weather, I had
no stripping to do, and began my descent, by taking hold of the
rope in each hand, and slipping down, sometimes with hands and
feet round the rope, and sometimes breasting off with one hand
and foot against the precipice, and holding on to the rope with
the other.  In this way I descended until I came to a place which
shelved in, and in which the hides were lodged.  Keeping hold of
the rope with one hand, I scrambled in, and by the other hand
and feet succeeded in dislodging all the hides, and continued on
my way.  Just below this place, the precipice projected again,
and going over the projection, I could see nothing below me but
the sea and the rocks upon which it broke, and a few gulls flying
in mid-air.  I got down in safety, pretty well covered with dirt;
and for my pains was told, “What a d–d fool you were to risk your
life for a half a dozen hides!”
While we were carrying the hides to the boat, I perceived, what I
had been too busy to observe before, that heavy black clouds were
rolling up from seaward, a strong swell heaving in, and every sign
of a south-easter.  The captain hurried everything.  The hides were
pitched into the boats; and, with some difficulty, and by wading
nearly up to our armpits, we got the boats through the surf, and began
pulling aboard.  Our gig’s crew towed the pinnace astern of the gig,
and the launch was towed by six men in the jolly-boat.  The ship was
lying three miles off, pitching at her anchor, and the farther we
pulled, the heavier grew the swell.  Our boat stood nearly up and
down several times; the pinnace parted her towline, and we expected
every moment to see the launch swamped.  We at length got alongside,
our boats half full of water; and now came the greatest difficulty
of all,–unloading the boats, in a heavy sea, which pitched them
about so that it was almost impossible to stand in them; raising
them sometimes even with the rail, and again dropping them below
the bends.  With great difficulty, we got all the hides aboard and
stowed under hatches, the yard and stay tackles hooked on, and the
launch and pinnace hoisted, checked, and griped.  The quarter-boats
were then hoisted up, and we began heaving in on the chain.
Getting the anchor was no easy work in such a sea, but as we
were not coming back to this port, the captain determined not
to slip.  The ship’s head pitched into the sea, and the water
rushed through the hawse-holes, and the chain surged so as almost
to unship the barrel of the windlass.  “Hove short, sir!” said
the mate.  “Aye, aye!  Weather-bit your chain and loose the
topsails!  Make sail on her, men–with a will!”  A few moments
served to loose the topsails, which were furled with reefs,
to sheet them home, and hoist them up.  “Bear a hand!” was the
order of the day; and every one saw the necessity of it, for the
gale was already upon us.  The ship broke out her own anchor,
which we catted and fished, after a fashion, and stood off from
the lee-shore against a heavy head sea, under reefed topsails,
fore-topmast staysail and spanker.  The fore course was given
to her, which helped her a little; but as she hardly held her
own against the sea which was settling her leeward–"Board the
main tack!” shouted the captain; when the tack was carried forward
and taken to the windlass, and all hands called to the handspikes.
The great sail bellied out horizontally as though it would lift up
the main stay; the blocks rattled and flew about; but the force of
machinery was too much for her.  “Heave ho!  Heave and pawl!  Yo,
heave, hearty, ho!” and, in time with the song, by the force of
twenty strong arms, the windlass came slowly round, pawl after pawl,
and the weather clew of the sail was brought down to the waterways.
The starboard watch hauled aft the sheet, and the ship tore through
the water like a mad horse, quivering and shaking at every joint,
and dashing from its head the foam, which flew off at every blow,
yards and yards to leeward.  A half hour of such sailing served our
turn, when the clews of the sail were hauled up, the sail furled,
and the ship, eased of her press, went more quietly on her way.
Soon after, the foresail was reefed, and we mizen-top men were
sent up to take another reef in the mizen topsail.  This was the
first time I had taken a weather earing, and I felt not a little
proud to sit, astride of the weather yard-arm, pass the earing,
and sing out “Haul out to leeward!”  From this time until we got
to Boston, the mate never suffered any one but our own gang to
go upon the mizen topsail yard, either for reefing or furling,
and the young English lad and myself generally took the earings
between us.
Having cleared the point and got well out to sea, we squared away
the yards, made more sail, and stood on, nearly before the wind,
for San Pedro.  It blew strong, with some rain, nearly all night,
but fell calm toward morning, and the gale having gone over,
we came-to,–
Thursday, Oct. 22d, at San Pedro, in the old south-easter berth,
a league from shore, with a slip-rope on the cable, reefs in the
topsails, and rope-yarns for gaskets.  Here we lay ten days,
with the usual boating, hide-carrying, rolling of cargo up the
steep hill, walking barefooted over stones, and getting drenched
in salt water.
The third day after our arrival, the Rosa came in from San Juan,
where she went the day after the south-easter.  Her crew said it was
as smooth as a mill-pond, after the gale, and she took off nearly
a thousand hides, which had been brought down for us, and which
we lost in consequence of the south-easter.  This mortified us;
not only that an Italian ship should have got to windward of us in
the trade, but because every thousand hides went toward completing
the forty thousand which we were to collect before we could say
good-by to California.
While lying here, we shipped one new hand, an Englishman, of about
two or three and twenty, who was quite an acquisition, as he proved
to be a good sailor, could sing tolerably, and, what was of more
importance to me, had a good education, and a somewhat remarkable
history.  He called himself George P. Marsh; professed to have been
at sea from a small boy, and to have served his time in the smuggling
trade between Germany and the coasts of France and England.  Thus he
accounted for his knowledge of the French language, which he spoke
and read as well as he did English; but his cutter education would
not account for his English, which was far too good to have been
learned in a smuggler; for he wrote an uncommonly handsome hand,
spoke with great correctness, and frequently, when in private talk
with me, quoted from books, and showed a knowledge of the customs
of society, and particularly of the formalities of the various
English courts of law, and of Parliament, which surprised me.
Still, he would give no other account of himself than that he
was educated in a smuggler.  A man whom we afterwards fell in with,
who had been a shipmate of George’s a few years before, said that
he heard at the boarding-house from which they shipped, that George
had been at college, (probably a naval one, as he knew no Latin
or Greek,) where he learned French and mathematics.  He was by
no means the man by nature that Harris was.  Harris had made
everything of his mind and character in spite of obstacles;
while this man had evidently been born in a different rank,
and educated early in life accordingly, but had been a vagabond,
and done nothing for himself since.  What had been given to him
by others, was all that made him to differ from those about him;
while Harris had made himself what he was.  Neither had George
the character, strength of mind, acuteness, or memory of Harris;
yet there was about him the remains of a pretty good education,
which enabled him to talk perhaps beyond his brains, and a high
spirit and sense of honor, which years of a dog’s life had not
broken.  After he had been a little while on board, we learned
from him his remarkable history, for the last two years, which we
afterwards heard confirmed in such a manner, as put the truth of
it beyond a doubt.
He sailed from New York in the year 1833, if I mistake not, before
the mast, in the brig Lascar, for Canton.  She was sold in the East
Indies, and he shipped at Manilla, in a small schooner, bound on
a trading voyage among the Ladrone and Pelew Islands.  On one of
the latter islands, their schooner was wrecked on a reef, and they
were attacked by the natives, and, after a desperate resistance,
in which all their number except the captain, George, and a boy,
were killed or drowned, they surrendered, and were carried bound,
in a canoe, to a neighboring island.  In about a month after this,
an opportunity occurred by which one of their number might get
away.  I have forgotten the circumstances, but only one could go,
and they yielded to the captain, upon his promising to send them
aid if he escaped.  He was successful in his attempt; got on board
an American vessel, went back to Manilla, and thence to America,
without making any effort for their rescue, or indeed, as George
afterwards discovered, without even mentioning their case to any
one in Manilla.  The boy that was with George died, and he being
alone, and there being no chance for his escape, the natives
soon treated him with kindness, and even with attention.  They
painted him, tattooed his body, (for he would never consent to
be marked in the face or hands,) gave him two or three wives;
and, in fact, made quite a pet of him.  In this way, he lived
for thirteen months, in a fine climate, with a plenty to eat,
half naked, and nothing to do.  He soon, however, became tired,
and went round the island, on different pretences, to look out
for a sail.  One day, he was out fishing in a small canoe with
another man, when he saw a large sail to the windward, about a
league and a half off, passing abreast of the island and standing
westward.  With some difficulty, he persuaded the islander to go
off with him to the ship, promising to return with a good supply
of rum and tobacco.  These articles, which the islanders had got
a taste of from American traders, were too strong a temptation
for the fellow, and he consented.  They paddled off in the track of
the ship, and lay-to until she came down to them.  George stepped
on board the ship, nearly naked, painted from head to foot, and in
no way distinguishable from his companion until he began to speak.
Upon this, the people on board were not a little astonished; and,
having learned his story, the captain had him washed and clothed,
and sending away the poor astonished native with a knife or two
and some tobacco and calico, took George with him on the voyage.
This was the ship Cabot, of New York, Captain Low.  She was bound
to Manilla, from across the Pacific, and George did seaman’s duty
in her until her arrival in Manilla, when he left her, and shipped
in a brig bound to the Sandwich Islands.  From Oahu, he came,
in the British brig Clementine, to Monterey, as second officer,
where, having some difficulty with the captain, he left her,
and coming down the coast, joined us at San Pedro.  Nearly six
months after this, among some papers we received by an arrival
from Boston, we found a letter from Captain Low, of the Cabot,
published immediately upon his arrival at New York, and giving all
the particulars just as we had them from George.  The letter was
published for the information of the friends of George, and Captain
Low added, that he left him at Manilia to go to Oahu, and he had
heard nothing of him since.
George had an interesting journal of his adventures in the Pelew
Islands, which he had written out at length, in a handsome hand,
and in correct English.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
