


Hawkeye Claims Another Grand Coup
“_Wa wa wa wa wa! Wa wa wa wa wa! Wa wa wa wa wa!_” Three times it
echoed through the woods–a loud, triumphant cry.
“That’s Hawkeye with a big story of bravery; let’s hide.”
So Sam and Yan scrambled quickly into the teepee, hid behind the
lining and watched through an “arrow hole.” Guy came proudly stepping,
chin in air, uttering his war-whoop at intervals as he drew near, and
carrying his coat bundled up under one arm.
“_Coup! Grand coup! Wa wa wa wa!_” he yelled again and again, but
looked simple and foolish when he found the camp apparently deserted.
So he ceased his yells and, walking deliberately into the teepee,
pulled out the sugar box and was stuffing a handful into his mouth
when the other two Chiefs let off their wildest howls and, leaping
from their concealment, chased him into the woods–not far, for Yan
laughed too much, and Sam had on but one boot.
This was their re-gathering after a new search for adventures. Early
in the morning, as he wiped off the breakfast knives by sticking them
into the sod, the Second War Chief had suggested: “Say, boys, in old
days Warriors would sometimes set out in different directions in
search of adventure, then agree to meet at a given time. Let’s do that
to-day and see what we run across.”
“Get your straws,” was Woodpecker’s reply, as he returned from putting
the scraps on the Wakan Rock.
“No you don’t,” put in Hawkeye hastily; “at least, not unless you let
me hold the straws. I know you’ll fix it so I’ll have to go home.”
“All right. You can hold the three straws; long one is
Woodpecker–that’s his head with a bit of red flannel to prevent
mistakes; the middle-sized thin one is me; and the short fat one is
you. Now let them drop. Sudden death and no try over.”
The straws fell, and the two boys gave a yell as Hawkeye’s fate
pointed straight to the Burns homestead.
“Oh, get out; that’s no good. We’ll take the other end,” he said
angrily, and persisted in going the opposite way.
“Now we all got to go straight till we find something, and meet here
again when that streak of sunlight gets around in the teepee to that
pole.”
As the sunstreak, which was their Indian clock, travelled just about
one pole for two hours, this gave about four hours for adventures.
Sam and Yan had been back some minutes, and now Guy, having recovered
his composure, bothered not to wipe the stolen sugar from his lips,
but broke out eagerly:
“Say, fellers, I bet I’m the bully boy. I bet you I–”
“Silence!” roared Woodpecker. “You come last.”
“All right; I don’t care. I bet I win over all of you. I bet a million
dollars I do.”
“Go ahead, Chief Woodpecker-settin’-on-the-edge.”
So Sam began:
“I pulls on my boots” [he went barefooted half the time]. “Oh, I tell
you I know when to wear my boots–an’ I set out following my straw
line straight out. I don’t take no back track. I’m not scared
of the front trail,” and he turned his little slit eyes sadly on Guy,
“and I kep’ right on, and when I came to the dry bed of the creek it
didn’t turn me; no, not a dozen rods; and I kept right till I
came to a Wasp’s nest, and I turned and went round that coz it’s
cruel to go blundering into a nest of a lot of poor innocent little
Wasps–and I kep’ on, till I heard a low growl, and I looked up and
didn’t see a thing. Then the growling got louder, and I seen it was a
hungry Chipmunk roaring at me and jest getting ready to spring. Then
when I got out my bonearrer he says to me, he says, as bold as brass
’Is your name Woodpecker?’ Now that scared me, and so I told a lie–my
very first. I says, says I. ’No,’ says I. ’I’m Hawkeye.’ Well, you
should ’a seen him. He just turned pale; every stripe on his back
faded when I said that name, and he made for a hollow log and
got in. Now I was mad, and tried to get him out, but when I’d run to
one end he’d run to the other, so we ran up and down till I had a
deep-worn trail alongside the log, an’ he had a deep-worn trail inside
the log, an’ I was figgerin’ to have him wear it right through at the
bottom so the log’d open, but all of a sudden I says, ’I know what to
do for you.’ I took off my boot and stuffs the leg into one end of the
log. Then I rattles a stick at the other end and I heard him run into
the boot. Then I squeezes in the leg and ties a string around it an’
brings him home, me wearing one boot and the Chipmunk the other, and
there he is in it now,” and Sam curled up his free bunch of toes in
graphic comment and added: “Humph! I s’pose you fellers thought I
didn’t know what I was about when I drawed on my long boots this
morning.”
“Well, I just want to see that Chipmunk an’ maybe I’ll believe you.”
“In there hunting for a loose patch,” and Sam held up the boot.
“Let’s turn him out,” suggested the Second Chief.
So the string was cut and the Chipmunk scrambled out and away to a
safer refuge.
“Now, sonny,” said Sam, as it disappeared, “don’t tell your folks what
happened you or they’ll swat you for a liar.”
“Oh, shucks! That’s no adventure. Why, I–”
“Hold on, Hawkeye; Little Beaver next.”
“Well, I don’t care. I bet I–”
Sam grabbed his knife and interrupted: “Do you know what Callahan’s
spring lamb did when it saw the old man gathering mint? Go ahead,
Little Beaver.”
“I hadn’t much of an adventure, but I went straight through the woods
where my straw pointed and ran into a big dead stub. It was too old
and rotten for Birds to use now, as well as too late in the season, so
I got a pole and pushed it over, and I found the whole history of a
tenement in that stub. First of all, a Flicker had come years ago
and dug put a fine big nesting-place, and used it maybe two or three
times. When he was through, or maybe between seasons, the Chickadees
made a winter den of it, for there were some Chickadee tail-feathers
in the bottom. Next a Purple Blackbird came and used the hole, piling
up a lot of roots with mud on them. Next year it seems it came again
and made another nest on top of the last; then that winter the
Chickadees again used it for a cubby-hole, for there were some more
Chickadee feathers. Next year a Blue Jay found it out and nested
there. I found some of her egg-shells among the soft stuff of the
nest. Then I suppose a year after a pair of Sparrow-hawks happened on
the place, found it suited them, and made their nest in it and hatched
a brood of little Sparrow-hawks. Well, one day this bold robber
brought home to his little ones a Shrew.”
“What’s that?”
“Oh, a little thing like a Mouse, only it isn’t a Mouse at all; it is
second cousin to a Mole.”
“I allus thought a Mole was a Mouse specie,” remarked Hawkeye,
not satisfied with Yan’s distinction.
“Oh, you!” interrupted Sam. “You’ll try to make out the Burnses is
some kin to the Raftens next.”
“I bet I won’t!” and for once Guy got even.
“Well,” Yan continued, “it so happened–about the first time in about
a million years–the little Hawks were not hungry just then. The Shrew
wasn’t gobbled up at once, and though wounded, it set to work to
escape as soon as it was free of the old one’s claws. First it hid
under the little ones, then it began to burrow down through the
feather-bed of the Sparrow-hawk’s nest, then through the Blue Jay’s
nest, then through the soft stuff of the Blackbird’s nest and among
the old truck left by the Chickadees till it struck the hard mud
floor of the Blackbird’s nest, and through that it could not dig. Its
strength gave out now, and it died there and lay hidden in the lowest
nest of the house, till years after I came by and broke open the old
stub and made it tell me a sad and mournful story–that–maybe–never
happened at all. But there’s the drawing I made of it at the place,
showing all the nests just as I found them, and there’s the dried up
body of the little Shrew.”
Sam listened with intense interest, but Guy was at no pains to conceal
his contempt. “Oh, pshaw! That’s no adventure–just a whole lot of
’s’posens’ without a blame thing doing. Now I’ll tell you what I done.
I–”
“Now, Hawkeye,” Sam put in, “please don’t be rough about it. Leave out
the awful things: I ain’t well to-day. You keep back the scary parts
till to-morrow.”
“I tell you I left here and went straight as a die, an’ I seen a
Woodchuck, but he wasn’t in line, so I says: ’No, some other day. I
kin get you easy any time.’ Then I seen a Hawk going off with
a Chicken, but that was off my beat, an’ I found lots o’ old stumps
an’ hundreds o’ Chipmunks an’ wouldn’t be bothered with them. Then I
come to a farmhouse an’–an’ I went around that so’s not to scare the
Dog, an’ I went pretty near as far as Downey’s Dump–yes, a little
a-past it–only to one side–when up jumps a Partridge as big as a
Turkey, an’ a hull gang of young ones–about thirty or forty. I bet I
seen them forty rod away, an’ they all flew, but one that lighted on
a tree as far as–oh, ’cross that field, anyway. I bet you fellers
wouldn’t ’a’ seen it at all. Well, I jest hauled off as ca’m as ca’m
an’ let him have it. I aimed straight for his eye–an’ that’s where I
hit him. Now who gets a grand coup, for there he is!” Hawkeye
unrolled his coat and turned out a bobtailed young Robin in the
speckled plumage, shot through the body.
“So that’s your Partridge. I call that a young Robin,” said the First
Chief with slow emphasis. “Rules is broke. Killed a Song-bird. Little
Beaver, arrest the criminal.”
But Hawkeye struggled with all the ferocity born of his recent
exploit, and had to be bound hand and foot while a full Council was
called to try the case. The angry protests weakened when he found how
serious the Councillors were. Finally he pleaded “guilty” and was
condemned to wear a black feather of disgrace and a white feather for
cowardice for three days, as well as wash the dishes for a week. They
would also have made him cook for that term, but that they had had
some unhappy experiences with some dishes of Guy’s make.
“Well, I won’t do it, that’s all,” was the prisoner’s defiant retort.
“I’ll go home first.”
“And hoe the garden? Oh, yes; I think I see you.”
“Well, I won’t do it. You better let me ’lone.”
“Little Beaver, what do they do when an Injun won’t obey the Council?”
“Strip him of his honours. Do you remember that stick we burned with
’Sapwood’ on it?”
“Good idee. We’ll burn Hawkeye for a name and dig up the old one”
“No, you won’t, you dirty mean Skunks! Ye promised me you’d never call
me that again. I am Hawkeye. I kin see farder’n–n–” and he
began to weep.
“Well, will you obey the Council?”
“Yes; but I won’t wear no white feather–I’m brave, boohoo!”
“All right. We’ll leave that off; but you must do the other
punishments.
“Will I still be Hawkeye?”
“Yes.”
“All right. I’ll do it.”
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
