


The Coon Hunt
Yan did not forget the proposed Coon hunt–in fact, he was most
impatient for it, and within two days the boys came to Caleb about
sundown and reminded him of his promise. It was a sultry night, but
Yan was sure it was just right for a Coon hunt, and his enthusiasm
carried all before it. Caleb was quietly amused at the ’cool
night_” selected, but reckoned it would be “better later.”
“Set down–set down, boys,” he said, seeing them standing ready for an
immediate start. “There’s no hurry. Coons won’t be running for three
or four hours after sundown.”
So he sat and smoked, while Sam vainly tried to get acquainted with
old Turk; Yan made notes on some bird wings nailed to the wall,
and Guy got out the latest improved edition of his exploits in
Deer-hunting and Woodchuck killing, as well as enlarged on his plans
for gloriously routing any Coon they might encounter.
By insisting that it would take an hour to get to the place, Yan
got them started at nine o’clock, Caleb, on a suggestion from Guy,
carrying a small axe. Keeping old Turk well in hand, they took the
highway, and for half an hour tramped on toward the “Corners.” Led by
Sam, they climbed a fence crossed a potato field, and reached the corn
patch by the stream.
“Go ahead, Turk. Sic him! Sic him! Sic him!” and the company sat in a
row on the fence to await developments.
Turk was somewhat of a character. He hunted what he pleased and when
he pleased. His master could bring him on the Coon grounds, but he
couldn’t make him hunt Coon nor anything else unless it suited his own
fancy. Caleb had warned the boys to be still, and they sat along the
fence in dead silence, awaiting the summons from the old Hound. He had
gone off beating and sniffing among the cornstalks. His steps sounded
very loud and his sniffs like puffs of steam. It was a time of tense
attention; but the Hound wandered, farther away, and even his noisy
steps were lost.
They had sat for two long minutes, when a low yelp from a distant part
of the field, then a loud ’bow-wow” from the Hound, set Yan’s
heart jumping.
“Game afoot,” said Sam in a low voice.
“Bet I heered him first,” piped Guy.
Yan’s first thought was to rush pell-mell after the Dog. He had often
read of the hunt following furiously the baying of the Hounds, but
Caleb restrained him.
“Hold on, boy; plenty of time. Don’t know yet what it is.”
For Turk, like most frontier Hounds, would run almost any trail–had
even been accused of running on his own–and it rested with those who
knew him best to discover from his peculiar style of tonguing just
what the game might be. But they waited long and patiently without
getting another bay from the Hound. Presently a rustling was heard and
Turk came up to his master and lay down at his feet.
“Go ahead, Turk, put him up,” but the Dog stirred not. “Go ahead,” and
Caleb gave him a rap with a small stick. The Dog dodged away, but lay
down again, panting.
“What was it, Mr. Clark?” demanded Yan.
“Don’t hardly know. Maybe he only spiked himself on a snag. But this
is sure; there’s no Coons here to-night. There won’t be after this. We
come too early, and it’s too hot for the Dog, anyway.”
“We could cross the creek and go into Boyle’s bush,” suggested the
Woodpecker. “We’re like to strike anything there. Larry de Neuville
swears he saw a Unicorn there the night he came back from Garney’s
wake.”
“How can you tell the kind of game by the Dog’s barking?” asked Yan.
“H-m!” answered Caleb, as he put a fresh quid in his lantern jaw. “You
surely can if you know the country an’ the game an’ the Dog. Course,
no two Dogs is alike; you got to study your Dog, an’ if he’s good
he’ll larn you lots about trailing.”
The brook was nearly dry now, so they crossed where they would. Then
feeling their way through the dark woods with eyes for the most part
closed, they groped toward Boyle’s open field, then across it to the
heavy timber. Turk had left them at the brook, and, following its
course till he came to a pool, had had a bath. As they entered the
timber tract he joined them, dripping wet and ready for business.
“Go ahead, Turk,” and again all sat down to await the opinion of the
expert.
It came quickly. The old Hound, after circling about in a way that
seemed to prove him independent of daylight, began to sniff loudly,
and gave a low whine. He followed a little farther, and now his tail
was heard to ’tap, tap, tap_’ the brush as he went through a dry
thicket.
“Hear that? He’s got something this time,” said Caleb in a low voice.
“Wait a little.”
The Hound was already working out a puzzle, and when at last he got
far enough to be sure, he gave a short bark. There was another
spell of sniffing, then another bark, then several little barks at
intervals, and at last a short bay; then the baying recommenced, but
was irregular and not full-chested. The sounds told that the Hound was
running in a circle about the forest, but at length ceased moving,
for all the barking was at one place. When the hunters got there
they found the Dog half-way in a hole under a stump, barking and
scratching.
“Humph,” said Caleb; “nothing but a Cottontail. Might ’a’ knowed that
by the light scent an’ the circling without treeing.”
So Turk was called off and the company groped through the inky woods
in quest of more adventures.
“There’s a kind of swampy pond down the lower end of the bush–a
likely place for Coons on a Frog-hunt,” suggested the Woodpecker.
So the Hound was again “turned on” near the pond. The dry woods were
poor for scent, but the damp margin of the marsh proved good, and Turk
became keenly interested and very sniffy. A preliminary ’Woof!_"
was followed by one or two yelps and then a full-chested
“_Boooow!” that left no doubt he had struck a hot trail at last.
Oh, what wonderfully thrilling horn-blasts those were! Yan for the
first time realized the power of the “full cry,” whose praises are so
often sung.
The hunters sat down to await the result, for, as Caleb pointed out,
there was “no saying where the critter might run.”
The Hound bayed his fullest, roundest notes at quick intervals, but
did not circle. The sound of his voice told them that the chase was
straight away, out of the woods, easterly across an open field, and at
a hot pace, with regular, full bellowing, unbroken by turn or doubt.
“I believe he’s after the old Callaghan Fox,” said the Trapper.
“They’ve tried it together before now, an’ there ain’t anything but a
Fox will run so straight and fetch such a tune out of Turk.”
The baying finally was lost in the distance, probably a mile away, but
there was nothing for it but to wait. If Turk had been a full-bred and
trained Foxhound he would have stuck to that trail all night, but in
half an hour he returned, puffing and hot, to throw himself into the
shallow pond.
“Everything scared away now,” remarked Caleb. “We might try the other
side of the pond.” Once or twice the dog became interested, but
decided that there was nothing in it, and returned to pant by his
master’s feet.
They had now travelled so far toward home that a very short cut across
fields would bring them into their own woods.
The moon arose as they got there, and after their long groping in the
murky darkness this made the night seem very bright and clear.
They had crossed the brook below Granny de Neuville’s, and were
following the old timber trail that went near the stream, when Turk
stopped to sniff, ran back and forth two or three times, then stirred
the echoes with a full-toned bugle blast and led toward the water.
“_Bow–bow–bow–bow,” he bawled for forty yards and came to a
stop. The baying was exactly the same that he gave on the Fox trail,
but the course of the animal was crooked, and now there was a break.
They could hear the dog beating about close at hand and far away, but
silent so far as tongue was concerned.
“What is it, Caleb?” said Sam with calm assurance, forgetting how
recent was their acquaintance.
“Dunno,” was the short reply.
“’Tisn’t a Fox, is it?” asked Yan.
But a sudden renewal of ’Bow–bow–bow–” from the Hound one
hundred yards away, at the fence, ended all discussion. The dog had
the hot trail again. The break had been along the line of a fence that
showed, as Caleb said, “It was a Coon, ’cept it might be some old
house Cat maybe; them was the only things that would run along top of
a fence in the night time.”
It was easy to follow now; the moonlight was good, and the baying of
the Hound was loud and regular. It led right down the creek, crossing
several pools and swamps.
“That settles it,” remarked the Trapper decisively. “Cats don’t take
to the water. That’s a Coon,” and as they hurried they heard a sudden
change in the dog’s note, no longer a deep rich ’B-o-o-w-w.’ It
became an outrageous clamour of mingled yelps, growls and barks.
“Ha–heh. That means he’s right on it. That is what he does when he
sees the critter.”
But the “view halloo” was quickly dropped and the tonguing of the dog
was now in short, high-pitched yelps at one place.
“Jest so! He’s treed! That’s a Coon, all right!” and Caleb led
straight for the place.
The Hound was barking and leaping against a big Basswood, and Caleb’s
comment was: “Hm, never knowed a Coon to do any other way–always gets
up the highest and tarnalest tree to climb in the hull bush. Now who’s
the best climber here?”
“Yan is,” volunteered Sam.
“Kin ye do it, Yan?”
“I’ll try.”
“Guess we’ll make a fire first and see if we can’t see him,” said the
Woodpecker.
“If it was a Woodchuck I’d soon get him for you,” chimed in Hawkeye,
but no one heeded.
Sam and Yan gathered stuff and soon had a flood of flickering red
light on all the surrounding trees. They scanned the big Basswood
without getting sight of their quarry. Caleb took a torch and found on
the bark some fresh mud. By going back on the trail to where it had
crossed the brook they found the footprint–undoubtedly that of a
large Coon.
“Reckon he’s in some hollow; he’s surely up that tree, and Basswood’s
are always hollow.”
Yan now looked at the large trunk in doubt as to whether he could
manage it.
Caleb remarked his perplexity and said: “Yes; that’s so. You ain’t
fifteen foot spread across the wings, are you? But hold on–”
He walked to a tall thin tree near at hand, cut it through with the
axe in a few minutes, and threw it so as to rest against the lowest
branch of the big Basswood. Up this Yan easily swarmed, carrying a
stout Elm stick tied behind. When he got to the great Basswood he felt
lost in the green mass, but the boys below carried torches so as to
shed light on each part in turn. At first Yan found neither hole in
the trunk nor Coon, but after long search in the upper branches he saw
a great ball of fur on a high crotch and in it two glowing eyes that
gave him a thrill. He yelled: “Here he is! Look out below.” He climbed
up nearer and tried to push the Coon off, but it braced itself firmly
and defied him until he climbed above it, when it leaped and scrambled
to a lower branch.
Yan followed it, while his companions below got greatly excited, as
they could see nothing, and only judged by the growling and snarling
that Yan and the Coon were fighting. After another passage at arms
the Coon left the second crotch and scrambled down the trunk till it
reached the leaning sapling, and there perched, glaring at the hunters
below. The old Hound raised a howl when he saw the quarry, and Caleb,
stepping to one side, drew his revolver and fired. The Coon fell dead
into their midst. Turk sprang to do battle, but he was not needed, and
Caleb fondly and proudly wiped the old white pistol as though it alone
were to be thanked for the clever shot.
Yan came down quickly, though he found it harder to get down than up.
He hurried excitedly into the ring and stroked the Coon with a mixture
of feelings–admiring its fur–sorry, after all, that it was killed,
and triumphant that he had led the way. It was his Coon, and
all admitted that. Sam “hefted” it by one leg and said, “Weighs thirty
pounds, I bet.”
Guy said: “Pooh! Tain’t half as big as that there big Woodchuck I
killed, an’ you never would have got him if I hadn’t thought of the
axe.”
Yan thought it would weigh thirty-five pounds. Caleb guessed it at
twenty-five (and afterward they found out that it barely weighed
eighteen). While they were thus talking the Dog broke into an angry
barking such as he gave for strangers–his “human voice,” Caleb called
it–and at once there stepped into the circle William Raften. He had
seen the lights in the woods, and, dreading a fire at this dry season,
had dressed and come out.
“Hello, Da; why ain’t you in bed, where you ought to be?”
Raften took no notice of his son, but said sneeringly to Caleb: “Ye
ain’t out trying to get another shot at me, air ye?” ’Tain’t worth
your while; I hain’t got no cash on me to-night.”
“Now see here, Da,” said Sam, interrupting before Caleb could answer,
“you don’t play fair. I know, an’ you ought to know, that’s all rot
about Caleb shooting at you. If he had, he’d ’a’ got you sure. I’ve
seen him shoot.”
“Not when he was drunk.”
“Last time I was drunk we was in it together,” said Caleb fiercely,
finding his voice.
“Purty good for a man as swore he had no revolver,” and Raften pointed
to Caleb’s weapon. “I seen you with that ten years ago. An’ sure
I’m not scairt of you an’ yer revolver,” said Raften, seeing Caleb
fingering his white pet; “an’ I tell ye this. I won’t have ye and yer
Sheep-killing cur ramatacking through my woods an’ making fires this
dry saison.”
“D–– you, Raften, I’ve stood all I’m goin’ to stand from you.” The
revolver was out in a flash, and doubtless Caleb would have lived up
to his reputation, but Sam, springing to push his father back, came
between, and Yan clung to Caleb’s revolver arm, while Guy got safely
behind a tree.
“Get out o’ the way, you kids!” snarled Caleb.
“By all manes,” said Raften scoffingly; “now that he’s got me
unarrumed again. You dhirty coward! Get out av the way, bhoys, an
Oi’ll settle him,” for Raften was incapable of fear, and the boys
would have been thrust aside and trouble follow, but that Raften as he
left the house had called his two hired men to follow and help fight
the fire, and now they came on the scene. One of them was quite
friendly with Caleb, the other neutral, and they succeeded in stopping
hostilities for a time, while Sam exploded:
“Now see here, Da, ’twould just ’a’ served you right if you’d got a
hole through you. You make me sick, running on Caleb. He didn’t make
that fire; ’twas me an’ Yan, an’ we’ll put it out safe enough. You
skinned Caleb an’ he never done you no harm. You run on him just as
Granny de Neuville done on you after she grabbed your groceries. You
ought to be ashamed of yourself. Tain’t square, an’ ’tain’t being a
man. When you can’t prove nothin’ you ought to shut up.”
Raften was somewhat taken aback by this outburst, especially as he
found all the company against him. He had often laughed at Granny de
Neuville’s active hatred against him when he had done her nothing but
good. It never occurred to him that he was acting a similar part. Most
men would have been furious at the disrespectful manner of their son,
but Raften was as insensitive as he was uncowardly. His first shock
of astonishment over, his only thought of Sam was, “Hain’t he got a
cheek! My! but he talks like a lawyer, an’ he sasses right back like a
fightin’ man; belave I’ll make him study law instid of tooth-pullin’.”
The storm was over, for Caleb’s wrath was of the short and fierce
kind, and Raften, turning away in moral defeat, growled: “See that ye
put that fire out safe. Ye ought all to be in yer beds an’ aslape,
like dacint folks.”
“Well, ain’t you dacint?” retorted Sam.
Raften turned away, heeding neither that nor Guy’s shrill attempt
to interpolate some details of his own importance in this present
hunt–"Ef it hadn’t been for me they wouldn’t had no axe along, Mr.
Raften"–but William had disappeared.
The boys put out the fire carefully and made somewhat silently for
camp. Sam and Yan carried the Coon between them on a stick, and before
they reached the teepee they agreed that the carcass weighed at least
eighty pounds.
Caleb left them, and they all turned in at once and slept the sleep of
the tired camper.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
