


The Wigwam
The very next day they must begin. As soon as every chore was done
they went to the woods to select a spot.
The brook, or “creek,” as they called it, ran through a meadow, then
through a fence into the woods. This was at first open and grassy, but
farther down the creek it was joined by a dense cedar swamp. Through
this there was no path, but Sam said that there was a nice high place
beyond. The high ground seemed a long way off in the woods, though
only a hundred yards through the swamp, but it was the very place for
a camp–high, dry and open hard woods, with the creek in front and the
cedar swamp all around. Yan was delighted. Sam caught no little of the
enthusiasm, and having brought an axe, was ready to begin the shanty.
But Yan had been thinking hard all morning, and now he said: “Sam, we
don’t want to be White hunters. They’re no good; we want to be
Indians.”
“Now, that’s just where you fool yourself,” said Sam. “Da says there
ain’t nothin’ an Injun can do that a White-man can’t do better.”
“Oh, what are you talking about?” said Yan warmly. “A White hunter
can’t trail a moccasined foot across a hard granite rock. A White
hunter can’t go into the woods with nothing but a knife and make
everything he needs. A White hunter can’t hunt with bows and arrows,
and catch game with snares, can he? And there never yet was a White
man could make a Birch canoe.” Then, changing his tone, Yan went on:
“Say, now, Sam, we want to be the best kind of hunters, don’t we, so
as to be ready for going out West. Let’s be Injuns and do everything
like Injuns.”
After all, this had the advantage of romance and picturesqueness, and
Sam consented to “try it for awhile, anyhow.” And now came the point
of Yan’s argument. “Injuns don’t live in shanties; they live in
teepees. Why not make a teepee instead?”
“That would be just bully,” said Sam, who had seen pictures enough to
need no description, “but what are we to make it of?”
“Well,” answered Yan, promptly assuming the leadership and rejoicing
in his ability to speak as an authority, “the Plains Injuns make their
teepees of skins, but the wood Injuns generally use Birch bark.”
“Well, I bet you can’t find skins or Birch bark enough in this woods
to make a teepee big enough for a Chipmunk to chaw nuts in.”
“We can use Elm bark.”
“That’s a heap easier,” replied Sam, “if it’ll answer, coz we cut a
lot o’ Elm logs last winter and the bark’ll be about willin’ to peel
now. But first let’s plan it out.”
This was a good move, one Yan would have overlooked. He would probably
have got a lot of material together and made the plan afterward, but
Sam had been taught to go about his work with method.
So Yan sketched on a smooth log his remembrance of an Indian teepee.
“It seems to me it was about this shape, with the poles sticking up
like that, a hole for the smoke here and another for the door there.”
“Sounds like you hain’t never seen one,” remarked Sam, with more point
than politeness, “but we kin try it. Now ’bout how big?”
Eight feet high and eight feet across was decided to be about right.
Four poles, each ten feet long, were cut in a few minutes, Yan
carrying them to a smooth place above the creek as fast as Sam cut
them.
“Now, what shall we tie them with?” said Yan.
“You mean for rope?”
“Yes, only we must get everything in the woods; real rope ain’t
allowed.”
“I kin fix that,” said Sam; “when Da double-staked the orchard fence,
he lashed every pair of stakes at the top with Willow withes.”
“That’s so–I quite forgot,” said Yan. In a few minutes they were
at work trying to tie the four poles together with slippery stiff
Willows, but it was no easy matter. They had to be perfectly tight or
they would slip and fall in a heap each time they were raised, and it
seemed at length that the boys would be forced to the impropriety of
using hay wire, when they heard a low grunt, and turning, saw William
Raften standing with his hands behind him as though he had watched
them for hours.
The boys were no little startled. Raften had a knack of turning up at
any point when something was going on, taking in the situation fully,
and then, if he disapproved, of expressing himself in a few words of
blistering mockery delivered in a rich Irish brogue. Just what view
he would take of their pastime the boys had no idea, but awaited with
uneasiness. If they had been wasting time when they should have been
working there is no question but that they would have been sent with
contumely to more profitable pursuits, but this was within their
rightful play hours, and Raften, after regarding them with a searching
look, said slowly: “Bhoys!” (Sam felt easier; his father would have
said ’Bhise_” if really angry.) “Fhat’s the good o’ wastin’ yer
time” (Yan’s heart sank) “wid Willow withes fur a job like that? They
can’t be made to howld. Whoi don’t ye git some hay woire or coord at
the barrun?”
The boys were greatly relieved, but still this friendly overture might
be merely a feint to open the way for a home thrust. Sam was silent.
So Yan said, presently, “We ain’t allowed to use anything but what the
Indians had or could get in the woods.”
“An’ who don’t allow yez?”
“The rules.”
“Oh,” said William, with some amusement. “Oi see! Hyar.”
He went into the woods looking this way and that, and presently
stopped at a lot of low shrubs.
“Do ye know what this is, Yan?”
“No, sir.”
“Le’s see if yer man enough to break it aff.”
Yan tried. The wood was brittle enough, but the bark, thin, smooth and
pliant, was as tough as leather, and even a narrow strip defied his
strength.
“That’s Litherwood,” said Raften. “That’s what the Injuns used; that’s
what we used ourselves in the airly days of this yer settlement.”
The boys had looked for a rebuke, and here was a helping hand. It all
turned on the fact that this was “play hours,” Raften left with a
parting word: “In wan hour an’ a half the pigs is fed.”
“You see Da’s all right when the work ain’t forgot,” said Sam, with
a patronizing air. “I wonder why I didn’t think o’ that there
Leatherwood meself. I’ve often heard that that’s what was used fur
tying bags in the old days when cord was scarce, an’ the Injuns used
it for tying their prisoners, too. Ain’t it the real stuff?”
Several strips were now used for tying four poles together at the top,
then these four were raised on end and spread out at the bottom to
serve as the frame of the teepee, or more properly wigwam, since it
was to be made of bark.
After consulting, they now got a long, limber Willow rod an inch
thick, and bending it around like a hoop, they tied it with
Leatherwood to each pole at a point four feet from the ground. Next
they cut four short poles to reach from the ground to this. These were
lashed at their upper ends to the Willow rod, and now they were ready
for the bark slabs. The boys went to the Elm logs and again Sam’s able
use of the axe came in. He cut the bark open along the top of one log,
and by using the edge of the axe and some wooden wedges they pried off
a great roll eight feet long and four feet across. It was a pleasant
surprise to see what a wide piece of bark the small log gave them.
Three logs yielded three fine large slabs and others yielded pieces of
various sizes. The large ones were set up against the frame so as to
make the most of them. Of course they were much too big for the top,
and much too narrow for the bottom; but the little pieces would do to
patch if some way could be found to make them stick.
Sam suggested nailing them to the posts, and Yan was horrified at the
idea of using nails. “No Indian has any nails.”
“Well, what would they use?” said Sam.
“They used thongs, an’–an’–maybe wooden pegs. I don’t know, but
seems to me that would be all right.”
“But them poles is hard wood,” objected the practical Sam. “You can
drive Oak pegs into Pine, but you can’t drive wooden pegs into hard
wood without you make some sort of a hole first. Maybe I’d better
bring a gimlet.”
“Now, Sam, you might just as well hire a carpenter–thatwouldn’t be Indian at all. Let’s play it right. We’ll find some way. I
believe we can tie them up with Leatherwood.”
So Sam made a sharp Oak pick with his axe, and Yan used it to pick
holes in each piece of bark and then did a sort of rude sewing till
the wigwam seemed beautifully covered in. But when they went inside
to look they were unpleasantly surprised to find how many holes
there were. It was impossible to close them all because the bark was
cracking in so many places, but the boys plugged the worst of them and
then prepared for the great sacred ceremony–the lighting of the fire
in the middle.
They gathered a lot of dry fuel, then Yan produced a match.
“That don’t look to me very Injun,” drawled Sam critically. “I don’t
think Injuns has matches.”
“Well, they don’t,” admitted Yan, humbly. “But I haven’t a flint and
steel, and don’t know how to work rubbing-sticks, so we just got to
use matches, if we want a fire.”
“Why, of course we want a fire. I ain’t kicking,” said Sam. “Go ahead
with your old leg-fire sulphur stick. A camp without a fire would be
’bout like last year’s bird’s nest or a house with the roof off.”
Yan struck a match and put it to the wood. It went out. He struck
another–same result. Yet another went out.
Sam remarked:
“Pears to me you don’t know much about lightin’ a fire. Lemme show
you. Let the White hunter learn the Injun somethin’ about the woods,"
said he with a leer.
Sam took the axe and cut some sticks of a dry Pine root. Then with his
knife he cut long curling shavings, which he left sticking in a fuzz
at the end of each stick.
“Oh, I’ve seen a picture of an Indian making them. They call them
’prayer-sticks,’” said Yan.
“Well, prayer-sticks is mighty good kindlin’” replied the other. He
struck a match, and in a minute he had a blazing fire in the middle of
the wigwam.
“Old Granny de Neuville, she’s a witch–she knows all about the woods,
and cracked Jimmy turns everything into poetry what she says. He says
she says when you want to make a fire in the woods you take–
  “First a curl of Birch bark as dry as it kin be,
  Then some twigs of soft-wood, dead, but on the tree,
  Last o’ all some Pine knots to make the kittle foam,
  An’ thar’s a fire to make you think you’re settin’ right at home.”
“Who’s Granny de Neuville?”
“Oh, she’s the old witch that lives down at the bend o’ the creek.”
“What? Has she got a granddaughter named Biddy?” said Yan, suddenly
remembering that his ancient ally came from this part of Sanger.
“Oh, my! Hain’t she? Ain’t Biddy a peach–drinks like a fish, talks
everybody to death about the time she resided in Bonnerton. Gits a
letter every mail begging her to come back and ’reside’ with them some
more.”
“Ain’t this fine,” said Yan, as he sat on a pile of Fir boughs in the
wigwam.
“Looks like the real thing,” replied Sam from his seat on the other
side. “But say, Yan, don’t make any more fire; it’s kind o’ warm here,
an’ there seems to be something wrong with that flue–wants sweepin’,
prob’ly–hain’t been swep’ since I kin remember.”
The fire blazed up and the smoke increased. Just a little of it
wandered out of the smoke-hole at the top, then it decided that this
was a mistake and thereafter positively declined to use the vent. Some
of it went out by chinks, and a large stream issued from the door, but
by far the best part of it seemed satisfied with the interior of the
wigwam, so that in a minute or less both boys scrambled out. Their
eyes were streaming with smoke-tears and their discomfiture was
complete.
“’Pears to me,” observed Sam, “like we got them holes mixed. The dooer
should ’a ’been at the top, sence the smoke has a fancy for usin’ it,
an’ then we’d had a chance.”
“The Indians make it work,” said Yan; “a White hunter ought to know
how.”
“Now’s the Injun’s chance,” said Sam. “Maybe it wants a dooer to
close, then the smoke would have to go out.”
They tried this, and of course some of the smoke was crowded out, but
not till long after the boys were.
“Seems like what does get out by the chinks is sucked back agin by
that there double-action flue,” said Sam.
It was very disappointing. The romance of sitting by the fire in one’s
teepee appealed to both of the boys, but the physical torture of
the smoke made it unbearable. Their dream was dispelled, and Sam
suggested, “Maybe we’d better try a shanty.”
“No,” said Yan, with his usual doggedness. “I know it can be done,
because the Indians do it. We’ll find out in time.”
But all their efforts were in vain. The wigwam was a failure, as far
as fire was concerned. It was very small and uncomfortable, too; the
wind blew through a hundred crevices, which grew larger as the Elm
bark dried and cracked. A heavy shower caught them once, and they were
rather glad to be driven into their cheerless lodge, but the rain came
abundantly into the smoke-hole as well as through the walls, and they
found it but little protection.
[Illustration: “The wigwam was a failure."]
“Seems to me, if anything, a leetle wetter in here than
outside,” said Sam, as he led in a dash for home.
That night a heavy storm set in, and next day the boys found their
flimsy wigwam blown down–nothing but a heap of ruins.
Some time after, Raften asked at the table in characteristic stern
style, “Bhoys, what’s doin’ down to yer camp? Is yer wigwam finished?”
“No good,” said Sam. “All blowed down.”
“How’s that?”
“I dunno’. It smoked like everything. We couldn’t stay in it.”
“Couldn’t a-been right made,” said Raften; then with a sudden
interest, which showed how eagerly he would have joined in this forty
years ago, he said, “Why don’t ye make a rale taypay?”
“Dunno’ how, an’ ain’t got no stuff.”
“Wall, now, yez have been pretty good an’ ain’t slacked on the wurruk,
yez kin have the ould wagon kiver. Cousin Bert could tache ye how to
make it, if he wuz here. Maybe Caleb Clark knows,” he added, with a
significant twinkle of his eye. “Better ask him.” Then he turned to
give orders to the hired men, who, of course, ate at the family table.
“Da, do you care if we go to Caleb?”
“I don’t care fwhat ye do wid him,” was the reply.
Raften was no idle talker and Sam knew that, so as soon as “the law
was off” he and Yan got out the old wagon cover. It seemed like an
acre of canvas when they spread it out. Having thus taken possession,
they put it away again in the cow-house, their own domain, and Sam
said: “I’ve a great notion to go right to Caleb; he sho’ly knows more
about a teepee than any one else here, which ain’t sayin’ much.”
“Who’s Caleb?”
“Oh, he’s the old Billy Goat that shot at Da oncet, just after Da beat
him at a horse trade. Let on it was a mistake: ’twas, too, as he
found out, coz Da bought up some old notes of his, got ’em cheap, and
squeezed him hard to meet them. He’s had hard luck ever since.
“He’s a mortal queer old duck, that Caleb. He knows heaps about the
woods, coz he was a hunter an’ trapper oncet. My! wouldn’t he be down
on me if he knowed who was my Da, but he don’t have to know.”
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
