


The Peace of Minnie
That night the two avoided each other. Yan ate but little, and to Mrs.
Raften’s kindly solicitous questions he said he was not feeling well.
After supper they were sitting around the table, the men sleepily
silent, Yan and Sam moodily so. Yan had it all laid out in his mind
now. Sam would make a one-sided report of the affair; Guy would
sustain him. Raften himself was witness of Yan’s violence.
The merry days at Sanger were over. He was doomed, and felt like a
condemned felon awaiting the carrying out of the sentence. There was
only one lively member of the group. That was little Minnie. She was
barely three, but a great chatterbox. Like all children, she dearly
loved a “secret,” and one of her favourite tricks was to beckon to
some one, laying her pinky finger on her pinker lips, and then when
they stooped she would whisper in their ear, “Don’t tell.” That was
all. It was her Idea of a “seek-it.”
She was playing at her brother’s knee. He picked her up and they
whispered to each other, then she scrambled down and went to Yan. He
lifted her with a tenderness that was born of the thought that she
alone loved him now. She beckoned his head down, put her chubby arms
around his neck and whispered, ’Don’t tell,” then slid down,
holding her dear innocent little finger warningly before her mouth.
What did it mean? Had Sam told her to do that, or was it a mere
repetition of her old trick? No matter, it brought a rush of warm
feeling into Yan’s heart. He coaxed the little cherub back and
whispered, “No, Minnie, I’ll never tell.” He began to see how crazy he
had been. Sam was such a good fellow, he was very fond of him, and he
wanted to make up; but no–with Sam holding threats of banishment over
him, he could not ask for forgiveness. No, he would do nothing but
wait and see.
He met Mr. Raften again and again that evening and nothing was said.
He slept little that night and was up early. He met Mr. Raften
alone–rather tried to meet him alone. He wanted to have it over with.
He was one of the kind not prayed for in the Litany that crave “sudden
death.” But Raften was unchanged. At breakfast Sam was as usual,
except to Yan, and not very different to him. He had a swelling on his
lip that he said he got “tusslin’ with the boys somehow or nuther.”
After breakfast Raften said:
“Yahn, I want you to come with me to the schoolhouse.”
“It’s come at last,” thought Yan, for the schoolhouse was on the road
to the railroad station. But why did not Raften say “the station”?
He was not a man to mince words. Nothing was said about his handbag
either, and there was no room for it in the buggy anyway.
Raften drove in silence. There was nothing unusual in that. At length
he said:
“Yahn, what’s yer father goin’ to make of ye?”
“An artist,” said Yan, wondering what this had to do with his
dismissal.
“Does an artist hev to be bang-up eddicated?”
“They’re all the better for it.”
“Av coorse, av coorse, that’s what I tell Sam. It’s eddication that
counts. Does artists make much money?”
“Yes, some of them. The successful ones sometimes make millions.”
“Millions? I guess not. Ain’t you stretchin’ it just a leetle?”
“No, sir. Turner made a million. Titian lived in a palace, and so did
Raphael.”
“Hm. Don’t know ’em, but maybe so–maybe so. It’s wonderful what
eddication does–that’s what I tell Sam.”
They now drew near the schoolhouse. It was holiday time, but the door
was open and on the steps were two graybearded men. They nodded to
Raften. These men were the school trustees. One of them was Char-less
Boyle; the other was old Moore, poor as a church mouse, but a genial
soul, and really put on the Board as a lubricant between Boyle and
Raften. Boyle was much the more popular. But Raften was always made
trustee, for the people knew that he would take extremely good care of
funds and school as well as of scholars.
This was a special meeting called to arrange for a new schoolhouse.
Raften got out a lot of papers, including letters from the Department
of Education. The School District had to find half the money; the
Department would supply the other half if all conditions were complied
with. Chief of these, the schoolhouse had to have a given number of
cubic feet of air for each pupil. This was very important, but how
were they to know in advance if they had the minimum and were not
greatly over. It would not do to ask the Department that. They could
not consult the teacher, for he was away now and probably would cheat
them with more air than was needed. It was Raften who brilliantly
solved this frightful mathematical problem and discovered a doughty
champion in the thin, bright-eyed child.
“Yahn,” he said, offering him a two-foot rule, “can ye tell me how
many foot of air is in this room for every scholar when the seats is
full?”
“You mean cubic feet?”
“Le’s see,” and Raften and Moore, after stabbing at the plans with
huge forefingers and fumbling cumberously at the much-pawed documents,
said together: “Yes, it says cubic feet.” Yan quickly measured the
length of the room and took the height with the map-lifter. The three
graybeards gazed with awe and admiration as they saw how surehe seemed. He then counted the seats and said, “Do you count the
teacher?” The men discussed this point, then decided, “Maybe ye
better; he uses more wind than any of them. Ha, ha!”
Yan made a few figures on paper, then said, “Twenty feet, rather
better.”
“Luk at thot,” said Raften in a voice of bullying and triumph; “jest
agrees with the Gover’ment Inspector. I towld ye he could. Now
let’s put the new buildin’ to test.”
More papers were pawed over.
“Yahn, how’s this–double as many children, one teacher an’ the
buildin’ so an’ so.”
Yan figured a minute and said, “Twenty-five feet each.”
“Thar, didn’t I tell ye,” thundered Raften; “didn’t I say that that
dhirty swindler of an architect was playing us into the conthractor’s
hands–thought we wuz simple–a put-up job, the hull durn thing. Luk
at it! They’re nothing but a gang of thieves.”
Yan glanced at the plan that was being flourished in the air.
“Hold on,” he said, with an air of authority that he certainly never
before had used to Raften, “there’s the lobby and cloak-room to come
off.” He subtracted their bulk and found the plan all right–the
Government minimum of air.
Boyle’s eye had now just a little gleam of triumphant malice. Raften
seemed actually disappointed not to have found some roguery.
“Well, they’re a shcaly lot, anyhow. They’ll bear watchin’,” he added,
in tones of self-justification.
“Now, Yahn, last year the township was assessed at $265,000 an’ we
raised $265 with a school-tax of wan mill on the dollar. This year the
new assessment gives $291,400; how much will the same tax raise if
cost of collecting is same?”
“Two hundred and ninety-one dollars and forty cents,” said Yan,
without hesitation–and the three men sat back in their chairs and
gasped.
It was the triumph of his life. Even old Boyle beamed in admiration,
and Raften glowed, feeling that not a little of it belonged to him.
There was something positively pathetic in the simplicity of the three
shrewd men and their abject reverence for the wonderful scholarship of
this raw boy, and not less touching was their absolute faith in his
infallibility as a mathematician.
Raften grinned at him in a peculiar, almost a weak way. Yan had never
seen that expression on his face before, excepting once, and that
was as he shook hands with a noted pugilist just after he had won a
memorable fight. Yan did not know whether he liked it or not.
On the road home Raften talked with unusual freeness about his plans
for his son. (Yan began to realize that the storm had blown over.) He
harped on his favourite theme, “eddication.” If Yan had only known,
that was the one word of comfort that Raften found when he saw his big
boy go down: “It’s eddication done it. Oh, but he’s fine eddicated."
Yan never knew until years afterward, when a grown man and he and
Raften were talking of the old days, that he had been for some time
winning respect from the rough-and-ready farmer, but what finally
raised him to glorious eminence was the hip-throw that he served that
day on Sam.
Raften was all right, Yan believed, but what of Sam? They had not
spoken yet. Yan wished to make up, but it grew harder. Sam had got
over his wrath and wanted a chance, but did not know how.
He had just set down his two buckets after feeding the pigs when
Minnie came toddling out.
“Sam! Sam! Take Minnie to ’ide,” then seeing Yan she added, “Yan, you
mate a tair, tate hold Sam’s hand.”
The queen must be obeyed. Sam and Yan sheepishly grasped hands to make
a queen’s chair for the little lady. She clutched them both around
the neck and brought their heads close together. They both loved the
pink-and-white baby between them, and both could talk to her though
not to each other. But there is something in touch that begets
comprehension. The situation was becoming ludicrous when Sam suddenly
burst out laughing, then:
“Say, Yan, let’s be friends.”
“I–I want–to–be,” stammered Yan, with tears standing in his eyes.
“I’m awfully sorry. I’ll never do it again,”
“Oh, shucks! I don’t care,” said Sam. “It was all that dirty little
sneak that made the trouble; but never mind, it’s all right. The
only thing that worries me is how you sent me flying. I’m bigger an’
stronger an’ older, I can heft more an’ work harder, but you throwed
me like a bag o’ shavings, I only wish I knowed how you done it.”
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
