


The only other vessel in port was the Russian government bark,
from Asitka, mounting eight guns, (four of which we found to be
Quakers,) and having on board the ex-governor, who was going in
her to Mazatlan, and thence overland to Vera Cruz.  He offered
to take letters, and deliver them to the American consul at
Vera Cruz, whence they could be easily forwarded to the United
States.  We accordingly made up a packet of letters, almost every
one writing, and dating them “January 1st, 1836.”  The governor
was true to his promise, and they all reached Boston before the
middle of March; the shortest communication ever yet made across
the country.
The brig Pilgrim had been lying in Monterey through the latter part
of November, according to orders, waiting for us.  Day after day,
Captain Faucon went up to the hill to look out for us, and at last,
gave us up, thinking we must have gone down in the gale which we
experienced off Point Conception, and which had blown with great
fury over the whole coast, driving ashore several vessels in the
snuggest ports.  An English brig, which had put into San Francisco,
lost both her anchors; the Rosa was driven upon a mud bank in
San Diego; and the Pilgrim, with great difficulty, rode out the
gale in Monterey, with three anchors a-head.  She sailed early
in December for San Diego and intermedios.
As we were to be here over Sunday, and Monterey was the best place
to go ashore on the whole coast, and we had had no liberty-day for
nearly three months, every one was for going ashore.  On Sunday morning,
as soon as the decks were washed, and we had got breakfast, those who
had obtained liberty began to clean themselves, as it is called,
to go ashore.  A bucket of fresh water apiece, a cake of soap,
a large coarse towel, and we went to work scrubbing one another,
on the forecastle.  Having gone through this, the next thing was
to get into the head,–one on each side–with a bucket apiece,
and duck one another, by drawing up water and heaving over each
other, while we were stripped to a pair of trowsers.  Then came
the rigging-up.  The usual outfit of pumps, white stockings,
loose white duck trowsers, blue jackets, clean checked shirts,
black kerchiefs, hats well varnished, with a fathom of black
ribbon over the left eye, a silk handkerchief flying from the
outside jacket pocket, and four or five dollars tied up in the
back of the neckerchief, and we were “all right.”  One of the
quarter-boats pulled us ashore, and we steamed up to the town.
I tried to find the church, in order to see the worship, but was told
that there was no service, except a mass early in the morning; so we
went about the town, visiting the Americans and English, and the
natives whom we had known when we were here before.  Toward noon
we procured horses, and rode out to the Carmel mission, which is
about a league from the town, where we got something in the way
of a dinner–beef, eggs, frijoles, tortillas, and some middling
wine–from the mayordomo, who, of course, refused to make any
charge, as it was the Lord’s gift, yet received our present,
as a gratuity, with a low bow, a touch of the hat, and “Dios
se lo pague!”
After this repast, we had a fine run, scouring the whole country
on our fleet horses, and came into town soon after sundown.
Here we found our companions who had refused to go to ride
with us, thinking that a sailor has no more business with a horse
than a fish has with a balloon.  They were moored, stem and stern,
in a grog-shop, making a great noise, with a crowd of Indians and
hungry half-breeds about them, and with a fair prospect of being
stripped and dirked, or left to pass the night in the calabozo.
With a great deal of trouble, we managed to get them down to the
boats, though not without many angry looks and interferences from
the Spaniards, who had marked them out for their prey.  The Diana’s
crew,–a set of worthless outcasts, who had been picked up at the
islands from the refuse of whale-ships,–were all as drunk as beasts,
and had a set-to, on the beach, with their captain, who was in no
better state than themselves.  They swore they would not go aboard,
and went back to the town, were stripped and beaten, and lodged in
the calabozo, until the next day, when the captain bought them out.
Our forecastle, as usual after a liberty-day, was a scene of tumult
all night long, from the drunken ones.  They had just got to sleep
toward morning, when they were turned up with the rest, and kept at
work all day in the water, carrying hides, their heads aching so that
they could hardly stand.  This is sailor’s pleasure.
Nothing worthy of remark happened while we were here, except a little
boxing-match on board our own ship, which gave us something to talk
about.  A broad-backed, big-headed Cape Cod boy, about sixteen
years old, had been playing the bully, for the whole voyage,
over a slender, delicate-looking boy, from one of the Boston
schools, and over whom he had much the advantage, in strength,
age, and experience in the ship’s duty, for this was the first
time the Boston boy had been on salt water.  The latter, however,
had “picked up his crumbs,” was learning his duty, and getting
strength and confidence daily; and began to assert his rights
against his oppressor.  Still, the other was his master, and,
by his superior strength, always tackled with him and threw him
down.  One afternoon, before we were turned-to, these boys got
into a violent squabble in the between-decks, when George (the
Boston boy) said he would fight Nat, if he could have fair play.
The chief mate heard the noise, dove down the hatchway, hauled them
both up on deck, and told them to shake hands and have no more
trouble for the voyage, or else they should fight till one gave
in for beaten.  Finding neither willing to make an offer for
reconciliation, he called all hands up, (for the captain was
ashore, and he could do as he chose aboard,) ranged the crew
in the waist, marked a line on the deck, brought the two boys
up to it, making them “toe the mark;” then made the bight of a
rope fast to a belaying pin, and stretched it across the deck,
bringing it just above their waists.  “No striking below the
rope!”  And there they stood, one on each side of it, face to
face, and went at it like two game-cocks.  The Cape Cod boy, Nat,
put in his double-fisters, starting the blood, and bringing the
black and blue spots all over the face and arms of the other,
whom we expected to see give in every moment: but the more he
was hurt, the better he fought.  Time after time he was knocked
nearly down, but up he came again and faced the mark, as bold as
a lion, again to take the heavy blows, which sounded so as to
make one’s heart turn with pity for him.  At length he came up
to the mark for the last time, his shirt torn from his body, his
face covered with blood and bruises, and his eyes flashing fire,
and swore he would stand there until one or the other was killed,
and set-to like a young fury.  “Hurrah in the bow!” said the men,
cheering him on.  “Well crowed!”  “Never say die, while there’s
a shot in the locker!”  Nat tried to close with him, knowing his
advantage, but the mate stopped that, saying there should be fair
play, and no fingering.  Nat then came up to the mark, but looked
white about the mouth, and his blows were not given with half the
spirit of his first.  He was evidently cowed.  He had always been
his master, and had nothing to gain, and everything to lose;
while the other fought for honor and freedom, under a sense of
wrong.  It would not do.  It was soon over.  Nat gave in; not so
much beaten, as cowed and mortified; and never afterwards tried
to act the bully on board.  We took George forward, washed him
in the deck-tub, complimented his pluck, and from this time he
became somebody on board, having fought himself into notice.
Mr. Brown’s plan had a good effect, for there was no more quarrelling
among the boys for the rest of the voyage.
Wednesday, January 6th.  Set sail from Monterey, with a number of
Spaniards as passengers, and shaped our course for Santa Barbara.
The Diana went out of the bay in company with us, but parted from
us off Point Pinos, being bound to the Sandwich Islands.  We had a
smacking breeze for several hours, and went along at a great rate,
until night, when it died away, as usual, and the land-breeze set in,
which brought us upon a taught bowline.  Among our passengers was a
young man who was the best representation of a decayed gentleman
I had ever seen.  He reminded me much of some of the characters
in Gil Blas.  He was of the aristocracy of the country, his family
being of pure Spanish blood, and once of great importance in Mexico.
His father had been governor of the province, and having amassed a
large property, settled at San Diego, where he built a large house
with a court-yard in front, kept a great retinue of Indians, and set
up for the grandee of that part of the country.  His son was sent
to Mexico, where he received the best education, and went into the
first society of the capital.  Misfortune, extravagance, and the
want of funds, or any manner of getting interest on money,
soon eat the estate up, and Don Juan Bandini returned from
Mexico accomplished, poor, and proud, and without any office
or occupation, to lead the life of most young men of the better
families–dissolute and extravagant when the means are at hand;
ambitious at heart, and impotent in act; often pinched for bread;
keeping up an appearance of style, when their poverty is known to
each half-naked Indian boy in the street, and they stand in dread of
every small trader and shopkeeper in the place.  He had a slight and
elegant figure, moved gracefully, danced and waltzed beautifully,
spoke the best of Castilian, with a pleasant and refined voice
and accent, and had, throughout, the bearing of a man of high
birth and figure.  Yet here he was, with his passage given him,
(as I afterwards learned,) for he had not the means of paying
for it, and living upon the charity of our agent.  He was polite
to every one, spoke to the sailors, and gave four reáls–I dare
say the last he had in his pocket–to the steward, who waited
upon him.  I could not but feel a pity for him, especially when I
saw him by the side of his fellow-passenger and townsman, a fat,
coarse, vulgar, pretending fellow of a Yankee trader, who had
made money in San Diego, and was eating out the very vitals of
the Bandinis, fattening upon their extravagance, grinding them in
their poverty; having mortgages on their lands, forestalling their
cattle, and already making an inroad upon their jewels, which were
their last hope.
Don Juan had with him a retainer, who was as much like many of
the characters in Gil Blas as his master.  He called himself a
private secretary, though there was no writing for him to do,
and he lived in the steerage with the carpenter and sailmaker.
He was certainly a character; could read and write extremely well;
spoke good Spanish; had been all over Spanish America, and lived in
every possible situation, and served in every conceivable capacity,
though generally in that of confidential servant to some man
of figure.  I cultivated this man’s acquaintance, and during
the five weeks that he was with us,–for he remained on board
until we arrived at San Diego,–I gained a greater knowledge
of the state of political parties in Mexico, and the habits
and affairs of the different classes of society, than I could
have learned from almost any one else.  He took great pains in
correcting my Spanish, and supplying me with colloquial phrases,
and common terms and exclamations in speaking.  He lent me a file
of late newspapers from the city of Mexico, which were full of
triumphal receptions of Santa Ana, who had just returned from
Tampico after a victory, and with the preparations for his expedition
against the Texans.  “Viva Santa Ana!” was the by-word everywhere,
and it had even reached California, though there were still many
here, among whom was Don Juan Bandini, who were opposed to his
government, and intriguing to bring in Bustamente.  Santa Ana,
they said, was for breaking down the missions; or, as they termed
it–"Santa Ana no quiere religion.”  Yet I had no doubt that the
office of administrador of San Diego would reconcile Don Juan to
any dynasty, and any state of the church.  In these papers, too,
I found scraps of American and English news; but which were so
unconnected, and I was so ignorant of everything preceding them
for eighteen months past, that they only awakened a curiosity which
they could not satisfy.  One article spoke of Taney as Justicia
Mayor de los Estados Unidos, (what had become of Marshall? was he
dead, or banished?) and another made known, by news received from
Vera Cruz, that “El Vizconde Melbourne” had returned to the office
of “primer ministro,” in place of Sir Roberto Peel.  (Sir Robert
Peel had been minister, then? and where were Earl Grey and the Duke
of Wellington?)  Here were the outlines of a grand parliamentary
overturn, the filling up of which I could imagine at my leisure.
The second morning after leaving Monterey, we were off Point Conception.
It was a bright, sunny day, and the wind, though strong, was fair;
and everything was in striking contrast with our experience in the
same place two months before, when we were drifting off from a
northwester under a fore and main spencer.  “Sail ho!” cried a
man who was rigging out a top-gallant studding-sail boom.–"Where
away?"–"Weather beam, sir!” and in a few minutes a full-rigged
brig was seen standing out from under Point Conception.  The
studding-sail halyards were let go, and the yards boom-ended,
the after yards braced aback, and we waited her coming down.
She rounded to, backed her main topsail, and showed her decks
full of men, four guns on a side, hammock nettings, and everything
man-of-war fashion, except that there was no boatswain’s whistle,
and no uniforms on the quarter-deck.  A short, square-built man,
in a rough grey jacket, with a speaking-trumpet in hand, stood in
the weather hammock nettings.  “Ship ahoy!"–"Hallo!"– “What ship
is that, pray?"–"Alert."–"Where are you from, pray?” etc., etc.
She proved to be the brig Convoy, from the Sandwich Islands,
engaged in otter hunting, among the islands which lie along
the coast.  Her armament was from her being an illegal trader.
The otter are very numerous among these islands, and being of
great value, the government require a heavy sum for a license to
hunt them, and lay a high duty upon every one shot or carried out
of the country.  This vessel had no license, and paid no duty,
besides being engaged in smuggling goods on board other vessels
trading on the coast, and belonging to the same owners in Oahu.
Our captain told him to look out for the Mexicans, but he said
they had not an armed vessel of his size in the whole Pacific.
This was without doubt the same vessel that showed herself off
Santa Barbara a few months before.  These vessels frequently
remain on the coast for years, without making port, except at
the islands for wood and water, and an occasional visit to Oahu
for a new outfit.
Sunday, January 10th.  Arrived at Santa Barbara, and on the
following Wednesday, slipped our cable and went to sea, on account
of a south-easter.  Returned to our anchorage the next day.  We were
the only vessel in the port.  The Pilgrim had passed through the
Canal and hove-to off the town, nearly six weeks before, on her
passage down from Monterey, and was now at the leeward.  She heard
here of our safe arrival at San Francisco.
Great preparations were making on shore for the marriage of our
agent, who was to marry Donna Anneta De G––- De N––- y C––-,
youngest daughter of Don Antonio N––-, the grandee of the place,
and the head of the first family in California.  Our steward was
ashore three days, making pastry and cake, and some of the best
of our stores were sent off with him.  On the day appointed for
the wedding, we took the captain ashore in the gig, and had orders
to come for him at night, with leave to go up to the house and see
the fandango.  Returning on board, we found preparations making for
a salute.  Our guns were loaded and run out, men appointed to each,
cartridges served out, matches lighted, and all the flags ready to
be run up.  I took my place at the starboard after gun, and we all
waited for the signal from on shore.  At ten o’clock the bride went up
with her sister to the confessional, dressed in deep black.  Nearly an
hour intervened, when the great doors of the mission church opened,
the bells rang out a loud, discordant peal, the private signal for
us was run up by the captain ashore, the bride, dressed in complete
white, came out of the church with the bridegroom, followed by
a long procession.  Just as she stepped from the church door,
a small white cloud issued from the bows of our ship, which was
full in sight, the loud report echoed among the surrounding hills
and over the bay, and instantly the ship was dressed in flags
and pennants from stem to stern.  Twenty-three guns followed in
regular succession, with an interval of fifteen seconds between
each when the cloud cleared away, and the ship lay dressed in her
colors, all day.  At sun-down, another salute of the same number
of guns was fired, and all the flags run down.  This we thought
was pretty well–a gun every fifteen seconds–for a merchantman
with only four guns and a dozen or twenty men.
After supper, the gig’s crew were called, and we rowed ashore,
dressed in our uniform, beached the boat, and went up to the
fandango.  The bride’s father’s house was the principal one in the
place, with a large court in front, upon which a tent was built,
capable of containing several hundred people.  As we drew near,
we heard the accustomed sound of violins and guitars, and saw
a great motion of the people within.  Going in, we found nearly
all the people of the town–men, women, and children–collected
and crowded together, leaving barely room for the dancers; for on
these occasions no invitations are given, but every one is expected
to come, though there is always a private entertainment within the
house for particular friends.  The old women sat down in rows,
clapping their hands to the music, and applauding the young ones.
The music was lively, and among the tunes, we recognized several
of our popular airs, which we, without doubt, have taken from
the Spanish.  In the dancing, I was much disappointed.  The women
stood upright, with their hands down by their sides, their eyes
fixed upon the ground before them, and slided about without any
perceptible means of motion; for their feet were invisible, the hem
of their dresses forming a perfect circle about them, reaching to the
ground.  They looked as grave as though they were going through some
religious ceremony, their faces as little excited as their limbs;
and on the whole, instead of the spirited, fascinating Spanish
dances which I had expected, I found the Californian fandango,
on the part of the women at least, a lifeless affair.  The men
did better.  They danced with grace and spirit, moving in circles
round their nearly stationary partners, and showing their figures
to great advantage.
A great deal was said about our friend Don Juan Bandini, and when he
did appear, which was toward the close of the evening, he certainly
gave us the most graceful dancing that I had ever seen.  He was
dressed in white pantaloons neatly made, a short jacket of dark
silk, gaily figured, white stockings and thin morocco slippers
upon his very small feet.  His slight and graceful figure was
well calculated for dancing, and he moved about with the grace
and daintiness of a young fawn.  An occasional touch of the
toe to the ground, seemed all that was necessary to give him a
long interval of motion in the air.  At the same time he was not
fantastic or flourishing, but appeared to be rather repressing a
strong tendency to motion.  He was loudly applauded, and danced
frequently toward the close of the evening.  After the supper,
the waltzing began, which was confined to a very few of the “gente
de razón,” and was considered a high accomplishment, and a mark of
aristocracy.  Here, too, Don Juan figured greatly, waltzing with the
sister of the bride, (Donna Angustia, a handsome woman and a general
favorite,) in a variety of beautiful, but, to me, offensive figures,
which lasted as much as half an hour, no one else taking the floor.
They were repeatedly and loudly applauded, the old men and women
jumping out of their seats in admiration, and the young people
waving their hats and handkerchiefs.  Indeed among people of the
character of these Mexicans, the waltz seemed to me to have found
its right place.  The great amusement of the evening,–which
I suppose was owing to its being carnival–was the breaking of
eggs filled with cologne, or other essences, upon the heads of
the company.  One end of the egg is broken and the inside taken
out, then it is partly filled with cologne, and the whole sealed
up.  The women bring a great number of these secretly about them,
and the amusement is to break one upon the head of a gentleman
when his back is turned.  He is bound in gallantry to find out
the lady and return the compliment, though it must not be done
if the person sees you. A tall, stately Don, with immense grey
whiskers, and a look of great importance, was standing before me,
when I felt a light hand on my shoulder, and turning round, saw Donna
Angustia, (whom we all knew, as she had been up to Monterey, and down
again, in the Alert,) with her finger upon her lip, motioning me
gently aside.  I stepped back a little, when she went up behind
the Don, and with one hand knocked off his huge sombrero, and at
the same instant, with the other, broke the egg upon his head,
and springing behind me, was out of sight in a moment.  The Don
turned slowly round, the cologne, running down his face, and over
his clothes, and a loud laugh breaking out from every quarter.
He looked round in vain, for some time, until the direction of
so many laughing eyes showed him the fair offender.  She was his
niece, and a great favorite with him, so old Don Domingo had to
join in the laugh.  A great many such tricks were played, and many
a war of sharp manoeuvering was carried on between couples of the
younger people, and at every successful exploit a general laugh
was raised.
Another singular custom I was for some time at a loss about. 
A pretty young girl was dancing, named, after what would appear to
us the sacrilegious custom of the country–Espiritu Santo, when a
young man went behind her and placed his hat directly upon her
head, letting it fall down over her eyes, and sprang back among
the crowd.  She danced for some time with the hat on, when she
threw it off, which called forth a general shout; and the young
man was obliged to go out upon the floor and pick it up.  Some of
the ladies, upon whose heads hats had been placed, threw them off
at once, and a few kept them on throughout the dance, and took
them off at the end, and held them out in their hands, when the
owner stepped out, bowed, and took it from them.  I soon began
to suspect the meaning of the thing, and was afterward told that
it was a compliment, and an offer to become the lady’s gallant
for the rest of the evening, and to wait upon her home.  If the
hat was thrown off, the offer was refused, and the gentleman was
obliged to pick up his hat amid a general laugh.  Much amusement
was caused sometimes by gentlemen putting hats on the ladies’ heads,
without permitting them to see whom it was done by.  This obliged
them to throw them off, or keep them on at a venture, and when they
came to discover the owner, the laugh was often turned upon them. 
The captain sent for us about ten o’clock, and we went aboard in
high spirits, having enjoyed the new scene much, and were of great
importance among the crew, from having so much to tell, and from the
prospect of going every night until it was over; for these fandangos
generally last three days.  The next day, two of us were sent up to
the town, and took care to come back by way of Capitan Noriego’s
and take a look into the booth.  The musicians were still there,
upon their platform, scraping and twanging away, and a few people,
apparently of the lower classes, were dancing.  The dancing is kept
up, at intervals, throughout the day, but the crowd, the spirit,
and the élite, come in at night.  The next night, which was the last,
we went ashore in the same manner, until we got almost tired of the
monotonous twang of the instruments, the drawling sounds which the
women kept up, as an accompaniment, and the slapping of the hands
in time with the music, in place of castanets.  We found ourselves
as great objects of attention as any persons or anything at the
place.  Our sailor dresses–and we took great pains to have them
neat and shipshape–were much admired, and we were invited, from
every quarter, to give them an American sailor’s dance; but after
the ridiculous figure some of our countrymen cut, in dancing after
the Spaniards, we thought it best to leave it to their imaginations.
Our agent, with a tight, black, swallow-tailed coat, just imported
from Boston, a high stiff cravat, looking as if he had been pinned
and skewered, with only his feet and hands left free, took the
floor just after Bandini; and we thought they had had enough of
Yankee grace.
The last night they kept it up in great style, and were getting
into a high-go, when the captain called us off to go aboard,
for, it being south-easter season, he was afraid to remain on
shore long; and it was well he did not, for that very night,
we slipped our cables, as a crowner to our fun ashore, and stood
off before a south-easter, which lasted twelve hours, and returned
to our anchorage the next day. 
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
