


Sunday, November 1st.  Sailed this day, (Sunday again,) for
Santa Barbara, where we arrived on the 5th.  Coming round St.
Buenaventura, and nearing the anchorage, we saw two vessels in port,
a large full-rigged, and a small hermaphrodite brig.  The former,
the crew said must be the Pilgrim; but I had been too long in the
Pilgrim to be mistaken in her, and I was right in differing from
them; for, upon nearer approach, her long, low shear, sharp bows,
and raking masts, told quite another story.  “Man-of-war brig,"
said some of them; “Baltimore clipper,” said others; the Ayacucho,
thought I; and soon the broad folds of the beautiful banner of
St. George,–white field with blood-red border and cross,–were
displayed from her peak.  A few minutes put it beyond a doubt,
and we were lying by the side of the Ayacucho, which had sailed
from San Diego about nine months before, while we were lying there
in the Pilgrim.  She had since been to Valparaiso, Callao, and the
Sandwich Islands, and had just come upon the coast.  Her boat came
on board, bringing Captain Wilson; and in half an hour the news was
all over the ship that there was a war between the United States
and France.  Exaggerated accounts reached the forecastle.
Battles had been fought, a large French fleet was in the Pacific,
etc., etc.; and one of the boat’s crew of the Ayacucho said that
when they left Callao, a large French frigate and the American
frigate Brandywine, which were lying there, were going outside to
have a battle, and that the English frigate Blonde was to be umpire,
and see fair play.  Here was important news for us.  Alone, on an
unprotected coast, without an American man-of-war within some
thousands of miles, and the prospect of a voyage home through the
whole length of the Pacific and Atlantic oceans!  A French prison
seemed a much more probable place of destination than the good port
of Boston.  However, we were too salt to believe every yarn that
comes into the forecastle, and waited to hear the truth of the
matter from higher authority.  By means of a supercargo’s clerk,
I got the account of the matter, which was, that the governments
had had difficulty about the payment of a debt; that war had been
threatened and prepared for, but not actually declared, although it
was pretty generally anticipated.  This was not quite so bad, yet
was no small cause of anxiety.  But we cared very little about the
matter ourselves.  “Happy go lucky” with Jack!  We did not believe
that a French prison would be much worse than “hide-droghing” on
the coast of California; and no one who has not been on a long,
dull voyage, shut up in one ship, can conceive of the effect of
monotony upon one’s thoughts and wishes.  The prospect of a change
is like a green spot in a desert, and the remotest probability
of great events and exciting scenes gives a feeling of delight,
and sets life in motion, so as to give a pleasure, which any one
not in the same state would be entirely unable to account for.
In fact, a more jovial night we had not passed in the forecastle
for months.  Every one seemed in unaccountably high spirits.
An undefined anticipation of radical changes, of new scenes,
and great doings, seemed to have possessed every one, and the
common drudgery of the vessel appeared contemptible.  Here was a
new vein opened; a grand theme of conversation, and a topic for all
sorts of discussions.  National feeling was wrought up.  Jokes were
cracked upon the only Frenchman in the ship, and comparisons made
between “old horse” and “soup meagre,” etc., etc.
We remained in uncertainty as to this war for more than two months,
when an arrival from the Sandwich Islands brought us the news of an
amicable arrangement of the difficulties. 
The other vessel which we found in port was the hermaphrodite brig
Avon, from the Sandwich Islands.  She was fitted up in handsome style;
fired a gun and ran her ensign up and down at sunrise and sunset; had a
band of four or five pieces of music on board, and appeared rather like
a pleasure yacht than a trader; yet, in connection with the Loriotte,
Clementine, Bolivar, Convoy, and other small vessels, belonging to
sundry Americans at Oahu, she carried on a great trade–legal and
illegal–in otter skins, silks, teas, specie, etc.
The second day after our arrival, a full-rigged brig came round
the point from the northward, sailed leisurely through the bay,
and stood off again for the south-east, in the direction of the
large island of Catalina.  The next day the Avon got under weigh,
and stood in the same direction, bound for San Pedro.  This might
do for marines and Californians, but we knew the ropes too well.
The brig was never again seen on the coast, and the Avon arrived
at San Pedro in about a week, with a full cargo of Canton and
American goods.
This was one of the means of escaping the heavy duties the Mexicans
lay upon all imports.  A vessel comes on the coast, enters a
moderate cargo at Monterey, which is the only custom-house,
and commences trading.  In a month or more, having sold a large
part of her cargo, she stretches over to Catalina, or other of the
large uninhabited islands which lie off the coast, in a trip from
port to port, and supplies herself with choice goods from a vessel
from Oahu, which has been lying off and on the islands, waiting for
her.  Two days after the sailing of the Avon, the Loriotte came
in from the leeward, and without doubt had also a snatch at the
brig’s cargo.
Tuesday, Nov. 10th.  Going ashore, as usual, in the gig, just
before sundown, to bring off the captain, we found, upon taking
in the captain and pulling off again, that our ship, which lay
the farthest out, had run up her ensign.  This meant “Sail ho!"
of course, but as we were within the point we could see nothing.
“Give way, boys!  Give way!  Lay out on your oars, and long stroke!"
said the captain; and stretching to the whole length of our arms,
bending back again, so that our backs touched the thwarts, we sent
her through the water like a rocket.  A few minutes of such pulling
opened the islands, one after another, in range of the point, and gave
us a view of the Canal, where was a ship, under top-gallant sails,
standing in, with a light breeze, for the anchorage.  Putting the
boat’s head in the direction of the ship, the captain told us to lay
out again; and we needed no spurring, for the prospect of boarding a
new ship, perhaps from home, hearing the news and having something
to tell of when we got back, was excitement enough for us, and we
gave way with a will.  Captain Nye, of the Loriotte, who had
been an old whaleman, was in the stern-sheets, and fell mightily
into the spirit of it.  “Bend your backs and break your oars!"
said he.  “Lay me on, Captain Bunker!”  “There she flukes!” and
other exclamations, peculiar to whalemen.  In the meantime, it
fell flat calm, and being within a couple of miles of the ship,
we expected to board her in a few moments, when a sudden breeze
sprung up, dead ahead for the ship, and she braced up and stood
off toward the islands, sharp on the larboard tack, making good
way through the water.  This, of course, brought us up, and we
had only to “ease larboard oars; pull round starboard!” and go
aboard the Alert, with something very like a flea in the ear.
There was a light land-breeze all night, and the ship did not come
to anchor until the next morning.  As soon as her anchor was down,
we went aboard, and found her to be the whaleship, Wilmington and
Liverpool Packet, of New Bedford, last from the “off-shore ground,"
with nineteen hundred barrels of oil.  A “spouter” we knew her to
be as soon as we saw her, by her cranes and boats, and by her stump
top-gallant masts, and a certain slovenly look to the sails, rigging,
spars and hull; and when we got on board, we found everything to
correspond,–spouter fashion.  She had a false deck, which was
rough and oily, and cut up in every direction by the chimes of
oil casks; her rigging was slack and turning white; no paint on
the spars or blocks; clumsy seizings and straps without covers,
and homeward-bound splices in every direction.  Her crew, too,
were not in much better order.  Her captain was a slab-sided,
shamble-legged Quaker, in a suit of brown, with a broad-brimmed
hat, and sneaking about decks, like a sheep, with his head down;
and the men looked more like fishermen and farmers than they did
like sailors.
Though it was by no means cold weather, (we having on only our red
shirts and duck trowsers,) they all had on woollen trowsers–not blue
and shipshape–but of all colors–brown, drab, grey, aye, and green,
with suspenders over their shoulders, and pockets to put their hands
in.  This, added to guernsey frocks, striped comforters about the
neck, thick cowhide boots, woollen caps, and a strong, oily smell,
and a decidedly green look, will complete the description.  Eight or
ten were on the fore-topsail yard, and as many more in the main,
furling the topsails, while eight or ten were hanging about the
forecastle, doing nothing.  This was a strange sight for a vessel
coming to anchor; so we went up to them, to see what was the matter.
One of them, a stout, hearty-looking fellow, held out his leg and
said he had the scurvy; another had cut his hand; and others had
got nearly well, but said that there were plenty aloft to furl the
sails, so they were sogering on the forecastle.  There was only one
“splicer” on board, a fine-looking old tar, who was in the bunt of
the fore-topsail.  He was probably the only sailor in the ship,
before the mast.  The mates, of course, and the boat-steerers,
and also two or three of the crew, had been to sea before, but
only whaling voyages; and the greater part of the crew were raw
hands, just from the bush, as green as cabbages, and had not yet
got the hay-seed out of their heads.  The mizen topsail hung in
the bunt-lines until everything was furled forward.  Thus a crew
of thirty men were half an hour in doing what would have been
done in the Alert with eighteen hands to go aloft, in fifteen
or twenty minutes.
We found they had been at sea six or eight months, and had no news
to tell us; so we left them, and promised to get liberty to come
on board in the evening, for some curiosities, etc.  Accordingly,
as soon as we were knocked off in the evening and had got supper,
we obtained leave, took a boat, and went aboard and spent an hour
or two.  They gave us pieces of whalebone, and the teeth and other
parts of curious sea animals, and we exchanged books with them–a
practice very common among ships in foreign ports, by which you
get rid of the books you have read and re-read, and a supply of
new ones in their stead, and Jack is not very nice as to their
comparative value.
Thursday, Nov. 12th.  This day was quite cool in the early part,
and there were black clouds about; but as it was often so in the
morning, nothing was apprehended, and all the captains went
ashore together, to spend the day.  Towards noon, the clouds
hung heavily over the mountains, coming half way down the
hills that encircle the town of Santa Barbara, and a heavy
swell rolled in from the south-east.  The mate immediately
ordered the gig’s crew away, and at the same time, we saw boats
pulling ashore from the other vessels.  Here was a grand chance
for a rowing match, and every one did his best.  We passed the
boats of the Ayacucho and Loriotte, but could gain nothing upon,
and indeed, hardly hold our own with, the long, six-oared boat of
the whale-ship.  They reached the breakers before us; but here
we had the advantage of them, for, not being used to the surf,
they were obliged to wait to see us beach our boat, just as,
in the same place, nearly a year before, we, in the Pilgrim,
were glad to be taught by a boat’s crew of Kanakas.
We had hardly got the boats beached, and their heads out, before our
old friend, Bill Jackson, the handsome English sailor, who steered
the Loriotte’s boat, called out that the brig was adrift; and, sure
enough, she was dragging her anchors, and drifting down into the
bight of the bay.  Without waiting for the captain, (for there
was no one on board but the mate and steward,) he sprung into
the boat, called the Kanakas together, and tried to put off.
But the Kanakas, though capital water-dogs, were frightened by
their vessel’s being adrift, and by the emergency of the case,
and seemed to lose their faculties.  Twice, their boat filled,
and came broadside upon the beach.  Jackson swore at them for
a parcel of savages, and promised to flog every one of them.
This made the matter no better; when we came forward, told the
Kanakas to take their seats in the boat, and, going two on each
side, walked out with her till it was up to our shoulders, and gave
them a shove, when, giving way with their oars, they got her safely
into the long, regular swell.  In the mean time, boats had put off
from our ships and the whaler, and coming all on board the brig
together, they let go the other anchor, paid out chain, braced the
yards to the wind, and brought the vessel up.
In a few minutes, the captains came hurrying down, on the run;
and there was no time to be lost, for the gale promised to be a
severe one, and the surf was breaking upon the beach, three deep,
higher and higher every instant.  The Ayacucho’s boat, pulled by four
Kanakas, put off first, and as they had no rudder or steering oar,
would probably never have got off, had we not waded out with them,
as far as the surf would permit.  The next that made the attempt was
the whale-boat, for we, being the most experienced “beach-combers,"
needed no help, and staid till the last.  Whalemen make the best
boats’ crews in the world for a long pull, but this landing was
new to them, and notwithstanding the examples they had had, they
slued round and were hove up–boat, oars, and men–altogether,
high and dry upon the sand.  The second time, they filled, and had
to turn their boat over, and set her off again.  We could be of no
help to them, for they were so many as to be in one another’s way,
without the addition of our numbers.  The third time, they got off,
though not without shipping a sea which drenched them all, and half
filled their boat, keeping them baling, until they reached their
ship.  We now got ready to go off, putting the boat’s head out;
English Ben and I, who were the largest, standing on each side of
the bows, to keep her “head on” to the sea, two more shipping and
manning the two after oars, and the captain taking the steering
oar.  Two or three Spaniards, who stood upon the beach looking
at us, wrapped their cloaks about them, shook their heads, and
muttered “Caramba!”  They had no taste for such doings; in fact,
the hydrophobia is a national malady, and shows itself in their
persons as well as their actions.
Watching for a “smooth chance,” we determined to show the other
boats the way it should be done; and, as soon as ours floated,
ran out with her, keeping her head on, with all our strength, and
the help of the captain’s oar, and the two after oarsmen giving
way regularly and strongly, until our feet were off the ground,
we tumbled into the bows, keeping perfectly still, from fear of
hindering the others.  For some time it was doubtful how it would
go.  The boat stood nearly up and down in the water, and the sea,
rolling from under her, let her fall upon the water with a force
which seemed almost to stave her bottom in.  By quietly sliding
two oars forward, along the thwarts, without impeding the rowers,
we shipped two bow oars, and thus, by the help of four oars and
the captain’s strong arm, we got safely off, though we shipped
several seas, which left us half full of water.  We pulled
alongside of the Loriotte, put her skipper on board, and found
her making preparations for slipping, and then pulled aboard our
own ship.  Here Mr. Brown, always “on hand,” had got everything
ready, so that we had only to hook on the gig and hoist it up,
when the order was given to loose the sails.  While we were on
the yards, we saw the Loriotte under weigh, and before our yards
were mast-headed, the Ayacucho had spread her wings, and, with yards
braced sharp up, was standing athwart our hawse.  There is no prettier
sight in the world than a full-rigged, clipper-built brig, sailing sharp
on the wind.  In a moment, our slip-rope was gone, the head-yards filled
away, and we were off.  Next came the whaler; and in a half an hour from
the time when four vessels were lying quietly at anchor, without a
rag out, or a sign of motion, the bay was deserted, and four white
clouds were standing off to sea.  Being sure of clearing the point,
we stood off with our yards a little braced in, while the Ayacucho
went off with a taught bowline, which brought her to windward of us.
During all this day, and the greater part of the night, we had the
usual south-easter entertainment, a gale of wind, variegated and
finally topped off with a drenching rain of three or four hours.
At daybreak, the clouds thinned off and rolled away, and the sun
came up clear.  The wind, instead of coming out from the northward,
as is usual, blew steadily and freshly from the anchoring-ground.
This was bad for us, for, being “flying light,” with little more
than ballast trim, we were in no condition for showing off on a
taught bowline, and had depended upon a fair wind, with which,
by the help of our light sails and studding-sails, we meant to
have been the first at the anchoring-ground; but the Ayacucho
was a good league to windward of us, and was standing in, in fine
style.  The whaler, however, was as far to leeward of us, and the
Loriotte was nearly out of sight, among the islands, up the Canal.
By hauling every brace and bowline, and clapping watch-tackles upon
all the sheets and halyards, we managed to hold our own, and drop
the leeward vessels a little in every tack.  When we reached the
anchoring-ground, the Ayacucho had got her anchor, furled her
sails, squared her yards, and was lying as quietly as if nothing
had happened for the last twenty-four hours.
We had our usual good luck in getting our anchor without letting go
another, and were all snug, with our boats at the boom-ends, in half
an hour.  In about two hours more, the whaler came in, and made a
clumsy piece of work in getting her anchor, being obliged to let
go her best bower, and finally, to get out a kedge and a hawser.
They were heave-ho-ing, stopping and unstopping, pawling, catting,
and fishing, for three hours; and the sails hung from the yards all
the afternoon, and were not furled until sundown.  The Loriotte came
in just after dark, and let go her anchor, making no attempt to pick
up the other until the next day.
This affair led to a great dispute as to the sailing of our ship
and the Ayacucho.  Bets were made between the captains, and the
crews took it up in their own way; but as she was bound to leeward
and we to windward, and merchant captains cannot deviate, a trial
never took place; and perhaps it was well for us that it did not,
for the Ayacucho had been eight years in the Pacific, in every part
of it–Valparaiso, Sandwich Islands, Canton, California, and all,
and was called the fastest merchantman that traded in the Pacific,
unless it was the brig John Gilpin, and perhaps the ship Ann McKim
of Baltimore.
Saturday, Nov. 14th.  This day we got under weigh, with the agent
and several Spaniards of note, as passengers, bound up to Monterey.
We went ashore in the gig to bring them off with their baggage,
and found them waiting on the beach, and a little afraid about
going off, as the surf was running very high.  This was nuts to
us; for we liked to have a Spaniard wet with salt water; and then
the agent was very much disliked by the crew, one and all; and we
hoped, as there was no officer in the boat, to have a chance to
duck them; for we knew that they were such “marines” that they
would not know whether it was our fault or not.  Accordingly,
we kept the boat so far from shore as to oblige them to wet their
feet in getting into her; and then waited for a good high comber,
and letting the head slue a little round, sent the whole force of
the sea into the stern-sheets, drenching them from head to feet.
The Spaniards sprang out of the boat, swore, and shook themselves
and protested against trying it again; and it was with the greatest
difficulty that the agent could prevail upon them to make another
attempt.  The next time we took care, and went off easily enough,
and pulled aboard.  The crew came to the side to hoist in their
baggage, and we gave them the wink, and they heartily enjoyed the
half-drowned looks of the company.
Everything being now ready, and the passengers aboard, we ran up
the ensign and broad pennant, (for there was no man-of-war, and
we were the largest vessel on the coast,) and the other vessels
ran up their ensigns.  Having hove short, cast off the gaskets,
and made the bunt of each sail fast by the jigger, with a man on
each yard; at the word, the whole canvas of the ship was loosed,
and with the greatest rapidity possible, everything was sheeted
home and hoisted up, the anchor tripped and catheaded, and the
ship under headway.  We were determined to show the “spouter” how
things could be done in a smart ship, with a good crew, though not
more than half their number.  The royal yards were all crossed at
once, and royals and skysails set, and, as we had the wind free,
the booms were run out, and every one was aloft, active as cats,
laying out on the yards and booms, reeving the studding-sail gear;
and sail after sail the captain piled upon her, until she was covered
with canvas, her sails looking like a great white cloud resting
upon a black speck.  Before we doubled the point, we were going
at a dashing rate, and leaving the shipping far astern.  We had
a fine breeze to take us through the Canal, as they call this bay
of forty miles long by ten wide.  The breeze died away at night,
and we were becalmed all day on Sunday, about half way between
Santa Barbara and Point Conception.  Sunday night we had a light,
fair wind, which set us up again; and having a fine sea-breeze on
the first part of Monday, we had the prospect of passing, without
any trouble, Point Conception,–the Cape Horn of California,
where it begins to blow the first of January, and blows all the
year round.  Toward the latter part of the afternoon, however,
the regular northwest wind, as usual, set in, which brought in our
studding-sails, and gave us the chance of beating round the Point,
which we were now just abreast of, and which stretched off into the
Pacific, high, rocky and barren, forming the central point of the
coast for hundreds of miles north and south.  A cap-full of wind
will be a bag-full here, and before night our royals were furled,
and the ship was laboring hard under her top-gallant sails.  At eight
bells our watch went below, leaving her with as much sail as she
could stagger under, the water flying over the forecastle at every
plunge.  It was evidently blowing harder, but then there was not a
cloud in the sky, and the sun had gone down bright.
We had been below but a short time, before we had the usual
premonitions of a coming gale: seas washing over the whole
forward part of the vessel, and her bows beating against them
with a force and sound like the driving of piles.  The watch,
too, seemed very busy trampling about decks, and singing out at
the ropes.  A sailor can always tell, by the sound, what sail is
coming in, and, in a short time, we heard the top-gallant sails
come in, one after another, and then the flying jib.  This seemed
to ease her a good deal, and we were fast going off to the land
of Nod, when–bang, bang, bang–on the scuttle, and “All hands,
reef topsails, ahoy!” started us out of our berths; and, it not
being very cold weather, we had nothing extra to put on, and were
soon on deck.  I shall never forget the fineness of the sight.
It was a clear, and rather a chilly night; the stars were twinkling
with an intense brightness, and as far as the eye could reach,
there was not a cloud to be seen.  The horizon met the sea in a
defined line.  A painter could not have painted so clear a sky.
There was not a speck upon it.  Yet it was blowing great guns from
the north-west.  When you can see a cloud to windward, you feel that
there is a place for the wind to come from; but here it seemed to
come from nowhere.  No person could have told, from the heavens,
by their eyesight alone, that it was not a still summer’s night.
One reef after another, we took in the topsails, and before
we could get them hoisted up, we heard a sound like a short,
quick rattling of thunder, and the jib was blown to atoms out of
the bolt-rope.  We got the topsails set, and the fragments of the
jib stowed away, and the fore-topmast staysail set in its place,
when the great mainsail gaped open, and the sail ripped from head
to foot.  “Lay up on that main-yard and furl the sail, before it
blows to tatters!” shouted the captain; and in a moment, we were
up, gathering the remains of it upon the yard.  We got it wrapped,
round the yard, and passed gaskets over it as snugly as possible,
and were just on deck again, when, with another loud rent,
which was heard throughout the ship, the fore-topsail, which had
been double-reefed, split in two, athwartships, just below the
reefband, from earing to earing.  Here again it was down yard,
haul out reef-tackles, and lay out upon the yard for reefing.
By hauling the reef-tackles chock-a-block, we took the strain
from the other earings, and passing the close-reef earing,
and knotting the points carefully, we succeeded in setting
the sail, close-reefed.
We had but just got the rigging coiled up, and were waiting to
hear “go below the watch!” when the main royal worked loose from
the gaskets, and blew directly out to leeward, flapping, and shaking
the mast like a wand.  Here was a job for somebody.  The royal must
come in or be cut adrift, or the mast would be snapped short off.
All the light hands in the starboard watch were sent up, one after
another, but they could do nothing with it.  At length, John,
the tall Frenchman, the head of the starboard watch, (and a better
sailor never stepped upon a deck,) sprang aloft, and, by the help
of his long arms and legs, succeeded, after a hard struggle,–the
sail blowing over the yard-arm to leeward, and the skysail blowing
directly over his head–in smothering it, and frapping it with long
pieces of sinnet.  He came very near being blown or shaken from
the yard, several times, but he was a true sailor, every finger
a fish-hook.  Having made the sail snug, he prepared to send the
yard down, which was a long and difficult job; for, frequently,
he was obliged to stop and hold on with all his might, for several
minutes, the ship pitching so as to make it impossible to do
anything else at that height.  The yard at length came down
safe, and after it, the fore and mizen royal-yards were sent
down.  All hands were then sent aloft, and for an hour or two
we were hard at work, making the booms well fast; unreeving the
studding-sail and royal and skysail gear; getting rolling-ropes
on the yards; setting up the weather breast-backstays; and making
other preparations for a storm.  It was a fine night for a gale;
just cool and bracing enough for quick work, without being cold,
and as bright as day.  It was sport to have a gale in such weather
as this.  Yet it blew like a hurricane.  The wind seemed to come
with a spite, an edge to it, which threatened to scrape us off
the yards.  The mere force of the wind was greater than I had
ever seen it before; but darkness, cold, and wet are the worst
parts of a storm to a sailor.
Having got on deck again, we looked round to see what time of
night it was, and whose watch.  In a few minutes the man at the
wheel struck four bells, and we found that the other watch was out,
and our own half out.  Accordingly, the starboard watch went below,
and left the ship to us for a couple of hours, yet with orders to
stand by for a call.
Hardly had they got below, before away went the fore-topmast staysail,
blown to ribbons.  This was a small sail, which we could manage in
the watch, so that we were not obliged to call up the other watch.
We laid out upon the bowsprit, where we were under water half the
time, and took in the fragments of the sail, and as she must have
some head sail on her, prepared to bend another staysail.  We got
the new one out, into the nettings; seized on the tack, sheets,
and halyards, and the hanks; manned the halyards, cut adrift the
frapping lines, and hoisted away; but before it was half way up
the stay, it was blown all to pieces.  When we belayed the halyards,
there was nothing left but the bolt-rope.  Now large eyes began to
show themselves in the foresail, and knowing that it must soon go,
the mate ordered us upon the yard to furl it.  Being unwilling to
call up the watch who had been on deck all night, he roused out the
carpenter, sailmaker, cook, steward, and other idlers, and,
with their help, we manned the foreyard, and after nearly half an
hour’s struggle, mastered the sail, and got it well furled round
the yard.  The force of the wind had never been greater than at
this moment.  In going up the rigging, it seemed absolutely to pin
us down to the shrouds; and on the yard, there was no such thing
as turning a face to windward.  Yet here was no driving sleet,
and darkness, and wet, and cold, as off Cape Horn; and instead of
a stiff oil-cloth suit, south-wester caps, and thick boots, we had
on hats, round jackets, duck trowsers, light shoes, and everything
light and easy.  All these things make a great difference to a
sailor.  When we got on deck, the man at the wheel struck eight
bells, (four o’clock in the morning,) and “All starbowlines,
ahoy!” brought the other watch up.  But there was no going below
for us.  The gale was now at its height, “blowing like scissors
and thumb-screws;” the captain was on deck; the ship, which was
light, rolling and pitching as though she would shake the long
sticks out of her; and the sail gaping open and splitting, in
every direction.  The mizen topsail, which was a comparatively
new sail, and close-reefed, split, from head to foot, in the
bunt; the fore-topsail went, in one rent, from clew to earing,
and was blowing to tatters; one of the chain bobstays parted;
the spritsail-yard sprung in the slings; the martingale had slued
away off to leeward; and, owing to the long dry weather, the lee
rigging hung in large bights, at every lurch.  One of the main
top-gallant shrouds had parted; and, to crown all, the galley had
got adrift, and gone over to leeward, and the anchor on the lee
bow had worked loose, and was thumping the side.  Here was work
enough for all hands for half a day.  Our gang laid out on the
mizen topsail yard, and after more than half an hour’s hard work,
furled the sail, though it bellied out over our heads, and again,
by a slant of the wind, blew in under the yard, with a fearful
jerk, and almost threw us off from the foot-ropes.
Double gaskets were passed round the yards, rolling tackles and
other gear bowsed taught, and everything made as secure as could
be.  Coming down, we found the rest of the crew just coming down
the fore rigging, having furled the tattered topsail, or, rather,
swathed it round the yard, which looked like a broken limb, bandaged.
There was no sail now on the ship but the spanker and the close-reefed
main topsail, which still held good.  But this was too much after
sail; and order was given to furl the spanker.  The brails were
hauled up, and all the light hands in the starboard watch sent
out on the gaff to pass the gaskets; but they could do nothing
with it.  The second mate swore at them for a parcel of “sogers,"
and sent up a couple of the best men; but they could do no better,
and the gaff was lowered down.  All hands were now employed in
setting up the lee rigging, fishing the spritsail-yard, lashing
the galley, and getting tackles upon the martingale, to bowse it
to windward.  Being in the larboard watch, my duty was forward,
to assist in setting up the martingale.  Three of us were out on
the martingale guys and back-ropes for more than half an hour,
carrying out, hooking and unhooking the tackles, several times
buried in the seas, until the mate ordered us in, from fear of
our being washed off.  The anchors were then to be taken up on
the rail, which kept all hands on the forecastle for an hour,
though every now and then the seas broke over it, washing the
rigging off to leeward, filling the lee scuppers breast high,
and washing chock aft to the taffrail.
Having got everything secure again, we were promising ourselves
some breakfast, for it was now nearly nine o’clock in the forenoon,
when the main topsail showed evident signs of giving way.  Some sail
must be kept on the ship, and the captain ordered the fore and main
spencer gaffs to be lowered down, and the two spencers (which were
storm sails, bran new, small, and made of the strongest canvas)
to be got up and bent; leaving the main topsail to blow away,
with a blessing on it, if it would only last until we could set
the spencers.  These we bent on very carefully, with strong robands
and seizings, and making tackles fast to the clews, bowsed them down
to the water-ways.  By this time the main topsail was among the
things that have been, and we went aloft to stow away the remnant
of the last sail of all those which were on the ship twenty-four
hours before.  The spencers were now the only whole sails on the
ship, and, being strong and small, and near the deck, presenting
but little surface to the wind above the rail, promised to hold
out well.  Hove-to under these, and eased by having no sail above
the tops, the ship rose and fell, and drifted off to leeward like
a line-of-battle ship.
It was now eleven o’clock, and the watch was sent below to
get breakfast, and at eight bells (noon), as everything was
snug, although the gale had not in the least abated, the watch
was set, and the other watch and idlers sent below.  For three
days and three nights, the gale continued with unabated fury,
and with singular regularity.  There was no lulls, and very
little variation in its fierceness.  Our ship, being light,
rolled so as almost to send the fore yard-arm under water,
and drifted off bodily, to leeward.  All this time there was
not a cloud to be seen in the sky, day or night;–no, not so
large as a man’s hand.  Every morning the sun rose cloudless
from the sea, and set again at night, in the sea, in a flood of
light.  The stars, too, came out of the blue, one after another,
night after night, unobscured, and twinkled as clear as on a still
frosty night at home, until the day came upon them.  All this time,
the sea was rolling in immense surges, white with foam, as far as
the eye could reach, on every side, for we were now leagues and
leagues from shore.
The between-decks being empty, several of us slept there in hammocks,
which are the best things in the world to sleep in during a storm;
it not being true of them, as it is of another kind of bed, “when the
wind blows, the cradle will rock;” for it is the ship that rocks,
while they always hang vertically from the beams.  During these
seventy-two hours we had nothing to do, but to turn in and out,
four hours on deck, and four below, eat, sleep, and keep watch.
The watches were only varied by taking the helm in turn, and now
and then, by one of the sails, which were furled, blowing out of
the gaskets, and getting adrift, which sent us up on the yards;
and by getting tackles on different parts of the rigging, which were
slack.  Once, the wheel-rope parted, which might have been fatal
to us, had not the chief mate sprung instantly with a relieving
tackle to windward, and kept the tiller up, till a new one could
be rove.  On the morning of the twentieth, at daybreak, the gale
had evidently done its worst, and had somewhat abated; so much so,
that all hands were called to bend new sails, although it was still
blowing as hard as two common gales.  One at a time, and with great
difficulty and labor, the old sails were unbent and sent down
by the bunt-lines, and three new topsails, made for the homeward
passage round Cape Horn, and which had never been bent, were got
up from the sailroom, and under the care of the sailmaker, were
fitted for bending, and sent up by the halyards into the tops, and,
with stops and frapping lines, were bent to the yards, close-reefed,
sheeted home, and hoisted.  These were done one at a time, and with
the greatest care and difficulty.  Two spare courses were then
got up and bent in the same manner and furled, and a storm-jib,
with the bonnet off, bent and furled to the boom.  It was twelve
o’clock before we got through; and five hours of more exhausting
labor I never experienced; and no one of that ship’s crew, I will
venture to say, will ever desire again to unbend and bend five large
sails, in the teeth of a tremendous north-wester.  Towards night,
a few clouds appeared in the horizon, and as the gale moderated,
the usual appearance of driving clouds relieved the face of the sky.
The fifth day after the commencement of the storm, we shook a reef
out of each topsail, and set the reefed foresail, jib and spanker;
but it was not until after eight days of reefed topsails that we
had a whole sail on the ship; and then it was quite soon enough,
for the captain was anxious to make up for leeway, the gale having
blown us half the distance to the Sandwich Islands.
Inch by inch, as fast as the gale would permit, we made sail on the
ship, for the wind still continued a-head, and we had many days’
sailing to get back to the longitude we were in when the storm
took us.  For eight days more we beat to windward under a stiff
top-gallant breeze, when the wind shifted and became variable.
A light south-easter, to which we could carry a reefed topmast
studding-sail, did wonders for our dead reckoning.
Friday, December 4th, after a passage of twenty days, we arrived
at the mouth of the bay of San Francisco.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
