


Tuesday, Sept. 8th.  This was my first day’s duty on board the
ship; and though a sailor’s life is a sailor’s life wherever it
may be, yet I found everything very different here from the customs
of the brig Pilgrim.  After all hands were called, at day-break,
three minutes and a half were allowed for every man to dress and
come on deck, and if any were longer than that, they were sure
to be overhauled by the mate, who was always on deck, and making
himself heard all over the ship.  The head-pump was then rigged,
and the decks washed down by the second and third mates; the chief
mate walking the quarter-deck and keeping a general supervision,
but not deigning to touch a bucket or a brush.  Inside and out,
fore and aft, upper deck and between decks, steerage and forecastle,
rail, bulwarks, and water-ways, were washed, scrubbed and scraped
with brooms and canvas, and the decks were wet and sanded all
over, and then holystoned.  The holystone is a large, soft stone,
smooth on the bottom, with long ropes attached to each end, by which
the crew keep it sliding fore and aft, over the wet, sanded decks.
Smaller hand-stones, which the sailors call “prayer-books,” are used
to scrub in among the crevices and narrow places, where the large
holystone will not go.  An hour or two, we were kept at this work,
when the head-pump was manned, and all the sand washed off the
decks and sides.  Then came swabs and squilgees; and after the
decks were dry, each one went to his particular morning job.
There were five boats belonging to the ship,–launch, pinnace,
jolly-boat, larboard quarter-boat, and gig,–each of which had a
coxswain, who had charge of it, and was answerable for the order
and cleanness of it.  The rest of the cleaning was divided among
the crew; one having the brass and composition work about the capstan;
another the bell, which was of brass, and kept as bright as a
gilt button; a third, the harness-cask; another, the man-rope
stanchions; others, the steps of the forecastle and hatchways,
which were hauled up and holystoned.  Each of these jobs must
be finished before breakfast; and, in the meantime, the rest
of the crew filled the scuttle-butt, and the cook scraped his
kids (wooden tubs out of which the sailors eat) and polished the
hoops, and placed them before the galley, to await inspection.
When the decks were dry, the lord paramount made his appearance
on the quarter-deck, and took a few turns, when eight bells
were struck, and all hands went to breakfast.  Half an hour
was allowed for breakfast, when all hands were called again;
the kids, pots, bread-bags, etc., stowed away; and, this morning,
preparations were made for getting under weigh.  We paid out on the
chain by which we swung; hove in on the other; catted the anchor;
and hove short on the first.  This work was done in shorter time
than was usual on board the brig; for though everything was more
than twice as large and heavy, the cat-block being as much as a
man could lift, and the chain as large as three of the Pilgrim’s,
yet there was a plenty of room to move about in, more discipline
and system, more men, and more good will.  Every one seemed ambitious
to do his best: officers and men knew their duty, and all went well.
As soon as she was hove short, the mate, on the forecastle, gave the
order to loose the sails, and, in an instant, every one sprung into
the rigging, up the shrouds, and out on the yards, scrambling by one
another,–the first up the best fellow,–cast off the yard-arm gaskets
and bunt gaskets, and one man remained on each yard, holding the bunt
jigger with a turn round the tye, all ready to let go, while the rest
laid down to man the sheets and halyards. The mate then hailed the
yards–"All ready forward?"–"All ready the cross-jack yards?” etc.,
etc., and “Aye, aye, sir!” being returned from each, the word was
given to let go; and in the twinkling of an eye, the ship, which
had shown nothing but her bare yards, was covered with her loose
canvas, from the royal-mast-heads to the decks.  Every one then
laid down, except one man in each top, to overhaul the rigging,
and the topsails were hoisted and sheeted home; all three yards
going to the mast-head at once, the larboard watch hoisting the
fore, the starboard watch the main, and five light hands, (of whom
I was one,) picked from the two watches, the mizen.  The yards were
then trimmed, the anchor weighed, the cat-block hooked on, the fall
stretched out, manned by “all hands and the cook,” and the anchor
brought to the head with “cheerily men!” in full chorus.  The ship
being now under weigh, the light sails were set, one after another,
and she was under full sail, before she had passed the sandy point.
The fore royal, which fell to my lot, (being in the mate’s watch,)
was more than twice as large as that of the Pilgrim, and, though I
could handle the brig’s easily, I found my hands full, with this,
especially as there were no jacks to the ship; everything being for
neatness, and nothing left for Jack to hold on by, but his eyelids.
As soon as we were beyond the point, and all sail out, the order
was given, “Go below the watch!” and the crew said that, ever since
they had been on the coast, they had had “watch and watch,” while
going from port to port; and, in fact, everything showed that,
though strict discipline was kept, and the utmost was required
of every man, in the way of his duty, yet, on the whole, there
was very good usage on board.  Each one knew that he must be a
man, and show himself smart when at his duty, yet every one was
satisfied with the usage; and a contented crew, agreeing with
one another, and finding no fault, was a contrast indeed with
the small, hard-used, dissatisfied, grumbling, desponding crew
of the Pilgrim.
It being the turn of our watch to go below, the men went to work,
mending their clothes, and doing other little things for themselves;
and I, having got my wardrobe in complete order at San Diego,
had nothing to do but to read.  I accordingly overhauled the
chests of the crew, but found nothing that suited me exactly,
until one of the men said he had a book which “told all about a
great highway-man,” at the bottom of his chest, and producing it,
I found, to my surprise and joy, that it was nothing else than
Bulwer’s Paul Clifford.  This, I seized immediately, and going
to my hammock, lay there, swinging and reading, until the watch
was out.  The between-decks were clear, the hatchways open,
and a cool breeze blowing through them, the ship under easy way,
and everything comfortable.  I had just got well into the story,
when eight bells were struck, and we were all ordered to dinner.
After dinner came our watch on deck for four hours, and, at four
o’clock, I went below again, turned into my hammock, and read
until the dog watch.  As no lights were allowed after eight o’clock,
there was no reading in the night watch.  Having light winds and
calms, we were three days on the passage, and each watch below,
during the daytime, I spent in the same manner, until I had
finished my book.  I shall never forget the enjoyment I derived
from it.  To come across anything with the slightest claims to
literary merit, was so unusual, that this was a perfect feast to
me.  The brilliancy of the book, the succession of capital hits,
lively and characteristic sketches, kept me in a constant state of
pleasing sensations.  It was far too good for a sailor.  I could
not expect such fine times to last long.
While on deck, the regular work of the ship went on.  The sailmaker
and carpenter worked between decks, and the crew had their work to do
upon the rigging, drawing yarns, making spun-yarn, etc., as usual in
merchantmen.  The night watches were much more pleasant than on board
the Pilgrim.  There, there were so few in a watch, that, one being at
the wheel, and another on the look-out, there was no one left to talk
with; but here, we had seven in a watch, so that we had long yarns,
in abundance.  After two or three night watches, I became quite well
acquainted with all the larboard watch.  The sailmaker was the head
man of the watch, and was generally considered the most experienced
seaman on board.  He was a thoroughbred old man-of-war’s-man, had
been to sea twenty-two years, in all kinds of vessels–men-of-war,
privateers, slavers, and merchantmen;–everything except whalers,
which a thorough sailor despises, and will always steer clear of,
if he can.  He had, of course, been in all parts of the world,
and was remarkable for drawing a long bow.  His yarns frequently
stretched through a watch, and kept all hands awake.  They were
always amusing from their improbability, and, indeed, he never
expected to be believed, but spun them merely for amusement;
and as he had some humor and a good supply of man-of-war slang
and sailor’s salt phrases, he always made fun.  Next to him in
age and experience, and, of course, in standing in the watch,
was an Englishman, named Harris, of whom I shall have more to
say hereafter.  Then, came two or three Americans, who had been
the common run of European and South American voyages, and one who
had been in a “spouter,” and, of course, had all the whaling stories
to himself.  Last of all, was a broad-backed, thick-headed boy from
Cape Cod, who had been in mackerel schooners, and was making his
first voyage in a square-rigged vessel.  He was born in Hingham,
and of course was called “Bucketmaker.”  The other watch was composed of
about the same number.  A tall, fine-looking Frenchman, with coal-black
whiskers and curly hair, a first-rate seaman, and named John, (one name
is enough for a sailor,) was the head man of the watch.  Then came two
Americans (one of whom had been a dissipated young man of property
and family, and was reduced to duck trowsers and monthly wages,)
a German, an English lad, named Ben, who belonged on the mizen
topsail yard with me, and was a good sailor for his years, and two
Boston boys just from the public schools.  The carpenter sometimes
mustered in the starboard watch, and was an old sea-dog, a Swede
by birth, and accounted the best helmsman in the ship.  This was
our ship’s company, beside cook and steward, who were blacks,
three mates, and the captain.
The second day out, the wind drew ahead, and we had to beat up
the coast; so that, in tacking ship, I could see the regulations
of the vessel.  Instead of going wherever was most convenient,
and running from place to place, wherever work was to be done,
each man had his station.  A regular tacking and wearing bill
was made out.  The chief mate commanded on the forecastle, and had
charge of the head sails and the forward part of the ship.  Two of
the best men in the ship–the sailmaker from our watch, and John,
the Frenchman, from the other, worked the forecastle.  The third
mate commanded in the waist, and, with the carpenter and one man,
worked the main tack and bowlines; the cook, ex-officio, the fore
sheet, and the steward the main.  The second mate had charge of
the after yards, and let go the lee fore and main braces.  I was
stationed at the weather cross-jack braces; three other light
hands at the lee; one boy at the spanker-sheet and guy; a man
and a boy at the main topsail, top-gallant, and royal braces;
and all the rest of the crew–men and boys–tallied on to the
main brace.  Every one here knew his station, must be there when
all hands were called to put the ship about, and was answerable
for every rope committed to him.  Each man’s rope must be let
go and hauled in at the order, properly made fast, and neatly
coiled away when the ship was about.  As soon as all hands are at
their stations, the captain, who stands on the weather side of the
quarter-deck, makes a sign to the man at the wheel to put it down,
and calls out “Helm’s a lee’!”  “Helm’s a lee’!” answers the mate on
the forecastle, and the head sheets are let go.  “Raise tacks and
sheets!” says the captain; “tacks and sheets!” is passed forward,
and the fore tack and main sheet are let go.  The next thing is to
haul taught for a swing.  The weather cross-jack braces and the lee
main braces are each belayed together upon two pins, and ready to
be let go; and the opposite braces hauled taught.  “Main topsail
haul!” shouts the captain; the braces are let go; and if he has
taken his time well, the yards swing round like a top; but if he
is too late, or too soon, it is like drawing teeth.  The after
yards are then braced up and belayed, the main sheet hauled aft,
the spanker eased over to leeward, and the men from the braces
stand by the head yards.  “Let go and haul!” says the captain;
the second mate lets go the weather fore braces, and the men haul
in to leeward.  The mate, on the forecastle, looks out for the
head yards.  “Well, the fore topsail yard!”  “Top-gallant yard’s
well!”  “Royal yard too much! Haul into windward! So! well that!"
“Well all!”  Then the starboard watch board the main tack, and the
larboard watch lay forward and board the fore tack and haul down
the jib sheet, clapping a tackle upon it, if it blows very fresh.
The after yards are then trimmed, the captain generally looking
out for them himself.  “Well the cross-jack yard!”  “Small pull the
main top-gallant yard!”  “Well that!”  “Well the mizen top-gallant
yard!”  “Cross-jack yards all well!”  “Well all aft!”  “Haul taught
to windward!”  Everything being now trimmed and in order, each man
coils up the rigging at his own station, and the order is given–"Go
below the watch!”
During the last twenty-four hours of the passage, we beat off and
on the land, making a tack about once in four hours, so that I
had a sufficient opportunity to observe the working of the ship;
and certainly, it took no more men to brace about this ship’s
lower yards, which were more than fifty feet square, than it did
those of the Pilgrim, which were not much more than half the size;
so much depends upon the manner in which the braces run, and the
state of the blocks; and Captain Wilson, of the Ayacucho, who was
afterwards a passenger with us, upon a trip to windward, said he
had no doubt that our ship worked two men lighter than his brig.
Friday, Sept. 11th.  This morning, at four o’clock, went below,
San Pedro point being about two leagues ahead, and the ship going
on under studding-sails.  In about an hour we were waked up by the
hauling of the chain about decks, and in a few minutes “All hands
ahoy!” was called; and we were all at work, hauling in and making
up the studding-sails, overhauling the chain forward, and getting
the anchors ready.  “The Pilgrim is there at anchor,” said some
one, as we were running about decks; and taking a moment’s look
over the rail, I saw my old friend, deeply laden, lying at anchor
inside of the kelp.  In coming to anchor, as well as in tacking,
each one had his station and duty.  The light sails were clewed
up and furled, the courses hauled up and the jibs down; then came
the topsails in the buntlines, and the anchor let go.  As soon as
she was well at anchor, all hands lay aloft to furl the topsails;
and this, I soon found, was a great matter on board this ship;
for every sailor knows that a vessel is judged of, a good deal,
by the furl of her sails.  The third mate, a sailmaker, and the
larboard watch went upon the fore topsail yard; the second mate,
carpenter, and the starboard watch upon the main; and myself
and the English lad, and the two Boston boys, and the young
Cape-Cod man, furled the mizen topsail.  This sail belonged
to us altogether, to reef and to furl, and not a man was allowed
to come upon our yard.  The mate took us under his special care,
frequently making us furl the sail over, three or four times,
until we got the bunt up to a perfect cone, and the whole sail
without a wrinkle.  As soon as each sail was hauled up and the
bunt made, the jigger was bent on to the slack of the buntlines,
and the bunt triced up, on deck.  The mate then took his place
between the knightheads to “twig” the fore, on the windlass to
twig the main, and at the foot of the mainmast, for the mizen;
and if anything was wrong,–too much bunt on one side, clews too
taught or too slack, or any sail abaft the yard,–the whole must be
dropped again.  When all was right, the bunts were triced well up,
the yard-arm gaskets passed, so as not to leave a wrinkle forward
of the yard–short gaskets with turns close together.
From the moment of letting go the anchor, when the captain ceases
his care of things, the chief mate is the great man.  With a voice
like a young lion, he was hallooing and bawling, in all directions,
making everything fly, and, at the same time, doing everything well.
He was quite a contrast to the worthy, quiet, unobtrusive mate of the
Pilgrim; not so estimable a man, perhaps, but a far better mate
of a vessel; and the entire change in Captain T––-’s conduct,
since he took command of the ship, was owing, no doubt, in a
great measure, to this fact.  If the chief officer wants force,
discipline slackens, everything gets out of joint, the captain
interferes continually; that makes a difficulty between them,
which encourages the crew, and the whole ends in a three-sided
quarrel.  But Mr. Brown (the mate of the Alert) wanted no help
from anybody; took everything into his own hands; and was more
likely to encroach upon the authority of the master, than to
need any spurring.  Captain T––- gave his directions to the
mate in private, and, except in coming to anchor, getting under
weigh, tacking, reefing topsails, and other “all-hands-work,"
seldom appeared in person.  This is the proper state of things,
and while this lasts, and there is a good understanding aft,
everything will go on well.
Having furled all the sails, the royal yards were next to be sent
down.  The English lad and myself sent down the main, which was
larger than the Pilgrim’s main top-gallant yard; two more light
hands, the fore; and one boy, the mizen.  This order, we always
kept while on the coast; sending them up and down every time we
came in and went out of port.  They were all tripped and lowered
together, the main on the starboard side, and the fore and mizen,
to port.  No sooner was she all snug, than tackles were got up
on the yards and stays, and the long-boat and pinnace hove out.
The swinging booms were then guyed out, and the boats made fast
by geswarps, and everything in harbor style.  After breakfast,
the hatches were taken off, and all got ready to receive hides
from the Pilgrim.  All day, boats were passing and repassing,
until we had taken her hides from her, and left her in ballast
trim.  These hides made but little show in our hold, though they
had loaded the Pilgrim down to the water’s edge.  This changing
of the hides settled the question of the destination of the two
vessels, which had been one of some speculation to us.  We were
to remain in the leeward ports, while the Pilgrim was to sail,
the next morning, for San Francisco.  After we had knocked off
work, and cleared up decks for the night, my friend S––- came
on board, and spent an hour with me in our berth between decks.
The Pilgrim’s crew envied me my place on board the ship, and seemed
to think that I had got a little to windward of them; especially in
the matter of going home first.  S––- was determined to go home on
the Alert, by begging or buying; if Captain T––- would not let
him come on other terms, he would purchase an exchange with some
one of the crew.  The prospect of another year after the Alert
should sail, was rather “too much of the monkey.”  About seven
o’clock, the mate came down into the steerage, in fine trim for fun,
roused the boys out of the berth, turned up the carpenter with his
fiddle, sent the steward with lights to put in the between-decks,
and set all hands to dancing.  The between-decks were high enough
to allow of jumping; and being clear, and white, from holystoning,
made a fine dancing-hall.  Some of the Pilgrim’s crew were in the
forecastle, and we all turned-to and had a regular sailor’s shuffle,
till eight bells.  The Cape-Cod boy could dance the true fisherman’s
jig, barefooted, knocking with his heels, and slapping the decks
with his bare feet, in time with the music.  This was a favorite
amusement of the mate’s, who always stood at the steerage door,
looking on, and if the boys would not dance, he hazed them round
with a rope’s end, much to the amusement of the men.
The next morning, according to the orders of the agent, the Pilgrim
set sail for the windward, to be gone three or four months.  She got
under weigh with very little fuss, and came so near us as to throw
a letter on board, Captain Faucon standing at the tiller himself,
and steering her as he would a mackerel smack.  When Captain T––-
was in command of the Pilgrim, there was as much preparation
and ceremony as there would be in getting a seventy-four under
weigh.  Captain Faucon was a sailor, every inch of him; he knew
what a ship was, and was as much at home in one, as a cobbler in
his stall.  I wanted no better proof of this than the opinion of
the ship’s crew, for they had been six months under his command,
and knew what he was; and if sailors allow their captain to be a
good seaman, you may be sure he is one, for that is a thing they
are not always ready to say.
After the Pilgrim left us, we lay three weeks at San Pedro, from the
11th of September until the 2nd of October, engaged in the usual port
duties of landing cargo, taking off hides, etc., etc.  These duties
were much easier, and went on much more agreeably, than on board
the Pilgrim.  “The more, the merrier,” is the sailor’s maxim; and a
boat’s crew of a dozen could take off all the hides brought down in
a day, without much trouble, by division of labor; and on shore,
as well as on board, a good will, and no discontent or grumbling,
make everything go well.  The officer, too, who usually went with
us, the third mate, was a fine young fellow, and made no unnecessary
trouble; so that we generally had quite a sociable time, and were
glad to be relieved from the restraint of the ship.  While here,
I often thought of the miserable, gloomy weeks we had spent in
this dull place, in the brig; discontent and hard usage on board,
and four hands to do all the work on shore.  Give me a big ship.
There is more room, more hands, better outfit, better regulation,
more life, and more company.  Another thing was better arranged
here: we had a regular gig’s crew.  A light whale-boat, handsomely
painted, and fitted out with stern seats, yoke, tiller-ropes, etc.,
hung on the starboard quarter, and was used as the gig.  The youngest
lad in the ship, a Boston boy about thirteen years old, was coxswain
of this boat, and had the entire charge of her, to keep her clean,
and have her in readiness to go and come at any hour.  Four light
hands, of about the same size and age, of whom I was one, formed the
crew.  Each had his oar and seat numbered, and we were obliged to be
in our places, have our oars scraped white, our tholepins in, and the
fenders over the side.  The bow-man had charge of the boat-hook and
painter, and the coxswain of the rudder, yoke, and stern-sheets.
Our duty was to carry the captain and agent about, and passengers
off and on; which last was no trifling duty, as the people on shore
have no boats, and every purchaser, from the boy who buys his pair
of shoes, to the trader who buys his casks and bales, were to be
taken off and on, in our boat.  Some days, when people were coming
and going fast, we were in the boat, pulling off and on, all day long,
with hardly time for our meals; making, as we lay nearly three
miles from shore, from forty to fifty miles’ rowing in a day.
Still, we thought it the best berth in the ship; for when the
gig was employed, we had nothing to do with the cargo, except
small bundles which the passengers carried with them, and no
hides to carry, besides the opportunity of seeing everybody,
making acquaintances, hearing the news, etc.  Unless the captain
or agent were in the boat, we had no officer with us, and often had
fine times with the passengers, who were always willing to talk and
joke with us.  Frequently, too, we were obliged to wait several hours
on shore; when we would haul the boat up on the beach, and leaving
one to watch her, go up to the nearest house, or spend the time in
strolling about the beach, picking up shells, or playing hopscotch,
and other games, on the hard sand.  The rest of the crew never left
the ship, except for bringing heavy goods and taking off hides;
and though we were always in the water, the surf hardly leaving us
a dry thread from morning till night, yet we were young, and the
climate was good, and we thought it much better than the quiet,
hum-drum drag and pull on board ship.  We made the acquaintance
of nearly half of California; for, besides carrying everybody in
our boat,–men, women, and children,–all the messages, letters,
and light packages went by us, and being known by our dress,
we found a ready reception everywhere.
At San Pedro, we had none of this amusement, for, there being but
one house in the place, we, of course, had but little company.
All the variety that I had, was riding, once a week, to the
nearest rancho, to order a bullock down for the ship.
The brig Catalina came in from San Diego, and being bound up to
windward, we both got under weigh at the same time, for a trial
of speed up to Santa Barbara, a distance of about eighty miles.
We hove up and got under sail about eleven o’clock at night, with
a light land-breeze, which died away toward morning, leaving us
becalmed only a few miles from our anchoring-place.  The Catalina,
being a small vessel, of less than half our size, put out sweeps
and got a boat ahead, and pulled out to sea, during the night,
so that she had the sea-breeze earlier and stronger than we did,
and we had the mortification of seeing her standing up the coast,
with a fine breeze, the sea all ruffled about her, while we
were becalmed, in-shore.  When the sea-breeze died away, she was
nearly out of sight; and, toward the latter part of the afternoon,
the regular north-west wind set in fresh, we braced sharp upon it,
took a pull at every sheet, tack, and halyard, and stood after her,
in fine style, our ship being very good upon a taughtened bowline.
We had nearly five hours of fine sailing, beating up to windward,
by long stretches in and off shore, and evidently gaining upon the
Catalina at every tack.  When this breeze left us, we were so near
as to count the painted ports on her side.  Fortunately, the wind
died away when we were on our inward tack, and she on her outward,
so we were in-shore, and caught the land-breeze first, which came
off upon our quarter, about the middle of the first watch.  All hands
were turned-up, and we set all sail, to the skysails and the
royal studding-sails; and with these, we glided quietly through
the water, leaving the Catalina, which could not spread so much
canvas as we, gradually astern, and, by daylight, were off
St. Buenaventura, and our antagonist nearly out of sight.
The sea-breeze, however, favored her again, while we were becalmed
under the headland, and laboring slowly along, she was abreast of
us by noon.  Thus we continued, ahead, astern, and abreast of one
another, alternately; now, far out at sea, and again, close in under
the shore.  On the third morning, we came into the great bay of
Santa Barbara, two hours behind the brig, and thus lost the bet;
though, if the race had been to the point, we should have beaten
her by five or six hours.  This, however, settled the relative
sailing of the vessels, for it was admitted that although she,
being small and light, could gain upon us in very light winds,
yet whenever there was breeze enough to set us agoing, we walked
away from her like hauling in a line; and in beating to windward,
which is the best trial of a vessel, we had much the advantage of
her.
Sunday, Oct. 4th.  This was the day of our arrival; and somehow
or other, our captain always managed not only to sail, but to come
into port, on a Sunday.  The main reason for sailing on the Sabbath
is not, as many people suppose, because Sunday is thought a lucky
day, but because it is a leisure day.  During the six days, the crew
are employed upon the cargo and other ship’s works, and the Sabbath,
being their only day of rest, whatever additional work can be thrown
into Sunday, is so much gain to the owners.  This is the reason of
our coasters, packets, etc, sailing on the Sabbath.  They get six
good days’ work out of the crew, and then throw all the labor of
sailing into the Sabbath.  Thus it was with us, nearly all the
time we were on the coast, and many of our Sabbaths were lost
entirely to us.  The Catholics on shore have no trading and make
no journeys on Sunday, but the American has no national religion,
and likes to show his independence of priestcraft by doing as he
chooses on the Lord’s day.
Santa Barbara looked very much as it did when I left it five months
before: the long sand beach, with the heavy rollers, breaking upon
it in a continual roar, and the little town, imbedded on the plain,
girt by its amphitheatre of mountains.  Day after day, the sun shone
clear and bright upon the wide bay and the red roofs of the houses;
everything being as still as death, the people really hardly seeming
to earn their sun-light.  Daylight actually seemed thrown away upon
them.  We had a few visitors, and collected about a hundred hides,
and every night, at sundown, the gig was sent ashore, to wait for
the captain, who spent his evenings in the town.  We always took
our monkey-jackets with us, and flint and steel, and made a fire
on the beach with the driftwood and the bushes we pulled from the
neighboring thickets, and lay down by it, on the sand.  Sometimes we
would stray up to the town, if the captain was likely to stay late,
and pass the time at some of the houses, in which we were almost
always well received by the inhabitants.  Sometimes earlier and
sometimes later, the captain came down; when, after a good drenching
in the surf, we went aboard, changed our clothes, and turned in for
the night–yet not for all the night, for there was the anchor watch
to stand.
This leads me to speak of my watchmate for nine months–and,
taking him all in all, the most remarkable man I have ever
seen–Tom Harris.  An hour, every night, while lying in port,
Harris and myself had the deck to ourselves, and walking fore
and aft, night after night, for months, I learned his whole
character and history, and more about foreign nations, the habits
of different people, and especially the secrets of sailors’ lives
and hardships, and also of practical seamanship, (in which he was
abundantly capable of instructing me,) than I could ever have
learned elsewhere.  But the most remarkable thing about him, was
the power of his mind.  His memory was perfect; seeming to form a
regular chain, reaching from his earliest childhood up to the time
I knew him, without one link wanting.  His power of calculation,
too, was remarkable.  I called myself pretty quick at figures, and
had been through a course of mathematical studies; but, working by
my head, I was unable to keep within sight of this man, who had
never been beyond his arithmetic: so rapid was his calculation.
He carried in his head not only a log-book of the whole voyage,
in which everything was complete and accurate, and from which no
one ever thought of appealing, but also an accurate registry of
all the cargo; knowing, precisely, where each thing was, and how
many hides we took in at every port.
One night, he made a rough calculation of the number of hides that
could be stowed in the lower hold, between the fore and main masts,
taking the depth of hold and breadth of beam, (for he always knew
the dimension of every part of the ship, before he had been a month
on board,) and the average area and thickness of a hide; he came
surprisingly near the number, as it afterwards turned out.  The mate
frequently came to him to know the capacity of different parts of
the vessel, so he could tell the sailmaker very nearly the amount
of canvas he would want for each sail in the ship; for he knew the
hoist of every mast, and spread of every sail, on the head and foot,
in feet and inches.  When we were at sea, he kept a running account,
in his head, of the ship’s way–the number of knots and the courses;
and if the courses did not vary much during the twenty-four hours,
by taking the whole progress, and allowing so many eighths southing
or northing, to so many easting or westing; he would make up his
reckoning just before the captain took the sun at noon, and often
came wonderfully near the mark.  Calculation of all kinds was his
delight.  He had, in his chest, several volumes giving accounts
of inventions in mechanics, which he read with great pleasure,
and made himself master of.  I doubt if he ever forgot anything
that he read.  The only thing in the way of poetry that he ever
read was Falconer’s Shipwreck, which he was delighted with,
and whole pages of which he could repeat.  He knew the name
of every sailor that had ever been his shipmate, and also,
of every vessel, captain, and officer, and the principal dates
of each voyage; and a sailor whom he afterwards fell in with,
who had been in a ship with Harris nearly twelve years before,
was very much surprised at having Harris tell him things about
himself which he had entirely forgotten.  His facts, whether dates
or events, no one thought of disputing; and his opinions, few of
the sailors dared to oppose; for, right or wrong, he always had
the best of the argument with them.  His reasoning powers were
remarkable.  I have had harder work maintaining an argument with
him in a watch, even when I knew myself to be right, and he was
only doubting, than I ever had before; not from his obstinacy,
but from his acuteness.  Give him only a little knowledge of his
subject, and, certainly among all the young men of my acquaintance
and standing at college, there was not one whom I had not rather meet,
than this man.  I never answered a question from him, or advanced
an opinion to him, without thinking more than once.  With an iron
memory, he seemed to have your whole past conversation at command,
and if you said a thing now which ill agreed with something said
months before, he was sure to have you on the hip.  In fact,
I always felt, when with him, that I was with no common man.
I had a positive respect for his powers of mind, and felt often
that if half the pains had been spent upon his education which
are thrown away, yearly, in our colleges, he would have been
a man of great weight in society.  Like most self-taught men,
he over-estimated the value of an education; and this, I often
told him, though I profited by it myself; for he always treated
me with respect, and often unnecessarily gave way to me, from an
over-estimate of my knowledge.  For the intellectual capacities
of all the rest of the crew, captain and all, he had the most
sovereign contempt.  He was a far better sailor, and probably
a better navigator, than the captain, and had more brains than
all the after part of the ship put together.  The sailors said,
“Tom’s got a head as long as the bowsprit,” and if any one got
into an argument with him, they would call out–"Ah, Jack! you’d
better drop that, as you would a hot potato, for Tom will turn
you inside out before you know it.”
I recollect his posing me once on the subject of the Corn Laws.
I was called to stand my watch, and, coming on deck, found him
there before me; and we began, as usual, to walk fore and aft,
in the waist.  He talked about the Corn Laws; asked me my opinion
about them, which I gave him; and my reasons; my small stock of
which I set forth to the best advantage, supposing his knowledge
on the subject must be less than mine, if, indeed, he had
any at all.  When I had got through, he took the liberty of
differing from me, and, to my surprise, brought arguments and
facts connected with the subject which were new to me, to which
I was entirely unable to reply.  I confessed that I knew almost
nothing of the subject, and expressed my surprise at the extent
of his information.  He said that, a number of years before,
while at a boarding-house in Liverpool, he had fallen in with
a pamphlet on the subject, and, as it contained calculations,
had read it very carefully, and had ever since wished to find
some one who could add to his stock of knowledge on the question.
Although it was many years since he had seen the book, and it was
a subject with which he had no previous acquaintance, yet he had
the chain of reasoning, founded upon principles of political
economy, perfect in his memory; and his facts, so far as I
could judge, were correct; at least, he stated them with great
precision.  The principles of the steam engine, too, he was very
familiar with, having been several months on board of a steamboat,
and made himself master of its secrets.  He knew every lunar star
in both hemispheres, and was a perfect master of his quadrant and
sextant.  Such was the man, who, at forty, was still a dog before
the mast, at twelve dollars a month.  The reason of this was to
be found in his whole past life, as I had it, at different times,
from himself.
He was an Englishman, by birth, a native of Ilfracomb, in Devonshire.
His father was skipper of a small coaster, from Bristol, and dying,
left him, when quite young, to the care of his mother, by whose
exertions he received a common-school education, passing his
winters at school and his summers in the coasting trade, until his
seventeenth year, when he left home to go upon foreign voyages.
Of his mother, he often spoke with the greatest respect, and said
that she was a strong-minded woman, and had the best system of
education he had ever known; a system which had made respectable
men of his three brothers, and failed only in him, from his own
indomitable obstinacy.  One thing he often mentioned, in which he
said his mother differed from all other mothers that he had ever
seen disciplining their children; that was, that when he was out
of humor and refused to eat, instead of putting his plate away,
as most mothers would, and saying that his hunger would bring
him to it, in time, she would stand over him and oblige him to
eat it–every mouthful of it.  It was no fault of hers that he
was what I saw him; and so great was his sense of gratitude for
her efforts, though unsuccessful, that he determined, at the
close of the voyage, to embark for home with all the wages he
should get, to spend with and for his mother, if perchance he
should find her alive.
After leaving home, he had spent nearly twenty years, sailing upon
all sorts of voyages, generally out of the ports of New York and
Boston.  Twenty years of vice!  Every sin that a sailor knows, he
had gone to the bottom of.  Several times he had been hauled up in
the hospitals, and as often, the great strength of his constitution
had brought him out again in health.  Several times, too, from his
known capacity, he had been promoted to the office of chief mate,
and as often, his conduct when in port, especially his drunkenness,
which neither fear nor ambition could induce him to abandon, put him
back into the forecastle.  One night, when giving me an account of his
life, and lamenting the years of manhood he had thrown away, he said
that there, in the forecastle, at the foot of the steps–a chest
of old clothes–was the result of twenty-two years of hard labor
and exposure–worked like a horse, and treated like a dog.  As he
grew older, he began to feel the necessity of some provision for
his later years, and came gradually to the conviction that rum had
been his worst enemy.  One night, in Havana, a young shipmate of
his was brought aboard drunk, with a dangerous gash in his head,
and his money and new clothes stripped from him.  Harris had seen
and been in hundreds of such scenes as these, but in his then state
of mind, it fixed his determination, and he resolved never to taste
another drop of strong drink, of any kind.  He signed no pledge, and
made no vow, but relied on his own strength of purpose.  The first
thing with him was a reason, and then a resolution, and the thing
was done.  The date of his resolution he knew, of course, to the
very hour.  It was three years before I knew him, and during all
that time, nothing stronger than cider or coffee had passed his
lips.  The sailors never thought of enticing Tom to take a glass,
any more than they would of talking to the ship’s compass.  He was
now a temperate man for life, and capable of filling any berth in
a ship, and many a high station there is on shore which is held by
a meaner man.
He understood the management of a ship upon scientific principles,
and could give the reason for hauling every rope; and a long
experience, added to careful observation at the time, and a
perfect memory, gave him a knowledge of the expedients and resorts
in times of hazard, which was remarkable, and for which I became
much indebted to him, as he took the greatest pleasure in opening
his stores of information to me, in return for what I was able to
do for him.  Stories of tyranny and hardship which had driven men
to piracy;–of the incredible ignorance of masters and mates,
and of horrid brutality to the sick, dead, and dying; as well
as of the secret knavery and impositions practised upon seamen
by connivance of the owners, landlords, and officers; all these
he had, and I could not but believe them; for men who had known him
for fifteen years had never taken him even in an exaggeration, and,
as I have said, his statements were never disputed.  I remember,
among other things, his speaking of a captain whom I had known
by report, who never handed a thing to a sailor, but put it on
deck and kicked it to him; and of another, who was of the best
connections in Boston, who absolutely murdered a lad from Boston
that went out with him before the mast to Sumatra, by keeping him
hard at work while ill of the coast fever, and obliging him to
sleep in the close steerage.  (The same captain has since died
of the same fever on the same coast.)
In fact, taking together all that I learned from him of seamanship,
of the history of sailors’ lives, of practical wisdom, and of human
nature under new circumstances,–a great history from which many are
shut out,–I would not part with the hours I spent in the watch with
that man for any given hours of my life passed in study and social
intercourse.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
