


A New Kind of Coon
A merry meal now followed, chaffing and jokes passed several hours
away, but the boys were rested and restless by nine o’clock and eager
for more adventures.
“Aren’t there any Coons ’round here, Mr. Clark?”
“Oh, I reckon so. Y-e-s! Down a piece in the hardwood bush near Widdy
Biddy Baggs’s place there’s lots o’ likely Cooning ground.”
That was enough to stir them all, for the place was near at hand.
Peetweet alone was for staying in camp, but when told that he might
stay and keep house by himself he made up his mind to get all the fun
he could. The night was hot and moonless, Mosquitoes abundant, and
in trampling and scrambling through the gloomy woods the hunters had
plenty of small troubles, but they did not mind that so long as Turk
was willing to do his part. Once or twice he showed signs of interest
in the trail, but soon decided against it.
Thus they worked toward the Widdy Baggs’s till they came to a dry
brook bed. Turk began at once to travel up this, while Caleb tried
to make him go down. But the Dog recognized no superior officer when
hunting. After leading his impatient army a quarter of a mile away
from the really promising heavy timber, Turk discovered what hewas after, and that was a little muddy puddle. In this he calmly lay
down, puffing, panting and lapping with energy, and his humble human
followers had nothing to do but sit on a log and impatiently await
his lordship’s pleasure. Fifteen minutes went by, and Turk was still
enjoying himself, when Sam ventured at last:
“’Pears to me if I owned a Dog I’d own him.”
“There’s no use crowdin’ him,” was the answer. “He’s runnin’ this
hunt, an’ he knows it. A Dog without a mind of his own is no ’count.”
So when Turk had puffed like a Porpoise, grunted and wallowed like
a Hog, to his heart’s content and to the envy of the eight who sat
sweltering and impatient, he arose, all dribbling ooze, probably to
seek a new wallowing place, when his nose discovered something on the
bank that had far more effect than all the coaxings and threats of the
“waiting line,” and he gave a short bark that was a note of joy for
the boys. They were all attention now, as the old Hound sniffed it
out, and in a few moments stirred the echoes with an opening blast of
his deepest strain.
“Turk’s struck it rich!” opined Caleb.
The old Dog’s bawling was strong now, but not very regular, showing
that the hunted animal’s course was crooked. Then there was a long
break in it, showing possibly that the creature had run a fence or
swung from one tree to another.
“That’s a Coon,” said Yan eagerly, for he had not forgotten any detail
of the other lesson.
Caleb made no reply.
The Hound tongued a long way off, but came back to the pond and had
one or two checks.
“It’s a great running for a Coon,” Yan remarked, at length in doubt.
Then to Caleb, “What do you think?”
Caleb answered slowly: “I dunno what to think. It runs too far for a
Coon, an’ ’tain’t treed yet; an’ I kin tell by the Dog’s voice he’s
mad. If you was near him now you’d see all his back hair stannin’ up.”
Another circle was announced by the Dog’s baying, and then the long,
continuous, high-pitched yelping told that the game was treed at last.
“Well, that puts Fox and Skunk out of it,” said the Trapper, “but it
certainly don’t act like a Coon on the ground.”
“First there gets the Coon!” shouted Blackhawk, and the boys skurried
through the dark woods, getting many a scratch and fall. As it was,
Yan and Wesley arrived together and touched the tree at the same
moment. The rest came straggling up, with Char-less last and Guy a
little ahead of him. Guy wanted to relate the full particulars of his
latest glorious victory over Char-less, but all attention was now on
old Turk, who was barking savagely up the tree.
“Don’t unnerstan’ it at all, at all,” said Caleb. “Coony kind o’ tree,
but Dog don’t act Coony.”
“Let’s have a fire,” said the Woodpecker, and the two crowds of boys
began each a fire and strove hard to get theirs first ablaze.
The firelight reached far up into the night, and once or twice the
hunters thought they saw the shining eyes of the Coon.
“Now who’s to climb?” asked the Medicine Man.
“I will, I will,” etc., seven times repeated; even Guy and Char-less
chimed in.
“You’re mighty keen hunters, but I want you to know I can’t tell what
it is that’s up that tree. It may be a powerful big Coon, but seems to
me the Dog acts a little like it was a Cat, and ’tain’t so long since
there was Painter in this county. The fact of him treeing for Turk
don’t prove that he’s afraid of a Dog; lots of animals does that
’cause they don’t want to be bothered with his noise. If it’s a Cat,
him as climbs is liable to get his face scratched. Judging by the
actions of the Dog, I think it’s something dangerous. Now who
wants the job?”
For awhile no one spoke. Then Yan, “I’ll go if you’ll lend me the
revolver.”
“So would I,” said Wesley quickly.
“Well, now, we’ll draw straws"–and Yan won. Caleb felled a thin tree
against the big one and Yan climbed as he had done once before.
There was an absence of the joking and chaffing that all had kept
up when on the other occasion Yan went after the Coon. There was a
tension that held them still and reached the climber to thrill him
with a weird sense of venturing into black darkness to face a fearful
and mysterious danger. The feeling increased as he climbed from the
leaning tree to the great trunk of the Basswood, to lose sight of his
comrades in the wilderness of broad leaves and twisted tree-arms.
The dancing firelight sent shadow-blots and light-spots in a dozen
directions with fantastic effect. Some of the feelings of the night at
Garney’s grave came back to him, but this time with the knowledge of
real danger. A little higher and he was out of sight of his friends
below. The danger began to appal him; he wanted to go back, and to
justify the retreat he tried to call out, “No Coon here!” but his
voice failed him, and, as he clung to the branch, he remembered
Caleb’s words, “There’s nothing ahead of grit, an’ grit ain’t so much
not bein’ scairt as it is goin’ straight ahead when you arescairt.” No; he would go on, come what would.
“Find anything?” drawled a cheery voice below, just at the right time.
Yan did not pause to answer, but continued to climb into the gloom.
Then he thought he heard a Coon snarl above him. He swung to a higher
branch and shouted, “Coon here, all right!” but the moment he did so
a rattling growl sounded close to him, and looking down he saw a huge
grey beast spring to a large branch between him and the ground, then
come climbing savagely toward him. As it leaped to a still nearer
place Yan got a dim view of a curious four-cornered face, shaggy
and striped, like the one he saw so long ago in Glenyan–it was an
enormous Lynx.
Yan got such a shock that he nearly lost his hold, but quickly
recovering, he braced himself in a crotch, and got out the revolver
just as the Lynx with a fierce snarl leaped to a side branch that
brought it nearly on a level with him. He nervously cocked the pistol,
and scarcely attempting to sight in the darkness, he fired and missed.
The Lynx recoiled a little and crouched at the report. The boys below
raised a shout and Turk outdid them all in racket.
“A Lynx!” shouted Yan, and his voice betrayed his struggle with fear.
“Look out!” Caleb called. “You better not let him get too close.”
The Lynx was growling ferociously. Yan put forth all his will-power to
control his trembling hand, took more deliberate aim, and fired. The
fierce beast was struck, but leaped wildly at the boy. He threw up his
arm and it buried its teeth in his flesh, while Yan clung desperately
to the tree with the other arm. In a moment he knew he would be
dragged off and thrown to the ground, yet felt less fear now than he
had before. He clutched for the revolver with the left hand, but it
found only the fur of the Lynx, and the revolver dropped from his
grasp. Now he was indeed without hope, and dark fear fell on him. But
the beast was severely wounded. Its hind quarters were growing heavy.
It loosed its hold of Yan and struggled to get on the limb. A kick from
his right foot upset its balance; it slipped from the tree and flopped
to the ground below, wounded, but full of fight. Turk rushed at it, but
got a blow from its armed paw that sent him off howling.
[Illustration: “He nervously fired and missed."]
A surge of reaction came over Yan. He might have fainted, but again he
remembered the Trapper’s words, “Bravery is keeping on even when you
are skairt.” He pulled himself together and very cautiously
worked his way back to the leaning tree. Hearing strange sounds,
yells, growls, sounds of conflict down below, expecting every moment
to hear the Lynx scramble up the trunk again, to finish him, dimly
hearing but not comprehending the shouts, he rested once at the
leaning tree and breathed freely.
“Hurry up, Yan, with that revolver,” shouted Blackhawk.
“I dropped it long ago.”
“Where is it?”
Yan slid down the sapling without making reply. The Lynx had gone,
but not far. It would have got away, but Turk kept running around and
bothering it so it could not even climb a tree, and the noise they
made in the thicket was easy to follow.
“Where’s the revolver?” shouted Caleb, with unusual excitement.
“I dropped it in the fight.”
“I know. I heard it fall in the bushes,” and Sam soon found it.
Caleb seized it, but Yan said feebly, “Let me! Let me! It’s my fight!”
Caleb surrendered the pistol, said “Look out for the Dog!” and Yan
crawled through the bushes till that dark moving form was seen again.
Another shot and another. The sound of combat died away, and the
Indians raised a yell of triumph–all but Little Beaver. A giddiness
came over him; he trembled and reeled, and sank down on a root. Caleb
and Sam came up quickly.
“What’s the matter, Yan?”
“I’m sick–I––”
Caleb took his arm. It was wet. A match was struck.
“Hallo, you’re bleeding.”
“Yes, he had me–he caught me up the tree. I–I–thought I was a
goner.”
All interest was now turned from the dead Lynx to the wounded boy.
“Let’s get him to the water.”
“Guess the camp well is the nearest.”
Caleb and Sam took care of Yan, while the others brought the Lynx.
Yan grew better as they moved slowly homeward. He told all about the
attack of the Lynx.
“Gosh! I’d ’a’ been scared out o’ my wits,” said Sam.
“Guess I would, too,” added Caleb, to the surprise of the Tribe; “up
there, helpless, with a wounded Lynx–I tell you!”
“Well, I was scared–just as scared as I could be,” admitted
Yan.
At camp a blazing fire gave its lurid light. Cold water was handy and
Yan’s bleeding arm was laid bare. He was shocked and yet secretly
delighted to see what a mauling he had got, for his shirt sleeve was
soaked with blood, and the wondering words of his friends was sweetest
music to his ears.
Caleb and the city boy dressed his wounds, and when washed they did
not look so very dreadful.
They were too much excited to sleep for an hour at least, and as they
sat about the fire–that they did not need but would not dream of
doing without–Yan found no lack of enthusiasm in the circle, and
blushed with pleasure to be the hero of the camp. Guy didn’t see
anything to make so much fuss about, but Caleb said, “I knowed it; I
always knowed you was the stuff, after the night you went to Garney’s
grave.”
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
