


The same day, I met with one of those narrow escapes, which are
so often happening in a sailor’s life.  I had been aloft nearly
all the afternoon, at work, standing for as much as an hour on
the fore top-gallant yard, which was hoisted up, and hung only by
the tie; when, having got through my work, I balled up my yarns,
took my serving-board in my hand, laid hold deliberately of the
top-gallant rigging, took one foot from the yard, and was just
lifting the other, when the tie parted, and down the yard fell.
I was safe, by my hold upon the rigging, but it made my heart beat
quick.  Had the tie parted one instant sooner, or had I stood an
instant longer on the yard, I should inevitably have been thrown
violently from the height of ninety or a hundred feet, overboard;
or, what is worse, upon the deck.  However, “a miss is as good
as a mile;” a saying which sailors very often have occasion to
use.  An escape is always a joke on board ship.  A man would be
ridiculed who should make a serious matter of it.  A sailor knows
too well that his life hangs upon a thread, to wish to be always
reminded of it; so, if a man has an escape, he keeps it to himself,
or makes a joke of it.  I have often known a man’s life to be saved
by an instant of time, or by the merest chance,–the swinging of
a rope,–and no notice taken of it.  One of our boys, when off
Cape Horn, reefing topsails of a dark night, and when there were
no boats to be lowered away, and where, if a man fell overboard he
must be left behind,–lost his hold of the reef-point, slipped from
the foot-rope, and would have been in the water in a moment, when
the man who was next to him on the yard caught him by the collar
of his jacket, and hauled him up upon the yard, with–"Hold on,
another time, you young monkey, and be d––d to you!"–and that
was all that was heard about it.
Sunday, August 7th.  Lat. 25° 59’ S., long. 27° 0’ W.  Spoke the
English bark Mary-Catherine, from Bahia, bound to Calcutta.
This was the first sail we had fallen in with, and the first
time we had seen a human form or heard the human voice, except of
our own number, for nearly a hundred days.  The very yo-ho-ing of
the sailors at the ropes sounded sociably upon the ear.  She was
an old, damaged-looking craft, with a high poop and top-gallant
forecastle, and sawed off square, stem and stern, like a true
English “tea-wagon,” and with a run like a sugar-box.  She had
studding-sails out alow and aloft, with a light but steady breeze,
and her captain said he could not get more than four knots out of
her and thought he should have a long passage.  We were going six
on an easy bowline.
The next day, about three P. M., passed a large corvette-built
ship, close upon the wind, with royals and skysails set fore
and aft, under English colors.  She was standing south-by-east,
probably bound round Cape Horn.  She had men in her tops, and black
mast-heads; heavily sparred, with sails cut to a t, and other marks
of a man-of-war.  She sailed well, and presented a fine appearance;
the proud, aristocratic-looking banner of St. George, the cross in
a blood-red field, waving from the mizen.  We probably were as fine
a sight, with our studding-sails spread far out beyond the ship
on either side, and rising in a pyramid to royal studding-sails
and sky-sails, burying the hull in canvas, and looking like what
the whale-men on the Banks, under their stump top-gallant masts,
call “a Cape Horn-er under a cloud of sail.”
Friday, August 12th.  At daylight made the island of Trinidad,
situated in lat. 20° 28’ S., long. 29° 08’ W. At twelve M.,
it bore N. W. 1/2 N., distant twenty-seven miles.  It was a
beautiful day, the sea hardly ruffled by the light trades,
and the island looking like a small blue mound rising from
a field of glass.
Such a fair and peaceful-looking spot is said to have been, for a
long time, the resort of a band of pirates, who ravaged the tropical
seas.
Thursday, August 18th.  At three P. M., made the island of Fernando
Naronha, lying in lat. 3° 55’ S., long. 32° 35’ W.; and between
twelve o’clock Friday night and one o’clock Saturday morning,
crossed the equator, for the fourth time since leaving Boston,
in long. 35° W.; having been twenty-seven days from Staten
Land–a distance, by the courses we had made, of more than
four thousand miles.
We were now to the northward of the line, and every day added to
our latitude.  The Magellan Clouds, the last sign of South latitude,
were sunk in the horizon, and the north star, the Great Bear,
and the familiar signs of northern latitudes, were rising in
the heavens.
Next to seeing land, there is no sight which makes one realize
more that he is drawing near home, than to see the same heavens,
under which he was born, shining at night over his head.  The
weather was extremely hot, with the usual tropical alternations
of a scorching sun and squalls of rain; yet not a word was said
in complaint of the heat, for we all remembered that only three or
four weeks before we would have given nearly our all to have been
where we now were.  We had plenty of water, too, which we caught by
spreading an awning, with shot thrown in to make hollows.  These
rain squalls came up in the manner usual between the tropics.–A
clear sky; burning, vertical sun; work going lazily on, and men
about decks with nothing but duck trowsers, checked shirts, and
straw hats; the ship moving as lazily through the water; the man
at the helm resting against the wheel, with his hat drawn over
his eyes; the captain below, taking an afternoon nap; the passenger
leaning over the taffrail, watching a dolphin following slowly in
our wake; the sailmaker mending an old topsail on the lee side of
the quarter-deck; the carpenter working at his bench, in the waist;
the boys making sinnet; the spun-yarn winch whizzing round and round,
and the men walking slowly fore and aft with their yarns.–A
cloud rises to windward, looking a little black; the sky-sails are
brailed down; the captain puts his head out of the companion-way,
looks at the cloud, comes up, and begins to walk the deck.–The
cloud spreads and comes on;–the tub of yarns, the sail, and other
matters, are thrown below, and the sky-light and booby-hatch put
on, and the slide drawn over the forecastle.–"Stand by the royal
halyards;"–the man at the wheel keeps a good weather helm, so as
not to be taken aback.  The squall strikes her.  If it is light,
the royal yards are clewed down, and the ship keeps on her way;
but if the squall takes strong hold, the royals are clewed up,
fore and aft; light hands lay aloft and furl them; top-gallant
yards clewed down, flying-jib hauled down, and the ship kept off
before it,–the man at the helm laying out his strength to heave
the wheel up to windward.  At the same time a drenching rain,
which soaks one through in an instant.  Yet no one puts on a
jacket or cap; for if it is only warm, a sailor does not mind
a ducking; and the sun will soon be out again.  As soon as the
force of the squall has passed, though to a common eye the ship
would seem to be in the midst of it,–"Keep her up to her course,
again!"–"Keep her up, sir,” (answer);–"Hoist away the top-gallant
yards!"–"Run up the flying jib!"–"Lay aloft, you boys, and loose
the royals!"–and all sail is on her again before she is fairly
out of the squall; and she is going on in her course.  The sun
comes out once more, hotter than ever, dries up the decks and
the sailors’ clothes; the hatches are taken off; the sail got up
and spread on the quarter-deck; spun-yarn winch set a whirling
again; rigging coiled up; captain goes below; and every sign of
an interruption is removed.
These scenes, with occasional dead calms, lasting for hours, and
sometimes for days, are fair specimens of the Atlantic tropics.
The nights were fine; and as we had all hands all day, the watch
were allowed to sleep on deck at night, except the man at the
wheel, and one look-out on the forecastle.  This was not so much
expressly allowed, as winked at.  We could do it if we did not
ask leave.  If the look-out was caught napping, the whole watch
was kept awake.
We made the most of this permission, and stowed ourselves away
upon the rigging, under the weather rail, on the spars, under the
windlass, and in all the snug corners; and frequently slept out
the watch, unless we had a wheel or a look-out.  And we were glad
enough to get this rest; for under the “all hands” system, out of
every other thirty-six hours, we had only four below; and even
an hour’s sleep was a gain not to be neglected.  One would have
thought so, to have seen our watch, some nights, sleeping through
a heavy rain.  And often have we come on deck, and finding a
dead calm and a light, steady rain, and determined not to lose
our sleep, have laid a coil of rigging down so as to keep us out
of the water which was washing about decks, and stowed ourselves
away upon it, covering a jacket over us, and slept as soundly as
a Dutchman between two feather beds.
For a week or ten days after crossing the line, we had the usual
variety of calms, squalls, head winds, and fair winds;–at one
time braced sharp upon the wind, with a taught bowline, and in
an hour after, slipping quietly along, with a light breeze over
the taffrail, and studding-sails out on both sides;–until we fell
in with the north-east trade-winds; which we did on the afternoon of
Sunday, August 28th, in lat. 12° N. The trade-wind clouds had been
in sight for a day or two previously, and we expected to take them
every hour.  The light southerly breeze, which had been blowing
languidly during the first part of the day, died away toward noon,
and in its place came puffs from the north-east, which caused us
to take our studding-sails in and brace up; and in a couple of
hours more, we were bowling gloriously along, dashing the spray
far ahead and to leeward, with the cool, steady north-east trades,
freshening up the sea, and giving us as much as we could carry
our royals to.  These winds blew strong and steady, keeping us
generally upon a bowline, as our course was about north-north-west;
and sometimes, as they veered a little to the eastward, giving us
a chance at a main top-gallant studding-sail; and sending us well
to the northward, until–
Sunday, Sept. 4th, when they left us, in lat. 22° N., long. 51° W.,
directly under the tropic of Cancer. 
For several days we lay “humbugging about” in the Horse latitudes,
with all sorts of winds and weather, and occasionally, as we were in
the latitude of the West Indies–a thunder storm.  It was hurricane
month, too, and we were just in the track of the tremendous hurricane
of 1830, which swept the North Atlantic, destroying almost everything
before it.  The first night after the tradewinds left us, while we
were in the latitude of the island of Cuba, we had a specimen of
a true tropical thunder storm.  A light breeze had been blowing
directly from aft during the first part of the night which gradually
died away, and before midnight it was dead calm, and a heavy black
cloud had shrouded the whole sky.  When our watch came on deck at
twelve o’clock, it was as black as Erebus; the studding-sails were
all taken in, and the royals furled; not a breath was stirring;
the sails hung heavy and motionless from the yards; and the
perfect stillness, and the darkness, which was almost palpable,
were truly appalling.  Not a word was spoken, but every one stood
as though waiting for something to happen.  In a few minutes the
mate came forward; and in a low tone, which was almost a whisper,
told us to haul down the jib.  The fore and mizen top-gallant sails
were taken in, in the same silent manner; and we lay motionless upon
the water, with an uneasy expectation, which, from the long suspense,
became actually painful.  We could hear the captain walking the deck,
but it was too dark to see anything more than one’s hand before the
face.  Soon the mate came forward again, and gave an order, in a
low tone, to clew up the main top-gallant sail; and so infectious
was the awe and silence, that the clewlines and buntlines were
hauled up without any of the customary singing out at the ropes.
An English lad and myself went up to furl it; and we had just got
the bunt up, when the mate called out to us, something, we did
not hear what,–but supposing it to be an order to bear-a-hand,
we hurried, and made all fast, and came down, feeling our way among
the rigging.  When we got down we found all hands looking aloft,
and there, directly over where we had been standing, upon the main
top-gallant-mast-head, was a ball of light, which the sailors name
a corposant (corpus sancti), and which the mate had called out to
us to look at.  They were all watching it carefully, for sailors
have a notion that if the corposant rises in the rigging, it is
a sign of fair weather, but if it comes lower down, there will
be a storm.  Unfortunately, as an omen, it came down, and showed
itself on the top-gallant yard-arm.  We were off the yard in good
season, for it is held a fatal sign to have the pale light of the
corposant thrown upon one’s face.  As it was, the English lad did
not feel comfortably at having had it so near him, and directly
over his head.  In a few minutes it disappeared, and showed itself
again on the fore top-gallant yard; and after playing about for
some time, disappeared again; when the man on the forecastle
pointed to it upon the flying-jib-boom-end.  But our attention
was drawn from watching this, by the falling of some drops of
rain and by a perceptible increase of the darkness, which seemed
suddenly to add a new shade of blackness to the night.  In a few
minutes, low, grumbling thunder was heard, and some random flashes
of lightning came from the south-west.  Every sail was taken in
but the topsails, still, no squall appeared to be coming.  A few
puffs lifted the topsails, but they fell again to the mast, and all
was as still as ever.  A moment more, and a terrific flash and peal
broke simultaneously upon us, and a cloud appeared to open directly
over our heads and let down the water in one body, like a falling
ocean.  We stood motionless, and almost stupefied; yet nothing had
been struck.  Peal after peal rattled over our heads, with a sound
which seemed actually to stop the breath in the body, and the
“speedy gleams” kept the whole ocean in a glare of light.
The violent fall of rain lasted but a few minutes, and was
succeeded by occasional drops and showers; but the lightning
continued incessant for several hours, breaking the midnight
darkness with irregular and blinding flashes.  During all which
time there was not a breath stirring, and we lay motionless, like a
mark to be shot at, probably the only object on the surface of the
ocean for miles and miles.  We stood hour after hour, until our
watch was out, and we were relieved, at four o’clock.  During all
this time, hardly a word was spoken; no bells were struck, and the
wheel was silently relieved.  The rain fell at intervals in heavy
showers, and we stood drenched through and blinded by the flashes,
which broke the Egyptian darkness with a brightness which seemed
almost malignant; while the thunder rolled in peals, the concussion
of which appeared to shake the very ocean.  A ship is not often
injured by lightning, for the electricity is separated by the
great number of points she presents, and the quantity of iron
which she has scattered in various parts.  The electric fluid
ran over our anchors, top-sail sheets and ties; yet no harm was
done to us.  We went below at four o’clock, leaving things in the
same state.  It is not easy to sleep, when the very next flash may
tear the ship in two, or set her on fire; or where the deathlike
calm may be broken by the blast of a hurricane, taking the masts
out of the ship.  But a man is no sailor if he cannot sleep when
he turns-in, and turn out when he’s called.  And when, at seven
bells, the customary “All the larboard watch, ahoy?” brought us
on deck, it was a fine, clear, sunny morning, the ship going
leisurely along, with a good breeze and all sail set.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
