


As we had now a long “spell” of fine weather, without any incident
to break the monotony of our lives, there can be no better place to
describe the duties, regulations, and customs of an American merchantman,
of which ours was a fair specimen.
The captain, in the first place, is lord paramount.  He stands no watch,
comes and goes when he pleases, and is accountable to no one, and must
be obeyed in everything, without a question, even from his chief officer.
He has the power to turn his officers off duty, and even to break them
and make them do duty as sailors in the forecastle.  When there are no
passengers and no supercargo, as in our vessel, he has no companion
but his own dignity, and no pleasures, unless he differs from most
of his kind, but the consciousness of possessing supreme power, and,
occasionally, the exercise of it.
The prime minister, the official organ, and the active and superintending
officer, is the chief mate.  He is first lieutenant, boatswain,
sailing-master, and quarter-master.  The captain tells him what
he wishes to have done, and leaves to him the care of overseeing,
of allotting the work, and also the responsibility of its being
well done.  The mate (as he is always called, par excellence)
also keeps the log-book, for which he is responsible to the owners
and insurers, and has the charge of the stowage, safe keeping, and
delivery of the cargo.  He is also, ex-officio, the wit of the crew;
for the captain does not condescend to joke with the men, and the
second mate no one cares for; so that when “the mate” thinks fit to
entertain “the people” with a coarse joke or a little practical wit,
every one feels bound to laugh.
The second mate’s is proverbially a dog’s berth.  He is neither
officer nor man.  The men do not respect him as an officer, and he
is obliged to go aloft to reef and furl the topsails, and to put
his hands into the tar and slush, with the rest.  The crew call
him the “sailor’s waiter,” as he has to furnish them with spun-yarn,
marline, and all other stuffs that they need in their work, and has
charge of the boatswain’s locker, which includes serving-boards,
marline-spikes, etc.  He is expected by the captain to maintain
his dignity and to enforce obedience, and still is kept at a great
distance from the mate, and obliged to work with the crew.  He is
one to whom little is given and of whom much is required.  His wages
are usually double those of a common sailor, and he eats and sleeps
in the cabin; but he is obliged to be on deck nearly all the time,
and eats at the second table, that is, makes a meal out of what the
captain and chief mate leave.
The steward is the captain’s servant, and has charge of the pantry,
from which every one, even the mate himself, is excluded.  These
distinctions usually find him an enemy in the mate, who does not
like to have any one on board who is not entirely under his control;
the crew do not consider him as one of their number, so he is left
to the mercy of the captain.
The cook is the patron of the crew, and those who are in his favor
can get their wet mittens and stockings dried, or light their pipes
at the galley on the night watch.  These two worthies, together
with the carpenter and sailmaker, if there be one, stand no watch,
but, being employed all day, are allowed to “sleep in” at night,
unless all hands are called.
The crew are divided into two divisions, as equally as may be, called
the watches.  Of these the chief mate commands the larboard, and the
second mate the starboard.  They divide the time between them, being
on and off duty, or, as it is called, on deck and below, every other
four hours.  If, for instance, the chief mate with the larboard watch
have the first night-watch from eight to twelve; at the end of the
four hours, the starboard watch is called, and the second mate takes
the deck, while the larboard watch and the first mate go below until
four in the morning, when they come on deck again and remain until
eight; having what is called the morning watch.  As they will have
been on deck eight hours out of the twelve, while those who had the
middle watch–from twelve to four, will only have been up four hours,
they have what is called a “forenoon watch below,” that is, from
eight, A.M., till twelve, M.  In a man-of-war, and in some merchantmen,
this alteration of watches is kept up throughout the twenty-four hours;
but our ship, like most merchantmen, had “all hands” from twelve o’clock
till dark, except in bad weather, when we had “watch and watch.”
An explanation of the “dog watches” may, perhaps, be of use to one
who has never been at sea.  They are to shift the watches each
night, so that the same watch need not be on deck at the same hours.
In order to effect this, the watch from four to eight, P.M.,
is divided into two half, or dog watches, one from four to six,
and the other from six to eight.  By this means they divide the
twenty-four hours into seven watches instead of six, and thus
shift the hours every night.  As the dog watches come during twilight,
after the day’s work is done, and before the night watch is set, they
are the watches in which everybody is on deck.  The captain is up,
walking on the weather side of the quarter-deck, the chief mate is
on the lee side, and the second mate about the weather gangway.
The steward has finished his work in the cabin, and has come up to
smoke his pipe with the cook in the galley.  The crew are sitting on
the windlass or lying on the forecastle, smoking, singing, or telling
long yarns.  At eight o’clock, eight bells are struck, the log is hove,
the watch set, the wheel relieved, the galley shut up, and the other
watch goes below.
The morning commences with the watch on deck’s “turning-to” at
day-break and washing down, scrubbing, and swabbing the decks.
This, together with filling the “scuttled butt” with fresh water,
and coiling up the rigging, usually occupies the time until seven
bells, (half after seven,) when all hands get breakfast.  At eight,
the day’s work begins, and lasts until sun-down, with the exception
of an hour for dinner.
Before I end my explanations, it may be well to define a day’s work,
and to correct a mistake prevalent among landsmen about a sailor’s
life.  Nothing is more common than to hear people say–"Are not sailors
very idle at sea?–what can they find to do?”  This is a very natural
mistake, and being very frequently made, it is one which every sailor
feels interested in having corrected.  In the first place, then, the
discipline of the ship requires every man to be at work upon something
when he is on deck, except at night and on Sundays.  Except at these
times, you will never see a man, on board a well-ordered vessel,
standing idle on deck, sitting down, or leaning over the side.
It is the officers’ duty to keep every one at work, even if there
is nothing to be done but to scrape the rust from the chain cables.
In no state prison are the convicts more regularly set to work, and
more closely watched.  No conversation is allowed among the crew at
their duty, and though they frequently do talk when aloft, or when
near one another, yet they always stop when an officer is nigh.
With regard to the work upon which the men are put, it is a matter
which probably would not be understood by one who has not been at
sea.  When I first left port, and found that we were kept regularly
employed for a week or two, I supposed that we were getting the vessel
into sea trim, and that it would soon be over, and we should have
nothing to do but sail the ship; but I found that it continued so
for two years, and at the end of the two years there was as much to
be done as ever.  As has often been said, a ship is like a lady’s
watch, always out of repair.  When first leaving port, studding-sail
gear is to be rove, all the running rigging to be examined, that
which is unfit for use to be got down, and new rigging rove in its
place: then the standing rigging is to be overhauled, replaced,
and repaired, in a thousand different ways; and wherever any of
the numberless ropes or the yards are chafing or wearing upon it,
there “chafing gear,” as it is called, must be put on.  This chafing
gear consists of worming, parcelling, roundings, battens, and service
of all kinds–both rope-yarns, spun-yarn, marline and seizing-stuffs.
Taking off, putting on, and mending the chafing gear alone, upon a
vessel, would find constant employment for two or three men, during
working hours, for a whole voyage.
The next point to be considered is, that all the “small stuffs” which
are used on board a ship–such as spun-yarn, marline, seizing-stuff,
etc.–are made on board.  The owners of a vessel buy up incredible
quantities of “old junk,” which the sailors unlay, after drawing out
the yarns, knot them together, and roll them up in balls.  These
“rope-yarns” are constantly used for various purposes, but the
greater part is manufactured into spun-yarn.  For this purpose
every vessel is furnished with a “spun-yarn winch;” which is very
simple, consisting of a wheel and spindle.  This may be heard
constantly going on deck in pleasant weather; and we had employment,
during a great part of the time, for three hands in drawing and
knotting yarns, and making them spun-yarn.
Another method of employing the crew is, “setting up” rigging.
Whenever any of the standing rigging becomes slack, (which is
continually happening), the seizings and coverings must be taken
off, tackles got up, and after the rigging is bowsed well taught,
the seizings and coverings replaced; which is a very nice piece of work.
There is also such a connection between different parts of a vessel,
that one rope can seldom be touched without altering another.
You cannot stay a mast aft by the back stays, without slacking up
the head stays, etc.  If we add to this all the tarring, greasing,
oiling, varnishing, painting, scraping, and scrubbing which is
required in the course of a long voyage, and also remember this
is all to be done in addition to watching at night, steering,
reefing, furling, bracing, making and setting sail, and pulling,
hauling, and climbing in every direction, one will hardly ask,
“What can a sailor find to do at sea?”
If, after all this labor–after exposing their lives and limbs in
storms, wet and cold,
   “Wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch;
    The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
    Keep their fur dry;–”
the merchants and captain think that they have not earned their
twelve dollars a month, (out of which they clothe themselves,) and
their salt beef and hard bread, they keep them picking oakum–
ad infinitum.  This is the usual resource upon a rainy day, for
then it will not do to work upon rigging; and when it is pouring
down in floods, instead of letting the sailors stand about in
sheltered places, and talk, and keep themselves comfortable,
they are separated to different parts of the ship and kept at
work picking oakum.  I have seen oakum stuff placed about in
different parts of the ship, so that the sailors might not be
idle in the snatches between the frequent squalls upon crossing
the equator.  Some officers have been so driven to find work for
the crew in a ship ready for sea, that they have set them to
pounding the anchors (often done) and scraping the chain cables.
The “Philadelphia Catechism” is,
“Six days shalt thou labor and do all thou art able,
 And on the seventh–holystone the decks and scrape the cable.”
This kind of work, of course, is not kept up off Cape Horn,
Cape of Good Hope, and in extreme north and south latitudes;
but I have seen the decks washed down and scrubbed, when the
water would have frozen if it had been fresh; and all hands
kept at work upon the rigging, when we had on our pea-jackets,
and our hands so numb that we could hardly hold our marline-spikes.
I have here gone out of my narrative course in order that any who
read this may form as correct an idea of a sailor’s life and duty
as possible.  I have done it in this place because, for some time,
our life was nothing but the unvarying repetition of these duties,
which can be better described together.  Before leaving this
description, however, I would state, in order to show landsmen how
little they know of the nature of a ship, that a ship-carpenter
is kept in constant employ during good weather on board vessels
which are in, what is called, perfect sea order.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
