


At eight o’clock all hands were called aft, and the watches set for
the voyage.  Some changes were made; but I was glad to find myself
still in the larboard watch.  Our crew was somewhat diminished;
for a man and a boy had gone in the Pilgrim; another was second
mate of the Ayacucho; and a third, the oldest man of the crew,
had broken down under the hard work and constant exposure on the
coast, and, having had a stroke of the palsy, was left behind at
the hide-house under the charge of Captain Arthur.  The poor fellow
wished very much to come home in the ship; and he ought to have
been brought home in her.  But a live dog is better than a dead
lion, and a sick sailor belongs to nobody’s mess; so he was sent
ashore with the rest of the lumber, which was only in the way.
By these diminutions, we were short-handed for a voyage round
Cape Horn in the dead of winter.  Besides S––-  and myself,
there were only five in the forecastle; who, together with four
boys in the steerage, the sailmaker, carpenter, etc., composed the
whole crew.  In addition to this, we were only three or four days
out, when the sailmaker, who was the oldest and best seaman on
board, was taken with the palsy, and was useless for the rest of the
voyage.  The constant wading in the water, in all weathers, to take
off hides, together with the other labors, is too much for old men,
and for any who have not good constitutions.  Beside these two men
of ours, the second officer of the California and the carpenter of
the Pilgrim broke down under the work, and the latter died at Santa
Barbara.  The young man, too, who came out with us from Boston in
the Pilgrim, had to be taken from his berth before the mast and
made clerk, on account of a fit of rheumatism which attacked him
soon after he came upon the coast.  By the loss of the sailmaker,
our watch was reduced to five, of whom two were boys, who never
steered but in fine weather, so that the other two and myself had
to stand at the wheel four hours apiece out of every twenty-four;
and the other watch had only four helmsmen.  “Never mind–we’re
homeward bound!” was the answer to everything; and we should not
have minded this, were it not for the thought that we should be
off Cape Horn in the very dead of winter.  It was now the first
part of May; and two months would bring us off the cape in July,
which is the worst month in the year there; when the sun rises at
nine and sets at three, giving eighteen hours night, and there is
snow and rain, gales and high seas, in abundance.
The prospect of meeting this in a ship half manned, and loaded
so deep that every heavy sea must wash her fore and aft, was by
no means pleasant.  The Alert, in her passage out, doubled the
Cape in the month of February, which is midsummer; and we came
round in the Pilgrim in the latter part of October, which we
thought was bad enough.  There was only one of our crew who
had been off there in the winter, and that was in a whaleship,
much lighter and higher than our ship; yet he said they had man-
killing weather for twenty days without intermission, and their
decks were swept twice, and they were all glad enough to see the
last of it.  The Brandywine frigate, also, in her passage round,
had sixty days off the Cape, and lost several boats by the heavy
sea.  All this was for our comfort; yet pass it we must; and all
hands agreed to make the best of it.
During our watches below we overhauled our clothes, and made and
mended everything for bad weather.  Each of us had made for himself
a suit of oil-cloth or tarpaulin, and these we got out, and gave
thorough coatings of oil or tar, and hung upon the stays to dry.
Our stout boots, too, we covered over with a thick mixture
of melted grease and tar, and hung out to dry.  Thus we took
advantage of the warm sun and fine weather of the Pacific to
prepare for its other face.  In the forenoon watches below,
our forecastle looked like the workshop of what a sailor is,–a
Jack at all trades.  Thick stockings and drawers were darned and
patched; mittens dragged from the bottom of the chest and mended;
comforters made for the neck and ears; old flannel shirts cut up
to line monkey jackets; south-westers lined with flannel, and a
pot of paint smuggled forward to give them a coat on the outside;
and everything turned to hand; so that, although two years had
left us but a scanty wardrobe, yet the economy and invention
which necessity teaches a sailor, soon put each of us in pretty
good trim for bad weather, even before we had seen the last of the
fine.  Even the cobbler’s art was not out of place.  Several old
shoes were very decently repaired, and with waxed ends, an awl,
and the top of an old boot, I made me quite a respectable sheath
for my knife.
There was one difficulty, however, which nothing that we could do
would remedy; and that was the leaking of the forecastle, which made
it very uncomfortable in bad weather, and rendered half of the
berths tenantless.  The tightest ships, in a long voyage, from the
constant strain which is upon the bowsprit, will leak, more or less,
round the heel of the bowsprit, and the bitts, which come down into
the forecastle; but, in addition to this, we had an unaccountable
leak on the starboard bow, near the cat-head, which drove us
from the forward berths on that side, and, indeed, when she was
on the starboard tack, from all the forward berths.  One of the
after berths, too, leaked in very bad weather; so that in a ship
which was in other respects as tight as a bottle, and brought her
cargo to Boston perfectly dry, we had, after every effort made to
prevent it, in the way of caulking and leading, a forecastle with
only three dry berths for seven of us.  However, as there is never
but one watch below at a time, by ’turning in and out,’ we did
pretty well.  And there being, in our watch, but three of us who
lived forward, we generally had a dry berth apiece in bad weather.(1)
–––––––-
1. On removing the cat-head, after the ship arrived at Boston, it was
found that there were two holes under it which had been bored for the
purpose of driving tree-nails, and which, accidentally, had not been
plugged up when the cat-head was placed over them.  This was sufficient
to account for the leak, and for our not having been able to discover
and stop it. 
–––––––-
All this, however, was but anticipation.  We were still in fine
weather in the North Pacific, running down the north-east trades,
which we took on the second day after leaving San Diego. 
Sunday, May 15th, one week out, we were in latitude 14° 56’ N.,
long.  116° 14’ W., having gone, by reckoning, over thirteen hundred
miles in seven days.  In fact, ever since leaving San Diego, we had
had a fair wind, and as much as we wanted of it.  For seven days,
our lower and topmast studding-sails were set all the time, and our
royals and top-gallant studding-sails, whenever she could stagger
under them.  Indeed, the captain had shown, from the moment we got
to sea, that he was to have no boy’s play, but that the ship had
got to carry all she could, and that he was going to make up, by
“cracking on” to her, what she wanted in lightness.  In this way,
we frequently made three degrees of latitude, besides something
in longitude, in the course of twenty-four hours.–Our days were
spent in the usual ship’s work.  The rigging which had become slack
from being long in port was to be set up; breast backstays got up;
studding-sail booms rigged upon the main yard; and the royal studding-
sails got ready for the light trades; ring-tail set; and new rigging
fitted and sails got ready for Cape Horn.  For, with a ship’s gear,
as well as a sailor’s wardrobe, fine weather must be improved to
get ready for the bad to come.  Our forenoon watch below, as I
have said, was given to our own work, and our night watches were
spent in the usual manner:–a trick at the wheel, a look-out on
the forecastle, a nap on a coil of rigging under the lee of the
rail; a yarn round the windlass-end; or, as was generally my way,
a solitary walk fore and aft, in the weather waist, between the
windlass-end and the main tack.  Every wave that she threw aside
brought us nearer home, and every day’s observation at noon showed
a progress which, if it continued, would in less than five months,
take us into Boston Bay.  This is the pleasure of life at sea,
–fine weather, day after day, without interruption,–fair wind,
and a plenty of it,–and homeward bound.  Every one was in good
humor; things went right; and all was done with a will.  At the
dog watch, all hands came on deck, and stood round the weather
side of the forecastle, or sat upon the windlass, and sung sea
songs, and those ballads of pirates and highwaymen, which sailors
delight in.  Home, too, and what we should do when we got there,
and when and how we should arrive, was no infrequent topic.
Every night, after the kids and pots were put away, and we had
lighted our pipes and cigars at the galley, and gathered about
the windlass, the first question was,–
“Well, Tom, what was the latitude to-day?”
“Why fourteen, north, and she has been going seven knots ever since.”
“Well, this will bring us up to the line in five days.”
“Yes, but these trades won’t last twenty-four hours longer,"
says an old salt, pointing with the sharp of his hand to leeward,
–"I know that by the look of the clouds.”
Then came all manner of calculations and conjectures as to the
continuance of the wind, the weather under the line, the south-east
trades, etc., and rough guesses as to the time the ship would be up
with the Horn; and some, more venturous, gave her so many days
to Boston light, and offered to bet that she would not exceed it. 
“You’d better wait till you get round Cape Horn,” says an old
croaker. 
“Yes,” says another, “you may see Boston, but you’ve got to
’smell hell’ before that good day.”
Rumors also of what had been said in the cabin, as usual, found
their way forward.  The steward had heard the captain say something
about the straits of Magellan, and the man at the wheel fancied
he had heard him tell the “passenger” that, if he found the wind
ahead and the weather very bad off the Cape, he should stick her
off for New Holland, and come home round the Cape of Good Hope.
This passenger–the first and only one we had had, except to go
from port to port, on the coast, was no one else than a gentleman
whom I had known in my better days; and the last person I should
have expected to have seen on the coast of California–Professor
N––-, of Cambridge.  I had left him quietly seated in the chair
of Botany and Ornithology, in Harvard University; and the next I
saw of him, was strolling about San Diego beach, in a sailor’s
pea-jacket, with a wide straw hat, and barefooted, with his
trowsers roiled up to his knees, picking up stones and shells.
He had travelled overland to the North-west Coast, and come down
in a small vessel to Monterey.  There he learned that there was a
ship at the leeward, about to sail for Boston; and, taking passage
in the Pilgrim, which was then at Monterey, he came slowly down,
visiting the intermediate ports, and examining the trees, plants,
earths, birds, etc., and joined us at San Diego shortly before
we sailed.  The second mate of the Pilgrim told me that they had
an old gentleman on board who knew me, and came from the college
that I had been in.
He could not recollect his name, but said he was a “sort of an
oldish man,” with white hair, and spent all his time in the bush,
and along the beach, picking up flowers and shells, and such truck,
and had a dozen boxes and barrels, full of them.  I thought over
everybody who would be likely to be there, but could fix upon no
one; when, the next day, just as we were about to shove off from
the beach, he came down to the boat, in the rig I have described,
with his shoes in his hand, and his pockets full of specimens.
I knew him at once, though I should not have been more surprised
to have seen the Old South steeple shoot up from the hide-house.
He probably had no less difficulty in recognizing me.  As we left
home about the same time, we had nothing to tell one another;
and, owing to our different situations on board, I saw but little
of him on the passage home.  Sometimes, when I was at the wheel
of a calm night, and the steering required no attention, and the
officer of the watch was forward, he would come aft and hold a
short yarn with me; but this was against the rules of the ship,
as is, in fact, all intercourse between passengers and the crew.
I was often amused to see the sailors puzzled to know what to make
of him, and to hear their conjectures about him and his business.
They were as much puzzled as our old sailmaker was with the captain’s
instruments in the cabin.
He said there were three:–the chro-nometer, the chre-nometer,
and the the-nometer.  (Chronometer, barometer, and thermometer.)
The Pilgrim’s crew christened Mr. N. “Old Curious,” from his zeal
for curiosities, and some of them said that he was crazy, and that
his friends let him go about and amuse himself in this way.  Why
else a rich man (sailors call every man rich who does not work
with his hands, and wears a long coat and cravat) should leave a
Christian country, and come to such a place as California, to pick
up shells and stones, they could not understand.  One of them,
however, an old salt, who had seen something more of the world
ashore, set all to rights, as he thought,–"Oh, ’vast there!–You
don’t know anything about them craft.  I’ve seen them colleges,
and know the ropes.  They keep all such things for cur’osities,
and study ’em, and have men a’ purpose to go and get ’em.  This
old chap knows what he’s about.  He a’n’t the child you take him
for.  He’ll carry all these things to the college, and if they
are better than any that they have had before, he’ll be head of
the college.  Then, by-and-by, somebody else will go after some
more, and if they beat him, he’ll have to go again, or else give
up his berth.  That’s the way they do it.  This old covey knows
the ropes.  He has worked a traverse over ’em, and come ’way out
here, where nobody’s ever been afore, and where they’ll never
think of coming.”  This explanation satisfied Jack; and as it
raised Mr. N.’s credit for capacity, and was near enough to
the truth for common purposes, I did not disturb it.
With the exception of Mr. N., we had no one on board but the
regular ship’s company, and the live stock.  Upon this, we
had made a considerable inroad.  We killed one of the bullocks
every four days, so that they did not last us up to the line.
We, or, rather, they, then began upon the sheep and the poultry,
for these never come into Jack’s mess.(1)  The pigs were left
–––––––-
1. The customs as to the allowance of “grub” are very nearly the
same in all American merchantmen.  Whenever a pig is killed, the
sailors have one mess from it.  The rest goes to the cabin.  The
smaller live stock, poultry, etc., they never taste.
And, indeed, they do not complain of this, for it would take a great
deal to supply them with a good meal, and without the accompaniments,
(which could hardly be furnished to them,) it would not be much better
than salt beef.  But even as to the salt beef, they are scarcely dealt
fairly with; for whenever a barrel is opened, before any of the beef
is put into the harness-cask, the steward comes up, and picks it
all over, and takes out the best pieces, (those that have any fat
in them) for the cabin.
This was done in both the vessels I was in, and the men said that it
was usual in other vessels.  Indeed, it is made no secret, but some
of the crew are usually called to help in assorting and putting away
the pieces.  By this arrangement the hard, dry pieces, which the
sailors call “old horse,” come to their share.
There is a singular piece of rhyme, traditional among sailors,
which they say over such pieces of beef.  I do not know that
it ever appeared in print before.  When seated round the kid,
if a particularly bad piece is found, one of them takes it up,
and addressing it, repeats these lines: “Old horse! old horse!
what brought you here?”
–"From Sacarap to Portland pier
I’ve carted stone this many a year:
Till, killed by blows and sore abuse,
They salted me down for sailors’ use. 
The sailors they do me despise:
They turn me over and damn my eyes;
Cut off my meat, and pick my bones,
And pitch the rest to Davy Jones.”
There is a story current among seamen, that a beef-dealer was
convicted, at Boston, of having sold old horse for ship’s stores,
instead of beef, and had been sentenced to be confined in jail,
until he should eat the whole of it; and that he is now lying
in Boston jail.  I have heard this story often, on board other
vessels beside those of our own nation.  It is very generally
believed, and is always highly commended, as a fair instance
of retaliatory justice.
–––––––-
for the latter part of the voyage, for they are sailors, and can
stand all weathers.  We had an old sow on board, the mother of a
numerous progeny, who had been twice round the Cape of Good Hope,
and once round Cape Horn.  The last time going round, was very
nearly her death.  We heard her squealing and moaning one dark
night, after it had been snowing and hailing for several hours,
and getting into the sty, we found her nearly frozen to death.
We got some straw, an old sail, and other things, and wrapped her
up in a corner of the sty, where she staid until we got into fine
weather again.
Wednesday, May 18th.  Lat. 9° 54’ N., long. 113° 17’ W.  The north-
east trades had now left us, and we had the usual variable winds,
which prevail near the line, together with some rain.  So long as
we were in these latitudes, we had but little rest in our watch on
deck at night, for, as the winds were light and variable, and we
could not lose a breath, we were all the watch bracing the yards,
and taking in and making sail, and “humbugging” with our flying
kites.  A little puff of wind on the larboard quarter, and then
–"larboard fore braces!” and studding-booms were rigged out,
studding-sails set alow and aloft, the yards trimmed, and jibs and
spanker in; when it would come as calm as a duck-pond, and the man
at the wheel stand with the palm of his hand up, feeling for the
wind.  “Keep her off a little!”  “All aback forward, sir!” cries
a man from the forecastle.  Down go the braces again; in come
the studding-sails, all in a mess, which half an hour won’t set
right; yards braced sharp up; and she’s on the starboard tack,
close hauled.
The studding-sails must now be cleared away, and set up in the
tops, and on the booms.  By the time this is done, and you are
looking out for a soft plank for a nap,–"Lay aft here, and square
in the head yards!” and the studding-sails are all set again on
the starboard side.  So it goes until it is eight bells,–call
the watch,–heave the log,–relieve the wheel, and go below
the larboard watch.
Sunday, May 22d.  Lat. 5° 14’ N., long. 166° 45’ W.  We were now
a fortnight out, and within five degrees of the line, to which two
days of good breeze would take us; but we had, for the most part,
what sailors call “an Irishman’s hurricane,–right up and down.”
This day it rained nearly all day, and being Sunday, and nothing
to do, we stopped up the scuppers and filled the decks with rain
water, and bringing all our clothes on deck, had a grand wash,
fore and aft.  When this was through, we stripped to our drawers,
and taking pieces of soap and strips of canvas for towels,
we turned-to and soaped, washed, and scrubbed one another down,
to get off, as we said, the California dust; for the common wash
in salt water, which is all Jack can get, being on an allowance of
fresh, had little efficacy, and was more for taste than utility.
The captain was below all the afternoon, and we had something
nearer to a Saturnalia than anything we had yet seen; for the
mate came into the scuppers, with a couple of boys to scrub him,
and got into a battle with them in heaving water.  By unplugging
the holes, we let the soap-suds off the decks, and in a short time
had a new supply of rain water, in which we had a grand rinsing.
It was surprising to see how much soap and fresh water did for
the complexions of many of us; how much of what we supposed to
be tan and sea-blacking, we got rid of.  The next day, the sun
rising clear, the ship was covered, fore and aft, with clothes
of all sorts, hanging out to dry.
As we approached the line, the wind became more easterly, and
the weather clearer, and in twenty days from San Diego,–
Saturday, May 28th, at about three P. M., with a fine breeze from
the east-south-east, we crossed the equator.  In twenty-four hours
after crossing the line, which was very unusual, we took the regular
south-east trades.  These winds come a little from the eastward of
south-east, and, with us, they blew directly from the east-south-
east, which was fortunate for us, for our course was south-by-west,
and we could thus go one point free.  The yards were braced so that
every sail drew, from the spanker to the flying-jib; and the upper
yards being squared in a little, the fore and main top-gallant
studding-sails were set, and just drew handsomely.  For twelve
days this breeze blew steadily, not varying a point, and just so
fresh that we could carry our royals; and, during the whole time,
we hardly started a brace.  Such progress did we make, that at the
end of seven days from the time we took the breeze, on
Sunday, June 5th, we were in lat. 19° 29’ S., and long. 118° 01’ W.,
having made twelve hundred miles in seven days, very nearly
upon a taught bowline.  Our good ship was getting to be herself
again, had increased her rate of sailing more than one-third since
leaving San Diego.  The crew ceased complaining of her, and the
officers hove the log every two hours with evident satisfaction.
This was glorious sailing.  A steady breeze; the light trade-wind
clouds over our heads; the incomparable temperature of the Pacific,
–neither hot nor cold; a clear sun every day, and clear moon and
stars each night; and new constellations rising in the south, and
the familiar ones sinking in the north, as we went on our course,
–"stemming nightly toward the pole.”  Already we had sunk the north
star and the Great Bear in the northern horizon, and all hands
looked out sharp to the southward for the Magellan Clouds, which,
each succeeding night, we expected to make.  “The next time we see
the north star,” said one, “we shall be standing to the northward,
the other side of the Horn.” This was true enough, and no doubt it
would be a welcome sight; for sailors say that in coming home from
round Cape Horn, and the Cape of Good Hope, the north star is the
first land you make.
These trades were the same that, in the passage out in the Pilgrim,
lasted nearly all the way from Juan Fernandez to the line; blowing
steadily on our starboard quarter for three weeks, without our
starting a brace, or even brailing down the skysails.  Though we
had now the same wind, and were in the same latitude with the
Pilgrim on her passage out, yet we were nearly twelve hundred miles
to the westward of her course; for the captain, depending upon the
strong south-west winds which prevail in high southern latitudes
during the winter months, took the full advantage of the trades,
and stood well to the westward, so far that we passed within about
two hundred miles of Ducie’s Island.
It was this weather and sailing that brought to my mind a little
incident that occurred on board the Pilgrim, while we were in the
same latitude.  We were going along at a great rate, dead before
the wind, with studding-sails out on both sides, alow and aloft,
on a dark night, just after midnight, and everything was as still
as the grave, except the washing of the water by the vessel’s side;
for, being before the wind, with a smooth sea, the little brig,
covered with canvas, was doing great business, with very little
noise.  The other watch was below, and all our watch, except myself
and the man at the wheel, were asleep under the lee of the boat.
The second mate, who came out before the mast, and was always very
thick with me, had been holding a yarn with me, and just gone aft
to his place on the quarter-deck, and I had resumed my usual
walk to and from the windlass-end, when, suddenly, we heard a
loud scream coming from ahead, apparently directly from under
the bows.  The darkness, and complete stillness of the night,
and the solitude of the ocean, gave to the sound a dreadful and
almost supernatural effect.  I stood perfectly still, and my heart
beat quick.
The sound woke up the rest of the watch, who stood looking at one
another.  “What, in the name of God, is that?” said the second mate,
coming slowly forward.  The first thought I had was, that it might
be a boat, with the crew of some wrecked vessel, or perhaps the
boat of some whaleship, out over night, and we had run them down
in the darkness.  Another scream, but less loud than the first.
This started us, and we ran forward, and looked over the bows,
and over the sides, to leeward, but nothing was to be seen or
heard.  What was to be done.  Call the captain, and heave the
ship aback?  Just at this moment, in crossing the forecastle,
one of the men saw a light below, and looking down the scuttle,
saw the watch all out of their berths, and afoul of one poor
fellow, dragging him out of his berth, and shaking him, to wake
him out of a nightmare.
They had been waked out of their sleep, and as much alarmed at the
scream as we were, and were hesitating whether to come on deck,
when the second sound, coming directly from one of the berths,
revealed the cause of the alarm.  The fellow got a good shaking
for the trouble he had given.  We made a joke of the matter and
we could well laugh, for our minds were not a little relieved
by its ridiculous termination.
We were now close upon the southern tropical line, and, with
so fine a breeze, were daily leaving the sun behind us, and drawing
nearer to Cape Horn, for which it behoved us to make every
preparation.  Our rigging was all examined and overhauled, and
mended, or replaced with new, where it was necessary: new and
strong bobstays fitted in the place of the chain ones, which were
worn out; the spritsail yard and martingale guys and back-ropes
set well taught; bran new fore and main braces rove; top-gallant
sheets, and wheel-ropes, made of green hide, laid up in the form of
rope, were stretched and fitted; and new top-sail clewlines, etc.,
rove; new fore-topmast back-stays fitted; and other preparations
made, in good season, that the ropes might have time to stretch
and become limber before we got into cold weather. 
Sunday, June 12th.  Lat. 26° 04’ S., 116° 31’ W.  We had now lost
the regular trades, and had the winds variable, principally from
the westward, and kept on, in a southerly course, sailing very
nearly upon a meridian, and at the end of the week,
Sunday, June 19th, were in lat. 34° 15’ S., and long. 116° 38’ W.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
