


The Owls and The Night School
One night Sam was taking a last look at the stars before turning in. A
Horned Owl had been hooting not far away.
“_Hoo–hohoo-hoho–hoooooo.”
And as he looked, what should silently sail to the top of the medicine
pole stuck in the ground twenty yards away but the Owl.
“Yan! Yan! Give me my bow and arrow, quick. Here’s a Cat-Owl–a
chicken stealer, he’s fair game.”
“He’s only codding you, Yan,” said Guy sleepily from his blanket. “I
wouldn’t go.”
But Yan rushed out with his own and Sam’s weapons.
Sam fired at the great feathery creature, but evidently missed, for
the Owl spread its wings and sailed away.
“There goes my best arrow. That was my ’Sure-death.’”
“Pshaw!” growled Yan, as he noted the miss. “You can’t shoot a little
bit.”
But as they stood, there was a fluttering of broad wings, and there,
alighting as before on the medicine pole, was the Owl again.
“My turn now!” exclaimed Yan in a gaspy whisper.
He drew his bow, the arrow flew, and the Owl slipped off unharmed as
it had the first time.
“Yan, you’re no good. An easy shot like that. Why, any idiot could hit
that. Why didn’t you fetch her?”
“’Cause I’m not an idiot, I suppose. I hit the same place as you did,
anyway, and drew just as much blood.”
“Ef he comes back again you call me,” piped Guy in his shrill voice.
“I’ll show you fellers how to shoot. You’re no good at all ’thout me.
Why, I mind the time I was Deer-shooting––” but a fierce dash of the
whole Tribe for Sappy’s bed put a stop to the reminiscent flow and
replaced it with whines of “Now you let me alone. I ain’t doin’
nothin’ to you.”
During the night they were again awakened by the screech in the
tree-tops, and Yan, sitting up, said, “Say, boys, that’s nothing but
that big Cat Owl.”
“So it is,” was Sam’s answer; “wonder I didn’t think of that before.”
“I did,” said Guy; “I knew it all the time.”
In the morning they went out to find their arrows. The medicine pole
was a tall pole bearing a feathered shield, with the tribal totem, a
white Buffalo, which Yan had set up to be in Indian fashion. Sighting
in line from the teepee over this, they walked on, looking far beyond,
for they had learned always to draw the arrow to the head. They
had not gone twenty-five feet before Yan burst out in unutterable
astonishment: “Look! Look at that–and that–––”
There on the ground not ten feet apart were two enormous Horned Owls,
both shot fairly through the heart, one with Sam’s “Sure-death” arrow,
the other with Yan’s “Whistler"; both shots had been true, and the
boys could only say, “Well, if you saw that in print you would say it
was a big lie!” It was indeed one of those amazing things which happen
only in real life, and the whole of the Tribe with one exception voted
a grand coup to each of the hunters.
Guy was utterly contemptuous. “They got so close they hit by chance
an’ didn’t know they done it. If he had been shooting,” etc., etc.,
etc.
“How about that screech in the tree-tops, Guy?”
“Errrrh.”
What a fascination the naturalist always finds in a fine Bird. Yan
revelled in these two. He measured their extent of wing and the length
from beak to tail of each. He studied the pattern on their quills;
he was thrilled by their great yellow eyes and their long, powerful
claws, and he loved their every part. He hated to think that in a few
days these wonderful things would be disgusting and fit only to be
buried.
“I wish I knew hew to stuff them,” he said.
“Why don’t you get Si Lee to show you,” was Sam’s suggestion. “Seems
to me I often seen pictures of Injun medicine men with stuffed birds,"
he added shrewdly and happily.
“Well, that’s just what I will do.”
Then arose a knotty question. Should he go to Si Lee and thereby turn
“White” and break the charm of the Indian life, or should he attempt
the task of persuading Si to come down there to work without proper
conveniences. They voted to bring Si to camp. “Da might think we was
backing out.” After all, the things needed were easily carried, and
Si, having been ambushed by a scout, consented to come and open a
night-school in taxidermy.
The tools and things that he brought were a bundle of tow made by
unravelling a piece of rope, some cotton wool, strong linen thread,
two long darning needles, arsenical soap worked up like cream,
corn-meal, some soft iron wire about size sixteen and some of
stovepipe size, a file, a pair of pliers, wire cutters, a sharp knife,
a pair of stout scissors, a gimlet, two ready-made wooden stands, and
last of all a good lamp. The boys hitherto had been content with the
firelight.
Thus in the forest teepee Yan had his first lesson in the art that was
to give him so much joy and some sorrow in the future.
Guy was interested, though scornful; Sam was much interested; Yan was
simply rapt, and Si Lee was in his glory. His rosy red cheeks and his
round figure swelled with pride; even his semi-nude head and fat,
fumbling fingers seemed to partake of his general elation and
importance.
First he stuffed the Owls’ throats and wounds with cotton wool.
Then he took one, cut a slit from the back of the breast-bone nearly
to the tail (_A to B, Fig. 1), while Yan took the other and tried
faithfully to follow his example.
He worked the skin from the body chiefly by the use of his finger
nails, till he could reach the knee of each leg and cut this through
at the joint with the knife (_Kn, Fig. 1). The flesh was removed from
each leg-bone down to the heel-joint (_Hl, Hl, Fig. 1), leaving the
leg and skin as in Lg, Figure 2. Then working back on each side of
the tail, he cut the “pope’s nose” from the body and left it as part
of the skin, with the tail feathers in it, and this, Si explained, was
a hard place to get around. Sam called it “rounding Cape Horn.” As the
flesh was exposed Si kept it powdered thickly with corn-meal, and this
saved the feathers from soiling.
Once around Cape Horn it was easy sailing. The skin was rapidly pushed
off till the wings were reached. These were cut off at the joint deep
in the breast (under J J, Fig. 1, or seen on the back, W J, Fig. 2),
the first bone of each wing was cleared of meat, and the skin, now
inside out and well mealed, was pushed off the neck up to the head.
Here Si explained that in most birds it would slip easily over the head,
but in Owls, Woodpeckers, Ducks and some others one had sometimes to
help it by a lengthwise slit on the nape (_Sn, Fig. 2). “Owls is hard,
anyway,” he went on, “though not so bad as Water-fowl. If ye want a real
easy bird for a starter, take a Robin or a Blackbird, or any land Bird
about that size except Woodpeckers.”
When the ears were reached they were skinned and pulled out of the skull
without cutting, then, after the eyes were passed, the skin and body
looked as in Figure 2. Now the back of the head with the neck and body
was cut off (_Ct, Fig. 2), and the first operation of the skinning was
done.
Yan got along fairly well, tearing and cutting the skin once or twice,
but learning very quickly to manage it.
Now began the cleaning of the skin.
The eyes were cut clean out and the brains and flesh carefully scraped
away from the skull.
The wing bones were already cleaned of meat down to the elbow joint,
where the big quill feathers began, and the rest of the wing had to
be cleared of flesh by cutting open the under side of the next joint
(_H to El, Fig. 1). The “pope’s nose” and the skin generally was
freed from meat and grease by scraping with a knife and rubbing with
the meal.
Then came the poisoning. Every part of the bones and flesh had to be
painted with the creamy arsenical soap, then the head was worked back
into its place and the skin turned right side out.
When this was done it was quite late. Guy was asleep, Sam was nearly
so, and Yan was thoroughly tired out.
“Guess I’ll go now,” said Si. “Them skins is in good shape to keep,
only don’t let them dry,” so they were wrapped up in a damp sack and
put away in a tin till next night, when Si promised to return and
finish the course in one more lesson.
[Illustration: Owl-stuffing plate]
    Fig. 1. The dead Owl, showing the cuts made in skinning it: A to
    B, for the body; El to H, on each wing, to remove the meat of the
    second joint.
    Fig. 2. After the skinning is done the skull remains attached to
    the skin, which is now inside out, the neck and body are cut off
    at Ct. Sn to Sn shows the slit in the nape needed for Owls and
    several other kinds.
    Fig. 3. Top view of the tow body, neck end up, and neck wire
    projecting.
    Fig. 4. Side view of the tow body, with the neck wire put through
    it; the tail end is downward.
    Fig. 5. The heavy iron wire for neck.
    Fig. 6. The Owl after the body is put in; it is now ready to close
    up, by stitching up the slit on the nape, the body slit B to C and
    the two wing slits El to H, on each wing.
    Fig. 7. A dummy as it would look if all the feathers were
    off; this shows the proper position for legs and wings on the
    body. At W is a glimpse of the leg wire entering the body at the
    middle of the side.
    Fig. 8. Another view of the body without feathers; the dotted
    lines show the wires of the legs through the hard body, and the
    neck wire.
    Fig. 9. Two views of one of the wooden eyes; these are on a much
    larger scale than the rest of the figures in this plate.
    Fig. 10. The finished Owl, with the thread wrappings on and
    the wires still projecting; Nw is end of the neck wire; Bp is
    back-pin–that is, the wire in the center of the back; Ww and Ww
    are the wing wires; Tl are the cards pinned on the tail to hold it
    flat while it dries. The last operation is to remove the threads
    and cut all the wires off close so that the feathers hide what
    remains.
While they were so working Sam had busied himself opening the Owls’
stomachs–"looking up their records,” as he called it. He now reported
that one had lynched a young Partridge and the other had killed a
Rabbit for its latest meal.
Next night Si Lee came as promised, but brought bad news. He had
failed to find the glass Owl eyes he had hoped were in his trunk. His
ingenuity, however, was of the kind that is never balked in a small
matter. He produced some black and yellow oil paints, explaining,
“Guess we’ll make wooden eyes do for the present, an’ when you get to
town you can put glass ones in their place.” So Sam was set to work
whittling four wooden eyes the shape of well-raised buns and about
three-quarters of an inch across. When whittled, scraped and smooth,
Si painted them brilliant yellow with a central black spot and put
them away to dry (shown on a large scale on Owl Stuffing Plate, Fig. 9,
a and b_).
Meanwhile, he and Yan got out the two skins. The bloody feathers on
the breasts were washed clean in a cup of warm water, then dried with
cotton and dusted all over with meal to soak up any moisture left. The
leg and wing bones were now wrapped with as much tow as would take the
place of the removed meat. The eye sockets were partly filled with
cotton, then a long soft roll of tow about the length and thickness of
the original neck was worked up into the neck skin and into the skull
and left hanging. The ends of the two wing bones were fastened two
inches apart with a shackle of strong string (_X, Fig. 2 and
Fig. 7). Now the body was needed.
For this Si rolled and lashed a wad of tow with strong thread until
he made a dummy of the same size and shape as the body taken out,
squeezing and sewing it into a hard solid mass. Next he cut about two
and a half feet of the large wire, filed both ends sharp, doubled
about four inches of one end back in a hook (Fig. 5), then drove the
long end through the tow body from the tail end out where the neck
should join on (Figs. 3 and 4). This was driven well in so that the
short end of the hook was buried out of sight. Now Si passed the
projecting ends of the long wire up the neck in the middle of the tow
roll or neck already there, worked it through the skull and out at the
top of the Owl’s head, and got the tow body properly placed in the
skin with the string that bound the wing bones across the back
(_X, Fig. 7).
Two heavy wires each eighteen inches long and sharp at one end were
needed for the legs. These were worked up one through the sole of
each foot under the skin of the leg behind (_Lw, Fig. 6), then
through the tow body at the middle of the side (_W, Fig. 7),
after which the sharp end was bent with pliers into a hook and driven
back into the hard body (after the manner of the neck wire, Fig. 4).
Another wire was sharpened and driven through the bones of the tail,
fastening that also to the tow body (_Tw, Fig. 7).
Now a little soft tow was packed into places where it seemed needed
to fit the skin on, and it remained to sew up the opening below
(_Bc in Fig. 6), the wing slits (_El, H, Fig. 6 and Fig.
1), and the slit in the nape (_Sn Sn, Fig. 2) with half a dozen
stitches, always putting the needle into the skin from the flesh side.
The projecting wires of the feet were put through gimlet holes in the
perch and made firm, and Si’s Owls were ready for their positions.
They were now the most ridiculous looking things imaginable, wings
floppy, heads hanging.
“Here is where the artist comes in,” said Si proudly, conscious that
this was himself. He straightened up the main line of the body by
bending the leg wires and set the head right by hunching the neck into
the shoulders. “An Owl always looks over its shoulder,” he explained,
but took no notice of Sam’s query as to “whose shoulder he expected it
to look over.” He set two toes of each foot forward on the perch and
two back to please Yan, who insisted that that was Owly, though Si
had his doubts. He spread the tail a little by pinning it between two
pieces of card (_Tl, Fig. 10), gave it the proper slant, and now
had the wings to arrange.
They were drooping like those of a clucking hen. A sharp wire of the
small size was driven into the bend of each wing (_0, Fig. 7),
nailing it in effect to the body (_Ww and Ww, Fig. 10). A long pin
was set in the middle of the back (_Bp, Fig. 10), then using these
with the wing wires and head wire as lashing points, Si wrapped the
whole bird with the thread (Fig. 10), putting a wad of cotton here or
a bit of stick there under the wrapping till he had the position and
“feathering” perfect, as he put it.
“We can put in the eyes now,” said he, “or later, if we soften
the skin around the eye-sockets by putting wet cotton in them for
twenty-four hours.”
Yan had carefully copied Si’s method with the second Owl, and
developed unusual quickness at it.
His teacher remarked, “Wall, I larned lots o’ fellows to stuff birds,
but you ketch on the quickest I ever seen.”
Si’s ideas of perfection might differ from those of a trained
taxidermist; indeed, these same Owls afforded Yan no little amusement
in later years, but for the present they were an unmitigated joy.
They were just the same in position. Si knew only one; all his birds
had that. But when they had dried fully, had their wrappings removed,
the wires cut off flush and received the finishing glory of their
wooden eyes, they were a source of joy and wonder to the whole Tribe
of Indians.
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
