


The Triumph Of Guy
The boys had hunted the Woodchuck quite regularly since first meeting
it. Their programme was much the same–each morning about nine or ten
they would sneak out to the clover field. It was usually Guy who first
discovered the old Grizzly, then all would fire a harmless shot, the
Woodchuck would scramble into his den and the incident be closed for
the day. This became as much a part of the day’s routine as getting
breakfast, and much more so than the washing of the dishes. Once or
twice the old Grizzly had narrow escapes, but so far he was none the
worse, rather the better, being wiser. The boys, on the other
hand, gained nothing, with the possible exception of Guy. Always
quick-sighted, his little washed-out optics developed a marvellous
keenness. At first it was as often Yan or Sam who saw the old Grizzly,
but later it was always Guy.
One morning Sam approached the game from one point, Guy and Yan from
another some yards away. “No Woodchuck!” was the first opinion, but
suddenly Guy called “I see him.” There in a little hollow fully sixty
yards from his den, and nearly a hundred from the boys, concealed in a
bunch of clover, Guy saw a patch of gray fur hardly two inches square.
“That’s him, sure.”
Yan could not see it at all. Sam saw but doubted. An instant later
the Woodchuck (for it was he) stood up on his hind legs, raised his
chestnut breast above the clover, and settled all doubt.
“By George!” exclaimed Yan in admiration. ’That is great. You
have the most wonderful eyes I ever did see. Your name ought to be
’Hawkeye’–that should be your name.”
“All right,” shrilled out Guy enthusiastically. “Will you–will
you, Sam, will you call me Hawkeye? I think you ought to,” he added
pleadingly.
“I think so, Sam,” said the Second Chief. “He’s turned out great
stuff, an’ it’s regular Injun.”
“We’ll have to call a Council and settle that. Now let’s to business.”
“Say, Sapwood, you’re so smart, couldn’t you go round through the
woods to your side and crawl through the clover so as get between the
old Grizzly and his den?” suggested the Head Chief.
“I bet I can, an’ I’ll bet a dollar–”
“Here, now,” said Yan, “Injuns don’t have dollars.”
“Well, I’ll bet my scalp–my black scalp, I mean–against Sam’s that I
kill the old Grizzly first.”
“Oh, let me do it first–you do it second,” said Sam imploringly.
“Errr–yer scared of yer scalp.”
“I’ll go you,” said Sam.
Each of the boys had a piece of black horsehair that he called his
scalp. It was tied with a string to the top of his head–and this was
what Guy wished to wager.
Yan now interfered: “Quit your squabbling, you Great War Chiefs, an’
’tend to business. If Woodpecker kills old Grizzly he takes Sapwood’s
scalp; if Sappy kills him he takes the Woodpecker’s scalp, an’ the
winner gets a grand feather, too.”
Sam and Yan waited impatiently in the woods while Guy sneaked around.
The Woodchuck seemed unusually bold this day. He wandered far from his
den and got out of sight in hollows at times. The boys saw Guy crawl
through the fence, though the Woodchuck did not. The fact was, that he
had always had the enemy approach him from the other side, and was not
watching eastward.
Guy, flat on his breast, worked his way through the clover. He crawled
about thirty yards and now was between the Woodchuck and his den.
Still old Grizzly kept on stuffing himself with clover and watching
toward the Raften woods. The boys became intensely excited. Guy could
see them, but not the Woodchuck. They pointed and gesticulated. Guy
thought that meant “Now shoot.” He got up cautiously. The Woodchuck
saw him and bounded straight for its den–that is, toward Guy. Guy
fired wildly. The arrow went ten feet over the Grizzly’s head, and,
that “huge, shaking mass of fur” bounding straight at him, struck
terror to his soul. He backed up hastily, not knowing where to run. He
was close to the den.
The Woodchuck chattered his teeth and plunged to get by the boy, each
as scared as could be. Guy gave a leap of terror and fell heavily just
as the Woodchuck would have passed under him and home. But the boy
weighed nearly 100 pounds, and all that weight came with crushing
force on old Grizzly, knocking the breath out of his body. Guy
scrambled to his feet to run for his life, but he saw the Woodchuck
lying squirming, and plucked up courage enough to give him a couple
of kicks on the nose that settled him. A loud yell from the other two
boys was the first thing that assured Guy of his victory. They came
running over and found him standing like the hunter in an amateur
photograph, holding his bow in one hand and the big Woodchuck by the
tail in the other.
[Illustration: The hunter]
“Now, I guess you fellers will come to me to larn you how to kill
Woodchucks. Ain’t he an old socker? I bet he weighs fifty pounds–yes,
near sixty.” (It weighed about ten pounds.)
“Good boy! Bully boy! Hooray for the Third War Chief! Hooray for Chief
Sapwood!” and Guy had no cause to complain of lack of appreciation on
the part of the others.
He swelled out his chest and looked proud and haughty. “Wished I knew
where there was some more Woodchucks,” he said. ’I know how to
get them, if the rest don’t.”
“Well, that should count for a grand coup, Sappy.”
[Illustration: “Guy gave a leap of terror and fell."]
“You tole me you wuz goin’ to call me ’Hawkeye’ after this morning.”
“We’ll have to have a Grand Council to fix that up,” replied the Head
Chief.
“All right; let’s have it this afternoon, will you?”
“All right.”
“’Bout four o’clock?”
“Why, yes; any time.”
“And you’ll fix me up as ’Hawkeye,’ and give me a dandy Eagle feather
for killing the Woodchuck, at four o’clock?”
“Yes, sure, only, why do you want it at four o’clock?”
But Guy seemed not to hear, and right away after dinner he
disappeared.
“He’s dodging the dishwashing again,” suggested the Woodpecker.
“No, he isn’t,” said the Second Chief. “I believe he’s going to bring
his folks to see him in his triumph.”
“That’s so. Let’s chip right in and make it an everlasting old
blowout–kind of a new date in history. You’ll hear me lie like sixty
to help him out.”
“Good enough. I’m with you. You go and get your folks. I’ll go after
old Caleb, and we’ll fix it up to call him ’Hawkeye’ and give him his
grand coup feather all at once.”
“’Feard my folks and Caleb wouldn’t mix,” replied Sam, “but I believe
for a splurge like this Guy’d ruther have my folks. You see, Da has
the mortgage on their place.”
So it was agreed Sam was to go for his mother, while Yan was to
prepare the Eagle feather and skin the Woodchuck.
It was not “as big as a bear,” but it was a very large Woodchuck, and
Yan was as much elated over the victory as any of them. He still had
an hour or more before four o’clock, and eager to make Guy’s triumph
as Indian as possible, he cut off all the Woodchuck’s claws, then
strung them on a string, with a peeled and pithed Elder twig an inch
long between each two. Some of the claws were very, very small, but
the intention was there to make a Grizzly-claw necklace.
Guy made for home as fast as he could go. His father hailed him as he
neared the garden and evidently had plans of servitude, but Guy
darted into the dining-room-living-room-bedroom-kitchen-room, which
constituted nine-tenths of the house.
“Oh, Maw, you just ought to seen me; you just want to come this
afternoon–I’m the Jim Dandy of the hull Tribe, an they’re going to
make me Head Chief. I killed that whaling old Woodchuck that pooty
nigh killed Paw. They couldn’t do a thing without me–them fellers in
camp. They tried an’ tried more’n a thousand times to get that old
Woodchuck–yes, I bet they tried a million times, an’ I just waited
till they was tired and give up, then I says, ’Now, I’ll show you
how.’ First I had to point him out. Them fellers is no good to see
things. Then I says, ’Now, Sam and Yan, you fellers stay here, an’
just to show how easy it is when you know how, I’ll leave all my
bosenarrers behind an’ go with nothing.’ Wall, there they stood an’
watched me, an’ I s-n-e-a-k-e-d round the fence an’ c-r-a-w-l-e-d in
the clover just like an Injun till I got between him an’ his hole, and
then I hollers and he come a-snortin’ an’ a-chatterin’ his teeth at
me to chaw me up, for he seen I had no stick nor nothin’, an’ I never
turned a hair; I kep’ cool an’ waited till jest as he was going to
jump for my throat, then I turned and gave him one kick on the snoot
that sent him fifty feet in the air, an’ when he come down he was
deader’n Kilsey’s hen when she was stuffed with onions. Oh, Maw, I’m
just the bully boy; they can’t do nothin’ in camp ’thout me. I had to
larn ’em to hunt Deer an’ see things–an’–an’–an’–lots o’ things,
so they are goin’ to make me Head Chief of the hull Tribe, an’ call
me ’Hawkeye,’ too; that’s the way the Injuns does. It’s to be at four
o’clock this afternoon, an’ you got to come.”
Burns scoffed at the whole thing and told Guy to get to work at the
potatoes, and if he left down the bars so that the Pig got out he’d
skin him alive; he would have no such fooling round his place. But Mrs
Burns calmly informed him that she was going. It was to her
much like going to see a university degree conferred on her boy.
Since Burns would not assist, the difficulty of the children now
arose. This, however, was soon settled. They should go along. It was
two hours’ toil for the mother to turn the four brown-limbed, nearly
naked, dirty, happy towsle-tops into four little martyrs, befrocked,
beribboned, becombed and be-booted. Then they all straggled across the
field, Mrs. Burns carrying the baby in one arm and a pot of jam in
the other. Guy ran ahead to show the way, and four-year-old,
three-year-old and two-year-old, hand in hand, formed a diagonal line
in the wake of the mother.
They were just a little surprised on getting to camp to find Mrs.
Raften and Minnie there in holiday clothes. Marget’s first feeling was
resentment, but her second thought was a pleasant one. That “stuck-up"
woman, the enemy’s wife, should see her boy’s triumph, and Mrs. Burns
at once seized on the chance to play society cat.
“How do ye do, Mrs. Raften; hope you’re well,” she said with a tinge
of malicious pleasure and a grand attempt at assuming the leadership.
“Quite well, thank you. We came down to see how the boys were getting
on in camp.”
“They’ve got on very nicely sense my boy j’ined them,” retorted
Mrs. Burns, still fencing.
“So I understand; the other two have become very fond of him,"
returned Mrs. Raften, seeking to disarm her enemy.
This speech had its effect. Mrs. Burns aimed only to forestall the
foe, but finding to her surprise that the enemy’s wife was quite
gentle, a truce was made, and by the time Mrs. Raften had petted and
praised the four tow-tops and lauded Guy to the utmost the air of
latent battle was replaced by one of cordiality.
The boys now had everything ready for the grand ceremony. On the
Calfskin rug at one end was the Council; Guy, seated on the skin of
the Woodchuck and nearly hiding it from view, Sam on his left hand
and Yan with the drum, on his right. In the middle the Council fire
blazed. To give air, the teepee cover was raised on the shady side and
the circle of visitors was partly in the teepee and partly out.
The Great War Chief first lighted the peace pipe, puffed for a minute,
then blew off the four smokes to the four winds and handed it to the
Second and Third War Chiefs, who did the same.
Little Beaver gave three thumps on the drum for silence, and the Great
Woodpecker rose up:
“Big Chiefs, Little Chiefs, Braves, Warriors, Councillors, Squaws,
and Papooses of the Sanger Indians: When our Tribe was at war with
them–them–them–other Injuns–them Birchbarks, we took prisoner one
of their warriors and tortured him to death two or three times, and he
showed such unusual stuff that we took him into our Tribe–”
Loud cries of “How–How–How,” led by Yan.
“We gave a sun-dance for his benefit, but he didn’t brown–seemed too
green–so we called him Sapwood. From that time he has fought his way
up from the ranks and got to be Third War Chief–”
“How–How–How.”
“The other day the hull Tribe j’ined to attack an’ capture a big
Grizzly and was licked bad, when the War Chief Sapwood came to the
rescue an’ settled the owld baste with one kick on the snoot. Deeds
like this is touching. A feller that kin kick like that didn’t orter
be called Sapwood nor Saphead nor Sapanything. No, sirree! It ain’t
right. He’s the littlest Warrior among the War Chiefs, but he kin see
farder an’ do it oftener an’ better than his betters. He kin see round
a corner or through a tree. ’Cept maybe at night, he’s the swell seer
of the outfit, an’ the Council has voted to call him ’Hawkeye.’”
“How–How–How–How–How–”
Here Little Beaver handed the Head War Chief a flat white stick on
which was written in large letters “Sapwood.”
“Here’s the name he went by before he was great an’ famous, an’ this
is the last of it.” The Chief put the stick in the fire, saying, “Now
let us see if you’re too green to burn.” Little Beaver then handed
Woodpecker a fine Eagle feather, red-tufted, and bearing in outline
a man with a Hawk’s head and an arrow from his eye. “This here’s a
swagger Eagle feather for the brave deed he done, and tells about him
being Hawkeye, too” (the feather was stuck in Guy’s hair and the claw
necklace put about his neck amid loud cries of “How–How–” and thumps
of the drum), “and after this, any feller that calls him Sapwood has to
double up and give Hawkeye a free kick.”
There was a great chorus of “How–How.” Guy tried hard to look
dignified and not grin, but it got beyond him. He was smiling right
across and half way round. His mother beamed with pride till her eyes
got moist and overflowed.
Every one thought the ceremony was over, but Yan stood up and began:
“There is something that has been forgotten, Chiefs, Squaws and
Pappooses of the Sanger Nation: When we went out after this Grizzly I
was witness to a bargain between two of the War Chiefs. According to a
custom of our Tribe, they bet their scalps, each that he would be the
one to kill the Grizzly. The Head Chief Woodpecker was one and Hawkeye
was the other. Hawkeye, you can help yourself to Woodpecker’s scalp.”
Sam had forgotten about this, but he bowed his head. Guy cut the
string, and holding up the scalp, he uttered a loud, horrible
war-whoop which every one helped with some sort of noise. It was the
crowning event. Mrs. Burns actually wept for joy to see her heroic boy
properly recognized at last.
Then she went over to Sam and said, “Did you bring your folks here to
see my boy get praised?”
Sam nodded and twinkled an eye.
“Well, I don’t care who ye are, Raften or no Raften, you got a good
heart, an’ it’s in the right place. I never did hold with them as says
’There ain’t no good in a Raften.’ I always hold there’s some good in
every human. I know your Paw did buy the mortgage on our place,
but I never did believe your Maw stole our Geese, an’ I never
will, an’ next time I hear them runnin’ on the Raftens I’ll jest
open out an’ tell what I know.”
[Illustration: The picture on the Teepee Lining, to record Guy’s
Exploit.]
Continue...

This eBook of Two Little Savages by Ernest Thompson Seton belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Two Little SavagesBy Ernest Thompson SetonAt Amazon
