


In our first attempt to double the Cape, when we came up to the
latitude of it, we were nearly seventeen hundred miles to the
westward, but, in running for the straits of Magellan, we stood so
far to the eastward, that we made our second attempt at a distance
of not more than four or five hundred miles; and we had great hopes,
by this means, to run clear of the ice; thinking that the easterly
gales, which had prevailed for a long time, would have driven it
to the westward.  With the wind about two points free, the yards
braced in a little, and two close-reefed topsails and a reefed
foresail on the ship, we made great way toward the southward and,
almost every watch, when we came on deck, the air seemed to grow
colder, and the sea to run higher.  Still, we saw no ice, and had
great hopes of going clear of it altogether, when, one afternoon,
about three o’clock, while we were taking a siesta during our
watch below, “All hands!” was called in a loud and fearful voice.
“Tumble up here, men!–tumble up!–don’t stop for your clothes–
before we’re upon it!”  We sprang out of our berths and hurried
upon deck.
The loud, sharp voice of the captain was heard giving orders,
as though for life or death, and we ran aft to the braces,
not waiting to look ahead, for not a moment was to be lost.
The helm was hard up, the after yards shaking, and the ship
in the act of wearing.
Slowly, with stiff ropes and iced rigging, we swung the yards round,
everything coming hard, and with a creaking and rending sound, like
pulling up a plank which had been frozen into the ice.  The ship
wore round fairly, the yards were steadied, and we stood off on the
other tack, leaving behind us, directly under our larboard quarter,
a large ice island, peering out of the mist, and reaching high above
our tops, while astern; and on either side of the island, large tracts
of field-ice were dimly seen, heaving and rolling in the sea.  We were
now safe, and standing to the northward; but, in a few minutes more,
had it not been for the sharp look-out of the watch, we should have
been fairly upon the ice, and left our ship’s old bones adrift in
the Southern ocean.  After standing to the northward a few hours,
we wore ship, and the wind having hauled, we stood to the southward
and eastward.  All night long, a bright lookout was kept from every
part of the deck; and whenever ice was seen on the one bow or the
other, the helm was shifted and the yards braced, and by quick
working of the ship she was kept clear.  The accustomed cry of
“Ice ahead!"–"Ice on the lee bow!"–"Another island!” in the
same tones, and with the same orders following them, seemed to
bring us directly back to our old position of the week before.
During our watch on deck, which was from twelve to four, the wind
came out ahead, with a pelting storm of hail and sleet, and we
lay hove-to, under a close-reefed main topsail, the whole watch.
During the next watch it fell calm, with a drenching rain, until
daybreak, when the wind came out to the westward, and the weather
cleared up, and showed us the whole ocean, in the course which we
should have steered, had it not been for the head wind and calm,
completely blocked up with ice.  Here then our progress was stopped,
and we wore ship, and once more stood to the northward and eastward;
not for the straits of Magellan, but to make another attempt to
double the Cape, still farther to the eastward; for the captain
was determined to get round if perseverance could do it; and the
third time, he said, never failed.
With a fair wind we soon ran clear of the field-ice, and by noon
had only the stray islands floating far and near upon the ocean. 
The sun was out bright, the sea of a deep blue, fringed with the
white foam of the waves which ran high before a strong south-wester;
our solitary ship tore on through the water, as though glad to be
out of her confinement; and the ice islands lay scattered upon the
ocean here and there, of various sizes and shapes, reflecting the
bright rays of the sun, and drifting slowly northward before the
gale.  It was a contrast to much that we had lately seen, and a
spectacle not only of beauty, but of life; for it required but
little fancy to imagine these islands to be animate masses which
had broken loose from the “thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice,"
and were working their way, by wind and current, some alone,
and some in fleets, to milder climes.  No pencil has ever yet
given anything like the true effect of an iceberg.  In a picture,
they are huge, uncouth masses, stuck in the sea, while their chief
beauty and grandeur,–their slow, stately motion; the whirling
of the snow about their summits, and the fearful groaning and
cracking of their parts,–the picture cannot give.  This is the
large iceberg; while the small and distant islands, floating on
the smooth sea, in the light of a clear day, look like little
floating fairy isles of sapphire.
From a north-east course we gradually hauled to the eastward, and
after sailing about two hundred miles, which brought us as near to
the western coast of Terra del Fuego as was safe, and having lost
sight of the ice altogether,–for the third time we put the ship’s
head to the southward, to try the passage of the Cape. The weather
continued clear and cold, with a strong gale from the westward,
and we were fast getting up with the latitude of the Cape, with a
prospect of soon being round.  One fine afternoon, a man who had
gone into the fore-top to shift the rolling tackles, sung out, at
the top of his voice, and with evident glee,–"Sail ho!”  Neither
land nor sail had we seen since leaving San Diego; and any one who
has traversed the length of a whole ocean alone, can imagine what
an excitement such an announcement produced on board.  “Sail ho!"
shouted the cook, jumping out of his galley; “Sail ho!” shouted
a man, throwing back the slide of the scuttle, to the watch below,
who were soon out of their berths and on deck; and “Sail ho!"
shouted the captain down the companion-way to the passenger in
the cabin.  Besides the pleasure of seeing a ship and human beings
in so desolate a place, it was important for us to speak a vessel,
to learn whether there was ice to the eastward, and to ascertain the
longitude; for we had no chronometer, and had been drifting about
so long that we had nearly lost our reckoning, and opportunities
for lunar observations are not frequent or sure in such a place as
Cape Horn.  For these various reasons, the excitement in our little
community was running high, and conjectures were made, and everything
thought of for which the captain would hail, when the man aloft sung
out–"Another sail, large on the weather bow!”
This was a little odd, but so much the better, and did not shake
our faith in their being sails.  At length the man in the top
hailed, and said he believed it was land, after all.  “Land in
your eye!” said the mate, who was looking through a telescope;
“they are ice islands, if I can see a hole through a ladder;” and a
few moments showed the mate to be right and all our expectations
fled; and instead of what we most wished to see, we had what we
most dreaded, and what we hoped we had seen the last of.  We soon,
however, left these astern, having passed within about two miles
of them; and at sundown the horizon was clear in all directions.
Having a fine wind, we were soon up with and passed the latitude
of the Cape, and having stood far enough to the southward to give
it a wide berth, we began to stand to the eastward, with a good
prospect of being round and steering to the northward on the
other side, in a very few days.
But ill luck seemed to have lighted upon us.  Not four hours had
we been standing on in this course, before it fell dead calm;
and in half an hour it clouded up; a few straggling blasts,
with spits of snow and sleet, came from the eastward; and in
an hour more, we lay hove-to under a close-reefed main topsail,
drifting bodily off to leeward before the fiercest storm that we
had yet felt, blowing dead ahead, from the eastward.  It seemed
as though the genius of the place had been roused at finding that
we had nearly slipped through his fingers, and had come down upon
us with tenfold fury.  The sailors said that every blast, as it
shook the shrouds, and whistled through the rigging, said to the
old ship, “No, you don’t!"–"No, you don’t!”
For eight days we lay drifting about in this manner.  Sometimes,–
generally towards noon,–it fell calm; once or twice a round copper
ball showed itself for a few moments in the place where the sun ought
to have been; and a puff or two came from the westward, giving some
hope that a fair wind had come at last.  During the first two days,
we made sail for these puffs, shaking the reefs out of the topsails
and boarding the tacks of the courses; but finding that it only made
work for us when the gale set in again, it was soon given up, and we
lay-to under our close-reefs.
We had less snow and hail than when we were farther to the westward,
but we had an abundance of what is worse to a sailor in cold
weather–drenching rain.  Snow is blinding, and very bad when
coming upon a coast, but, for genuine discomfort, give me rain
with freezing weather.  A snow-storm is exciting, and it does not
wet through the clothes (which is important to a sailor); but a
constant rain there is no escaping from.  It wets to the skin,
and makes all protection vain.  We had long ago run through all
our dry clothes, and as sailors have no other way of drying them
than by the sun, we had nothing to do but to put on those which
were the least wet.
At the end of each watch, when we came below, we took off our clothes
and wrung them out; two taking hold of a pair of trowsers,–one
at each end,–and jackets in the same way.  Stockings, mittens,
and all, were wrung out also and then hung up to drain and chafe
dry against the bulk-heads.  Then, feeling of all our clothes,
we picked out those which were the least wet, and put them on,
so as to be ready for a call, and turned-in, covered ourselves
up with blankets, and slept until three knocks on the scuttle
and the dismal sound of “All starbowlines ahoy!  Eight bells,
there below!  Do you hear the news?” drawled out from on deck,
and the sulky answer of “Aye, aye!” from below, sent us up again.
On deck, all was as dark as a pocket, and either a dead calm,
with the rain pouring steadily down, or, more generally, a violent
gale dead ahead, with rain pelting horizontally, and occasional
variations of hail and sleet;–decks afloat with water swashing
from side to side, and constantly wet feet; for boots could not
be wrung out like drawers, and no composition could stand the
constant soaking.  In fact, wet and cold feet are inevitable
in such weather, and are not the least of those little items
which go to make up the grand total of the discomforts of a winter
passage round the Cape.  Few words were spoken between the watches
as they shifted, the wheel was relieved, the mate took his place
on the quarter-deck, the look-outs in the bows; and each man had
his narrow space to walk fore and aft in, or, rather, to swing
himself forward and back in, from one belaying pin to another,–
for the decks were too slippery with ice and water to allow of
much walking.  To make a walk, which is absolutely necessary to
pass away the time, one of us hit upon the expedient of sanding
the deck; and afterwards, whenever the rain was not so violent
as to wash it off, the weatherside of the quarter-deck and a part
of the waist and forecastle were sprinkled with the sand which we
had on board for holystoning; and thus we made a good promenade,
where we walked fore and aft, two and two, hour after hour, in our
long, dull, and comfortless watches.  The bells seemed to be an
hour or two apart, instead of half an hour, and an age to elapse
before the welcome sound of eight bells.  The sole object was to
make the time pass on.  Any change was sought for, which would
break the monotony of the time; and even the two hours’ trick at
the wheel, which came round to each of us, in turn, once in every
other watch, was looked upon as a relief.  Even the never-failing
resource of long yarns, which eke out many a watch, seemed to have
failed us now; for we had been so long together that we had heard
each other’s stories told over and over again, till we had them
by heart; each one knew the whole history of each of the others,
and we were fairly and literally talked out.  Singing and joking,
we were in no humor for, and, in fact, any sound of mirth or laughter
would have struck strangely upon our ears, and would not have been
tolerated, any more than whistling, or a wind instrument.  The last
resort, that of speculating upon the future, seemed now to fail us,
for our discouraging situation, and the danger we were really in,
(as we expected every day to find ourselves drifted back among the
ice) “clapped a stopper” upon all that.  From saying–"when we get
home"–we began insensibly to alter it to–"if we get home"–and at
last the subject was dropped by a tacit consent.
In this state of things, a new light was struck out, and a new
field opened, by a change in the watch.  One of our watch was
laid up for two or three days by a bad hand, (for in cold weather
the least cut or bruise ripens into a sore,) and his place was
supplied by the carpenter.  This was a windfall, and there was
quite a contest, who should have the carpenter to walk with him.
As “Chips” was a man of some little education, and he and I had
had a good deal of intercourse with each other, he fell in with
me in my walk.  He was a Fin, but spoke English very well, and
gave me long accounts of his country;–the customs, the trade,
the towns, what little he knew of the government, (I found he was
no friend of Russia), his voyages, his first arrival in America,
his marriage and courtship;–he had married a countrywoman of his,
a dress-maker, whom he met with in Boston.  I had very little to
tell him of my quiet, sedentary life at home; and, in spite of
our best efforts, which had protracted these yarns through five
or six watches, we fairly talked one another out, and I turned
him over to another man in the watch, and put myself upon my
own resources.
I commenced a deliberate system of time-killing, which united
some profit with a cheering up of the heavy hours.  As soon
as I came on deck, and took my place and regular walk, I began
with repeating over to myself a string of matters which I had
in my memory, in regular order.  First, the multiplication table
and the tables of weights and measures; then the states of the
union, with their capitals; the counties of England, with their
shire towns; the kings of England in their order; and a large
part of the peerage, which I committed from an almanac that we
had on board; and then the Kanaka numerals.  This carried me
through my facts, and, being repeated deliberately, with long
intervals, often eked out the two first bells.  Then came the
ten commandments; the thirty-ninth chapter of Job, and a few
other passages from Scripture.  The next in the order, that I
never varied from, came Cowper’s Castaway, which was a great
favorite with me; the solemn measure and gloomy character of
which, as well as the incident that it was founded upon, made it
well suited to a lonely watch at sea.  Then his lines to Mary,
his address to the jackdaw, and a short extract from Table Talk;
(I abounded in Cowper, for I happened to have a volume of his
poems in my chest;) “Ille et nefasto” from Horace, and Goethe’s
Erl King.  After I had got through these, I allowed myself a more
general range among everything that I could remember, both in prose
and verse.  In this way, with an occasional break by relieving the
wheel, heaving the log, and going to the scuttle-butt for a drink
of water, the longest watch was passed away; and I was so regular
in my silent recitations, that if there was no interruption by
ship’s duty, I could tell very nearly the number of bells by my
progress.
Our watches below were no more varied than the watch on deck. 
All washing, sewing, and reading was given up; and we did nothing
but eat, sleep, and stand our watch, leading what might be called a
Cape Horn life.  The forecastle was too uncomfortable to sit up in;
and whenever we were below, we were in our berths.  To prevent the
rain, and the sea-water which broke over the bows, from washing down,
we were obliged to keep the scuttle closed, so that the forecastle
was nearly air-tight.  In this little, wet, leaky hole, we were all
quartered, in an atmosphere so bad that our lamp, which swung in
the middle from the beams, sometimes actually burned blue, with a
large circle of foul air about it.  Still I was never in better
health than after three weeks of this life.  I gained a great
deal of flesh, and we all ate like horses.  At every watch, when we
came below, before turning-in, the bread barge and beef kid were
overhauled.  Each man drank his quart of hot tea night and morning;
and glad enough we were to get it, for no nectar and ambrosia were
sweeter to the lazy immortals, than was a pot of hot tea, a hard
biscuit, and a slice of cold salt beef, to us after a watch on
deck.  To be sure, we were mere animals and had this life lasted
a year instead of a month we should have been little better than
the ropes in the ship.  Not a razor, nor a brush, nor a drop
of water, except the rain and the spray, had come near us all
the time; for we were on an allowance of fresh water; and who
would strip and wash himself in salt water on deck, in the snow
and ice, with the thermometer at zero?
After about eight days of constant easterly gales, the wind
hauled occasionally a little to the southward, and blew hard,
which, as we were well to the southward, allowed us to brace
in a little and stand on, under all the sail we could carry.
These turns lasted but a short while, and sooner or later it set
again from the old quarter; yet each time we made something,
and were gradually edging along to the eastward.  One night,
after one of these shifts of the wind, and when all hands had been
up a great part of the time, our watch was left on deck, with the
mainsail hanging in the buntlines, ready to be set if necessary.
It came on to blow worse and worse, with hail and snow beating
like so many furies upon the ship, it being as dark and thick as
night could make it.  The mainsail was blowing and slatting with
a noise like thunder, when the captain came on deck, and ordered
it to be furled.  The mate was about to call all hands, when the
captain stopped him, and said that the men would be beaten out if
they were called up so often; that as our watch must stay on deck,
it might as well be doing that as anything else.
Accordingly, we went upon the yard; and never shall I forget
that piece of work.  Our watch had been so reduced by sickness,
and by some having been left in California, that, with one man
at the wheel, we had only the third mate and three beside myself,
to go aloft; so that at most, we could only attempt to furl one
yard-arm at a time.  We manned the weather yard-arm, and set to
work to make a furl of it.  Our lower masts being short, and our
yards very square, the sail had a head of nearly fifty feet,
and a short leach, made still shorter by the deep reef which
was in it, which brought the clew away out on the quarters of
the yard, and made a bunt nearly as square as the mizen royal-
yard.  Beside this difficulty, the yard over which we lay was
cased with ice, the gaskets and rope of the foot and leach of
the sail as stiff and hard as a piece of suction-hose, and the
sail itself about as pliable as though it had been made of sheets
of sheathing copper.  It blew a perfect hurricane, with alternate
blasts of snow, hail, and rain.  We had to fist the sail with
bare hands.  No one could trust himself to mittens, for if he
slipped, he was a gone man.  All the boats were hoisted in on
deck, and there was nothing to be lowered for him.  We had need
of every finger God had given us.  Several times we got the sail
upon the yard, but it blew away again before we could secure it.
It required men to lie over the yard to pass each turn of the
gaskets, and when they were passed, it was almost impossible to
knot them so that they would hold.  Frequently we were obliged to
leave off altogether and take to beating our hands upon the sail,
to keep them from freezing.
After some time,–which seemed forever,–we got the weather side
stowed after a fashion, and went over to leeward for another trial. 
This was still worse, for the body of the sail had been blown over
to leeward, and as the yard was a-cock-bill by the lying over of
the vessel, we had to light it all up to windward.  When the yard-
arms were furled, the bunt was all adrift again, which made more
work for us.  We got all secure at last, but we had been nearly
an hour and a half upon the yard, and it seemed an age.  It just
struck five bells when we went up, and eight were struck soon after
we came down.  This may seem slow work, but considering the state
of everything, and that we had only five men to a sail with just
half as many square yards of canvas in it as the mainsail of the
Independence, sixty-gun ship, which musters seven hundred men at
her quarters, it is not wonderful that we were no quicker about it.
We were glad enough to get on deck, and still more, to go below.
The oldest sailor in the watch said, as he went down,–"I shall
never forget that main yard;–it beats all my going a fishing.
Fun is fun, but furling one yard-arm of a course, at a time,
off Cape Horn, is no better than man-killing.”
During the greater part of the next two days, the wind was pretty
steady from the southward.  We had evidently made great progress,
and had good hope of being soon up with the Cape, if we were not
there already.  We could put but little confidence in our reckoning,
as there had been no opportunities for an observation, and we had
drifted too much to allow of our dead reckoning being anywhere
near the mark.  If it would clear off enough to give a chance for
an observation, or if we could make land, we should know where we
were; and upon these, and the chances of falling in with a sail
from the eastward, we depended almost entirely.
Friday, July 22d.  This day we had a steady gale from the southward,
and stood on under close sail, with the yards eased a little by the
weather braces, the clouds lifting a little, and showing signs of
breaking away.  In the afternoon, I was below with Mr. H––-,
the third mate, and two others, filling the bread locker in the
steerage from the casks, when a bright gleam of sunshine broke
out and shone down the companion-way and through the skylight,
lighting up everything below, and sending a warm glow through the
heart of every one.  It was a sight we had not seen for weeks,–an
omen, a god-send.  Even the roughest and hardest face acknowledged
its influence.  Just at that moment we heard a loud shout from all
parts of the deck, and the mate called out down the companion-way to
the captain, who was sitting in the cabin.  What he said, we could
not distinguish, but the captain kicked over his chair, and was on
deck at one jump.  We could not tell what it was; and, anxious as
we were to know, the discipline of the ship would not allow of our
leaving our places.  Yet, as we were not called, we knew there was
no danger.  We hurried to get through with our job, when, seeing the
steward’s black face peering out of the pantry, Mr. H––- hailed
him, to know what was the matter.  “Lan’ o, to be sure, sir!  No
you hear ’em sing out, ’Lan’ o?’  De cap’em say ’im Cape Horn!”
This gave us a new start, and we were soon through our work,
and on deck; and there lay the land, fair upon the larboard
beam, and slowly edging away upon the quarter.  All hands were
busy looking at it–the captain and mates from the quarter-deck,
the cook from his galley, and the sailors from the forecastle;
and even Mr. N., the passenger, who had kept in his shell for
nearly a month, and hardly been seen by anybody, and who we had
almost forgotten was on board, came out like a butterfly, and was
hopping round as bright as a bird.
The land was the island of Staten Land, and, just to the eastward
of Cape Horn; and a more desolate-looking spot I never wish to set
eyes upon;–bare, broken, and girt with rocks and ice, with here
and there, between the rocks and broken hillocks, a little stunted
vegetation of shrubs.  It was a place well suited to stand at the
junction of the two oceans, beyond the reach of human cultivation,
and encounter the blasts and snows of a perpetual winter.  Yet,
dismal as it was, it was a pleasant sight to us; not only as being
the first land we had seen, but because it told us that we had
passed the Cape,–were in the Atlantic,–and that, with twenty-
four hours of this breeze, might bid defiance to the Southern
Ocean.  It told us, too, our latitude and longitude better than
any observation; and the captain now knew where we were, as well
as if we were off the end of Long wharf.
In the general joy, Mr. N. said he should like to go ashore upon
the island and examine a spot which probably no human being had
ever set foot upon; but the captain intimated that he would see the
island–specimens and all,–in–another place, before he would get
out a boat or delay the ship one moment for him. 
We left the land gradually astern; and at sundown had the
Atlantic Ocean clear before us.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
