


Here was a change in my life as complete as it had been sudden.
In the twinkling of an eye, I was transformed from a sailor into a
“beach-comber” and a hide-curer; yet the novelty and the comparative
independence of the life were not unpleasant.  Our hide-house was a
large building, made of rough boards, and intended to hold forty
thousand hides.  In one corner of it, a small room was parted off,
in which four berths were made, where we were to live, with mother
earth for our floor.  It contained a table, a small locker for pots,
spoons, plates, etc., and a small hole cut to let in the light.
Here we put our chests, threw our bedding into the berths, and took
up our quarters.  Over our head was another small room, in which
Mr. Russell lived, who had charge of the hide-house; the same man
who was for a time an officer of the Pilgrim.  There he lived in
solitary grandeur; eating and sleeping alone, (and these were his
principal occupations,) and communing with his own dignity.
The boy was to act as cook; while myself, a giant of a Frenchman
named Nicholas, and four Sandwich Islanders, were to cure the hides.
Sam, the Frenchman, and myself, lived together in the room, and the
four Sandwich Islanders worked and ate with us, but generally slept
at the oven.  My new messmate, Nicholas, was the most immense man
that I had ever seen in my life.  He came on the coast in a vessel
which was afterwards wrecked, and now let himself out to the
different houses to cure hides.  He was considerably over six
feet, and of a frame so large that he might have been shown
for a curiosity.  But the most remarkable thing about him was his
feet.  They were so large that he could not find a pair of shoes
in California to fit him, and was obliged to send to Oahu for a
pair; and when he got them, he was compelled to wear them down at
the heel.  He told me once, himself, that he was wrecked in an
American brig on the Goodwin Sands, and was sent up to London,
to the charge of the American consul, without clothing to his
back or shoes to his feet, and was obliged to go about London
streets in his stocking feet three or four days, in the month
of January, until the consul could have a pair of shoes made
for him.  His strength was in proportion to his size, and his
ignorance to his strength–"strong as an ox, and ignorant as
strong.”  He neither knew how to read nor write.  He had been
to sea from a boy, and had seen all kinds of service, and been
in every kind of vessel: merchantmen, men-of-war, privateers,
and slavers; and from what I could gather from his accounts of
himself, and from what he once told me, in confidence, after we
had become better acquainted, he had even been in worse business
than slave-trading.  He was once tried for his life in Charleston,
South Carolina, and though acquitted, yet he was so frightened that
he never would show himself in the United States again; and I could
not persuade him that he could never be tried a second time for the
same offence.  He said he had got safe off from the breakers, and was
too good a sailor to risk his timbers again.
Though I knew what his life had been, yet I never had the slightest
fear of him.  We always got along very well together, and, though
so much stronger and larger than I, he showed a respect for
my education, and for what he had heard of my situation before
coming to sea.  “I’ll be good friends with you,” he used to say,
“for by-and-by you’ll come out here captain, and then you’ll haze me
well!”  By holding well together, we kept the officer in good order,
for he was evidently afraid of Nicholas, and never ordered us,
except when employed upon the hides.  My other companions,
the Sandwich Islanders, deserve particular notice.
A considerable trade has been carried on for several years between
California and the Sandwich Islands, and most of the vessels are
manned with Islanders; who, as they, for the most part, sign no
articles, leave whenever they choose, and let themselves out to
cure hides at San Diego, and to supply the places of the men of the
American vessels while on the coast.  In this way, quite a colony
of them had become settled at San Diego, as their headquarters.
Some of these had recently gone off in the Ayacucho and Loriotte,
and the Pilgrim had taken Mr. Mannini and three others, so that
there were not more than twenty left.   Of these, four were on pay
at the Ayacucho’s house, four more working with us, and the rest
were living at the oven in a quiet way; for their money was nearly
gone, and they must make it last until some other vessel came down
to employ them.
During the four months that I lived here, I got well acquainted
with all of them, and took the greatest pains to become familiar
with their language, habits, and characters.  Their language,
I could only learn, orally, for they had not any books among them,
though many of them had been taught to read and write by the
missionaries at home.  They spoke a little English, and by a sort
of compromise, a mixed language was used on the beach, which could be
understood by all.  The long name of Sandwich Islanders is dropped,
and they are called by the whites, all over the Pacific ocean,
“Kanákas,” from a word in their own language which they apply to
themselves, and to all South Sea Islanders, in distinction from
whites, whom they call “Haole.”  This name, “Kanaka,” they answer to,
both collectively and individually.  Their proper names, in their
own language, being difficult to pronounce and remember, they are
called by any names which the captains or crews may choose to
give them.  Some are called after the vessel they are in; others
by common names, as Jack, Tom, Bill; and some have fancy names,
as Ban-yan, Fore-top, Rope-yarn, Pelican, etc., etc.  Of the four
who worked at our house one was named “Mr. Bingham,” after the
missionary at Oahu; another, Hope, after a vessel that he had been
in; a third, Tom Davis, the name of his first captain; and the fourth,
Pelican, from his fancied resemblance to that bird.  Then there was
Lagoda-Jack, California-Bill, etc., etc.  But by whatever names
they might be called, they were the most interesting, intelligent,
and kind-hearted people that I ever fell in with.  I felt a positive
attachment for almost all of them; and many of them I have, to this
time, a feeling for, which would lead me to go a great way for the
mere pleasure of seeing them, and which will always make me feel a
strong interest in the mere name of a Sandwich Islander.
Tom Davis knew how to read, write, and cipher in common arithmetic;
had been to the United States, and spoke English quite well.
His education was as good as that of three-quarters of the Yankees
in California, and his manners and principles a good deal better,
and he was so quick of apprehension that he might have been taught
navigation, and the elements of many of the sciences, with the most
perfect ease.  Old “Mr. Bingham” spoke very little English–almost
none, and neither knew how to read nor write; but he was the
best-hearted old fellow in the world.  He must have been over fifty
years of age, and had two of his front teeth knocked out, which was
done by his parents as a sign of grief at the death of Kamehameha,
the great king of the Sandwich Islands.  We used to tell him that he
ate Captain Cook, and lost his teeth in that way.  That was the only
thing that ever made him angry.  He would always be quite excited
at that; and say–"Aole!” (no.)  “Me no eat Captain Cook!  Me
pikinini–small–so high–no more!  My father see Captain Cook!
Me–no!”  None of them liked to have anything said about Captain
Cook, for the sailors all believe that he was eaten, and that,
they cannot endure to be taunted with.–"New Zealand Kanaka eat
white man;–Sandwich Island Kanaka–no.  Sandwich Island Kanaka
ua like pu na haole–all ’e same a’ you!”
Mr. Bingham was a sort of patriarch among them, and was always
treated with great respect, though he had not the education and energy
which gave Mr. Mannini his power over them.  I have spent hours in
talking with this old fellow about Kamehameha, the Charlemagne
of the Sandwich Islands; his son and successor Riho Riho, who died
in England, and was brought to Oahu in the frigate Blonde, Captain
Lord Byron, and whose funeral he remembered perfectly; and also
about the customs of his country in his boyhood, and the changes
which had been made by the missionaries.  He never would allow that
human beings had been eaten there; and, indeed, it always seemed
like an insult to tell so affectionate, intelligent, and civilized
a class of men, that such barbarities had been practised in their
own country within the recollection of many of them.  Certainly,
the history of no people on the globe can show anything like so
rapid an advance.  I would have trusted my life and my fortune in
the hands of any one of these people; and certainly had I wished
for a favor or act of sacrifice, I would have gone to them all,
in turn, before I should have applied to one of my own countrymen
on the coast, and should have expected to have seen it done,
before my own countrymen had got half through counting the cost.
Their costumes, and manner of treating one another, show a simple,
primitive generosity, which is truly delightful; and which is often
a reproach to our own people.  Whatever one has, they all have.
Money, food, clothes, they share with one another; even to the
last piece of tobacco to put in their pipes.  I once heard old
Mr. Bingham say, with the highest indignation, to a Yankee trader
who was trying to persuade him to keep his money to himself–"No!
We no all ’e same a’ you!–Suppose one got money, all got money.
You;–suppose one got money–lock him up in chest.–No good!"–
“Kanaka all ’e same a’ one!”  This principle they carry so far,
that none of them will eat anything in the sight of others without
offering it all round.  I have seen one of them break a biscuit,
which had been given him, into five parts, at a time when I knew
he was on a very short allowance, as there was but little to eat
on the beach.
My favorite among all of them, and one who was liked by both officers
and men, and by whomever he had anything to do with, was Hope.
He was an intelligent, kind-hearted little fellow, and I never
saw him angry, though I knew him for more than a year, and have
seen him imposed upon by white people, and abused by insolent
officers of vessels.  He was always civil, and always ready,
and never forgot a benefit.  I once took care of him when he was ill,
getting medicines from the ship’s chests, when no captain or officer
would do anything for him, and he never forgot it.  Every Kanaka has
one particular friend, whom he considers himself bound to do
everything for, and with whom he has a sort of contract,–an
alliance offensive and defensive,–and for whom he will often make
the greatest sacrifices.  This friend they call aikane; and for such
did Hope adopt me.  I do not believe I could have wanted anything
which he had, that he would not have given me.  In return for this,
I was always his friend among the Americans, and used to teach
him letters and numbers; for he left home before he had learned
how to read.  He was very curious about Boston (as they call the
United States); asking many questions about the houses, the people,
etc., and always wished to have the pictures in books explained to
him.  They were all astonishingly quick in catching at explanations,
and many things which I had thought it utterly impossible to make
them understand, they often seized in an instant, and asked
questions which showed that they knew enough to make them wish to
go farther.  The pictures of steamboats and railroad cars, in the
columns of some newspapers which I had, gave me great difficulty
to explain.  The grading of the road, the rails, the construction of
the carriages, they could easily understand, but the motion produced
by steam was a little too refined for them.  I attempted to show it
to them once by an experiment upon the cook’s coppers, but failed;
probably as much from my own ignorance as from their want of
apprehension; and, I have no doubt, left them with about as clear
an idea of the principle as I had myself.  This difficulty, of course,
existed in the same force with the steamboats and all I could do was
to give them some account of the results, in the shape of speed; for,
failing in the reason, I had to fall back upon the fact.  In my account
of the speed I was supported by Tom, who had been to Nantucket,
and seen a little steamboat which ran over to New Bedford.
A map of the world, which I once showed them, kept their attention
for hours; those who knew how to read pointing out the places
and referring to me for the distances.  I remember being much
amused with a question which Hope asked me.  Pointing to the large
irregular place which is always left blank round the poles, to
denote that it is undiscovered, he looked up and asked.–"Pau?"
(Done? ended?)
The system of naming the streets and numbering the houses, they
easily understood, and the utility of it.  They had a great desire to
see America, but were afraid of doubling Cape Horn, for they suffer
much in cold weather, and had heard dreadful accounts of the Cape,
from those of their number who had been round it.
They smoke a great deal, though not much at a time; using pipes
with large bowls, and very short stems, or no stems at all.  These,
they light, and putting them to their mouths, take a long draught,
getting their mouths as full as they can hold, and their cheeks
distended, and then let it slowly out through their mouths and nostrils.
The pipe is then passed to others, who draw, in the same manner,
one pipe-full serving for half a dozen.  They never take short,
continuous draughts, like Europeans, but one of these “Oahu puffs,"
as the sailors call them, serves for an hour or two, until some one
else lights his pipe, and it is passed round in the same manner.
Each Kanaka on the beach had a pipe, flint, steel, tinder, a hand
of tobacco, and a jack-knife, which he always carried about with him.
That which strikes a stranger most peculiarly is their style of
singing.  They run on, in a low, guttural, monotonous sort of chant,
their lips and tongues seeming hardly to move, and the sounds modulated
solely in the throat.  There is very little tune to it, and the
words, so far as I could learn, are extempore.  They sing about
persons and things which are around them, and adopt this method
when they do not wish to be understood by any but themselves;
and it is very effectual, for with the most careful attention I never
could detect a word that I knew.  I have often heard Mr. Mannini,
who was the most noted improvisatore among them, sing for an hour
together, when at work in the midst of Americans and Englishmen;
and, by the occasional shouts and laughter of the Kanakas,
who were at a distance, it was evident that he was singing about
the different men that he was at work with.  They have great powers
of ridicule, and are excellent mimics; many of them discovering and
imitating the peculiarities of our own people, before we had seen
them ourselves.
These were the people with whom I was to spend a few months;
and who, with the exception of the officer, Nicholas the Frenchman,
and the boy, made the whole population of the beach.  I ought,
perhaps, to except the dogs, for they were an important part of our
settlement.  Some of the first vessels brought dogs out with them,
who, for convenience, were left ashore, and there multiplied,
until they came to be a great people.  While I was on the beach,
the average number was about forty, and probably an equal, or
greater number are drowned, or killed in some other way, every year.
They are very useful in guarding the beach, the Indians being afraid
to come down at night; for it was impossible for any one to get within
half a mile of the hide-houses without a general alarm.  The father
of the colony, old Sachem, so called from the ship in which he was
brought out, died while I was there, full of years, and was honorably
buried.  Hogs, and a few chickens, were the rest of the animal tribe,
and formed, like the dogs, a common company, though they were all
known and marked, and usually fed at the houses to which they
belonged.
I had been but a few hours on the beach, and the Pilgrim was
hardly out of sight, when the cry of “Sail ho!” was raised, and a
small hermaphrodite brig rounded the point, bore up into the harbor,
and came to anchor.  It was the Mexican brig Fazio, which we
had left at San Pedro, and which had come down to land her tallow,
try it all over, and make new bags, and then take it in, and leave the
coast.  They moored ship, erected their try-works on shore, put up
a small tent, in which they all lived, and commenced operations.
They made an addition to our society, and we spent many evenings in
their tent, where, amid the Babel of English, Spanish, French, Indian,
and Kanaka, we found some words that we could understand in common.
The morning after my landing, I began the duties of hide-curing.
In order to understand these, it will be necessary to give the whole
history of a hide, from the time it is taken from a bullock until it
is put on board the vessel to be carried to Boston.  When the hide
is taken from the bullock, holes are cut round it, near the edge,
by which it is staked out to dry.  In this manner it dries without
shrinking.  After they are thus dried in the sun, they are received by
the vessels, and brought down to the depot at San Diego.  The vessels
land them, and leave them in large piles near the houses.
Then begins the hide-curer’s duty.  The first thing is to put them
in soak.  This is done by carrying them down at low tide, and making
them fast, in small piles, by ropes, and letting the tide come up
and cover them.  Every day we put in soak twenty-five for each
man, which, with us, made an hundred and fifty.  There they
lie forty-eight hours, when they are taken out, and rolled up,
in wheelbarrows, and thrown into the vats.  These vats contain brine,
made very strong; being sea-water, with great quantities of salt thrown
in.  This pickles the hides, and in this they lie forty-eight hours;
the use of the sea-water, into which they are first put, being merely
to soften and clean them.  From these vats, they are taken, and lie on
a platform twenty-four hours, and then are spread upon the ground,
and carefully stretched and staked out, so that they may dry smooth.
After they were staked, and while yet wet and soft, we used to go
upon them with our knives, and carefully cut off all the bad parts:–
the pieces of meat and fat, which would corrupt and infect the whole
if stowed away in a vessel for many months, the large flippers,
the ears, and all other parts which would prevent close stowage.
This was the most difficult part of our duty: as it required much
skill to take everything necessary off and not to cut or injure the hide.
It was also a long process, as six of us had to clean an hundred and
fifty, most of which required a great deal to be done to them, as the
Spaniards are very careless in skinning their cattle.  Then, too,
as we cleaned them while they were staked out, we were obliged to
kneel down upon them, which always gives beginners the back-ache.
The first day, I was so slow and awkward that I cleaned only eight;
at the end of a few days I doubled my number; and in a fortnight or
three weeks, could keep up with the others, and clean my proportion
–twenty-five.
This cleaning must be got through with before noon; for by that
time they get too dry.  After the sun has been upon them a few
hours, they are carefully gone over with scrapers, to get off all the
grease which the sun brings out.  This being done, the stakes are
pulled up, and the hides carefully doubled, with the hair side out,
and left to dry.  About the middle of the afternoon they are turned
upon the other side, and at sundown piled up and covered over.
The next day they are spread out and opened again, and at night,
if fully dry, are thrown upon a long, horizontal pole, five at
a time, and beat with flails.  This takes all the dust from them.
Then, being salted, scraped, cleaned, dried, and beaten, they are
stowed away in the house.  Here ends their history, except that
they are taken out again when the vessel is ready to go home, beaten,
stowed away on board, carried to Boston, tanned, made into shoes and
other articles for which leather is used; and many of them, very probably,
in the end, brought back again to California in the shape of shoes,
and worn out in pursuit of other bullocks, or in the curing of
other hides.
By putting an hundred and fifty in soak every day, we had the
same number at each stage of curing, on each day; so that we had,
every day, the same work to do upon the same number: an hundred
and fifty to put in soak; an hundred and fifty to wash out and put
in the vat; the same number to haul from the vat and put on the
platform to drain; the same number to spread and stake out and
clean; and the same number to beat and stow away in the home.
I ought to except Sunday; for, by a prescription which no captain
or agent has yet ventured to break in upon, Sunday has been a day
of leisure on the beach for years.  On Saturday night, the hides,
in every stage of progress, are carefully covered up, and not
uncovered until Monday morning.  On Sundays we had absolutely
no work to do, unless it was to kill a bullock, which was sent
down for our use about once a week, and sometimes came on Sunday.
Another good arrangement was, that we had just so much work to do,
and when that was through, the time was our own.  Knowing this,
we worked hard, and needed no driving.  We “turned out” every
morning at the first signs of daylight, and allowing a short time,
about eight o’clock, for breakfast, generally got through our labor
between one and two o’clock, when we dined, and had the rest of the
time to ourselves; until just before sundown, when we beat the dry
hides and put them in the house, and covered over all the others.
By this means we had about three hours to ourselves every afternoon;
and at sundown we had our supper, and our work was done for the day.
There was no watch to stand, and no topsails to reef.  The evenings
we generally spent at one another’s houses, and I often went up and
spent an hour or so at the oven; which was called the “Kanaka Hotel,"
and the “Oahu Coffee-house.”  Immediately after dinner we usually
took a short siésta to make up for our early rising, and spent the
rest of the afternoon according to our own fancies.  I generally
read, wrote, and made or mended clothes; for necessity, the mother
of invention, had taught me these two latter arts.  The Kanakas went
up to the oven, and spent the time in sleeping, talking, and smoking;
and my messmate, Nicholas, who neither knew how to read or write,
passed away the time by a long siésta, two or three smokes with
his pipe, and a paséo to the other houses.  This leisure time is
never interfered with, for the captains know that the men earn it
by working hard and fast, and that if they interfered with it,
the men could easily make their twenty-five hides apiece last
through the day.  We were pretty independent, too, for the master
of the house–"capitan de la casa"– had nothing to say to us,
except when we were at work on the hides, and although we could
not go up to the town without his permission, this was seldom or
never refused.
The great weight of the wet hides, which we were obliged to roll
about in wheelbarrows; the continual stooping upon those which
were pegged out to be cleaned; and the smell of the vats, into which
we were often obliged to get, knee-deep, to press down the hides;
all made the work disagreeable and fatiguing;–but we soon got
hardened to it, and the comparative independence of our life
reconciled us to it; for there was nobody to haze us and find fault;
and when we got through, we had only to wash and change our clothes,
and our time was our own.  There was, however, one exception to the
time’s being our own; which was, that on two afternoons of every
week we were obliged to go off and get wood, for the cook to use
in the galley.  Wood is very scarce in the vicinity of San Diego;
there being no trees of any size, for miles.  In the town,
the inhabitants burn the small wood which grows in thickets,
and for which they send out Indians, in large numbers, every few days.
Fortunately, the climate is so fine that they had no need of a fire in
their houses, and only use it for cooking.  With us the getting of
wood was a great trouble; for all that in the vicinity of the houses
had been cut down, and we were obliged to go off a mile or two,
and to carry it some distance on our backs, as we could not get the
hand-cart up the hills and over the uneven places.  Two afternoons
in the week, generally Monday and Thursday, as soon as we had got
through dinner, we started off for the bush, each of us furnished
with a hatchet and a long piece of rope, and dragging the hand-cart
behind us, and followed by the whole colony of dogs, who were
always ready for the bush, and were half mad whenever they saw
our preparations.  We went with the hand-cart as far as we could
conveniently drag it, and leaving it in an open, conspicuous place,
separated ourselves; each taking his own course, and looking about
for some good place to begin upon.  Frequently, we had to go nearly
a mile from the hand-cart before we could find any fit place.
Having lighted upon a good thicket, the next thing was to clear
away the under-brush, and have fair play at the trees.  These trees
are seldom more than five or six feet high, and the highest that I
ever saw in these expeditions could not have been more than twelve;
so that, with lopping off the branches and clearing away the underwood,
we had a good deal of cutting to do for a very little wood.  Having cut
enough for a “back-load,” the next thing was to make it well fast
with the rope, and heaving the bundle upon our backs, and taking
the hatchet in hand, to walk off, up hill and down dale, to the
hand-cart.  Two good back-loads apiece filled the hand-cart;
and that was each one’s proportion.  When each had brought down
his second load, we filled the hand-cart, and took our way again
slowly back, and unloading, covering the hides for the night,
and getting our supper, finished the day’s work.
These wooding excursions had always a mixture of something
rather pleasant in them.  Roaming about in the woods with hatchet
in hand, like a backwoodsman, followed by a troop of dogs; starting
up of birds, snakes, hares and foxes, and examining the various kinds
of trees, flowers, and birds’ nests, was at least, a change from
the monotonous drag and pull on shipboard.  Frequently, too,
we had some amusement and adventure.  The coati, of which I have
before spoken,–a sort of mixture of the fox and wolf breeds,–fierce
little animals, with bushy tails and large heads, and a quick, sharp
bark, abound here, as in all other parts of California.  These,
the dogs were very watchful for, and whenever they saw them,
started off in full run after them.  We had many fine chases;
yet, although our dogs ran finely, the rascals generally escaped.
They are a match for the dog,–-one to one,–but as the dogs
generally went in squads, there was seldom a fair fight.  A smaller
dog, belonging to us, once attacked a coati, single, and got a good
deal worsted, and might perhaps have been killed had we not come to
his assistance.  We had, however, one dog which gave them a good
deal of trouble, and many hard runs.  He was a fine, tall fellow,
and united strength and agility better than any dog that I have
ever seen.  He was born at the Islands, his father being an English
mastiff, and his mother a greyhound.  He had the high head, long legs,
narrow body, and springing gait of the latter, and the heavy jaw,
thick jowls, and strong fore-quarters of the mastiff.  When he was
brought to San Diego, an English sailor said that he looked,
about the face, precisely like the Duke of Wellington, whom he had
once seen at the Tower; and, indeed, there was something about him
which resembled the portraits of the Duke.  From this time he was
christened “Welly,” and became the favorite and bully of the beach.
He always led the dogs by several yards in the chase, and had killed
two coati at different times in single combats.  We often had fine
sport with these fellows.  A quick, sharp bark from a coati, and in
an instant every dog was at the height of his speed.  A few moments
made up for an unfair start, and gave each dog his relative place.
Welly, at the head, seemed almost to skim over the bushes; and after
him came Fanny, Feliciana, Childers, and the other fleet ones,–
the spaniels and terriers; and then behind, followed the heavy
corps–bulldogs, etc., for we had every breed.  Pursuit by us was
in vain, and in about half an hour a few of them would come panting
and straggling back.
Beside the coati, the dogs sometimes made prizes of rabbits and
hares, which are very plentiful here, and great numbers of which
we often shot for our dinners.  There was another animal that I
was not so much disposed to find amusement from, and that was the
rattlesnake.  These are very abundant here, especially during the
spring of the year.  The latter part of the time that I was on shore,
I did not meet with so many, but for the first two months we seldom
went into “the bush” without one of our number starting some of them.
The first that I ever saw, I remember perfectly well.  I had left my
companions, and was beginning to clear away a fine clump of trees,
when just in the midst of the thicket, not more than eight yards from
me, one of these fellows set up his hiss.  It is a sharp, continuous
sound, and resembles very much the letting off of the steam from
the small pipe of a steamboat, except that it is on a smaller scale.
I knew, by the sound of an axe, that one of my companions was near,
and called out to him, to let him know what I had fallen upon.
He took it very lightly, and as he seemed inclined to laugh at me for
being afraid, I determined to keep my place.  I knew that so long
as I could hear the rattle, I was safe, for these snakes never make
a noise when they are in motion.  Accordingly, I kept at my work,
and the noise which I made with cutting and breaking the trees kept
him in alarm; so that I had the rattle to show me his whereabouts.
Once or twice the noise stopped for a short time, which gave me a
little uneasiness, and retreating a few steps, I threw something
into the bush, at which he would set his rattle agoing; and finding
that he had not moved from his first place, I was easy again.
In this way I continued at my work until I had cut a full load,
never suffering him to be quiet for a moment.  Having cut my load,
I strapped it together, and got everything ready for starting. 
I felt that I could now call the others without the imputation of
being afraid; and went in search of them.  In a few minutes we
were all collected, and began an attack upon the bush.  The big
Frenchman, who was the one that I had called to at first, I found
as little inclined to approach the snake as I had been.  The dogs,
too, seemed afraid of the rattle, and kept up a barking at a safe
distance; but the Kanakas showed no fear, and getting long sticks,
went into the bush, and keeping a bright look-out, stood within a
few feet of him.  One or two blows struck near him, and a few stones
thrown, started him, and we lost his track, and had the pleasant
consciousness that he might be directly under our feet.  By throwing
stones and chips in different directions, we made him spring his
rattle again, and began another attack.  This time we drove him
into the clear ground, and saw him gliding off, with head and tail
erect, when a stone, well aimed, knocked him over the bank, down a
declivity of fifteen or twenty feet, and stretched him at his length.
Having made sure of him, by a few more stones, we went down, and one
of the Kanakas cut off his rattle.  These rattles vary in number it
is said, according to the age of the snake; though the Indians think
they indicate the number of creatures they have killed.  We always
preserved them as trophies, and at the end of the summer had quite
a number.  None of our people were ever bitten by them, but one of
our dogs died of a bite, and another was supposed to have been bitten,
but recovered.  We had no remedy for the bite, though it was said that
the Indians of the country had, and the Kanakas professed to have an
herb which would cure it, but it was fortunately never brought to the test.
Hares and rabbits, as I said before, were abundant, and, during the
winter months, the waters are covered with wild ducks and geese.
Crows, too, were very numerous, and frequently alighted in great
numbers upon our hides, picking at the pieces of dried meat and fat.
Bears and wolves are numerous in the upper parts, and in the interior,
(and, indeed, a man was killed by a bear within a few miles of
San Pedro, while we were there,) but there were none in our
immediate neighborhood.  The only other animals were horses.
Over a dozen of these were owned by different people on the beach,
and were allowed to run loose among the hills, with a long lasso
attached to them, and pick up feed wherever they could find it.
We were sure of seeing them once a day, for there was no water
among the hills, and they were obliged to come down to the well
which had been dug upon the beach.  These horses were bought at,
from two, to six and eight dollars apiece, and were held very much
as common property.  We generally kept one fast to one of the houses
every day, so that we could mount him and catch any of the others.
Some of them were really fine animals, and gave us many good runs
up to the Presidio and over the country.
Continue...

This eBook of “Two Years Before the Mast” (A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea/ With an introduction and notes by Homer Eaton Keyes, B.L.,  Assistant Professor of Art in Dartmouth College) by Richard Henry Dana belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Richard Henry Dana Jr.: Two Years Before the Mast and Other Voyages (Library of America)By Richard Henry Dana Jr.At Amazon
