


Lifted.
–It is this hour of a day in mid June, Stephen said, begging with a
swift glance their hearing. The flag is up on the playhouse by the
bankside. The bear Sackerson growls in the pit near it, Paris garden.
Canvasclimbers who sailed with Drake chew their sausages among the
groundlings.
Local colour. Work in all you know. Make them accomplices.
–Shakespeare has left the huguenot’s house in Silver street and walks by
the swanmews along the riverbank. But he does not stay to feed the pen
chivying her game of cygnets towards the rushes. The swan of Avon has
other thoughts.
Composition of place. Ignatius Loyola, make haste to help me!
–The play begins. A player comes on under the shadow, made up in the
castoff mail of a court buck, a wellset man with a bass voice. It is the
ghost, the king, a king and no king, and the player is Shakespeare who
has studied HAMLET all the years of his life which were not vanity in
order to play the part of the spectre. He speaks the words to Burbage,
the young player who stands before him beyond the rack of cerecloth,
calling him by a name:
    Hamlet, I Am Thy Father’s Spirit,
bidding him list. To a son he speaks, the son of his soul, the prince,
young Hamlet and to the son of his body, Hamnet Shakespeare, who has died
in Stratford that his namesake may live for ever.
Is it possible that that player Shakespeare, a ghost by absence, and in
the vesture of buried Denmark, a ghost by death, speaking his own words
to his own son’s name (had Hamnet Shakespeare lived he would have been
prince Hamlet’s twin), is it possible, I want to know, or probable that
he did not draw or foresee the logical conclusion of those premises: you
are the dispossessed son: I am the murdered father: your mother is the
guilty queen, Ann Shakespeare, born Hathaway?
–But this prying into the family life of a great man, Russell began
impatiently.
Art thou there, truepenny?
–Interesting only to the parish clerk. I mean, we have the plays. I mean
when we read the poetry of KING LEAR what is it to us how the poet lived?
As for living our servants can do that for us, Villiers de l’Isle has
said. Peeping and prying into greenroom gossip of the day, the poet’s
drinking, the poet’s debts. We have KING LEAR: and it is immortal.
Mr Best’s face, appealed to, agreed.
    FLOW OVER THEM WITH YOUR WAVES AND WITH YOUR WATERS, MANANAAN,
    MANANAAN MACLIR ...
How now, sirrah, that pound he lent you when you were hungry?
Marry, I wanted it.
Take thou this noble.
Go to! You spent most of it in Georgina Johnson’s bed, clergyman’s
daughter. Agenbite of inwit.
Do you intend to pay it back?
O, yes.
When? Now?
Well ... No.
When, then?
I paid my way. I paid my way.
Steady on. He’s from beyant Boyne water. The northeast corner. You owe
it.
Wait. Five months. Molecules all change. I am other I now. Other I got
pound.
Buzz. Buzz.
But I, entelechy, form of forms, am I by memory because under
everchanging forms.
I that sinned and prayed and fasted.
A child Conmee saved from pandies.
I, I and I. I.
A.e.i.o.u.
–Do you mean to fly in the face of the tradition of three centuries?
John Eglinton’s carping voice asked. Her ghost at least has been laid for
ever. She died, for literature at least, before she was born.
–She died, Stephen retorted, sixtyseven years after she was born. She
saw him into and out of the world. She took his first embraces. She bore
his children and she laid pennies on his eyes to keep his eyelids closed
when he lay on his deathbed.
Mother’s deathbed. Candle. The sheeted mirror. Who brought me into this
world lies there, bronzelidded, under few cheap flowers. LILIATA
RUTILANTIUM.
I wept alone.
John Eglinton looked in the tangled glowworm of his lamp.
–The world believes that Shakespeare made a mistake, he said, and got
out of it as quickly and as best he could.
–Bosh! Stephen said rudely. A man of genius makes no mistakes. His
errors are volitional and are the portals of discovery.
Portals of discovery opened to let in the quaker librarian,
softcreakfooted, bald, eared and assiduous.
–A shrew, John Eglinton said shrewdly, is not a useful portal of
discovery, one should imagine. What useful discovery did Socrates learn
from Xanthippe?
–Dialectic, Stephen answered: and from his mother how to bring thoughts
into the world. What he learnt from his other wife Myrto (ABSIT NOMEN!),
Socratididion’s Epipsychidion, no man, not a woman, will ever know. But
neither the midwife’s lore nor the caudlelectures saved him from the
archons of Sinn Fein and their naggin of hemlock.
–But Ann Hathaway? Mr Best’s quiet voice said forgetfully. Yes, we seem
to be forgetting her as Shakespeare himself forgot her.
His look went from brooder’s beard to carper’s skull, to remind, to chide
them not unkindly, then to the baldpink lollard costard, guiltless though
maligned.
–He had a good groatsworth of wit, Stephen said, and no truant memory.
He carried a memory in his wallet as he trudged to Romeville whistling
THE GIRL I LEFT BEHIND ME. If the earthquake did not time it we should
know where to place poor Wat, sitting in his form, the cry of hounds, the
studded bridle and her blue windows. That memory, VENUS AND ADONIS, lay
in the bedchamber of every light-of-love in London. Is Katharine the
shrew illfavoured? Hortensio calls her young and beautiful. Do you think
the writer of ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA, a passionate pilgrim, had his eyes in
the back of his head that he chose the ugliest doxy in all Warwickshire
to lie withal? Good: he left her and gained the world of men. But his
boywomen are the women of a boy. Their life, thought, speech are lent
them by males. He chose badly? He was chosen, it seems to me. If others
have their will Ann hath a way. By cock, she was to blame. She put the
comether on him, sweet and twentysix. The greyeyed goddess who bends over
the boy Adonis, stooping to conquer, as prologue to the swelling act, is
a boldfaced Stratford wench who tumbles in a cornfield a lover younger
than herself.
And my turn? When?
Come!
–Ryefield, Mr Best said brightly, gladly, raising his new book, gladly,
brightly.
He murmured then with blond delight for all:
    BETWEEN THE ACRES OF THE RYE
    THESE PRETTY COUNTRYFOLK WOULD LIE.
Paris: the wellpleased pleaser.
A tall figure in bearded homespun rose from shadow and unveiled its
cooperative watch.
–I am afraid I am due at the HOMESTEAD.
Whither away? Exploitable ground.
–Are you going? John Eglinton’s active eyebrows asked. Shall we see you
at Moore’s tonight? Piper is coming.
–Piper! Mr Best piped. Is Piper back?
Peter Piper pecked a peck of pick of peck of pickled pepper.
–I don’t know if I can. Thursday. We have our meeting. If I can get away
in time.
Yogibogeybox in Dawson chambers. ISIS UNVEILED. Their Pali book we tried
to pawn. Crosslegged under an umbrel umbershoot he thrones an Aztec
logos, functioning on astral levels, their oversoul, mahamahatma. The
faithful hermetists await the light, ripe for chelaship, ringroundabout
him. Louis H. Victory. T. Caulfield Irwin. Lotus ladies tend them i’the
eyes, their pineal glands aglow. Filled with his god, he thrones, Buddh
under plantain. Gulfer of souls, engulfer. Hesouls, shesouls, shoals of
souls. Engulfed with wailing creecries, whirled, whirling, they bewail.
    IN QUINTESSENTIAL TRIVIALITY
    FOR YEARS IN THIS FLESHCASE A SHESOUL DWELT.
–They say we are to have a literary surprise, the quaker librarian said,
friendly and earnest. Mr Russell, rumour has it, is gathering together a
sheaf of our younger poets’ verses. We are all looking forward anxiously.
Anxiously he glanced in the cone of lamplight where three faces, lighted,
shone.
See this. Remember.
Stephen looked down on a wide headless caubeen, hung on his
ashplanthandle over his knee. My casque and sword. Touch lightly with two
index fingers. Aristotle’s experiment. One or two? Necessity is that in
virtue of which it is impossible that one can be otherwise. Argal, one
hat is one hat.
Listen.
Young Colum and Starkey. George Roberts is doing the commercial part.
Longworth will give it a good puff in the EXPRESS. O, will he? I liked
Colum’s DROVER. Yes, I think he has that queer thing genius. Do you think
he has genius really? Yeats admired his line: AS IN WILD EARTH A GRECIAN
VASE. Did he? I hope you’ll be able to come tonight. Malachi Mulligan is
coming too. Moore asked him to bring Haines. Did you hear Miss Mitchell’s
joke about Moore and Martyn? That Moore is Martyn’s wild oats? Awfully
clever, isn’t it? They remind one of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. Our
national epic has yet to be written, Dr Sigerson says. Moore is the man
for it. A knight of the rueful countenance here in Dublin. With a saffron
kilt? O’Neill Russell? O, yes, he must speak the grand old tongue. And
his Dulcinea? James Stephens is doing some clever sketches. We are
becoming important, it seems.
Cordelia. CORDOGLIO. Lir’s loneliest daughter.
Nookshotten. Now your best French polish.
–Thank you very much, Mr Russell, Stephen said, rising. If you will be
so kind as to give the letter to Mr Norman ...
–O, yes. If he considers it important it will go in. We have so much
correspondence.
–I understand, Stephen said. Thanks.
God ild you. The pigs’ paper. Bullockbefriending.
Synge has promised me an article for DANA too. Are we going to be read? I
feel we are. The Gaelic league wants something in Irish. I hope you will
come round tonight. Bring Starkey.
Stephen sat down.
The quaker librarian came from the leavetakers. Blushing, his mask said:
–Mr Dedalus, your views are most illuminating.
He creaked to and fro, tiptoing up nearer heaven by the altitude of a
chopine, and, covered by the noise of outgoing, said low:
–Is it your view, then, that she was not faithful to the poet?
Alarmed face asks me. Why did he come? Courtesy or an inward light?
–Where there is a reconciliation, Stephen said, there must have been
first a sundering.
–Yes.
Christfox in leather trews, hiding, a runaway in blighted treeforks, from
hue and cry. Knowing no vixen, walking lonely in the chase. Women he won
to him, tender people, a whore of Babylon, ladies of justices, bully
tapsters’ wives. Fox and geese. And in New Place a slack dishonoured body
that once was comely, once as sweet, as fresh as cinnamon, now her leaves
falling, all, bare, frighted of the narrow grave and unforgiven.
–Yes. So you think ...
The door closed behind the outgoer.
Rest suddenly possessed the discreet vaulted cell, rest of warm and
brooding air.
A vestal’s lamp.
Here he ponders things that were not: what Caesar would have lived to do
had he believed the soothsayer: what might have been: possibilities of
the possible as possible: things not known: what name Achilles bore when
he lived among women.
Coffined thoughts around me, in mummycases, embalmed in spice of words.
Thoth, god of libraries, a birdgod, moonycrowned. And I heard the voice
of that Egyptian highpriest. IN PAINTED CHAMBERS LOADED WITH TILEBOOKS.
They are still. Once quick in the brains of men. Still: but an itch of
death is in them, to tell me in my ear a maudlin tale, urge me to wreak
their will.
–Certainly, John Eglinton mused, of all great men he is the most
enigmatic. We know nothing but that he lived and suffered. Not even so
much. Others abide our question. A shadow hangs over all the rest.
–But HAMLET is so personal, isn’t it? Mr Best pleaded. I mean, a kind of
private paper, don’t you know, of his private life. I mean, I don’t care
a button, don’t you know, who is killed or who is guilty ...
He rested an innocent book on the edge of the desk, smiling his defiance.
His private papers in the original. TA AN BAD AR AN TIR. TAIM IN MO
SHAGART. Put beurla on it, littlejohn.
Quoth littlejohn Eglinton:
–I was prepared for paradoxes from what Malachi Mulligan told us but I
may as well warn you that if you want to shake my belief that Shakespeare
is Hamlet you have a stern task before you.
Bear with me.
Stephen withstood the bane of miscreant eyes glinting stern under
wrinkled brows. A basilisk. E QUANDO VEDE L’UOMO L’ATTOSCA. Messer
Brunetto, I thank thee for the word.
–As we, or mother Dana, weave and unweave our bodies, Stephen said, from
day to day, their molecules shuttled to and fro, so does the artist weave
and unweave his image. And as the mole on my right breast is where it was
when I was born, though all my body has been woven of new stuff time
after time, so through the ghost of the unquiet father the image of the
unliving son looks forth. In the intense instant of imagination, when the
mind, Shelley says, is a fading coal, that which I was is that which I am
and that which in possibility I may come to be. So in the future, the
sister of the past, I may see myself as I sit here now but by reflection
from that which then I shall be.
Drummond of Hawthornden helped you at that stile.
–Yes, Mr Best said youngly. I feel Hamlet quite young. The bitterness
might be from the father but the passages with Ophelia are surely from
the son.
Has the wrong sow by the lug. He is in my father. I am in his son.
–That mole is the last to go, Stephen said, laughing.
John Eglinton made a nothing pleasing mow.
–If that were the birthmark of genius, he said, genius would be a drug
in the market. The plays of Shakespeare’s later years which Renan admired
so much breathe another spirit.
–The spirit of reconciliation, the quaker librarian breathed.
–There can be no reconciliation, Stephen said, if there has not been a
sundering.
Said that.
–If you want to know what are the events which cast their shadow over
the hell of time of KING LEAR, OTHELLO, HAMLET, TROILUS AND CRESSIDA,
look to see when and how the shadow lifts. What softens the heart of a
man, shipwrecked in storms dire, Tried, like another Ulysses, Pericles,
prince of Tyre?
Head, redconecapped, buffeted, brineblinded.
–A child, a girl, placed in his arms, Marina.
–The leaning of sophists towards the bypaths of apocrypha is a constant
quantity, John Eglinton detected. The highroads are dreary but they lead
to the town.
Good Bacon: gone musty. Shakespeare Bacon’s wild oats. Cypherjugglers
going the highroads. Seekers on the great quest. What town, good masters?
Mummed in names: A. E., eon: Magee, John Eglinton. East of the sun, west
of the moon: TIR NA N-OG. Booted the twain and staved.
    HOW MANY MILES TO DUBLIN?
    THREE SCORE AND TEN, SIR.
    WILL WE BE THERE BY CANDLELIGHT?
–Mr Brandes accepts it, Stephen said, as the first play of the closing
period.
–Does he? What does Mr Sidney Lee, or Mr Simon Lazarus as some aver his
name is, say of it?
–Marina, Stephen said, a child of storm, Miranda, a wonder, Perdita,
that which was lost. What was lost is given back to him: his daughter’s
child. MY DEAREST WIFE, Pericles says, WAS LIKE THIS MAID. Will any man
love the daughter if he has not loved the mother?
–The art of being a grandfather, Mr Best gan murmur. L’ART D’ETRE GRAND
...
–Will he not see reborn in her, with the memory of his own youth added,
another image?
Do you know what you are talking about? Love, yes. Word known to all men.
Amor vero aliquid alicui bonum vult unde et ea quae concupiscimus ...
–His own image to a man with that queer thing genius is the standard of
all experience, material and moral. Such an appeal will touch him. The
images of other males of his blood will repel him. He will see in them
grotesque attempts of nature to foretell or to repeat himself.
The benign forehead of the quaker librarian enkindled rosily with hope.
–I hope Mr Dedalus will work out his theory for the enlightenment of the
public. And we ought to mention another Irish commentator, Mr George
Bernard Shaw. Nor should we forget Mr Frank Harris. His articles on
Shakespeare in the SATURDAY REVIEW were surely brilliant. Oddly enough he
too draws for us an unhappy relation with the dark lady of the sonnets.
The favoured rival is William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. I own that if
the poet must be rejected such a rejection would seem more in harmony
with–what shall I say?–our notions of what ought not to have been.
Felicitously he ceased and held a meek head among them, auk’s egg, prize
of their fray.
He thous and thees her with grave husbandwords. Dost love, Miriam? Dost
love thy man?
–That may be too, Stephen said. There’s a saying of Goethe’s which Mr
Magee likes to quote. Beware of what you wish for in youth because you
will get it in middle life. Why does he send to one who is a BUONAROBA, a
bay where all men ride, a maid of honour with a scandalous girlhood, a
lordling to woo for him? He was himself a lord of language and had made
himself a coistrel gentleman and he had written ROMEO AND JULIET. Why?
Belief in himself has been untimely killed. He was overborne in a
cornfield first (ryefield, I should say) and he will never be a victor in
his own eyes after nor play victoriously the game of laugh and lie down.
Assumed dongiovannism will not save him. No later undoing will undo the
first undoing. The tusk of the boar has wounded him there where love lies
ableeding. If the shrew is worsted yet there remains to her woman’s
invisible weapon. There is, I feel in the words, some goad of the flesh
driving him into a new passion, a darker shadow of the first, darkening
even his own understanding of himself. A like fate awaits him and the two
rages commingle in a whirlpool.
They list. And in the porches of their ears I pour.
–The soul has been before stricken mortally, a poison poured in the
porch of a sleeping ear. But those who are done to death in sleep cannot
know the manner of their quell unless their Creator endow their souls
with that knowledge in the life to come. The poisoning and the beast with
two backs that urged it King Hamlet’s ghost could not know of were he not
endowed with knowledge by his creator. That is why the speech (his lean
unlovely English) is always turned elsewhere, backward. Ravisher and
ravished, what he would but would not, go with him from Lucrece’s
bluecircled ivory globes to Imogen’s breast, bare, with its mole
cinquespotted. He goes back, weary of the creation he has piled up to
hide him from himself, an old dog licking an old sore. But, because loss
is his gain, he passes on towards eternity in undiminished personality,
untaught by the wisdom he has written or by the laws he has revealed. His
beaver is up. He is a ghost, a shadow now, the wind by Elsinore’s rocks
or what you will, the sea’s voice, a voice heard only in the heart of him
who is the substance of his shadow, the son consubstantial with the
father.
–Amen! was responded from the doorway.
Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?
Entr’acte.
A ribald face, sullen as a dean’s, Buck Mulligan came forward, then
blithe in motley, towards the greeting of their smiles. My telegram.
–You were speaking of the gaseous vertebrate, if I mistake not? he asked
of Stephen.
Primrosevested he greeted gaily with his doffed Panama as with a bauble.
They make him welcome. WAS DU VERLACHST WIRST DU NOCH DIENEN.
Brood of mockers: Photius, pseudomalachi, Johann Most.
He Who Himself begot middler the Holy Ghost and Himself sent Himself,
Agenbuyer, between Himself and others, Who, put upon by His fiends,
stripped and whipped, was nailed like bat to barndoor, starved on
crosstree, Who let Him bury, stood up, harrowed hell, fared into heaven
and there these nineteen hundred years sitteth on the right hand of His
Own Self but yet shall come in the latter day to doom the quick and dead
when all the quick shall be dead already.
Glo–o–ri–a in ex–cel–sis De–o.
He lifts his hands. Veils fall. O, flowers! Bells with bells with bells
aquiring.
–Yes, indeed, the quaker librarian said. A most instructive discussion.
Mr Mulligan, I’ll be bound, has his theory too of the play and of
Shakespeare. All sides of life should be represented.
He smiled on all sides equally.
Buck Mulligan thought, puzzled:
–Shakespeare? he said. I seem to know the name.
A flying sunny smile rayed in his loose features.
–To be sure, he said, remembering brightly. The chap that writes like
Synge.
Mr Best turned to him.
–Haines missed you, he said. Did you meet him? He’ll see you after at
the D. B. C. He’s gone to Gill’s to buy Hyde’s LOVESONGS OF CONNACHT.
–I came through the museum, Buck Mulligan said. Was he here?
–The bard’s fellowcountrymen, John Eglinton answered, are rather tired
perhaps of our brilliancies of theorising. I hear that an actress played
Hamlet for the fourhundredandeighth time last night in Dublin. Vining
held that the prince was a woman. Has no-one made him out to be an
Irishman? Judge Barton, I believe, is searching for some clues. He swears
(His Highness not His Lordship) by saint Patrick.
–The most brilliant of all is that story of Wilde’s, Mr Best said,
lifting his brilliant notebook. That PORTRAIT OF MR W. H. where he proves
that the sonnets were written by a Willie Hughes, a man all hues.
–For Willie Hughes, is it not? the quaker librarian asked.
Or Hughie Wills? Mr William Himself. W. H.: who am I?
–I mean, for Willie Hughes, Mr Best said, amending his gloss easily. Of
course it’s all paradox, don’t you know, Hughes and hews and hues, the
colour, but it’s so typical the way he works it out. It’s the very
essence of Wilde, don’t you know. The light touch.
His glance touched their faces lightly as he smiled, a blond ephebe. Tame
essence of Wilde.
You’re darned witty. Three drams of usquebaugh you drank with Dan Deasy’s
ducats.
How much did I spend? O, a few shillings.
For a plump of pressmen. Humour wet and dry.
Wit. You would give your five wits for youth’s proud livery he pranks in.
Lineaments of gratified desire.
There be many mo. Take her for me. In pairing time. Jove, a cool ruttime
send them. Yea, turtledove her.
Eve. Naked wheatbellied sin. A snake coils her, fang in’s kiss.
–Do you think it is only a paradox? the quaker librarian was asking. The
mocker is never taken seriously when he is most serious.
They talked seriously of mocker’s seriousness.
Buck Mulligan’s again heavy face eyed Stephen awhile. Then, his head
wagging, he came near, drew a folded telegram from his pocket. His mobile
lips read, smiling with new delight.
–Telegram! he said. Wonderful inspiration! Telegram! A papal bull!
He sat on a corner of the unlit desk, reading aloud joyfully:
–THE SENTIMENTALIST IS HE WHO WOULD ENJOY WITHOUT INCURRING THE IMMENSE
DEBTORSHIP FOR A THING DONE. Signed: Dedalus. Where did you launch it
from? The kips? No. College Green. Have you drunk the four quid? The aunt
is going to call on your unsubstantial father. Telegram! Malachi
Mulligan, The Ship, lower Abbey street. O, you peerless mummer! O, you
priestified Kinchite!
Joyfully he thrust message and envelope into a pocket but keened in a
querulous brogue:
–It’s what I’m telling you, mister honey, it’s queer and sick we were,
Haines and myself, the time himself brought it in. ’Twas murmur we did
for a gallus potion would rouse a friar, I’m thinking, and he limp with
leching. And we one hour and two hours and three hours in Connery’s
sitting civil waiting for pints apiece.
He wailed:
–And we to be there, mavrone, and you to be unbeknownst sending us your
conglomerations the way we to have our tongues out a yard long like the
drouthy clerics do be fainting for a pussful.
Stephen laughed.
Quickly, warningfully Buck Mulligan bent down.
–The tramper Synge is looking for you, he said, to murder you. He heard
you pissed on his halldoor in Glasthule. He’s out in pampooties to murder
you.
–Me! Stephen exclaimed. That was your contribution to literature.
Buck Mulligan gleefully bent back, laughing to the dark eavesdropping
ceiling.
–Murder you! he laughed.
Harsh gargoyle face that warred against me over our mess of hash of
lights in rue Saint-Andre-des-Arts. In words of words for words,
palabras. Oisin with Patrick. Faunman he met in Clamart woods,
brandishing a winebottle. C’EST VENDREDI SAINT! Murthering Irish. His
image, wandering, he met. I mine. I met a fool i’the forest.
–Mr Lyster, an attendant said from the door ajar.
– ... in which everyone can find his own. So Mr Justice Madden in his
DIARY OF MASTER WILLIAM SILENCE has found the hunting terms ... Yes? What
is it?
–There’s a gentleman here, sir, the attendant said, coming forward and
offering a card. From the FREEMAN. He wants to see the files of the
KILKENNY PEOPLE for last year.
–Certainly, certainly, certainly. Is the gentleman? ...
He took the eager card, glanced, not saw, laid down unglanced, looked,
asked, creaked, asked:
–Is he? ... O, there!
Brisk in a galliard he was off, out. In the daylit corridor he talked
with voluble pains of zeal, in duty bound, most fair, most kind, most
honest broadbrim.
–This gentleman? FREEMAN’S JOURNAL? KILKENNY PEOPLE? To be sure. Good
day, sir. KILKENNY ... We have certainly ...
A patient silhouette waited, listening.
–All the leading provincial ... NORTHERN WHIG, CORK EXAMINER,
ENNISCORTHY GUARDIAN, 1903 ... Will you please? ... Evans, conduct this
gentleman ... If you just follow the atten ... Or, please allow me ...
This way ... Please, sir ...
Voluble, dutiful, he led the way to all the provincial papers, a bowing
dark figure following his hasty heels.
The door closed.
–The sheeny! Buck Mulligan cried.
He jumped up and snatched the card.
–What’s his name? Ikey Moses? Bloom.
He rattled on:
–Jehovah, collector of prepuces, is no more. I found him over in the
museum where I went to hail the foamborn Aphrodite. The Greek mouth that
has never been twisted in prayer. Every day we must do homage to her.
LIFE OF LIFE, THY LIPS ENKINDLE.
Suddenly he turned to Stephen:
–He knows you. He knows your old fellow. O, I fear me, he is Greeker
than the Greeks. His pale Galilean eyes were upon her mesial groove.
Venus Kallipyge. O, the thunder of those loins! THE GOD PURSUING THE
MAIDEN HID.
–We want to hear more, John Eglinton decided with Mr Best’s approval. We
begin to be interested in Mrs S. Till now we had thought of her, if at
all, as a patient Griselda, a Penelope stayathome.
–Antisthenes, pupil of Gorgias, Stephen said, took the palm of beauty
from Kyrios Menelaus’ brooddam, Argive Helen, the wooden mare of Troy in
whom a score of heroes slept, and handed it to poor Penelope. Twenty
years he lived in London and, during part of that time, he drew a salary
equal to that of the lord chancellor of Ireland. His life was rich. His
art, more than the art of feudalism as Walt Whitman called it, is the art
of surfeit. Hot herringpies, green mugs of sack, honeysauces, sugar of
roses, marchpane, gooseberried pigeons, ringocandies. Sir Walter Raleigh,
when they arrested him, had half a million francs on his back including a
pair of fancy stays. The gombeenwoman Eliza Tudor had underlinen enough
to vie with her of Sheba. Twenty years he dallied there between conjugial
love and its chaste delights and scortatory love and its foul pleasures.
You know Manningham’s story of the burgher’s wife who bade Dick Burbage
to her bed after she had seen him in RICHARD III and how Shakespeare,
overhearing, without more ado about nothing, took the cow by the horns
and, when Burbage came knocking at the gate, answered from the capon’s
blankets: WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR CAME BEFORE RICHARD III. And the gay
lakin, mistress Fitton, mount and cry O, and his dainty birdsnies, lady
Penelope Rich, a clean quality woman is suited for a player, and the
punks of the bankside, a penny a time.
Cours la Reine. ENCORE VINGT SOUS. NOUS FERONS DE PETITES COCHONNERIES.
MINETTE? TU VEUX?
–The height of fine society. And sir William Davenant of oxford’s mother
with her cup of canary for any cockcanary.
Buck Mulligan, his pious eyes upturned, prayed:
–Blessed Margaret Mary Anycock!
–And Harry of six wives’ daughter. And other lady friends from neighbour
seats as Lawn Tennyson, gentleman poet, sings. But all those twenty years
what do you suppose poor Penelope in Stratford was doing behind the
diamond panes?
Do and do. Thing done. In a rosery of Fetter lane of Gerard, herbalist,
he walks, greyedauburn. An azured harebell like her veins. Lids of Juno’s
eyes, violets. He walks. One life is all. One body. Do. But do. Afar, in
a reek of lust and squalor, hands are laid on whiteness.
Buck Mulligan rapped John Eglinton’s desk sharply.
–Whom do you suspect? he challenged.
–Say that he is the spurned lover in the sonnets. Once spurned twice
spurned. But the court wanton spurned him for a lord, his dearmylove.
Love that dare not speak its name.
–As an Englishman, you mean, John sturdy Eglinton put in, he loved a
lord.
Old wall where sudden lizards flash. At Charenton I watched them.
–It seems so, Stephen said, when he wants to do for him, and for all
other and singular uneared wombs, the holy office an ostler does for the
stallion. Maybe, like Socrates, he had a midwife to mother as he had a
shrew to wife. But she, the giglot wanton, did not break a bedvow. Two
deeds are rank in that ghost’s mind: a broken vow and the dullbrained
yokel on whom her favour has declined, deceased husband’s brother. Sweet
Ann, I take it, was hot in the blood. Once a wooer, twice a wooer.
Stephen turned boldly in his chair.
–The burden of proof is with you not with me, he said frowning. If you
deny that in the fifth scene of HAMLET he has branded her with infamy
tell me why there is no mention of her during the thirtyfour years
between the day she married him and the day she buried him. All those
women saw their men down and under: Mary, her goodman John, Ann, her poor
dear Willun, when he went and died on her, raging that he was the first
to go, Joan, her four brothers, Judith, her husband and all her sons,
Susan, her husband too, while Susan’s daughter, Elizabeth, to use
granddaddy’s words, wed her second, having killed her first.
O, yes, mention there is. In the years when he was living richly in royal
London to pay a debt she had to borrow forty shillings from her father’s
shepherd. Explain you then. Explain the swansong too wherein he has
commended her to posterity.
He faced their silence.
To whom thus Eglinton:
        You mean the will.
    But that has been explained, I believe, by jurists.
    She was entitled to her widow’s dower
    At common law. His legal knowledge was great
    Our judges tell us.
        Him Satan fleers,
    Mocker:
        And therefore he left out her name
    From the first draft but he did not leave out
    The presents for his granddaughter, for his daughters,
    For his sister, for his old cronies in Stratford
    And in London. And therefore when he was urged,
    As I believe, to name her
    He left her his
    Secondbest
    Bed.
                PUNKT.
    Leftherhis
    Secondbest
    Leftherhis
    Bestabed
    Secabest
    Leftabed.
Woa!
AMPLIUS. IN SOCIETATE HUMANA HOC EST MAXIME NECESSARIUM UT SIT AMICITIA
INTER MULTOS.
–Saint Thomas, Stephen began ...
–ORA PRO NOBIS, Monk Mulligan groaned, sinking to a chair.
There he keened a wailing rune.
–POGUE MAHONE! ACUSHLA MACHREE! It’s destroyed we are from this day!
It’s destroyed we are surely!
All smiled their smiles.
–Saint Thomas, Stephen smiling said, whose gorbellied works I enjoy
reading in the original, writing of incest from a standpoint different
from that of the new Viennese school Mr Magee spoke of, likens it in his
wise and curious way to an avarice of the emotions. He means that the
love so given to one near in blood is covetously withheld from some
stranger who, it may be, hungers for it. Jews, whom christians tax with
avarice, are of all races the most given to intermarriage. Accusations
are made in anger. The christian laws which built up the hoards of the
jews (for whom, as for the lollards, storm was shelter) bound their
affections too with hoops of steel. Whether these be sins or virtues old
Nobodaddy will tell us at doomsday leet. But a man who holds so tightly
to what he calls his rights over what he calls his debts will hold
tightly also to what he calls his rights over her whom he calls his wife.
No sir smile neighbour shall covet his ox or his wife or his manservant
or his maidservant or his jackass.
–Or his jennyass, Buck Mulligan antiphoned.
–Gentle Will is being roughly handled, gentle Mr Best said gently.
–Which will? gagged sweetly Buck Mulligan. We are getting mixed.
–The will to live, John Eglinton philosophised, for poor Ann, Will’s
widow, is the will to die.
–REQUIESCAT! Stephen prayed.
    WHAT OF ALL THE WILL TO DO?
    IT HAS VANISHED LONG AGO ...
–She lies laid out in stark stiffness in that secondbest bed, the mobled
queen, even though you prove that a bed in those days was as rare as a
motorcar is now and that its carvings were the wonder of seven parishes.
In old age she takes up with gospellers (one stayed with her at New Place
and drank a quart of sack the town council paid for but in which bed he
slept it skills not to ask) and heard she had a soul. She read or had
read to her his chapbooks preferring them to the MERRY WIVES and, loosing
her nightly waters on the jordan, she thought over HOOKS AND EYES FOR
BELIEVERS’ BREECHES and THE MOST SPIRITUAL SNUFFBOX TO MAKE THE MOST
DEVOUT SOULS SNEEZE. Venus has twisted her lips in prayer. Agenbite of
inwit: remorse of conscience. It is an age of exhausted whoredom groping
for its god.
–History shows that to be true, INQUIT EGLINTONUS CHRONOLOLOGOS. The
ages succeed one another. But we have it on high authority that a man’s
worst enemies shall be those of his own house and family. I feel that
Russell is right. What do we care for his wife or father? I should say
that only family poets have family lives. Falstaff was not a family man.
I feel that the fat knight is his supreme creation.
Lean, he lay back. Shy, deny thy kindred, the unco guid. Shy, supping
with the godless, he sneaks the cup. A sire in Ultonian Antrim bade it
him. Visits him here on quarter days. Mr Magee, sir, there’s a gentleman
to see you. Me? Says he’s your father, sir. Give me my Wordsworth. Enter
Magee Mor Matthew, a rugged rough rugheaded kern, in strossers with a
buttoned codpiece, his nether stocks bemired with clauber of ten forests,
a wand of wilding in his hand.
Your own? He knows your old fellow. The widower.
Hurrying to her squalid deathlair from gay Paris on the quayside I
touched his hand. The voice, new warmth, speaking. Dr Bob Kenny is
attending her. The eyes that wish me well. But do not know me.
–A father, Stephen said, battling against hopelessness, is a necessary
evil. He wrote the play in the months that followed his father’s death.
If you hold that he, a greying man with two marriageable daughters, with
thirtyfive years of life, NEL MEZZO DEL CAMMIN DI NOSTRA VITA, with fifty
of experience, is the beardless undergraduate from Wittenberg then you
must hold that his seventyyear old mother is the lustful queen. No. The
corpse of John Shakespeare does not walk the night. From hour to hour it
rots and rots. He rests, disarmed of fatherhood, having devised that
mystical estate upon his son. Boccaccio’s Calandrino was the first and
last man who felt himself with child. Fatherhood, in the sense of
conscious begetting, is unknown to man. It is a mystical estate, an
apostolic succession, from only begetter to only begotten. On that
mystery and not on the madonna which the cunning Italian intellect flung
to the mob of Europe the church is founded and founded irremovably
because founded, like the world, macro and microcosm, upon the void. Upon
incertitude, upon unlikelihood. AMOR MATRIS, subjective and objective
genitive, may be the only true thing in life. Paternity may be a legal
fiction. Who is the father of any son that any son should love him or he
any son?
What the hell are you driving at?
I know. Shut up. Blast you. I have reasons.
Amplius. Adhuc. Iterum. Postea.
Are you condemned to do this?
–They are sundered by a bodily shame so steadfast that the criminal
annals of the world, stained with all other incests and bestialities,
hardly record its breach. Sons with mothers, sires with daughters, lesbic
sisters, loves that dare not speak their name, nephews with grandmothers,
jailbirds with keyholes, queens with prize bulls. The son unborn mars
beauty: born, he brings pain, divides affection, increases care. He is a
new male: his growth is his father’s decline, his youth his father’s
envy, his friend his father’s enemy.
In rue Monsieur-le-Prince I thought it.
–What links them in nature? An instant of blind rut.
Am I a father? If I were?
Shrunken uncertain hand.
–Sabellius, the African, subtlest heresiarch of all the beasts of the
field, held that the Father was Himself His Own Son. The bulldog of
Aquin, with whom no word shall be impossible, refutes him. Well: if the
father who has not a son be not a father can the son who has not a father
be a son? When Rutlandbaconsouthamptonshakespeare or another poet of the
same name in the comedy of errors wrote HAMLET he was not the father of
his own son merely but, being no more a son, he was and felt himself the
father of all his race, the father of his own grandfather, the father of
his unborn grandson who, by the same token, never was born, for nature,
as Mr Magee understands her, abhors perfection.
Eglintoneyes, quick with pleasure, looked up shybrightly. Gladly
glancing, a merry puritan, through the twisted eglantine.
Flatter. Rarely. But flatter.
–Himself his own father, Sonmulligan told himself. Wait. I am big with
child. I have an unborn child in my brain. Pallas Athena! A play! The
play’s the thing! Let me parturiate!
He clasped his paunchbrow with both birthaiding hands.
–As for his family, Stephen said, his mother’s name lives in the forest
of Arden. Her death brought from him the scene with Volumnia in
CORIOLANUS. His boyson’s death is the deathscene of young Arthur in KING
JOHN. Hamlet, the black prince, is Hamnet Shakespeare. Who the girls in
THE TEMPEST, in PERICLES, in WINTER’S TALE are we know. Who Cleopatra,
fleshpot of Egypt, and Cressid and Venus are we may guess. But there is
another member of his family who is recorded.
–The plot thickens, John Eglinton said.
The quaker librarian, quaking, tiptoed in, quake, his mask, quake, with
haste, quake, quack.
Door closed. Cell. Day.
They list. Three. They.
I you he they.
Come, mess.
STEPHEN: He had three brothers, Gilbert, Edmund, Richard. Gilbert in his
old age told some cavaliers he got a pass for nowt from Maister Gatherer
one time mass he did and he seen his brud Maister Wull the playwriter up
in Lunnon in a wrastling play wud a man on’s back. The playhouse sausage
filled Gilbert’s soul. He is nowhere: but an Edmund and a Richard are
recorded in the works of sweet William.
MAGEEGLINJOHN: Names! What’s in a name?
BEST: That is my name, Richard, don’t you know. I hope you are going to
say a good word for Richard, don’t you know, for my sake.
                (Laughter)
Buckmulligan: (piano, Diminuendo)
         Then outspoke medical Dick
         To his comrade medical Davy ...
STEPHEN: In his trinity of black Wills, the villain shakebags, Iago,
Richard Crookback, Edmund in KING LEAR, two bear the wicked uncles’
names. Nay, that last play was written or being written while his brother
Edmund lay dying in Southwark.
BEST: I hope Edmund is going to catch it. I don’t want Richard, my
name ...
                (Laughter)
QUAKERLYSTER: (A TEMPO) But he that filches from me my good name ...
STEPHEN: (STRINGENDO) He has hidden his own name, a fair name, William,
in the plays, a super here, a clown there, as a painter of old Italy set
his face in a dark corner of his canvas. He has revealed it in the
sonnets where there is Will in overplus. Like John o’Gaunt his name is
dear to him, as dear as the coat and crest he toadied for, on a bend
sable a spear or steeled argent, honorificabilitudinitatibus, dearer than
his glory of greatest shakescene in the country. What’s in a name? That
is what we ask ourselves in childhood when we write the name that we are
told is ours. A star, a daystar, a firedrake, rose at his birth. It shone
by day in the heavens alone, brighter than Venus in the night, and by
night it shone over delta in Cassiopeia, the recumbent constellation
which is the signature of his initial among the stars. His eyes watched
it, lowlying on the horizon, eastward of the bear, as he walked by the
slumberous summer fields at midnight returning from Shottery and from her
arms.
Both satisfied. I too.
Don’t tell them he was nine years old when it was quenched.
And from her arms.
Wait to be wooed and won. Ay, meacock. Who will woo you?
Read the skies. AUTONTIMORUMENOS. BOUS STEPHANOUMENOS. Where’s your
configuration? Stephen, Stephen, cut the bread even. S. D: SUA DONNA.
GIA: DI LUI. GELINDO RISOLVE DI NON AMARE S. D.
–What is that, Mr Dedalus? the quaker librarian asked. Was it a
celestial phenomenon?
–A star by night, Stephen said. A pillar of the cloud by day.
What more’s to speak?
Stephen looked on his hat, his stick, his boots.
STEPHANOS, my crown. My sword. His boots are spoiling the shape of
my feet. Buy a pair. Holes in my socks. Handkerchief too.
–You make good use of the name, John Eglinton allowed. Your own name
is strange enough. I suppose it explains your fantastical humour.
Me, Magee and Mulligan.
Fabulous artificer. The hawklike man. You flew. Whereto?
Newhaven-Dieppe, steerage passenger. Paris and back. Lapwing. Icarus.
PATER, AIT. Seabedabbled, fallen, weltering. Lapwing you are. Lapwing be.
Mr Best eagerquietly lifted his book to say:
–That’s very interesting because that brother motive, don’t you know, we
find also in the old Irish myths. Just what you say. The three brothers
Shakespeare. In Grimm too, don’t you know, the fairytales. The third
brother that always marries the sleeping beauty and wins the best prize.
Best of Best brothers. Good, better, best.
The quaker librarian springhalted near.
–I should like to know, he said, which brother you ... I understand you
to suggest there was misconduct with one of the brothers ... But
perhaps I am anticipating?
He caught himself in the act: looked at all: refrained.
An attendant from the doorway called:
–Mr Lyster! Father Dineen wants ...
–O, Father Dineen! Directly.
Swiftly rectly creaking rectly rectly he was rectly gone.
John Eglinton touched the foil.
–Come, he said. Let us hear what you have to say of Richard and
Edmund. You kept them for the last, didn’t you?
–In asking you to remember those two noble kinsmen nuncle Richie and
nuncle Edmund, Stephen answered, I feel I am asking too much perhaps. A
brother is as easily forgotten as an umbrella.
Lapwing.
Where is your brother? Apothecaries’ hall. My whetstone. Him, then
Cranly, Mulligan: now these. Speech, speech. But act. Act speech. They
mock to try you. Act. Be acted on.
Lapwing.
I am tired of my voice, the voice of Esau. My kingdom for a drink.
On.
–You will say those names were already in the chronicles from which he
took the stuff of his plays. Why did he take them rather than others?
Richard, a whoreson crookback, misbegotten, makes love to a widowed
Ann (what’s in a name?), woos and wins her, a whoreson merry widow.
Richard the conqueror, third brother, came after William the conquered.
The other four acts of that play hang limply from that first. Of all his
kings Richard is the only king unshielded by Shakespeare’s reverence,
the angel of the world. Why is the underplot of KING LEAR in which Edmund
figures lifted out of Sidney’s ARCADIA and spatchcocked on to a Celtic
legend older than history?
–That was Will’s way, John Eglinton defended. We should not now
combine a Norse saga with an excerpt from a novel by George Meredith.
QUE VOULEZ-VOUS? Moore would say. He puts Bohemia on the seacoast and
makes Ulysses quote Aristotle.
–Why? Stephen answered himself. Because the theme of the false or the
usurping or the adulterous brother or all three in one is to Shakespeare,
what the poor are not, always with him. The note of banishment,
banishment from the heart, banishment from home, sounds uninterruptedly
from THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA onward till Prospero breaks his staff,
buries it certain fathoms in the earth and drowns his book. It doubles
itself in the middle of his life, reflects itself in another, repeats
itself, protasis, epitasis, catastasis, catastrophe. It repeats
itself again when he is near the grave, when his married daughter
Susan, chip of the old block, is accused of adultery. But it was
the original sin that darkened his understanding, weakened his
will and left in him a strong inclination to evil. The words are
those of my lords bishops of Maynooth. An original sin and, like original
sin, committed by another in whose sin he too has sinned. It is between
the lines of his last written words, it is petrified on his tombstone
under which her four bones are not to be laid. Age has not withered it.
Beauty and peace have not done it away. It is in infinite variety
everywhere in the world he has created, in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, twice
in AS YOU LIKE IT, in THE TEMPEST, in HAMLET, in MEASURE FOR MEASURE–and
in all the other plays which I have not read.
He laughed to free his mind from his mind’s bondage.
Judge Eglinton summed up.
–The truth is midway, he affirmed. He is the ghost and the prince. He is
all in all.
–He is, Stephen said. The boy of act one is the mature man of act five.
All in all. In CYMBELINE, in OTHELLO he is bawd and cuckold. He acts and
is acted on. Lover of an ideal or a perversion, like Jose he kills the
real Carmen. His unremitting intellect is the hornmad Iago ceaselessly
willing that the moor in him shall suffer.
–Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Cuck Mulligan clucked lewdly. O word of fear!
Dark dome received, reverbed.
–And what a character is Iago! undaunted John Eglinton exclaimed.
When all is said Dumas FILS (or is it Dumas PERE?) is right. After God
Shakespeare has created most.
–Man delights him not nor woman neither, Stephen said. He returns after
a life of absence to that spot of earth where he was born, where he has
always been, man and boy, a silent witness and there, his journey of life
ended, he plants his mulberrytree in the earth. Then dies. The motion is
ended. Gravediggers bury Hamlet PERE and Hamlet FILS. A king and a
prince at last in death, with incidental music. And, what though murdered
and betrayed, bewept by all frail tender hearts for, Dane or Dubliner,
sorrow for the dead is the only husband from whom they refuse to be
divorced. If you like the epilogue look long on it: prosperous Prospero,
the good man rewarded, Lizzie, grandpa’s lump of love, and nuncle Richie,
the bad man taken off by poetic justice to the place where the bad niggers
go. Strong curtain. He found in the world without as actual what was in his
world within as possible. Maeterlinck says: IF SOCRATES LEAVE HIS HOUSE
TODAY HE WILL FIND THE SAGE SEATED ON HIS DOORSTEP. IF JUDAS GO FORTH
TONIGHT IT IS TO JUDAS HIS STEPS WILL TEND. Every life is many days,
day after day. We walk through ourselves, meeting robbers, ghosts, giants,
old men, young men, wives, widows, brothers-in-love, but always meeting
ourselves. The playwright who wrote the folio of this world and wrote it
badly (He gave us light first and the sun two days later), the lord of
things as they are whom the most Roman of catholics call DIO BOIA,
hangman god, is doubtless all in all in all of us, ostler and butcher,
and would be bawd and cuckold too but  that in the economy of heaven,
foretold by Hamlet, there are no more marriages, glorified man, an
androgynous angel, being a wife unto himself.
–EUREKA! Buck Mulligan cried. EUREKA!
Suddenly happied he jumped up and reached in a stride John Eglinton’s
desk.
–May I? he said. The Lord has spoken to Malachi.
He began to scribble on a slip of paper.
Take some slips from the counter going out.
–Those who are married, Mr Best, douce herald, said, all save one, shall
live. The rest shall keep as they are.
He laughed, unmarried, at Eglinton Johannes, of arts a bachelor.
Unwed, unfancied, ware of wiles, they fingerponder nightly each his
variorum edition of THE TAMING OF THE SHREW.
–You are a delusion, said roundly John Eglinton to Stephen. You have
brought us all this way to show us a French triangle. Do you believe your
own theory?
–No, Stephen said promptly.
–Are you going to write it? Mr Best asked. You ought to make it a
dialogue, don’t you know, like the Platonic dialogues Wilde wrote.
John Eclecticon doubly smiled.
–Well, in that case, he said, I don’t see why you should expect payment
for it since you don’t believe it yourself. Dowden believes there is some
mystery in HAMLET but will say no more. Herr Bleibtreu, the man Piper met
in Berlin, who is working up that Rutland theory, believes that the secret
is hidden in the Stratford monument. He is going to visit the present
duke, Piper says, and prove to him that his ancestor wrote the plays.
It will come as a surprise to his grace. But he believes his theory.
I believe, O Lord, help my unbelief. That is, help me to believe or help
me to unbelieve? Who helps to believe? EGOMEN. Who to unbelieve? Other
chap.
–You are the only contributor to DANA who asks for pieces of silver. Then
I don’t know about the next number. Fred Ryan wants space for an article
on economics.
Fraidrine. Two pieces of silver he lent me. Tide you over. Economics.
–For a guinea, Stephen said, you can publish this interview.
Buck Mulligan stood up from his laughing scribbling, laughing: and
then gravely said, honeying malice:
–I called upon the bard Kinch at his summer residence in upper
Mecklenburgh street and found him deep in the study of the SUMMA CONTRA
GENTILES in the company of two gonorrheal ladies, Fresh Nelly and Rosalie,
the coalquay whore.
He broke away.
–Come, Kinch. Come, wandering Aengus of the birds.
Come, Kinch. You have eaten all we left. Ay. I will serve you your orts
and offals.
Stephen rose.
Life is many days. This will end.
–We shall see you tonight, John Eglinton said. NOTRE AMI Moore says
Malachi Mulligan must be there.
Buck Mulligan flaunted his slip and panama.
–Monsieur Moore, he said, lecturer on French letters to the youth of
Ireland. I’ll be there. Come, Kinch, the bards must drink. Can you walk
straight?
Laughing, he ...
Swill till eleven. Irish nights entertainment.
Lubber ...
Stephen followed a lubber ...
One day in the national library we had a discussion. Shakes. After.
His lub back: I followed. I gall his kibe.
Stephen, greeting, then all amort, followed a lubber jester, a
wellkempt head, newbarbered, out of the vaulted cell into a shattering
daylight of no thought.
What have I learned? Of them? Of me?
Walk like Haines now.
The constant readers’ room. In the readers’ book Cashel Boyle
O’Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell parafes his polysyllables. Item: was
Hamlet mad? The quaker’s pate godlily with a priesteen in booktalk.
–O please do, sir ... I shall be most pleased ...
Amused Buck Mulligan mused in pleasant murmur with himself, selfnodding:
–A pleased bottom.
The turnstile.
Is that? ... Blueribboned hat ... Idly writing ... What? Looked? ...
The curving balustrade: smoothsliding Mincius.
Puck Mulligan, panamahelmeted, went step by step, iambing, trolling:
    JOHN EGLINTON, MY JO, JOHN,
    WHY WON’T YOU WED A WIFE?
He spluttered to the air:
–O, the chinless Chinaman! Chin Chon Eg Lin Ton. We went over to their
playbox, Haines and I, the plumbers’ hall. Our players are creating a new
art for Europe like the Greeks or M. Maeterlinck. Abbey Theatre! I smell
the pubic sweat of monks.
He spat blank.
Forgot: any more than he forgot the whipping lousy Lucy gave him.
And left the FEMME DE TRENTE ANS. And why no other children born? And his
first child a girl?
Afterwit. Go back.
The dour recluse still there (he has his cake) and the douce youngling,
minion of pleasure, Phedo’s toyable fair hair.
Eh ... I just eh ... wanted ... I forgot ... he ...
–Longworth and M’Curdy Atkinson were there ...
Puck Mulligan footed featly, trilling:
    I HARDLY HEAR THE PURLIEU CRY
    OR A TOMMY TALK AS I PASS ONE BY
    BEFORE MY THOUGHTS BEGIN TO RUN
    ON F. M’CURDY ATKINSON,
    THE SAME THAT HAD THE WOODEN LEG
    AND THAT FILIBUSTERING FILIBEG
    THAT NEVER DARED TO SLAKE HIS DROUTH,
    MAGEE THAT HAD THE CHINLESS MOUTH.
    BEING AFRAID TO MARRY ON EARTH
    THEY MASTURBATED FOR ALL THEY WERE WORTH.
Jest on. Know thyself.
Halted, below me, a quizzer looks at me. I halt.
–Mournful mummer, Buck Mulligan moaned. Synge has left off wearing
black to be like nature. Only crows, priests and English coal are black.
A laugh tripped over his lips.
–Longworth is awfully sick, he said, after what you wrote about that old
hake Gregory. O you inquisitional drunken jewjesuit! She gets you a job on
the paper and then you go and slate her drivel to Jaysus. Couldn’t you do
the Yeats touch?
He went on and down, mopping, chanting with waving graceful arms:
–The most beautiful book that has come out of our country in my time.
One thinks of Homer.
He stopped at the stairfoot.
–I have conceived a play for the mummers, he said solemnly.
The pillared Moorish hall, shadows entwined. Gone the nine men’s
morrice with caps of indices.
In sweetly varying voices Buck Mulligan read his tablet:
        EVERYMAN HIS OWN WIFE
                OR
        A HONEYMOON IN THE HAND
    (A NATIONAL IMMORALITY IN THREE ORGASMS)
                BY
        BALLOCKY MULLIGAN
He turned a happy patch’s smirk to Stephen, saying:
–The disguise, I fear, is thin. But listen.
He read, MARCATO:
–Characters:
    TODY TOSTOFF (a ruined Pole)
    CRAB (a bushranger)
    MEDICAL DICK  )
        and       ) (two birds with one stone)
    MEDICAL DAVY  )
    MOTHER GROGAN (a watercarrier)
    FRESH NELLY
        and
    ROSALIE (the coalquay whore).
He laughed, lolling a to and fro head, walking on, followed by Stephen:
and mirthfully he told the shadows, souls of men:
–O, the night in the Camden hall when the daughters of Erin had to lift
their skirts to step over you as you lay in your mulberrycoloured,
multicoloured, multitudinous vomit!
–The most innocent son of Erin, Stephen said, for whom they ever lifted
them.
About to pass through the doorway, feeling one behind, he stood aside.
Part. The moment is now. Where then? If Socrates leave his house
today, if Judas go forth tonight. Why? That lies in space which I in time
must come to, ineluctably.
My will: his will that fronts me. Seas between.
A man passed out between them, bowing, greeting.
–Good day again, Buck Mulligan said.
The portico.
Here I watched the birds for augury. Aengus of the birds. They go,
they come. Last night I flew. Easily flew. Men wondered. Street of harlots
after. A creamfruit melon he held to me. In. You will see.
–The wandering jew, Buck Mulligan whispered with clown’s awe. Did you
see his eye? He looked upon you to lust after you. I fear thee, ancient
mariner. O, Kinch, thou art in peril. Get thee a breechpad.
Manner of Oxenford.
Day. Wheelbarrow sun over arch of bridge.
A dark back went before them, step of a pard, down, out by the
gateway, under portcullis barbs.
They followed.
Offend me still. Speak on.
Kind air defined the coigns of houses in Kildare street. No birds. Frail
from the housetops two plumes of smoke ascended, pluming, and in a flaw
of softness softly were blown.
Cease to strive. Peace of the druid priests of Cymbeline: hierophantic:
from wide earth an altar.
    LAUD WE THE GODS
    AND LET OUR CROOKED SMOKES CLIMB TO THEIR NOSTRILS
    FROM OUR BLESS’D ALTARS.
The superior, the very reverend John Conmee S.J. reset his smooth
watch in his interior pocket as he came down the presbytery steps. Five to
three. Just nice time to walk to Artane. What was that boy’s name again?
Dignam. Yes. VERE DIGNUM ET IUSTUM EST. Brother Swan was the person to
see. Mr Cunningham’s letter. Yes. Oblige him, if possible. Good practical
catholic: useful at mission time.
A onelegged sailor, swinging himself onward by lazy jerks of his
crutches, growled some notes. He jerked short before the convent of the
sisters of charity and held out a peaked cap for alms towards the very
reverend John Conmee S. J. Father Conmee blessed him in the sun for his
purse held, he knew, one silver crown.
Father Conmee crossed to Mountjoy square. He thought, but not for
long, of soldiers and sailors, whose legs had been shot off by
cannonballs, ending their days in some pauper ward, and of cardinal
Wolsey’s words: IF I HAD SERVED MY GOD AS I HAVE SERVED MY KING HE WOULD
NOT HAVE ABANDONED ME IN MY OLD DAYS. He walked by the treeshade of
sunnywinking leaves: and towards him came the wife of Mr David Sheehy
M.P.
–Very well, indeed, father. And you, father?
Father Conmee was wonderfully well indeed. He would go to Buxton
probably for the waters. And her boys, were they getting on well at
Belvedere? Was that so? Father Conmee was very glad indeed to hear that.
And Mr Sheehy himself? Still in London. The house was still sitting, to be
sure it was. Beautiful weather it was, delightful indeed. Yes, it was very
probable that Father Bernard Vaughan would come again to preach. O,
yes: a very great success. A wonderful man really.
Father Conmee was very glad to see the wife of Mr David Sheehy
M.P. Iooking so well and he begged to be remembered to Mr David Sheehy
M.P. Yes, he would certainly call.
–Good afternoon, Mrs Sheehy.
Father Conmee doffed his silk hat and smiled, as he took leave, at the
jet beads of her mantilla inkshining in the sun. And smiled yet again, in
going. He had cleaned his teeth, he knew, with arecanut paste.
Father Conmee walked and, walking, smiled for he thought on Father
Bernard Vaughan’s droll eyes and cockney voice.
–Pilate! Wy don’t you old back that owlin mob?
A zealous man, however. Really he was. And really did great good in.
his way. Beyond a doubt. He loved Ireland, he said, and he loved the
Irish. Of good family too would one think it? Welsh, were they not?
O, lest he forget. That letter to father provincial.
Father Conmee stopped three little schoolboys at the corner of
Mountjoy square. Yes: they were from Belvedere. The little house. Aha.
And were they good boys at school? O. That was very good now. And what
was his name? Jack Sohan. And his name? Ger. Gallaher. And the other
little man? His name was Brunny Lynam. O, that was a very nice name to
have.
Father Conmee gave a letter from his breast to Master Brunny Lynam
and pointed to the red pillarbox at the corner of Fitzgibbon street.
–But mind you don’t post yourself into the box, little man, he said.
The boys sixeyed Father Conmee and laughed:
–O, sir.
–Well, let me see if you can post a letter, Father Conmee said.
Master Brunny Lynam ran across the road and put Father Conmee’s
letter to father provincial into the mouth of the bright red letterbox.
Father Conmee smiled and nodded and smiled and walked along Mountjoy
square east.
Mr Denis J Maginni, professor of dancing &c, in silk hat, slate
frockcoat with silk facings, white kerchief tie, tight lavender trousers,
canary gloves and pointed patent boots, walking with grave deportment
most respectfully took the curbstone as he passed lady Maxwell at the
corner of Dignam’s court.
Was that not Mrs M’Guinness?
Mrs M’Guinness, stately, silverhaired, bowed to Father Conmee from
the farther footpath along which she sailed. And Father Conmee smiled and
saluted. How did she do?
A fine carriage she had. Like Mary, queen of Scots, something. And to
think that she was a pawnbroker! Well, now! Such a ... what should he
say? ... such a queenly mien.
Father Conmee walked down Great Charles street and glanced at the
shutup free church on his left. The reverend T. R. Greene B.A. will (D.V.)
speak. The incumbent they called him. He felt it incumbent on him to say a
few words. But one should be charitable. Invincible ignorance. They acted
according to their lights.
Father Conmee turned the corner and walked along the North
Circular road. It was a wonder that there was not a tramline in such an
important thoroughfare. Surely, there ought to be.
A band of satchelled schoolboys crossed from Richmond street. All
raised untidy caps. Father Conmee greeted them more than once benignly.
Christian brother boys.
Father Conmee smelt incense on his right hand as he walked. Saint
Joseph’s church, Portland row. For aged and virtuous females. Father
Conmee raised his hat to the Blessed Sacrament. Virtuous: but occasionally
they were also badtempered.
Near Aldborough house Father Conmee thought of that spendthrift
nobleman. And now it was an office or something.
Father Conmee began to walk along the North Strand road and was
saluted by Mr William Gallagher who stood in the doorway of his shop.
Father Conmee saluted Mr William Gallagher and perceived the odours
that came from baconflitches and ample cools of butter. He passed
Grogan’s the Tobacconist against which newsboards leaned and told of a
dreadful catastrophe in New York. In America those things were
continually happening. Unfortunate people to die like that, unprepared.
Still, an act of perfect contrition.
Father Conmee went by Daniel Bergin’s publichouse against the
window of which two unlabouring men lounged. They saluted him and
were saluted.
Father Conmee passed H. J. O’Neill’s funeral establishment where
Corny Kelleher totted figures in the daybook while he chewed a blade of
hay. A constable on his beat saluted Father Conmee and Father Conmee
saluted the constable. In Youkstetter’s, the porkbutcher’s, Father Conmee
observed pig’s puddings, white and black and red, lie neatly curled in
tubes.
Moored under the trees of Charleville Mall Father Conmee saw a
turfbarge, a towhorse with pendent head, a bargeman with a hat of dirty
straw seated amidships, smoking and staring at a branch of poplar above
him. It was idyllic: and Father Conmee reflected on the providence of the
Creator who had made turf to be in bogs whence men might dig it out and
bring it to town and hamlet to make fires in the houses of poor people.
On Newcomen bridge the very reverend John Conmee S.J. of saint
Francis Xavier’s church, upper Gardiner street, stepped on to an outward
bound tram.
Off an inward bound tram stepped the reverend Nicholas Dudley
C. C. of saint Agatha’s church, north William street, on to Newcomen
bridge.
At Newcomen bridge Father Conmee stepped into an outward bound
tram for he disliked to traverse on foot the dingy way past Mud Island.
Father Conmee sat in a corner of the tramcar, a blue ticket tucked
with care in the eye of one plump kid glove, while four shillings, a
sixpence and five pennies chuted from his other plump glovepalm into his
purse. Passing the ivy church he reflected that the ticket inspector
usually made his visit when one had carelessly thrown away the ticket.
The solemnity of the occupants of the car seemed to Father Conmee
excessive for a journey so short and cheap. Father Conmee liked cheerful
decorum.
It was a peaceful day. The gentleman with the glasses opposite Father
Conmee had finished explaining and looked down. His wife, Father
Conmee supposed. A tiny yawn opened the mouth of the wife of the gentleman
with the glasses. She raised her small gloved fist, yawned ever so gently,
tiptapping  her small gloved fist on her opening mouth and smiled tinily,
sweetly.
Father Conmee perceived her perfume in the car. He perceived also
that the awkward man at the other side of her was sitting on the edge of
the seat.
Father Conmee at the altarrails placed the host with difficulty in the
mouth of the awkward old man who had the shaky head.
At Annesley bridge the tram halted and, when it was about to go, an
old woman rose suddenly from her place to alight. The conductor pulled
the bellstrap to stay the car for her. She passed out with her basket and
a marketnet: and Father Conmee saw the conductor help her and net and
basket down: and Father Conmee thought that, as she had nearly passed
the end of the penny fare, she was one of those good souls who had always
to be told twice BLESS YOU, MY CHILD, that they have been absolved, PRAY
FOR ME. But they had so many worries in life, so many cares, poor
creatures.
From the hoardings Mr Eugene Stratton grimaced with thick niggerlips at
Father Conmee.
Father Conmee thought of the souls of black and brown and yellow
men and of his sermon on saint Peter Claver S.J. and the African mission
and of the propagation of the faith and of the millions of black and brown
and yellow souls that had not received the baptism of water when their last
hour came like a thief in the night. That book by the Belgian jesuit, LE
NOMBRE DES ELUS, seemed to Father Conmee a reasonable plea. Those were
millions of human souls created by God in His Own likeness to whom the
faith had not (D.V.) been brought. But they were God’s souls, created by
God. It seemed to Father Conmee a pity that they should all be lost, a
waste, if one might say.
At the Howth road stop Father Conmee alighted, was saluted by the
conductor and saluted in his turn.
The Malahide road was quiet. It pleased Father Conmee, road and
name. The joybells were ringing in gay Malahide. Lord Talbot de Malahide,
immediate hereditary lord admiral of Malahide and the seas adjoining.
Then came the call to arms and she was maid, wife and widow in one day.
Those were old worldish days, loyal times in joyous townlands, old times
in the barony.
Father Conmee, walking, thought of his little book OLD TIMES IN THE
BARONY and of the book that might be written about jesuit houses and of
Mary Rochfort, daughter of lord Molesworth, first countess of Belvedere.
A listless lady, no more young, walked alone the shore of lough
Ennel, Mary, first countess of Belvedere, listlessly walking in the
evening, not startled when an otter plunged. Who could know the truth?
Not the jealous lord Belvedere and not her confessor if she had not
committed adultery fully, EIACULATIO SEMINIS INTER VAS NATURALE MULIERIS,
with her husband’s brother? She would half confess if she had not all
sinned as women did. Only God knew and she and he, her husband’s brother.
Father Conmee thought of that tyrannous incontinence, needed
however for man’s race on earth, and of the ways of God which were not
our ways.
Don John Conmee walked and moved in times of yore. He was
humane and honoured there. He bore in mind secrets confessed and he
smiled at smiling noble faces in a beeswaxed drawingroom, ceiled with full
fruit clusters. And the hands of a bride and of a bridegroom, noble to
noble, were impalmed by Don John Conmee.
It was a charming day.
The lychgate of a field showed Father Conmee breadths of cabbages,
curtseying to him with ample underleaves. The sky showed him a flock of
small white clouds going slowly down the wind. MOUTONNER, the French
said. A just and homely word.
Father Conmee, reading his office, watched a flock of muttoning
clouds over Rathcoffey. His thinsocked ankles were tickled by the stubble
of Clongowes field. He walked there, reading in the evening, and heard the
cries of the boys’ lines at their play, young cries in the quiet evening.
He was their rector: his reign was mild.
Father Conmee drew off his gloves and took his rededged breviary out.
An ivory bookmark told him the page.
Nones. He should have read that before lunch. But lady Maxwell had come.
Father Conmee read in secret PATER and AVE and crossed his breast.
DEUS IN ADIUTORIUM.
He walked calmly and read mutely the nones, walking and reading till
he came to RES in BEATI IMMACULATI: PRINCIPIUM VERBORUM TUORUM VERITAS:
IN ETERNUM OMNIA INDICIA IUSTITIAE TUAE.
A flushed young man came from a gap of a hedge and after him came
a young woman with wild nodding daisies in her hand. The young man
raised his cap abruptly: the young woman abruptly bent and with slow care
detached from her light skirt a clinging twig.
Father Conmee blessed both gravely and turned a thin page of his
breviary. SIN: PRINCIPES PERSECUTI SUNT ME GRATIS: ET A VERBIS TUIS
FORMIDAVIT COR MEUM.
    * * * * *
Corny Kelleher closed his long daybook and glanced with his
drooping eye at a pine coffinlid sentried in a corner. He pulled himself
erect, went to it and, spinning it on its axle, viewed its shape and brass
furnishings. Chewing his blade of hay he laid the coffinlid by and came to
the doorway. There he tilted his hatbrim to give shade to his eyes and
leaned against the doorcase, looking idly out.
Father John Conmee stepped into the Dollymount tram on
Newcomen bridge.
Corny Kelleher locked his largefooted boots and gazed, his hat
downtilted, chewing his blade of hay.
Constable 57C, on his beat, stood to pass the time of day.
–That’s a fine day, Mr Kelleher.
–Ay, Corny Kelleher said.
–It’s very close, the constable said.
Corny Kelleher sped a silent jet of hayjuice arching from his mouth
while a generous white arm from a window in Eccles street flung forth a
coin.
–What’s the best news? he asked.
–I seen that particular party last evening, the constable said with bated
breath.
    * * * * *
A onelegged sailor crutched himself round MacConnell’s corner,
skirting Rabaiotti’s icecream car, and jerked himself up Eccles street.
Towards Larry O’Rourke, in shirtsleeves in his doorway, he growled
unamiably:
–For England ...
He swung himself violently forward past Katey and Boody Dedalus,
halted and growled:
–Home and Beauty.
J. J. O’Molloy’s white careworn face was told that Mr Lambert was
in the warehouse with a visitor.
A stout lady stopped, took a copper coin from her purse and dropped
it into the cap held out to her. The sailor grumbled thanks, glanced
sourly at the unheeding windows, sank his head and swung himself forward
four strides.
He halted and growled angrily:
–For England ...
Two barefoot urchins, sucking long liquorice laces, halted near him,
gaping at his stump with their yellowslobbered mouths.
He swung himself forward in vigorous jerks, halted, lifted his head
towards a window and bayed deeply:
–Home and Beauty.
The gay sweet chirping whistling within went on a bar or two, ceased.
The blind of the window was drawn aside. A card UNFURNISHED APARTMENTS
slipped from the sash and fell. A plump bare generous arm shone, was seen,
held forth from a white petticoatbodice and taut shiftstraps. A woman’s
hand flung forth a coin over the area railings. It fell on the path.
One of the urchins ran to it, picked it up and dropped it into the
minstrel’s cap, saying:
–There, sir.
    * * * * *
Katey and Boody Dedalus shoved in the door of the closesteaming
kitchen.
–Did you put in the books? Boody asked.
Maggy at the range rammed down a greyish mass beneath bubbling
suds twice with her potstick and wiped her brow.
–They wouldn’t give anything on them, she said.
Father Conmee walked through Clongowes fields, his thinsocked
ankles tickled by stubble.
–Where did you try? Boody asked.
–M’Guinness’s.
Boody stamped her foot and threw her satchel on the table.
–Bad cess to her big face! she cried.
Katey went to the range and peered with squinting eyes.
–What’s in the pot? she asked.
–Shirts, Maggy said.
Boody cried angrily:
–Crickey, is there nothing for us to eat?
Katey, lifting the kettlelid in a pad of her stained skirt, asked:
–And what’s in this?
A heavy fume gushed in answer.
–Peasoup, Maggy said.
–Where did you get it? Katey asked.
–Sister Mary Patrick, Maggy said.
The lacquey rang his bell.
–Barang!
Boody sat down at the table and said hungrily:
–Give us it here.
Maggy poured yellow thick soup from the kettle into a bowl. Katey,
sitting opposite Boody, said quietly, as her fingertip lifted to her mouth
random crumbs:
–A good job we have that much. Where’s Dilly?
–Gone to meet father, Maggy said.
Boody, breaking big chunks of bread into the yellow soup, added:
–Our father who art not in heaven.
Maggy, pouring yellow soup in Katey’s bowl, exclaimed:
–Boody! For shame!
A skiff, a crumpled throwaway, Elijah is coming, rode lightly down
the Liffey, under Loopline bridge, shooting the rapids where water chafed
around the bridgepiers, sailing eastward past hulls and anchorchains,
between the Customhouse old dock and George’s quay.
    * * * * *
The blond girl in Thornton’s bedded the wicker basket with rustling
fibre. Blazes Boylan handed her the bottle swathed in pink tissue paper
and a small jar.
–Put these in first, will you? he said.
–Yes, sir, the blond girl said. And the fruit on top.
–That’ll do, game ball, Blazes Boylan said.
She bestowed fat pears neatly, head by tail, and among them ripe
shamefaced peaches.
Blazes Boylan walked here and there in new tan shoes about the
fruitsmelling shop, lifting fruits, young juicy crinkled and plump red
tomatoes, sniffing smells.
H. E. L. Y.’S filed before him, tallwhitehatted, past Tangier lane,
plodding towards their goal.
He turned suddenly from a chip of strawberries, drew a gold watch
from his fob and held it at its chain’s length.
–Can you send them by tram? Now?
A darkbacked figure under Merchants’ arch scanned books on the
hawker’s cart.
–Certainly, sir. Is it in the city?
–O, yes, Blazes Boylan said. Ten minutes.
The blond girl handed him a docket and pencil.
–Will you write the address, sir?
Blazes Boylan at the counter wrote and pushed the docket to her.
–Send it at once, will you? he said. It’s for an invalid.
–Yes, sir. I will, sir.
Blazes Boylan rattled merry money in his trousers’ pocket.
–What’s the damage? he asked.
The blond girl’s slim fingers reckoned the fruits.
Blazes Boylan looked into the cut of her blouse. A young pullet. He
took a red carnation from the tall stemglass.
–This for me? he asked gallantly.
The blond girl glanced sideways at him, got up regardless, with his tie
a bit crooked, blushing.
–Yes, sir, she said.
Bending archly she reckoned again fat pears and blushing peaches.
Blazes Boylan looked in her blouse with more favour, the stalk of the
red flower between his smiling teeth.
–May I say a word to your telephone, missy? he asked roguishly.
    * * * * *
–MA! Almidano Artifoni said.
He gazed over Stephen’s shoulder at Goldsmith’s knobby poll.
Two carfuls of tourists passed slowly, their women sitting fore,
gripping the handrests. Palefaces. Men’s arms frankly round their stunted
forms. They looked from Trinity to the blind columned porch of the bank
of Ireland where pigeons roocoocooed.
–ANCH’IO HO AVUTO DI QUESTE IDEE, Almidano Artifoni said, QUAND’ ERO
GIOVINE COME LEI. EPPOI MI SONO CONVINTO CHE IL MONDO E UNA BESTIA.
PECCATO. PERCHE LA SUA VOCE ... SAREBBE UN CESPITE DI RENDITA, VIA.
INVECE, LEI SI SACRIFICA.
–SACRIFIZIO INCRUENTO, Stephen said smiling, swaying his ashplant in slow
swingswong from its midpoint, lightly.
–SPERIAMO, the round mustachioed face said pleasantly. MA, DIA RETTA A
ME. CI RIFLETTA.
By the stern stone hand of Grattan, bidding halt, an Inchicore tram
unloaded straggling Highland soldiers of a band.
–CI RIFLETTERO, Stephen said, glancing down the solid trouserleg.
–MA, SUL SERIO, EH? Almidano Artifoni said.
His heavy hand took Stephen’s firmly. Human eyes. They gazed
curiously an instant and turned quickly towards a Dalkey tram.
–ECCOLO, Almidano Artifoni said in friendly haste. VENGA A TROVARMI E CI
PENSI. ADDIO, CARO.
–ARRIVEDERLA, MAESTRO, Stephen said, raising his hat when his hand was
freed. E GRAZIE.
–DI CHE? Almidano Artifoni said. SCUSI, EH? TANTE BELLE COSE!
Almidano Artifoni, holding up a baton of rolled music as a signal,
trotted on stout trousers after the Dalkey tram. In vain he trotted,
signalling in vain among the rout of barekneed gillies smuggling
implements of music through Trinity gates.
    * * * * *
Miss Dunne hid the Capel street library copy of THE WOMAN IN WHITE
far back in her drawer and rolled a sheet of gaudy notepaper into her
typewriter.
Too much mystery business in it. Is he in love with that one, Marion?
Change it and get another by Mary Cecil Haye.
The disk shot down the groove, wobbled a while, ceased and ogled
them: six.
Miss Dunne clicked on the keyboard:
–16 June 1904.
Five tallwhitehatted sandwichmen between Monypeny’s corner and
the slab where Wolfe Tone’s statue was not, eeled themselves turning
H. E. L. Y.’S and plodded back as they had come.
Then she stared at the large poster of Marie Kendall, charming soubrette,
and, listlessly lolling, scribbled on the jotter sixteens and capital
esses. Mustard hair and dauby cheeks. She’s not nicelooking, is she? The
way she’s holding up her bit of a skirt. Wonder will that fellow be at the
band tonight. If I could get that dressmaker to make a concertina skirt
like Susy Nagle’s. They kick out grand. Shannon and all the boatclub
swells never took his eyes off her. Hope to goodness he won’t keep me here
till seven.
The telephone rang rudely by her ear.
–Hello. Yes, sir. No, sir. Yes, sir. I’ll ring them up after five. Only
those two, sir, for Belfast and Liverpool. All right, sir. Then I can go
after six if you’re not back. A quarter after. Yes, sir. Twentyseven and
six. I’ll tell him. Yes: one, seven, six.
She scribbled three figures on an envelope.
–Mr Boylan! Hello! That gentleman from SPORT was in looking for you.
Mr Lenehan, yes. He said he’ll be in the Ormond at four. No, sir. Yes,
sir. I’ll ring them up after five.
    * * * * *
Two pink faces turned in the flare of the tiny torch.
–Who’s that? Ned Lambert asked. Is that Crotty?
–Ringabella and Crosshaven, a voice replied groping for foothold.
–Hello, Jack, is that yourself? Ned Lambert said, raising in salute his
pliant lath among the flickering arches. Come on. Mind your steps there.
The vesta in the clergyman’s uplifted hand consumed itself in a long soft
flame and was let fall. At their feet its red speck died: and mouldy air
closed round them.
–How interesting! a refined accent said in the gloom.
–Yes, sir, Ned Lambert said heartily. We are standing in the historic
council chamber of saint Mary’s abbey where silken Thomas proclaimed
himself a rebel in 1534. This is the most historic spot in all Dublin.
O’Madden Burke is going to write something about it one of these days. The
old bank of Ireland was over the way till the time of the union and the
original jews’ temple was here too before they built their synagogue over
in Adelaide road. You were never here before, Jack, were you?
–No, Ned.
–He rode down through Dame walk, the refined accent said, if my
memory serves me. The mansion of the Kildares was in Thomas court.
–That’s right, Ned Lambert said. That’s quite right, sir.
–If you will be so kind then, the clergyman said, the next time to allow
me perhaps ...
–Certainly, Ned Lambert said. Bring the camera whenever you like. I’ll
get those bags cleared away from the windows. You can take it from here or
from here.
In the still faint light he moved about, tapping with his lath the piled
seedbags and points of vantage on the floor.
From a long face a beard and gaze hung on a chessboard.
–I’m deeply obliged, Mr Lambert, the clergyman said. I won’t trespass on
your valuable time ...
–You’re welcome, sir, Ned Lambert said. Drop in whenever you like. Next
week, say. Can you see?
–Yes, yes. Good afternoon, Mr Lambert. Very pleased to have met you.
–Pleasure is mine, sir, Ned Lambert answered.
He followed his guest to the outlet and then whirled his lath away
among the pillars. With J. J. O’Molloy he came forth slowly into Mary’s
abbey where draymen were loading floats with sacks of carob and palmnut
meal, O’Connor, Wexford.
He stood to read the card in his hand.
–The reverend Hugh C. Love, Rathcoffey. Present address: Saint
Michael’s, Sallins. Nice young chap he is. He’s writing a book about the
Fitzgeralds he told me. He’s well up in history, faith.
The young woman with slow care detached from her light skirt a
clinging twig.
–I thought you were at a new gunpowder plot, J. J. O’Molloy said.
Ned Lambert cracked his fingers in the air.
–God! he cried. I forgot to tell him that one about the earl of Kildare
after he set fire to Cashel cathedral. You know that one? I’M BLOODY SORRY
I DID IT, says he, BUT I DECLARE TO GOD I THOUGHT THE ARCHBISHOP WAS
INSIDE. He mightn’t like it, though. What? God, I’ll tell him anyhow.
That was the great earl, the Fitzgerald Mor. Hot members they were all of
them, the Geraldines.
The horses he passed started nervously under their slack harness. He
slapped a piebald haunch quivering near him and cried:
–Woa, sonny!
He turned to J. J. O’Molloy and asked:
–Well, Jack. What is it? What’s the trouble? Wait awhile. Hold hard.
With gaping mouth and head far back he stood still and, after an
instant, sneezed loudly.
–Chow! he said. Blast you!
–The dust from those sacks, J. J. O’Molloy said politely.
–No, Ned Lambert gasped, I caught a ... cold night before ... blast
your soul ... night before last ... and there was a hell of a lot of
draught ...
He held his handkerchief ready for the coming ...
–I was ... Glasnevin this morning ... poor little ... what do you call
him ... Chow! ... Mother of Moses!
    * * * * *
Tom Rochford took the top disk from the pile he clasped against his
claret waistcoat.
–See? he said. Say it’s turn six. In here, see. Turn Now On.
He slid it into the left slot for them. It shot down the groove, wobbled
a while, ceased, ogling them: six.
Lawyers of the past, haughty, pleading, beheld pass from the
consolidated taxing office to Nisi Prius court Richie Goulding carrying
the costbag of Goulding, Collis and Ward and heard rustling from the
admiralty division of king’s bench to the court of appeal an elderly
female with false teeth smiling incredulously and a black silk skirt of
great amplitude.
–See? he said. See now the last one I put in is over here: Turns Over.
The impact. Leverage, see?
He showed them the rising column of disks on the right.
–Smart idea, Nosey Flynn said, snuffling. So a fellow coming in late can
see what turn is on and what turns are over.
–See? Tom Rochford said.
He slid in a disk for himself: and watched it shoot, wobble, ogle, stop:
four. Turn Now On.
–I’ll see him now in the Ormond, Lenehan said, and sound him. One good
turn deserves another.
–Do, Tom Rochford said. Tell him I’m Boylan with impatience.
–Goodnight, M’Coy said abruptly. When you two begin
Nosey Flynn stooped towards the lever, snuffling at it.
–But how does it work here, Tommy? he asked.
–Tooraloo, Lenehan said. See you later.
He followed M’Coy out across the tiny square of Crampton court.
–He’s a hero, he said simply.
–I know, M’Coy said. The drain, you mean.
–Drain? Lenehan said. It was down a manhole.
They passed Dan Lowry’s musichall where Marie Kendall, charming
soubrette, smiled on them from a poster a dauby smile.
Going down the path of Sycamore street beside the Empire musichall
Lenehan showed M’Coy how the whole thing was. One of those manholes
like a bloody gaspipe and there was the poor devil stuck down in it, half
choked with sewer gas. Down went Tom Rochford anyhow, booky’s vest
and all, with the rope round him. And be damned but he got the rope round
the poor devil and the two were hauled up.
–The act of a hero, he said.
At the Dolphin they halted to allow the ambulance car to gallop past
them for Jervis street.
–This way, he said, walking to the right. I want to pop into Lynam’s to
see Sceptre’s starting price. What’s the time by your gold watch and
chain?
M’Coy peered into Marcus Tertius Moses’ sombre office, then at
O’Neill’s clock.
–After three, he said. Who’s riding her?
–O. Madden, Lenehan said. And a game filly she is.
While he waited in Temple bar M’Coy dodged a banana peel with
gentle pushes of his toe from the path to the gutter. Fellow might damn
easy get a nasty fall there coming along tight in the dark.
The gates of the drive opened wide to give egress to the viceregal
cavalcade.
–Even money, Lenehan said returning. I knocked against Bantam Lyons in
there going to back a bloody horse someone gave him that hasn’t an
earthly. Through here.
They went up the steps and under Merchants’ arch. A darkbacked
figure scanned books on the hawker’s cart.
Continue...

This eBook of “Ulysses” by James Joyce belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
UlyssesBy James JoyceAt Amazon
