


Because in middle youth he had often sat observing through a rondel of
bossed glass of a multicoloured pane the spectacle offered with continual
changes of the thoroughfare without, pedestrians, quadrupeds,
velocipedes, vehicles, passing slowly, quickly, evenly, round and round
and round the rim of a round and round precipitous globe.
What distinct different memories had each of her now eight years
deceased?
The older, her bezique cards and counters, her Skye terrier, her
suppositious wealth, her lapses of responsiveness and incipient catarrhal
deafness: the younger, her lamp of colza oil before the statue of the
Immaculate Conception, her green and maroon brushes for Charles Stewart
Parnell and for Michael Davitt, her tissue papers.
Were there no means still remaining to him to achieve the rejuvenation
which these reminiscences divulged to a younger companion rendered the
more desirable?
The indoor exercises, formerly intermittently practised, subsequently
abandoned, prescribed in Eugen Sandow’s PHYSICAL STRENGTH AND HOW TO
OBTAIN IT which, designed particularly for commercial men engaged in
sedentary occupations, were to be made with mental concentration in front
of a mirror so as to bring into play the various families of muscles and
produce successively a pleasant rigidity, a more pleasant relaxation and
the most pleasant repristination of juvenile agility.
Had any special agility been his in earlier youth?
Though ringweight lifting had been beyond his strength and the full
circle gyration beyond his courage yet as a High school scholar he had
excelled in his stable and protracted execution of the half lever
movement on the parallel bars in consequence of his abnormally developed
abdominal muscles.
Did either openly allude to their racial difference?
Neither.
What, reduced to their simplest reciprocal form, were Bloom’s thoughts
about Stephen’s thoughts about Bloom and about Stephen’s thoughts about
Bloom’s thoughts about Stephen?
He thought that he thought that he was a jew whereas he knew that he knew
that he knew that he was not.
What, the enclosures of reticence removed, were their respective
parentages?
Bloom, only born male transubstantial heir of Rudolf Virag (subsequently
Rudolph Bloom) of Szombathely, Vienna, Budapest, Milan, London and Dublin
and of Ellen Higgins, second daughter of Julius Higgins (born Karoly) and
Fanny Higgins (born Hegarty). Stephen, eldest surviving male
consubstantial heir of Simon Dedalus of Cork and Dublin and of Mary,
daughter of Richard and Christina Goulding (born Grier).
Had Bloom and Stephen been baptised, and where and by whom, cleric or
layman?
Bloom (three times), by the reverend Mr Gilmer Johnston M. A., alone, in
the protestant church of Saint Nicholas Without, Coombe, by James
O’Connor, Philip Gilligan and James Fitzpatrick, together, under a pump
in the village of Swords, and by the reverend Charles Malone C. C., in
the church of the Three Patrons, Rathgar. Stephen (once) by the reverend
Charles Malone C. C., alone, in the church of the Three Patrons, Rathgar.
Did they find their educational careers similar?
Substituting Stephen for Bloom Stoom would have passed successively
through a dame’s school and the high school. Substituting Bloom for
Stephen Blephen would have passed successively through the preparatory,
junior, middle and senior grades of the intermediate and through the
matriculation, first arts, second arts and arts degree courses of the
royal university.
Why did Bloom refrain from stating that he had frequented the university
of life?
Because of his fluctuating incertitude as to whether this observation had
or had not been already made by him to Stephen or by Stephen to him.
What two temperaments did they individually represent?
The scientific. The artistic.
What proofs did Bloom adduce to prove that his tendency was towards
applied, rather than towards pure, science?
Certain possible inventions of which he had cogitated when reclining in a
state of supine repletion to aid digestion, stimulated by his
appreciation of the importance of inventions now common but once
revolutionary, for example, the aeronautic parachute, the reflecting
telescope, the spiral corkscrew, the safety pin, the mineral water
siphon, the canal lock with winch and sluice, the suction pump.
Were these inventions principally intended for an improved scheme of
kindergarten?
Yes, rendering obsolete popguns, elastic airbladders, games of hazard,
catapults. They comprised astronomical kaleidoscopes exhibiting the
twelve constellations of the zodiac from Aries to Pisces, miniature
mechanical orreries, arithmetical gelatine lozenges, geometrical to
correspond with zoological biscuits, globemap playing balls, historically
costumed dolls.
What also stimulated him in his cogitations?
The financial success achieved by Ephraim Marks and Charles A. James, the
former by his 1d bazaar at 42 George’s street, south, the latter at his
6-1/2d shop and world’s fancy fair and waxwork exhibition at 30 Henry
street, admission 2d, children 1d: and the infinite possibilities
hitherto unexploited of the modern art of advertisement if condensed in
triliteral monoideal symbols, vertically of maximum visibility (divined),
horizontally of maximum legibility (deciphered) and of magnetising
efficacy to arrest involuntary attention, to interest, to convince, to
decide.
Such as?
K. II. Kino’s 11/- Trousers. House of Keys. Alexander J. Keyes.
Such as not?
Look at this long candle. Calculate when it burns out and you receive
gratis 1 pair of our special non-compo boots, guaranteed 1 candle power.
Address: Barclay and Cook, 18 Talbot street.
Bacilikil (Insect Powder). Veribest (Boot Blacking). Uwantit (Combined
pocket twoblade penknife with corkscrew, nailfile and pipecleaner).
Such as never?
What is home without Plumtree’s Potted Meat?
Incomplete.
With it an abode of bliss.
Manufactured by George Plumtree, 23 Merchants’ quay, Dublin, put up in 4
oz pots, and inserted by Councillor Joseph P. Nannetti, M. P., Rotunda
Ward, 19 Hardwicke street, under the obituary notices and anniversaries
of deceases. The name on the label is Plumtree. A plumtree in a meatpot,
registered trade mark. Beware of imitations. Peatmot. Trumplee. Moutpat.
Plamtroo.
Which example did he adduce to induce Stephen to deduce that originality,
though producing its own reward, does not invariably conduce to success?
His own ideated and rejected project of an illuminated showcart, drawn by
a beast of burden, in which two smartly dressed girls were to be seated
engaged in writing.
What suggested scene was then constructed by Stephen?
Solitary hotel in mountain pass. Autumn. Twilight. Fire lit. In dark
corner young man seated. Young woman enters. Restless. Solitary. She
sits. She goes to window. She stands. She sits. Twilight. She thinks. On
solitary hotel paper she writes. She thinks. She writes. She sighs.
Wheels and hoofs. She hurries out. He comes from his dark corner. He
seizes solitary paper. He holds it towards fire. Twilight. He reads.
Solitary.
What?
In sloping, upright and backhands: Queen’s Hotel, Queen’s Hotel, Queen’s
Hotel. Queen’s Ho...
What suggested scene was then reconstructed by Bloom?
The Queen’s Hotel, Ennis, county Clare, where Rudolph Bloom (Rudolf
Virag) died on the evening of the 27 June 1886, at some hour unstated, in
consequence of an overdose of monkshood (aconite) selfadministered in the
form of a neuralgic liniment composed of 2 parts of aconite liniment to I
of chloroform liniment (purchased by him at 10.20 a.m. on the morning of
27 June 1886 at the medical hall of Francis Dennehy, 17 Church street,
Ennis) after having, though not in consequence of having, purchased at
3.15 p.m. on the afternoon of 27 June 1886 a new boater straw hat, extra
smart (after having, though not in consequence of having, purchased at
the hour and in the place aforesaid, the toxin aforesaid), at the general
drapery store of James Cullen, 4 Main street, Ennis.
Did he attribute this homonymity to information or coincidence or
intuition?
Coincidence.
Did he depict the scene verbally for his guest to see?
He preferred himself to see another’s face and listen to another’s words
by which potential narration was realised and kinetic temperament
relieved.
Did he see only a second coincidence in the second scene narrated to him,
described by the narrator as A PISGAH SIGHT OF PALESTINE OR THE PARABLE
OF THE PLUMS?
It, with the preceding scene and with others unnarrated but existent by
implication, to which add essays on various subjects or moral apothegms
(e.g. MY FAVOURITE HERO OR PROCRASTINATION IS THE THIEF OF TIME) composed
during schoolyears, seemed to him to contain in itself and in conjunction
with the personal equation certain possibilities of financial, social,
personal and sexual success, whether specially collected and selected as
model pedagogic themes (of cent per cent merit) for the use of
preparatory and junior grade students or contributed in printed form,
following the precedent of Philip Beaufoy or Doctor Dick or Heblon’s
STUDIES IN BLUE, to a publication of certified circulation and solvency
or employed verbally as intellectual stimulation for sympathetic
auditors, tacitly appreciative of successful narrative and confidently
augurative of successful achievement, during the increasingly longer
nights gradually following the summer solstice on the day but three
following, videlicet, Tuesday, 21 June (S. Aloysius Gonzaga), sunrise
3.33 a.m., sunset 8.29 p.m.
Which domestic problem as much as, if not more than, any other frequently
engaged his mind?
What to do with our wives.
What had been his hypothetical singular solutions?
Parlour games (dominos, halma, tiddledywinks, spilikins, cup and ball,
nap, spoil five, bezique, twentyfive, beggar my neighbour, draughts,
chess or backgammon): embroidery, darning or knitting for the policeaided
clothing society: musical duets, mandoline and guitar, piano and flute,
guitar and piano: legal scrivenery or envelope addressing: biweekly
visits to variety entertainments: commercial activity as pleasantly
commanding and pleasingly obeyed mistress proprietress in a cool dairy
shop or warm cigar divan: the clandestine satisfaction of erotic
irritation in masculine brothels, state inspected and medically
controlled: social visits, at regular infrequent prevented intervals and
with regular frequent preventive superintendence, to and from female
acquaintances of recognised respectability in the vicinity: courses of
evening instruction specially designed to render liberal instruction
agreeable.
What instances of deficient mental development in his wife inclined him
in favour of the lastmentioned (ninth) solution?
In disoccupied moments she had more than once covered a sheet of paper
with signs and hieroglyphics which she stated were Greek and Irish and
Hebrew characters. She had interrogated constantly at varying intervals
as to the correct method of writing the capital initial of the name of a
city in Canada, Quebec. She understood little of political complications,
internal, or balance of power, external. In calculating the addenda of
bills she frequently had recourse to digital aid. After completion of
laconic epistolary compositions she abandoned the implement of
calligraphy in the encaustic pigment, exposed to the corrosive action of
copperas, green vitriol and nutgall. Unusual polysyllables of foreign
origin she interpreted phonetically or by false analogy or by both:
metempsychosis (met him pike hoses), ALIAS (a mendacious person mentioned
in sacred scripture).
What compensated in the false balance of her intelligence for these and
such deficiencies of judgment regarding persons, places and things?
The false apparent parallelism of all perpendicular arms of all balances,
proved true by construction. The counterbalance of her proficiency of
judgment regarding one person, proved true by experiment.
How had he attempted to remedy this state of comparative ignorance?
Variously. By leaving in a conspicuous place a certain book open at a
certain page: by assuming in her, when alluding explanatorily, latent
knowledge: by open ridicule in her presence of some absent other’s
ignorant lapse.
With what success had he attempted direct instruction?
She followed not all, a part of the whole, gave attention with interest
comprehended with surprise, with care repeated, with greater difficulty
remembered, forgot with ease, with misgiving reremembered, rerepeated
with error.
What system had proved more effective?
Indirect suggestion implicating selfinterest.
Example?
She disliked umbrella with rain, he liked woman with umbrella, she
disliked new hat with rain, he liked woman with new hat, he bought new
hat with rain, she carried umbrella with new hat.
Accepting the analogy implied in his guest’s parable which examples of
postexilic eminence did he adduce?
Three seekers of the pure truth, Moses of Egypt, Moses Maimonides, author
of MORE NEBUKIM (Guide of the Perplexed) and Moses Mendelssohn of such
eminence that from Moses (of Egypt) to Moses (Mendelssohn) there arose
none like Moses (Maimonides).
What statement was made, under correction, by Bloom concerning a fourth
seeker of pure truth, by name Aristotle, mentioned, with permission, by
Stephen?
That the seeker mentioned had been a pupil of a rabbinical philosopher,
name uncertain.
Were other anapocryphal illustrious sons of the law and children of a
selected or rejected race mentioned?
Felix Bartholdy Mendelssohn (composer), Baruch Spinoza (philosopher),
Mendoza (pugilist), Ferdinand Lassalle (reformer, duellist).
What fragments of verse from the ancient Hebrew and ancient Irish
languages were cited with modulations of voice and translation of texts
by guest to host and by host to guest?
By Stephen: SUIL, SUIL, SUIL ARUN, SUIL GO SIOCAIR AGUS SUIL GO CUIN
(walk, walk, walk your way, walk in safety, walk with care).
By Bloom: KIFELOCH, HARIMON RAKATEJCH M’BAAD L’ZAMATEJCH (thy temple amid
thy hair is as a slice of pomegranate).
How was a glyphic comparison of the phonic symbols of both languages made
in substantiation of the oral comparison?
By juxtaposition. On the penultimate blank page of a book of inferior
literary style, entituled SWEETS OF SIN (produced by Bloom and so
manipulated that its front cover carne in contact with the surface of the
table) with a pencil (supplied by Stephen) Stephen wrote the Irish
characters for gee, eh, dee, em, simple and modified, and Bloom in turn
wrote the Hebrew characters ghimel, aleph, daleth and (in the absence of
mem) a substituted qoph, explaining their arithmetical values as ordinal
and cardinal numbers, videlicet 3, 1, 4, and 100.
Was the knowledge possessed by both of each of these languages, the
extinct and the revived, theoretical or practical?
Theoretical, being confined to certain grammatical rules of accidence and
syntax and practically excluding vocabulary.
What points of contact existed between these languages and between the
peoples who spoke them?
The presence of guttural sounds, diacritic aspirations, epenthetic and
servile letters in both languages: their antiquity, both having been
taught on the plain of Shinar 242 years after the deluge in the seminary
instituted by Fenius Farsaigh, descendant of Noah, progenitor of Israel,
and ascendant of Heber and Heremon, progenitors of Ireland: their
archaeological, genealogical, hagiographical, exegetical, homiletic,
toponomastic, historical and religious literatures comprising the works
of rabbis and culdees, Torah, Talmud (Mischna and Ghemara), Massor,
Pentateuch, Book of the Dun Cow, Book of Ballymote, Garland of Howth,
Book of Kells: their dispersal, persecution, survival and revival: the
isolation of their synagogical and ecclesiastical rites in ghetto (S.
Mary’s Abbey) and masshouse (Adam and Eve’s tavern): the proscription of
their national costumes in penal laws and jewish dress acts: the
restoration in Chanah David of Zion and the possibility of Irish
political autonomy or devolution.
What anthem did Bloom chant partially in anticipation of that multiple,
ethnically irreducible consummation?
    KOLOD BALEJWAW PNIMAH
    NEFESCH, JEHUDI, HOMIJAH.
Why was the chant arrested at the conclusion of this first distich?
In consequence of defective mnemotechnic.
How did the chanter compensate for this deficiency?
By a periphrastic version of the general text.
In what common study did their mutual reflections merge?
The increasing simplification traceable from the Egyptian epigraphic
hieroglyphs to the Greek and Roman alphabets and the anticipation of
modern stenography and telegraphic code in the cuneiform inscriptions
(Semitic) and the virgular quinquecostate ogham writing (Celtic). Did the
guest comply with his host’s request?
Doubly, by appending his signature in Irish and Roman characters.
What was Stephen’s auditive sensation?
He heard in a profound ancient male unfamiliar melody the accumulation of
the past.
What was Bloom’s visual sensation?
He saw in a quick young male familiar form the predestination of a future.
What were Stephen’s and Bloom’s quasisimultaneous volitional
quasisensations of concealed identities?
Visually, Stephen’s: The traditional figure of hypostasis, depicted by
Johannes Damascenus, Lentulus Romanus and Epiphanius Monachus as
leucodermic, sesquipedalian with winedark hair. Auditively, Bloom’s: The
traditional accent of the ecstasy of catastrophe.
What future careers had been possible for Bloom in the past and with what
exemplars?
In the church, Roman, Anglican or Nonconformist: exemplars, the very
reverend John Conmee S. J., the reverend T. Salmon, D. D., provost of
Trinity college, Dr Alexander J. Dowie. At the bar, English or Irish:
exemplars, Seymour Bushe, K. C., Rufus Isaacs, K. C. On the stage modern
or Shakespearean: exemplars, Charles Wyndham, high comedian Osmond Tearle
(died 1901), exponent of Shakespeare.
Did the host encourage his guest to chant in a modulated voice a strange
legend on an allied theme?
Reassuringly, their place, where none could hear them talk, being
secluded, reassured, the decocted beverages, allowing for subsolid
residual sediment of a mechanical mixture, water plus sugar plus cream
plus cocoa, having been consumed.
Recite the first (major) part of this chanted legend.
    LITTLE HARRY HUGHES AND HIS SCHOOLFELLOWS ALL
    WENT OUT FOR TO PLAY BALL.
    AND THE VERY FIRST BALL LITTLE HARRY HUGHES PLAYED
    HE DROVE IT O’ER THE JEW’S GARDEN WALL.
    AND THE VERY SECOND BALL LITTLE HARRY HUGHES PLAYED
    HE BROKE THE JEW’S WINDOWS ALL.
How did the son of Rudolph receive this first part?
With unmixed feeling. Smiling, a jew he heard with pleasure and saw the
unbroken kitchen window.
Recite the second part (minor) of the legend.
    THEN OUT THERE CAME THE JEW’S DAUGHTER
    AND SHE ALL DRESSED IN GREEN.
    “COME BACK, COME BACK, YOU PRETTY LITTLE BOY,
    AND PLAY YOUR BALL AGAIN.”
    “I CAN’T COME BACK AND I WON’T COME BACK
    WITHOUT MY SCHOOLFELLOWS ALL.
    FOR IF MY MASTER HE DID HEAR
    HE’D MAKE IT A SORRY BALL.”
    SHE TOOK HIM BY THE LILYWHITE HAND
    AND LED HIM ALONG THE HALL
    UNTIL SHE LED HIM TO A ROOM
    WHERE NONE COULD HEAR HIM CALL.
    SHE TOOK A PENKNIFE OUT OF HER POCKET
    AND CUT OFF  HIS LITTLE HEAD.
    AND NOW HE’LL PLAY HIS BALL NO MORE
    FOR HE LIES AMONG THE DEAD.
How did the father of Millicent receive this second part?
With mixed feelings. Unsmiling, he heard and saw with wonder a jew’s
daughter, all dressed in green.
Condense Stephen’s commentary.
One of all, the least of all, is the victim predestined. Once by
inadvertence twice by design he challenges his destiny. It comes when he
is abandoned and challenges him reluctant and, as an apparition of hope
and youth, holds him unresisting. It leads him to a strange habitation,
to a secret infidel apartment, and there, implacable, immolates him,
consenting.
Why was the host (victim predestined) sad?
He wished that a tale of a deed should be told of a deed not by him
should by him not be told.
Why was the host (reluctant, unresisting) still?
In accordance with the law of the conservation of energy.
Why was the host (secret infidel) silent?
He weighed the possible evidences for and against ritual murder: the
incitations of the hierarchy, the superstition of the populace, the
propagation of rumour in continued fraction of veridicity, the envy of
opulence, the influence of retaliation, the sporadic reappearance of
atavistic delinquency, the mitigating circumstances of fanaticism,
hypnotic suggestion and somnambulism.
From which (if any) of these mental or physical disorders was he not
totally immune?
From hypnotic suggestion: once, waking, he had not recognised his
sleeping apartment: more than once, waking, he had been for an indefinite
time incapable of moving or uttering sounds. From somnambulism: once,
sleeping, his body had risen, crouched and crawled in the direction of a
heatless fire and, having attained its destination, there, curled,
unheated, in night attire had lain, sleeping.
Had this latter or any cognate phenomenon declared itself in any member
of his family?
Twice, in Holles street and in Ontario terrace, his daughter Millicent
(Milly) at the ages of 6 and 8 years had uttered in sleep an exclamation
of terror and had replied to the interrogations of two figures in night
attire with a vacant mute expression.
What other infantile memories had he of her?
15 June 1889. A querulous newborn female infant crying to cause and
lessen congestion. A child renamed Padney Socks she shook with shocks her
moneybox: counted his three free moneypenny buttons, one, tloo, tlee: a
doll, a boy, a sailor she cast away: blond, born of two dark, she had
blond ancestry, remote, a violation, Herr Hauptmann Hainau, Austrian
army, proximate, a hallucination, lieutenant Mulvey, British navy.
What endemic characteristics were present?
Conversely the nasal and frontal formation was derived in a direct line
of lineage which, though interrupted, would continue at distant intervals
to more distant intervals to its most distant intervals.
What memories had he of her adolescence?
She relegated her hoop and skippingrope to a recess. On the duke’s lawn,
entreated by an English visitor, she declined to permit him to make and
take away her photographic image (objection not stated). On the South
Circular road in the company of Elsa Potter, followed by an individual of
sinister aspect, she went half way down Stamer street and turned abruptly
back (reason of change not stated). On the vigil of the 15th anniversary
of her birth she wrote a letter from Mullingar, county Westmeath, making
a brief allusion to a local student (faculty and year not stated).
Did that first division, portending a second division, afflict him?
Less than he had imagined, more than he had hoped.
What second departure was contemporaneously perceived by him similarly,
if differently?
A temporary departure of his cat.
Why similarly, why differently?
Similarly, because actuated by a secret purpose the quest of a new male
(Mullingar student) or of a healing herb (valerian). Differently, because
of different possible returns to the inhabitants or to the habitation.
In other respects were their differences similar?
In passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in
unexpectedness.
As?
Inasmuch as leaning she sustained her blond hair for him to ribbon it for
her (cf neckarching cat). Moreover, on the free surface of the lake in
Stephen’s green amid inverted reflections of trees her uncommented spit,
describing concentric circles of waterrings, indicated by the constancy
of its permanence the locus of a somnolent prostrate fish (cf
mousewatching cat).
Again, in order to remember the date, combatants, issue and consequences
of a famous military engagement she pulled a plait of her hair (cf
earwashing cat). Furthermore, silly Milly, she dreamed of having had an
unspoken unremembered conversation with a horse whose name had been
Joseph to whom (which) she had offered a tumblerful of lemonade which it
(he) had appeared to have accepted (cf hearthdreaming cat). Hence, in
passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in unexpectedness,
their differences were similar.
In what way had he utilised gifts 1) an owl, 2) a clock, given as
matrimonial auguries, to interest and to instruct her?
As object lessons to explain: 1) the nature and habits of oviparous
animals, the possibility of aerial flight, certain abnormalities of
vision, the secular process of imbalsamation: 2) the principle of the
pendulum, exemplified in bob, wheelgear and regulator, the translation in
terms of human or social regulation of the various positions of clockwise
moveable indicators on an unmoving dial, the exactitude of the recurrence
per hour of an instant in each hour when the longer and the shorter
indicator were at the same angle of inclination, VIDELICET, 5 5/11
minutes past each hour per hour in arithmetical progression.
In what manners did she reciprocate?
She remembered: on the 27th anniversary of his birth she presented to him
a breakfast moustachecup of imitation Crown Derby porcelain ware. She
provided: at quarter day or thereabouts if or when purchases had been
made by him not for her she showed herself attentive to his necessities,
anticipating his desires. She admired: a natural phenomenon having been
explained by him to her she expressed the immediate desire to possess
without gradual acquisition a fraction of his science, the moiety, the
quarter, a thousandth part.
What proposal did Bloom, diambulist, father of Milly, somnambulist, make
to Stephen, noctambulist?
To pass in repose the hours intervening between Thursday (proper) and
Friday (normal) on an extemporised cubicle in the apartment immediately
above the kitchen and immediately adjacent to the sleeping apartment of
his host and hostess.
What various advantages would or might have resulted from a prolongation
of such an extemporisation?
For the guest: security of domicile and seclusion of study. For the host:
rejuvenation of intelligence, vicarious satisfaction. For the hostess:
disintegration of obsession, acquisition of correct Italian
pronunciation.
Why might these several provisional contingencies between a guest and a
hostess not necessarily preclude or be precluded by a permanent
eventuality of reconciliatory union between a schoolfellow and a jew’s
daughter?
Because the way to daughter led through mother, the way to mother through
daughter.
To what inconsequent polysyllabic question of his host did the guest
return a monosyllabic negative answer?
If he had known the late Mrs Emily Sinico, accidentally killed at Sydney
Parade railway station, 14 October 1903.
What inchoate corollary statement was consequently suppressed by the
host?
A statement explanatory of his absence on the occasion of the interment
of Mrs Mary Dedalus (born Goulding), 26 June 1903, vigil of the
anniversary of the decease of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag).
Was the proposal of asylum accepted?
Promptly, inexplicably, with amicability, gratefully it was declined.
What exchange of money took place between host and guest?
The former returned to the latter, without interest, a sum of money
(1-7-0), one pound seven shillings sterling, advanced by the latter to
the former.
What counterproposals were alternately advanced, accepted, modified,
declined, restated in other terms, reaccepted, ratified, reconfirmed?
To inaugurate a prearranged course of Italian instruction, place the
residence of the instructed. To inaugurate a course of vocal instruction,
place the residence of the instructress. To inaugurate a series of static
semistatic and peripatetic intellectual dialogues, places the residence
of both speakers (if both speakers were resident in the same place), the
Ship hotel and tavern, 6 Lower Abbey street (W. and E. Connery,
proprietors), the National Library of Ireland, 10 Kildare street, the
National Maternity Hospital, 29, 30 and 31 Holles street, a public
garden, the vicinity of a place of worship, a conjunction of two or more
public thoroughfares, the point of bisection of a right line drawn
between their residences (if both speakers were resident in different
places).
What rendered problematic for Bloom the realisation of these mutually
selfexcluding propositions?
The irreparability of the past: once at a performance of Albert Hengler’s
circus in the Rotunda, Rutland square, Dublin, an intuitive particoloured
clown in quest of paternity had penetrated from the ring to a place in
the auditorium where Bloom, solitary, was seated and had publicly
declared to an exhilarated audience that he (Bloom) was his (the clown’s)
papa. The imprevidibility of the future: once in the summer of 1898 he
(Bloom) had marked a florin (2/-) with three notches on the milled edge
and tendered it m payment of an account due to and received by J. and T.
Davy, family grocers, 1 Charlemont Mall, Grand Canal, for circulation on
the waters of civic finance, for possible, circuitous or direct, return.
Was the clown Bloom’s son?
No.
Had Bloom’s coin returned?
Never.
Why would a recurrent frustration the more depress him?
Because at the critical turningpoint of human existence he desired to
amend many social conditions, the product of inequality and avarice and
international animosity.
He believed then that human life was infinitely perfectible, eliminating
these conditions?
There remained the generic conditions imposed by natural, as distinct
from human law, as integral parts of the human whole: the necessity of
destruction to procure alimentary sustenance: the painful character of
the ultimate functions of separate existence, the agonies of birth and
death: the monotonous menstruation of simian and (particularly) human
females extending from the age of puberty to the menopause: inevitable
accidents at sea, in mines and factories: certain very painful maladies
and their resultant surgical operations, innate lunacy and congenital
criminality, decimating epidemics: catastrophic cataclysms which make
terror the basis of human mentality: seismic upheavals the epicentres of
which are located in densely populated regions: the fact of vital growth,
through convulsions of metamorphosis, from infancy through maturity to
decay.
Why did he desist from speculation?
Because it was a task for a superior intelligence to substitute other
more acceptable phenomena in the place of the less acceptable phenomena
to be removed.
Did Stephen participate in his dejection?
He affirmed his significance as a conscious rational animal proceeding
syllogistically from the known to the unknown and a conscious rational
reagent between a micro and a macrocosm ineluctably constructed upon the
incertitude of the void.
Was this affirmation apprehended by Bloom?
Not verbally. Substantially.
What comforted his misapprehension?
That as a competent keyless citizen he had proceeded energetically from
the unknown to the known through the incertitude of the void.
In what order of precedence, with what attendant ceremony was the exodus
from the house of bondage to the wilderness of inhabitation effected?
Lighted Candle in Stick borne by
BLOOM
Diaconal Hat on Ashplant borne by
STEPHEN:
With what intonation secreto of what commemorative psalm?
The 113th, MODUS PEREGRINUS: IN EXITU ISRAEL DE EGYPTO: DOMUS JACOB DE
POPULO BARBARO.
What did each do at the door of egress?
Bloom set the candlestick on the floor. Stephen put the hat on his head.
For what creature was the door of egress a door of ingress?
For a cat.
What spectacle confronted them when they, first the host, then the guest,
emerged silently, doubly dark, from obscurity by a passage from the rere
of the house into the penumbra of the garden?
The heaventree of stars hung with humid nightblue fruit.
With what meditations did Bloom accompany his demonstration to his
companion of various constellations?
Meditations of evolution increasingly vaster: of the moon invisible in
incipient lunation, approaching perigee: of the infinite lattiginous
scintillating uncondensed milky way, discernible by daylight by an
observer placed at the lower end of a cylindrical vertical shaft 5000 ft
deep sunk from the surface towards the centre of the earth: of Sirius
(alpha in Canis Maior) 10 lightyears (57,000,000,000,000 miles) distant
and in volume 900 times the dimension of our planet: of Arcturus: of the
precession of equinoxes: of Orion with belt and sextuple sun theta and
nebula in which 100 of our solar systems could be contained: of moribund
and of nascent new stars such as Nova in 1901: of our system plunging
towards the constellation of Hercules: of the parallax or parallactic
drift of socalled fixed stars, in reality evermoving wanderers from
immeasurably remote eons to infinitely remote futures in comparison with
which the years, threescore and ten, of allotted human life formed a
parenthesis of infinitesimal brevity.
Were there obverse meditations of involution increasingly less vast?
Of the eons of geological periods recorded in the stratifications of the
earth: of the myriad minute entomological organic existences concealed in
cavities of the earth, beneath removable stones, in hives and mounds, of
microbes, germs, bacteria, bacilli, spermatozoa: of the incalculable
trillions of billions of millions of imperceptible molecules contained by
cohesion of molecular affinity in a single pinhead: of the universe of
human serum constellated with red and white bodies, themselves universes
of void space constellated with other bodies, each, in continuity, its
universe of divisible component bodies of which each was again divisible
in divisions of redivisible component bodies, dividends and divisors ever
diminishing without actual division till, if the progress were carried
far enough, nought nowhere was never reached.
Why did he not elaborate these calculations to a more precise result?
Because some years previously in 1886 when occupied with the problem of
the quadrature of the circle he had learned of .the existence of a number
computed to a relative degree of accuracy to be of such magnitude and of
so many places, e.g., the 9th power of the 9th power of 9, that, the
result having been obtained, 33 closely printed volumes of 1000 pages
each of innumerable quires and reams of India paper would have to be
requisitioned in order to contain the complete tale of its printed
integers of units, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands, millions, tens of millions, hundreds of millions, billions,
the nucleus of the nebula of every digit of every series containing
succinctly the potentiality of being raised to the utmost kinetic
elaboration of any power of any of its powers.
Did he find the problems of the inhabitability of the planets and their
satellites by a race, given in species, and of the possible social and
moral redemption of said race by a redeemer, easier of solution?
Of a different order of difficulty. Conscious that the human organism,
normally capable of sustaining an atmospheric pressure of 19 tons, when
elevated to a considerable altitude in the terrestrial atmosphere
suffered with arithmetical progression of intensity, according as the
line of demarcation between troposphere and stratosphere was approximated
from nasal hemorrhage, impeded respiration and vertigo, when proposing
this problem for solution, he had conjectured as a working hypothesis
which could not be proved impossible that a more adaptable and
differently anatomically constructed race of beings might subsist
otherwise under Martian, Mercurial, Veneral, Jovian, Saturnian, Neptunian
or Uranian sufficient and equivalent conditions, though an apogean
humanity of beings created in varying forms with finite differences
resulting similar to the whole and to one another would probably there as
here remain inalterably and inalienably attached to vanities, to vanities
of vanities and to all that is vanity.
And the problem of possible redemption?
The minor was proved by the major.
Which various features of the constellations were in turn considered?
The various colours significant of various degrees of vitality (white,
yellow, crimson, vermilion, cinnabar): their degrees of brilliancy: their
magnitudes revealed up to and including the 7th: their positions: the
waggoner’s star: Walsingham way: the chariot of David: the annular
cinctures of Saturn: the condensation of spiral nebulae into suns: the
interdependent gyrations of double suns: the independent synchronous
discoveries of Galileo, Simon Marius, Piazzi, Le Verrier, Herschel,
Galle: the systematisations attempted by Bode and Kepler of cubes of
distances and squares of times of revolution: the almost infinite
compressibility of hirsute comets and their vast elliptical egressive and
reentrant orbits from perihelion to aphelion: the sidereal origin of
meteoric stones: the Libyan floods on Mars about the period of the birth
of the younger astroscopist: the annual recurrence of meteoric showers
about the period of the feast of S. Lawrence (martyr, lo August): the
monthly recurrence known as the new moon with the old moon in her arms:
the posited influence of celestial on human bodies: the appearance of a
star (1st magnitude) of exceeding brilliancy dominating by night and day
(a new luminous sun generated by the collision and amalgamation in
incandescence of two nonluminous exsuns) about the period of the birth of
William Shakespeare over delta in the recumbent neversetting
constellation of Cassiopeia and of a star (2nd magnitude) of similar
origin but of lesser brilliancy which had appeared in and disappeared
from the constellation of the Corona Septentrionalis about the period of
the birth of Leopold Bloom and of other stars of (presumably) similar
origin which had (effectively or presumably) appeared in and disappeared
from the constellation of Andromeda about the period of the birth of
Stephen Dedalus, and in and from the constellation of Auriga some years
after the birth and death of Rudolph Bloom, junior, and in and from other
constellations some years before or after the birth or death of other
persons: the attendant phenomena of eclipses, solar and lunar, from
immersion to emersion, abatement of wind, transit of shadow, taciturnity
of winged creatures, emergence of nocturnal or crepuscular animals,
persistence of infernal light, obscurity of terrestrial waters, pallor of
human beings.
His (Bloom’s) logical conclusion, having weighed the matter and allowing
for possible error?
That it was not a heaventree, not a heavengrot, not a heavenbeast, not a
heavenman. That it was a Utopia, there being no known method from the
known to the unknown: an infinity renderable equally finite by the
suppositious apposition of one or more bodies equally of the same and of
different magnitudes: a mobility of illusory forms immobilised in space,
remobilised in air: a past which possibly had ceased to exist as a
present before its probable spectators had entered actual present
existence.
Was he more convinced of the esthetic value of the spectacle?
Indubitably in consequence of the reiterated examples of poets in the
delirium of the frenzy of attachment or in the abasement of rejection
invoking ardent sympathetic constellations or the frigidity of the
satellite of their planet.
Did he then accept as an article of belief the theory of astrological
influences upon sublunary disasters?
It seemed to him as possible of proof as of confutation and the
nomenclature employed in its selenographical charts as attributable to
verifiable intuition as to fallacious analogy: the lake of dreams, the
sea of rains, the gulf of dews, the ocean of fecundity.
What special affinities appeared to him to exist between the moon and
woman?
Her antiquity in preceding and surviving successive tellurian
generations: her nocturnal predominance: her satellitic dependence: her
luminary reflection: her constancy under all her phases, rising and
setting by her appointed times, waxing and waning: the forced
invariability of her aspect: her indeterminate response to inaffirmative
interrogation: her potency over effluent and refluent waters: her power
to enamour, to mortify, to invest with beauty, to render insane, to
incite to and aid delinquency: the tranquil inscrutability of her visage:
the terribility of her isolated dominant implacable resplendent
propinquity: her omens of tempest and of calm: the stimulation of her
light, her motion and her presence: the admonition of her craters, her
arid seas, her silence: her splendour, when visible: her attraction, when
invisible.
What visible luminous sign attracted Bloom’s, who attracted Stephen’s,
gaze?
In the second storey (rere) of his (Bloom’s) house the light of a
paraffin oil lamp with oblique shade projected on a screen of roller
blind supplied by Frank O’Hara, window blind, curtain pole and revolving
shutter manufacturer, 16 Aungier street.
How did he elucidate the mystery of an invisible attractive person, his
wife Marion (Molly) Bloom, denoted by a visible splendid sign, a lamp?
With indirect and direct verbal allusions or affirmations: with subdued
affection and admiration: with description: with impediment: with
suggestion.
Both then were silent?
Silent, each contemplating the other in both mirrors of the reciprocal
flesh of theirhisnothis fellowfaces.
Were they indefinitely inactive?
At Stephen’s suggestion, at Bloom’s instigation both, first Stephen, then
Bloom, in penumbra urinated, their sides contiguous, their organs of
micturition reciprocally rendered invisible by manual circumposition,
their gazes, first Bloom’s, then Stephen’s, elevated to the projected
luminous and semiluminous shadow.
Similarly?
The trajectories of their, first sequent, then simultaneous, urinations
were dissimilar: Bloom’s longer, less irruent, in the incomplete form of
the bifurcated penultimate alphabetical letter, who in his ultimate year
at High School (1880) had been capable of attaining the point of greatest
altitude against the whole concurrent strength of the institution, 210
scholars: Stephen’s higher, more sibilant, who in the ultimate hours of
the previous day had augmented by diuretic consumption an insistent
vesical pressure.
What different problems presented themselves to each concerning the
invisible audible collateral organ of the other?
To Bloom: the problems of irritability, tumescence, rigidity, reactivity,
dimension, sanitariness, pilosity.
To Stephen: the problem of the sacerdotal integrity of Jesus circumcised
(I January, holiday of obligation to hear mass and abstain from
unnecessary servile work) and the problem as to whether the divine
prepuce, the carnal bridal ring of the holy Roman catholic apostolic
church, conserved in Calcata, were deserving of simple hyperduly or of
the fourth degree of latria accorded to the abscission of such divine
excrescences as hair and toenails.
What celestial sign was by both simultaneously observed?
A star precipitated with great apparent velocity across the firmament
from Vega in the Lyre above the zenith beyond the stargroup of the Tress
of Berenice towards the zodiacal sign of Leo.
How did the centripetal remainer afford egress to the centrifugal
departer?
By inserting the barrel of an arruginated male key in the hole of an
unstable female lock, obtaining a purchase on the bow of the key and
turning its wards from right to left, withdrawing a bolt from its staple,
pulling inward spasmodically an obsolescent unhinged door and revealing
an aperture for free egress and free ingress.
How did they take leave, one of the other, in separation?
Standing perpendicular at the same door and on different sides of its
base, the lines of their valedictory arms, meeting at any point and
forming any angle less than the sum of two right angles.
What sound accompanied the union of their tangent, the disunion of their
(respectively) centrifugal and centripetal hands?
The sound of the peal of the hour of the night by the chime of the bells
in the church of Saint George.
What echoes of that sound were by both and each heard?
By Stephen:
    LILIATA RUTILANTIUM. TURMA CIRCUMDET.
    IUBILANTIUM TE VIRGINUM. CHORUS EXCIPIAT.
By Bloom:
    HEIGHO, HEIGHO,
    HEIGHO, HEIGHO.
Where were the several members of the company which with Bloom that day
at the bidding of that peal had travelled from Sandymount in the south to
Glasnevin in the north?
Martin Cunningham (in bed), Jack Power (in bed), Simon Dedalus (in bed),
Ned Lambert (in bed), Tom Kernan (in bed), Joe Hynes (in bed), John Henry
Menton (in bed), Bernard Corrigan (in bed), Patsy Dignam (in bed), Paddy
Dignam (in the grave).
Alone, what did Bloom hear?
The double reverberation of retreating feet on the heavenborn earth, the
double vibration of a jew’s harp in the resonant lane.
Alone, what did Bloom feel?
The cold of interstellar space, thousands of degrees below freezing point
or the absolute zero of Fahrenheit, Centigrade or Reaumur: the incipient
intimations of proximate dawn.
Of what did bellchime and handtouch and footstep and lonechill remind
him?
Of companions now in various manners in different places defunct: Percy
Apjohn (killed in action, Modder River), Philip Gilligan (phthisis,
Jervis Street hospital), Matthew F. Kane (accidental drowning, Dublin
Bay), Philip Moisel (pyemia, Heytesbury street), Michael Hart (phthisis,
Mater Misericordiae hospital), Patrick Dignam (apoplexy, Sandymount).
What prospect of what phenomena inclined him to remain?
The disparition of three final stars, the diffusion of daybreak, the
apparition of a new solar disk.
Had he ever been a spectator of those phenomena?
Once, in 1887, after a protracted performance of charades in the house of
Luke Doyle, Kimmage, he had awaited with patience the apparition of the
diurnal phenomenon, seated on a wall, his gaze turned in the direction of
Mizrach, the east.
He remembered the initial paraphenomena?
More active air, a matutinal distant cock, ecclesiastical clocks at
various points, avine music, the isolated tread of an early wayfarer, the
visible diffusion of the light of an invisible luminous body, the first
golden limb of the resurgent sun perceptible low on the horizon.
Did he remain?
With deep inspiration he returned, retraversing the garden, reentering
the passage, reclosing the door. With brief suspiration he reassumed the
candle, reascended the stairs, reapproached the door of the front room,
hallfloor, and reentered.
What suddenly arrested his ingress?
The right temporal lobe of the hollow sphere of his cranium came into
contact with a solid timber angle where, an infinitesimal but sensible
fraction of a second later, a painful sensation was located in
consequence of antecedent sensations transmitted and registered.
Describe the alterations effected in the disposition of the articles of
furniture.
A sofa upholstered in prune plush had been translocated from opposite the
door to the ingleside near the compactly furled Union Jack (an alteration
which he had frequently intended to execute): the blue and white checker
inlaid majolicatopped table had been placed opposite the door in the
place vacated by the prune plush sofa: the walnut sideboard (a projecting
angle of which had momentarily arrested his ingress) had been moved from
its position beside the door to a more advantageous but more perilous
position in front of the door: two chairs had been moved from right and
left of the ingleside to the position originally occupied by the blue and
white checker inlaid majolicatopped table.
Describe them.
One: a squat stuffed easychair, with stout arms extended and back slanted
to the rere, which, repelled in recoil, had then upturned an irregular
fringe of a rectangular rug and now displayed on its amply upholstered
seat a centralised diffusing and diminishing discolouration. The other: a
slender splayfoot chair of glossy cane curves, placed directly opposite
the former, its frame from top to seat and from seat to base being
varnished dark brown, its seat being a bright circle of white plaited
rush.
What significances attached to these two chairs?
Significances of similitude, of posture, of symbolism, of circumstantial
evidence, of testimonial supermanence.
What occupied the position originally occupied by the sideboard?
A vertical piano (Cadby) with exposed keyboard, its closed coffin
supporting a pair of long yellow ladies’ gloves and an emerald ashtray
containing four consumed matches, a partly consumed cigarette and two
discoloured ends of cigarettes, its musicrest supporting the music in the
key of G natural for voice and piano of LOVE’S OLD SWEET SONG (words by
G. Clifton Bingham, composed by J. L. Molloy, sung by Madam Antoinette
Sterling) open at the last page with the final indications AD LIBITUM,
FORTE, pedal, ANIMATO, sustained pedal, RITIRANDO, close.
With what sensations did Bloom contemplate in rotation these objects?
With strain, elevating a candlestick: with pain, feeling on his right
temple a contused tumescence: with attention, focussing his gaze on a
large dull passive and a slender bright active: with solicitation,
bending and downturning the upturned rugfringe: with amusement,
remembering Dr Malachi Mulligan’s scheme of colour containing the
gradation of green: with pleasure, repeating the words and antecedent act
and perceiving through various channels of internal sensibility the
consequent and concomitant tepid pleasant diffusion of gradual
discolouration.
His next proceeding?
From an open box on the majolicatopped table he extracted a black
diminutive cone, one inch in height, placed it on its circular base on a
small tin plate, placed his candlestick on the right corner of the
mantelpiece, produced from his waistcoat a folded page of prospectus
(illustrated) entitled Agendath Netaim, unfolded the same, examined it
superficially, rolled it into a thin cylinder, ignited it in the
candleflame, applied it when ignited to the apex of the cone till the
latter reached the stage of rutilance, placed the cylinder in the basin
of the candlestick disposing its unconsumed part in such a manner as to
facilitate total combustion.
What followed this operation?
The truncated conical crater summit of the diminutive volcano emitted a
vertical and serpentine fume redolent of aromatic oriental incense.
What homothetic objects, other than the candlestick, stood on the
mantelpiece?
A timepiece of striated Connemara marble, stopped at the hour of 4.46
a.m. on the 21 March 1896, matrimonial gift of Matthew Dillon: a dwarf
tree of glacial arborescence under a transparent bellshade, matrimonial
gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle: an embalmed owl, matrimonial gift of
Alderman John Hooper.
What interchanges of looks took place between these three objects and
Bloom?
In the mirror of the giltbordered pierglass the undecorated back of the
dwarf tree regarded the upright back of the embalmed owl. Before the
mirror the matrimonial gift of Alderman John Hooper with a clear
melancholy wise bright motionless compassionate gaze regarded Bloom while
Bloom with obscure tranquil profound motionless compassionated gaze
regarded the matrimonial gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle.
What composite asymmetrical image in the mirror then attracted his
attention?
The image of a solitary (ipsorelative) mutable (aliorelative) man.
Why solitary (ipsorelative)?
    BROTHERS AND SISTERS HAD HE NONE.
    YET THAT MAN’S FATHER WAS HIS GRANDFATHER’S SON.
Why mutable (aliorelative)?
From infancy to maturity he had resembled his maternal procreatrix. From
maturity to senility he would increasingly resemble his paternal
procreator.
What final visual impression was communicated to him by the mirror?
The optical reflection of several inverted volumes improperly arranged
and not in the order of their common letters with scintillating titles on
the two bookshelves opposite.
Catalogue these books.
THOM’S DUBLIN POST OFFICE DIRECTORY, 1886.
Denis Florence M’Carthy’s POETICAL WORKS (copper beechleaf bookmark
  at p. 5).
Shakespeare’s WORKS (dark crimson morocco, goldtooled).
THE USEFUL READY RECKONER (brown cloth).
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE COURT OF CHARLES II (red cloth, tooled
  binding).
THE CHILD’S GUIDE (blue cloth).
The Beauties of Killarney (wrappers).
WHEN WE WERE BOYS by William O’Brien M. P. (green cloth, slightly faded,
  envelope bookmark at p. 217).
THOUGHTS FROM SPINOZA (maroon leather).
THE STORY OF THE HEAVENS by Sir Robert Ball (blue cloth).
Ellis’s THREE TRIPS TO MADAGASCAR (brown cloth, title obliterated).
THE STARK-MUNRO LETTERS by A. Conan Doyle, property of the City of
  Dublin Public Library, 106 Capel street, lent 21 May (Whitsun Eve)
  1904, due 4 June 1904, 13 days overdue (black cloth binding, bearing
  white letternumber ticket).
VOYAGES IN CHINA by “Viator” (recovered with brown paper, red ink title).
PHILOSOPHY OF THE TALMUD (sewn pamphlet).
Lockhart’s LIFE OF NAPOLEON (cover wanting, marginal annotations,
  minimising victories, aggrandising defeats of the protagonist).
SOLL UND HABEN by Gustav Freytag (black boards, Gothic characters,
  cigarette coupon bookmark at p. 24).
Hozier’s HISTORY OF THE RUSSO-TURKISH WAR (brown cloth, a volumes, with
  gummed label, Garrison Library, Governor’s Parade, Gibraltar, on verso
  of cover).
LAURENCE BLOOMFIELD IN IRELAND by William Allingham (second edition,
  green cloth, gilt trefoil design, previous owner’s name on recto of
  flyleaf erased).
A HANDBOOK OF ASTRONOMY (cover, brown leather, detached, S plates,
  antique letterpress long primer, author’s footnotes nonpareil, marginal
  clues brevier, captions small pica).
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF CHRIST (black boards).
IN THE TRACK OF THE SUN (yellow cloth, titlepage missing, recurrent title
  intestation).
PHYSICAL STRENGTH AND HOW TO OBTAIN IT by Eugen Sandow (red cloth).
SHORT BUT YET PLAIN ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRY written in French by F. Ignat.
  Pardies and rendered into English by John Harris D. D. London,
  printed for R. Knaplock at the Bifhop’s Head, MDCCXI, with dedicatory
  epiftle to his worthy friend Charles Cox, efquire, Member of
  Parliament for the burgh of Southwark and having ink calligraphed
  statement on the flyleaf certifying that the book was the property of
  Michael Gallagher, dated this 10th day of May 1822 and requefting the
  perfon who should find it, if the book should be loft or go aftray,
  to reftore it to Michael Gallagher, carpenter, Dufery Gate,
  Ennifcorthy, county Wicklow, the fineft place in the world.
What reflections occupied his mind during the process of reversion of the
inverted volumes?
The necessity of order, a place for everything and everything in its
place: the deficient appreciation of literature possessed by females: the
incongruity of an apple incuneated in a tumbler and of an umbrella
inclined in a closestool: the insecurity of hiding any secret document
behind, beneath or between the pages of a book.
Which volume was the largest in bulk?
Hozier’s HISTORY OF THE RUSSO-TURKISH WAR.
What among other data did the second volume of the work in question
contain?
The name of a decisive battle (forgotten), frequently remembered by a
decisive officer, major Brian Cooper Tweedy (remembered).
Why, firstly and secondly, did he not consult the work in question?
Firstly, in order to exercise mnemotechnic: secondly, because after an
interval of amnesia, when, seated at the central table, about to consult
the work in question, he remembered by mnemotechnic the name of the
military engagement, Plevna.
What caused him consolation in his sitting posture?
The candour, nudity, pose, tranquility, youth, grace, sex, counsel of a
statue erect in the centre of the table, an image of Narcissus purchased
by auction from P. A. Wren, 9 Bachelor’s Walk.
What caused him irritation in his sitting posture? Inhibitory pressure of
collar (size 17) and waistcoat (5 buttons), two articles of clothing
superfluous in the costume of mature males and inelastic to alterations
of mass by expansion.
How was the irritation allayed?
He removed his collar, with contained black necktie and collapsible stud,
from his neck to a position on the left of the table. He unbuttoned
successively in reversed direction waistcoat, trousers, shirt and vest
along the medial line of irregular incrispated black hairs extending in
triangular convergence from the pelvic basin over the circumference of
the abdomen and umbilicular fossicle along the medial line of nodes to
the intersection of the sixth pectoral vertebrae, thence produced both
ways at right angles and terminating in circles described about two
equidistant points, right and left, on the summits of the mammary
prominences. He unbraced successively each of six minus one braced
trouser buttons, arranged in pairs, of which one incomplete.
What involuntary actions followed?
He compressed between 2 fingers the flesh circumjacent to a cicatrice in
the left infracostal region below the diaphragm resulting from a sting
inflicted 2 weeks and 3 days previously (23 May 1904) by a bee. He
scratched imprecisely with his right hand, though insensible of
prurition, various points and surfaces of his partly exposed, wholly
abluted skin. He inserted his left hand into the left lower pocket of his
waistcoat and extracted and replaced a silver coin (I shilling), placed
there (presumably) on the occasion (17 October 1903) of the interment of
Mrs Emily Sinico, Sydney Parade.
Compile the budget for 16 June 1904.
DEBIT                                           CREDIT
                         L–s–d                                   L–s–d
1 Pork kidney            0–0–3 Cash in Hand                      0–4–9
1 Copy FREEMAN’S JOURNAL 0–0–1 Commission recd FREEMAN’S JOURNAL 1–7–6
1 Bath And Gratification 0–1–6 Loan (Stephen Dedalus)            1–7–0
Tramfare                 0–0–1
1 In Memoriam
Patrick Dignam           0–5–0
2 Banbury cakes          0–0–1
1 Lunch                  0–0–7
1 Renewal fee for book   0–1–0
1 Packet Notepaper
and Envelopes            0–0–2
1 Dinner
and Gratification        0–2–0
I Postal Order
and Stamp                0–2–8
Tramfare                 0–0–1
1 Pig’s Foot             0–0–4
1 Sheep’s Trotter        0–0–3
1 Cake Fry’s
Plain Chocolate          0–0–1
1 Square Soda Bread      0–0–4
1 Coffee and Bun         0–0–4
Loan (Stephen Dedalus)
refunded                 1–7–0
BALANCE                 0–17–5
                        2–19–3                                  2–19–3
Did the process of divestiture continue?
Sensible of a benignant persistent ache in his footsoles he extended his
foot to one side and observed the creases, protuberances and salient
points caused by foot pressure in the course of walking repeatedly in
several different directions, then, inclined, he disnoded the laceknots,
unhooked and loosened the laces, took off each of his two boots for the
second time, detached the partially moistened right sock through the fore
part of which the nail of his great toe had again effracted, raised his
right foot and, having unhooked a purple elastic sock suspender, took off
his right sock, placed his unclothed right foot on the margin of the seat
of his chair, picked at and gently lacerated the protruding part of the
great toenail, raised the part lacerated to his nostrils and inhaled the
odour of the quick, then, with satisfaction, threw away the lacerated
ungual fragment.
Why with satisfaction?
Because the odour inhaled corresponded to other odours inhaled of other
ungual fragments, picked and lacerated by Master Bloom, pupil of Mrs
Ellis’s juvenile school, patiently each night in the act of brief
genuflection and nocturnal prayer and ambitious meditation.
In what ultimate ambition had all concurrent and consecutive ambitions
now coalesced?
Not to inherit by right of primogeniture, gavelkind or borough English,
or possess in perpetuity an extensive demesne of a sufficient number of
acres, roods and perches, statute land measure (valuation 42 pounds), of
grazing turbary surrounding a baronial hall with gatelodge and carriage
drive nor, on the other hand, a terracehouse or semidetached villa,
described as RUS IN URBE or QUI SI SANA, but to purchase by private
treaty in fee simple a thatched bungalowshaped 2 storey dwellinghouse of
southerly aspect, surmounted by vane and lightning conductor, connected
with the earth, with porch covered by parasitic plants (ivy or Virginia
creeper), halldoor, olive green, with smart carriage finish and neat
doorbrasses, stucco front with gilt tracery at eaves and gable, rising,
if possible, upon a gentle eminence with agreeable prospect from balcony
with stone pillar parapet over unoccupied and unoccupyable interjacent
pastures and standing in 5 or 6 acres of its own ground, at such a
distance from the nearest public thoroughfare as to render its
houselights visible at night above and through a quickset hornbeam hedge
of topiary cutting, situate at a given point not less than 1 statute mile
from the periphery of the metropolis, within a time limit of not more
than 15 minutes from tram or train line (e.g., Dundrum, south, or Sutton,
north, both localities equally reported by trial to resemble the
terrestrial poles in being favourable climates for phthisical subjects),
the premises to be held under feefarm grant, lease 999 years, the
messuage to consist of 1 drawingroom with baywindow (2 lancets),
thermometer affixed, 1 sittingroom, 4 bedrooms, 2 servants’ rooms, tiled
kitchen with close range and scullery, lounge hall fitted with linen
wallpresses, fumed oak sectional bookcase containing the Encyclopaedia
Britannica and New Century Dictionary, transverse obsolete medieval and
oriental weapons, dinner gong, alabaster lamp, bowl pendant, vulcanite
automatic telephone receiver with adjacent directory, handtufted
Axminster carpet with cream ground and trellis border, loo table with
pillar and claw legs, hearth with massive firebrasses and ormolu mantel
chronometer clock, guaranteed timekeeper with cathedral chime, barometer
with hygrographic chart, comfortable lounge settees and corner fitments,
upholstered in ruby plush with good springing and sunk centre, three
banner Japanese screen and cuspidors (club style, rich winecoloured
leather, gloss renewable with a minimum of labour by use of linseed oil
and vinegar) and pyramidically prismatic central chandelier lustre,
bentwood perch with fingertame parrot (expurgated language), embossed
mural paper at 10/- per dozen with transverse swags of carmine floral
design and top crown frieze, staircase, three continuous flights at
successive right angles, of varnished cleargrained oak, treads and
risers, newel, balusters and handrail, with steppedup panel dado, dressed
with camphorated wax: bathroom, hot and cold supply, reclining and
shower: water closet on mezzanine provided with opaque singlepane oblong
window, tipup seat, bracket lamp, brass tierod and brace, armrests,
footstool and artistic oleograph on inner face of door: ditto, plain:
servants’ apartments with separate sanitary and hygienic necessaries for
cook, general and betweenmaid (salary, rising by biennial unearned
increments of 2 pounds, with comprehensive fidelity insurance, annual
bonus (1 pound) and retiring allowance (based on the 65 system) after 30
years’ service), pantry, buttery, larder, refrigerator, outoffices, coal
and wood cellarage with winebin (still and sparkling vintages) for
distinguished guests, if entertained to dinner (evening dress), carbon
monoxide gas supply throughout.
What additional attractions might the grounds contain?
As addenda, a tennis and fives court, a shrubbery, a glass summerhouse
with tropical palms, equipped in the best botanical manner, a rockery
with waterspray, a beehive arranged on humane principles, oval flowerbeds
in rectangular grassplots set with eccentric ellipses of scarlet and
chrome tulips, blue scillas, crocuses, polyanthus, sweet William, sweet
pea, lily of the valley (bulbs obtainable from sir James W. Mackey
(Limited) wholesale and retail seed and bulb merchants and nurserymen,
agents for chemical manures, 23 Sackville street, upper), an orchard,
kitchen garden and vinery protected against illegal trespassers by
glasstopped mural enclosures, a lumbershed with padlock for various
inventoried implements.
As?
Eeltraps, lobsterpots, fishingrods, hatchet, steelyard, grindstone,
clodcrusher, swatheturner, carriagesack, telescope ladder, 10 tooth rake,
washing clogs, haytedder, tumbling rake, billhook, paintpot, brush, hoe
and so on.
What improvements might be subsequently introduced?
A rabbitry and fowlrun, a dovecote, a botanical conservatory, 2 hammocks
(lady’s and gentleman’s), a sundial shaded and sheltered by laburnum or
lilac trees, an exotically harmonically accorded Japanese tinkle gatebell
affixed to left lateral gatepost, a capacious waterbutt, a lawnmower with
side delivery and grassbox, a lawnsprinkler with hydraulic hose.
What facilities of transit were desirable?
When citybound frequent connection by train or tram from their respective
intermediate station or terminal. When countrybound velocipedes, a
chainless freewheel roadster cycle with side basketcar attached, or
draught conveyance, a donkey with wicker trap or smart phaeton with good
working solidungular cob (roan gelding, 14 h).
What might be the name of this erigible or erected residence?
Bloom Cottage. Saint Leopold’s. Flowerville.
Could Bloom of 7 Eccles street foresee Bloom of Flowerville?
In loose allwool garments with Harris tweed cap, price 8/6, and useful
garden boots with elastic gussets and wateringcan, planting aligned young
firtrees, syringing, pruning, staking, sowing hayseed, trundling a
weedladen wheelbarrow without excessive fatigue at sunset amid the scent
of newmown hay, ameliorating the soil, multiplying wisdom, achieving
longevity.
What syllabus of intellectual pursuits was simultaneously possible?
Snapshot photography, comparative study of religions, folklore relative
to various amatory and superstitious practices, contemplation of the
celestial constellations.
What lighter recreations?
Outdoor: garden and fieldwork, cycling on level macadamised causeways
ascents of moderately high hills, natation in secluded fresh water and
unmolested river boating in secure wherry or light curricle with kedge
anchor on reaches free from weirs and rapids (period of estivation),
vespertinal perambulation or equestrian circumprocession with inspection
of sterile landscape and contrastingly agreeable cottagers’ fires of
smoking peat turves (period of hibernation). Indoor: discussion in tepid
security of unsolved historical and criminal problems: lecture of
unexpurgated exotic erotic masterpieces: house carpentry with toolbox
containing hammer, awl nails, screws, tintacks, gimlet, tweezers,
bullnose plane and turnscrew. Might he become a gentleman farmer of field
produce and live stock?
Not impossibly, with 1 or 2 stripper cows, 1 pike of upland hay and
requisite farming implements, e.g., an end-to-end churn, a turnip pulper
etc.
What would be his civic functions and social status among the county
families and landed gentry?
Arranged successively in ascending powers of hierarchical order, that of
gardener, groundsman, cultivator, breeder, and at the zenith of his
career, resident magistrate or justice of the peace with a family crest
and coat of arms and appropriate classical motto (SEMPER PARATUS), duly
recorded in the court directory (Bloom, Leopold P., M. P., P. C., K. P.,
L. L. D. (HONORIS CAUSA), Bloomville, Dundrum) and mentioned in court and
fashionable intelligence (Mr and Mrs Leopold Bloom have left Kingstown
for England).
What course of action did he outline for himself in such capacity?
A course that lay between undue clemency and excessive rigour: the
dispensation in a heterogeneous society of arbitrary classes, incessantly
rearranged in terms of greater and lesser social inequality, of unbiassed
homogeneous indisputable justice, tempered with mitigants of the widest
possible latitude but exactable to the uttermost farthing with
confiscation of estate, real and personal, to the crown. Loyal to the
highest constituted power in the land, actuated by an innate love of
rectitude his aims would be the strict maintenance of public order, the
repression of many abuses though not of all simultaneously (every measure
of reform or retrenchment being a preliminary solution to be contained by
fluxion in the final solution), the upholding of the letter of the law
(common, statute and law merchant) against all traversers in covin and
trespassers acting in contravention of bylaws and regulations, all
resuscitators (by trespass and petty larceny of kindlings) of venville
rights, obsolete by desuetude, all orotund instigators of international
persecution, all perpetuators of international animosities, all menial
molestors of domestic conviviality, all recalcitrant violators of
domestic connubiality.
Prove that he had loved rectitude from his earliest youth.
To Master Percy Apjohn at High School in 1880 he had divulged his
disbelief in the tenets of the Irish (protestant) church (to which his
father Rudolf Virag (later Rudolph Bloom) had been converted from the
Israelitic faith and communion in 1865 by the Society for promoting
Christianity among the jews) subsequently abjured by him in favour of
Roman catholicism at the epoch of and with a view to his matrimony in
1888. To Daniel Magrane and Francis Wade in 1882 during a juvenile
friendship (terminated by the premature emigration of the former) he had
advocated during nocturnal perambulations the political theory of
colonial (e.g. Canadian) expansion and the evolutionary theories of
Charles Darwin, expounded in THE DESCENT OF MAN and THE ORIGIN OF
SPECIES. In 1885 he had publicly expressed his adherence to the
collective and national economic programme advocated by James Fintan
Lalor, John Fisher Murray, John Mitchel, J. F. X. O’Brien and others, the
agrarian policy of Michael Davitt, the constitutional agitation of
Charles Stewart Parnell (M. P. for Cork City), the programme of peace,
retrenchment and reform of William Ewart Gladstone (M. P. for Midlothian,
N. B.) and, in support of his political convictions, had climbed up into
a secure position amid the ramifications of a tree on Northumberland road
to see the entrance (2 February 1888) into the capital of a demonstrative
torchlight procession of 20,000 torchbearers, divided into 120 trade
corporations, bearing 2000 torches in escort of the marquess of Ripon and
(honest) John Morley.
How much and how did he propose to pay for this country residence?
As per prospectus of the Industrious Foreign Acclimatised Nationalised
Friendly Stateaided Building Society (incorporated 1874), a maximum of 60
pounds per annum, being 1/6 of an assured income, derived from giltedged
securities, representing at 5 percent simple interest on capital of 1200
pounds (estimate of price at 20 years’ purchase), of which   to be paid
on acquisition and the balance in the form of annual rent, viz. 800
pounds plus 2 1/2 percent interest on the same, repayable quarterly in
equal annual instalments until extinction by amortisation of loan
advanced for purchase within a period of 20 years, amounting to an annual
rental of 64 pounds, headrent included, the titledeeds to remain in
possession of the lender or lenders with a saving clause envisaging
forced sale, foreclosure and mutual compensation in the event of
protracted failure to pay the terms assigned, otherwise the messuage to
become the absolute property of the tenant occupier upon expiry of the
period of years stipulated.
What rapid but insecure means to opulence might facilitate immediate
purchase?
A private wireless telegraph which would transmit by dot and dash system
the result of a national equine handicap (flat or steeplechase) of I or
more miles and furlongs won by an outsider at odds of 50 to 1 at 3 hr 8 m
p.m. at Ascot (Greenwich time), the message being received and available
for betting purposes in Dublin at 2.59 p.m. (Dunsink time). The
unexpected discovery of an object of great monetary value (precious
stone, valuable adhesive or impressed postage stamps (7 schilling, mauve,
imperforate, Hamburg, 1866: 4 pence, rose, blue paper, perforate, Great
Britain, 1855: 1 franc, stone, official, rouletted, diagonal surcharge,
Luxemburg, 1878), antique dynastical ring, unique relic) in unusual
repositories or by unusual means: from the air (dropped by an eagle in
flight), by fire (amid the carbonised remains of an incendiated edifice),
in the sea (amid flotsam, jetsam, lagan and derelict), on earth (in the
gizzard of a comestible fowl). A Spanish prisoner’s donation of a distant
treasure of valuables or specie or bullion lodged with a solvent banking
corporation loo years previously at 5 percent compound interest of the
collective worth of 5,000,000 pounds stg (five million pounds sterling).
A contract with an inconsiderate contractee for the delivery of 32
consignments of some given commodity in consideration of cash payment on
delivery per delivery at the initial rate of 1/4d to be increased
constantly in the geometrical progression of 2 (1/4d, 1/2d, 1d, 2d, 4d,
8d, 1s 4d, 2s 8d to 32 terms). A prepared scheme based on a study of the
laws of probability to break the bank at Monte Carlo. A solution of the
secular problem of the quadrature of the circle, government premium
1,000,000 pounds sterling.
Was vast wealth acquirable through industrial channels?
The reclamation of dunams of waste arenary soil, proposed in the
prospectus of Agendath Netaim, Bleibtreustrasse, Berlin, W. 15, by the
cultivation of orange plantations and melonfields and reafforestation.
The utilisation of waste paper, fells of sewer rodents, human excrement
possessing chemical properties, in view of the vast production of the
first, vast number of the second and immense quantity of the third, every
normal human being of average vitality and appetite producing annually,
cancelling byproducts of water, a sum total of 80 lbs. (mixed animal and
vegetable diet), to be multiplied by 4,386,035, the total population of
Ireland according to census returns of 1901.
Were there schemes of wider scope?
A scheme to be formulated and submitted for approval to the harbour
commissioners for the exploitation of white coal (hydraulic power),
obtained by hydroelectric plant at peak of tide at Dublin bar or at head
of water at Poulaphouca or Powerscourt or catchment basins of main
streams for the economic production of 500,000 W. H. P. of electricity. A
scheme to enclose the peninsular delta of the North Bull at Dollymount
and erect on the space of the foreland, used for golf links and rifle
ranges, an asphalted esplanade with casinos, booths, shooting galleries,
hotels, boardinghouses, readingrooms, establishments for mixed bathing. A
scheme for the use of dogvans and goatvans for the delivery of early
morning milk. A scheme for the development of Irish tourist traffic in
and around Dublin by means of petrolpropelled riverboats, plying in the
fluvial fairway between Island bridge and Ringsend, charabancs, narrow
gauge local railways, and pleasure steamers for coastwise navigation
(10/- per person per day, guide (trilingual) included). A scheme for the
repristination of passenger and goods traffics over Irish waterways, when
freed from weedbeds. A scheme to connect by tramline the Cattle Market
(North Circular road and Prussia street) with the quays (Sheriff street,
lower, and East Wall), parallel with the Link line railway laid (in
conjunction with the Great Southern and Western railway line) between the
cattle park, Liffey junction, and terminus of Midland Great Western
Railway 43 to 45 North Wall, in proximity to the terminal stations or
Dublin branches of Great Central Railway, Midland Railway of England,
City of Dublin Steam Packet Company, Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway
Company, Dublin and Glasgow Steam Packet Company, Glasgow, Dublin and
Londonderry Steam Packet Company (Laird line), British and Irish Steam
Packet Company, Dublin and Morecambe Steamers, London and North Western
Railway Company, Dublin Port and Docks Board Landing Sheds and transit
sheds of Palgrave, Murphy and Company, steamship owners, agents for
steamers from Mediterranean, Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium and Holland
and for Liverpool Underwriters’ Association, the cost of acquired rolling
stock for animal transport and of additional mileage operated by the
Dublin United Tramways Company, limited, to be covered by graziers’ fees.
Positing what protasis would the contraction for such several schemes
become a natural and necessary apodosis?
Given a guarantee equal to the sum sought, the support, by deed of gift
and transfer vouchers during donor’s lifetime or by bequest after donor’s
painless extinction, of eminent financiers (Blum Pasha, Rothschild
Guggenheim, Hirsch, Montefiore, Morgan, Rockefeller) possessing fortunes
in 6 figures, amassed during a successful life, and joining capital with
opportunity the thing required was done.
What eventuality would render him independent of such wealth?
The independent discovery of a goldseam of inexhaustible ore.
For what reason did he meditate on schemes so difficult of realisation?
It was one of his axioms that similar meditations or the automatic
relation to himself of a narrative concerning himself or tranquil
recollection of the past when practised habitually before retiring for
the night alleviated fatigue and produced as a result sound repose and
renovated vitality.
His justifications?
As a physicist he had learned that of the 70 years of complete human life
at least 2/7, viz. 20 years are passed in sleep. As a philosopher he knew
that at the termination of any allotted life only an infinitesimal part
of any person’s desires has been realised. As a physiologist he believed
in the artificial placation of malignant agencies chiefly operative
during somnolence.
What did he fear?
The committal of homicide or suicide during sleep by an aberration of the
light of reason, the incommensurable categorical intelligence situated in
the cerebral convolutions.
What were habitually his final meditations?
Of some one sole unique advertisement to cause passers to stop in wonder,
a poster novelty, with all extraneous accretions excluded, reduced to its
simplest and most efficient terms not exceeding the span of casual vision
and congruous with the velocity of modern life.
What did the first drawer unlocked contain?
A Vere Foster’s handwriting copybook, property of Milly (Millicent)
Bloom, certain pages of which bore diagram drawings, marked PAPLI, which
showed a large globular head with 5 hairs erect, 2 eyes in profile, the
trunk full front with 3 large buttons, 1 triangular foot: 2 fading
photographs of queen Alexandra of England and of Maud Branscombe, actress
and professional beauty: a Yuletide card, bearing on it a pictorial
representation of a parasitic plant, the legend MIZPAH, the date Xmas
1892, the name of the senders: from Mr + Mrs M. Comerford, the versicle:
MAY THIS YULETIDE BRING TO THEE, JOY AND PEACE AND WELCOME GLEE: a butt
of red partly liquefied sealing wax, obtained from the stores department
of Messrs Hely’s, Ltd., 89, 90, and 91 Dame street: a box containing the
remainder of a gross of gilt “J” pennibs, obtained from same department
of same firm: an old sandglass which rolled containing sand which rolled:
a sealed prophecy (never unsealed) written by Leopold Bloom in 1886
concerning the consequences of the passing into law of William Ewart
Gladstone’s Home Rule bill of 1886 (never passed into law): a bazaar
ticket, no 2004, of S. Kevin’s Charity Fair, price 6d, 100 prizes: an
infantile epistle, dated, small em monday, reading: capital pee Papli
comma capital aitch How are you note of interrogation capital eye I am
very well full stop new paragraph signature with flourishes capital em
Milly no stop: a cameo brooch, property of Ellen Bloom (born Higgins),
deceased: a cameo scarfpin, property of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag),
deceased: 3 typewritten letters, addressee, Henry Flower, c/o. P. O.
Westland Row, addresser, Martha Clifford, c/o. P. O. Dolphin’s Barn: the
transliterated name and address of the addresser of the 3 letters in
reversed alphabetic boustrophedonic punctated quadrilinear cryptogram
(vowels suppressed) N. IGS./WI. UU. OX/W. OKS. MH/Y. IM: a press cutting
from an English weekly periodical MODERN SOCIETY, subject corporal
chastisement in girls’ schools: a pink ribbon which had festooned an
Easter egg in the year 1899: two partly uncoiled rubber preservatives
with reserve pockets, purchased by post from Box 32, P. O., Charing
Cross, London, W. C.: 1 pack of 1 dozen creamlaid envelopes and
feintruled notepaper, watermarked, now reduced by 3: some assorted
Austrian-Hungarian coins: 2 coupons of the Royal and Privileged Hungarian
Lottery: a lowpower magnifying glass: 2 erotic photocards showing a)
buccal coition between nude senorita (rere presentation, superior
position) and nude torero (fore presentation, inferior position) b) anal
violation by male religious (fully clothed, eyes abject) of female
religious (partly clothed, eyes direct), purchased by post from Box 32,
P. O., Charing Cross, London, W. C.: a press cutting of recipe for
renovation of old tan boots: a Id adhesive stamp, lavender, of the reign
of Queen Victoria: a chart of the measurements of Leopold Bloom compiled
before, during and after 2 months’ consecutive use of Sandow-Whiteley’s
pulley exerciser (men’s 15/-, athlete’s 20/-) viz. chest 28 in and 29 1/2
in, biceps 9 in and 10 in, forearm 8 1/2 in and 9 in, thigh 10 in and 12
in, calf 11 in and 12 in: 1 prospectus of The Wonderworker, the world’s
greatest remedy for rectal complaints, direct from Wonderworker, Coventry
House, South Place, London E C, addressed (erroneously) to Mrs L. Bloom
with brief accompanying note commencing (erroneously): Dear Madam.
Quote the textual terms in which the prospectus claimed advantages for
this thaumaturgic remedy.
It heals and soothes while you sleep, in case of trouble in breaking
wind, assists nature in the most formidable way, insuring instant relief
in discharge of gases, keeping parts clean and free natural action, an
initial outlay of 7/6 making a new man of you and life worth living.
Ladies find Wonderworker especially useful, a pleasant surprise when they
note delightful result like a cool drink of fresh spring water on a
sultry summer’s day. Recommend it to your lady and gentlemen friends,
lasts a lifetime. Insert long round end. Wonderworker.
Were there testimonials?
Numerous. From clergyman, British naval officer, wellknown author, city
man, hospital nurse, lady, mother of five, absentminded beggar.
How did absentminded beggar’s concluding testimonial conclude?
What a pity the government did not supply our men with wonderworkers
during the South African campaign! What a relief it would have been!
What object did Bloom add to this collection of objects?
A 4th typewritten letter received by Henry Flower (let H. F. be L. B.)
from Martha Clifford (find M. C.).
What pleasant reflection accompanied this action?
The reflection that, apart from the letter in question, his magnetic
face, form and address had been favourably received during the course of
the preceding day by a wife (Mrs Josephine Breen, born Josie Powell), a
nurse, Miss Callan (Christian name unknown), a maid, Gertrude (Gerty,
family name unknown).
What possibility suggested itself?
The possibility of exercising virile power of fascination in the not
immediate future after an expensive repast in a private apartment in the
company of an elegant courtesan, of corporal beauty, moderately
mercenary, variously instructed, a lady by origin.
What did the 2nd drawer contain?
Documents: the birth certificate of Leopold Paula Bloom: an endowment
assurance policy of 500 pounds in the Scottish Widows’ Assurance Society,
intestated Millicent (Milly) Bloom, coming into force at 25 years as with
profit policy of 430 pounds, 462/10/0 and 500 pounds at 60 years or
death, 65 years or death and death, respectively, or with profit policy
(paidup) of 299/10/0 together with cash payment of 133/10/0, at option: a
bank passbook issued by the Ulster Bank, College Green branch showing
statement of a/c for halfyear ending 31 December 1903, balance in
depositor’s favour: 18/14/6 (eighteen pounds, fourteen shillings and
sixpence, sterling), net personalty: certificate of possession of 900
pounds, Canadian 4 percent (inscribed) government stock (free of stamp
duty): dockets of the Catholic Cemeteries’ (Glasnevin) Committee,
relative to a graveplot purchased: a local press cutting concerning
change of name by deedpoll.
Quote the textual terms of this notice.
I, Rudolph Virag, now resident at no 52 Clanbrassil street, Dublin,
formerly of Szombathely in the kingdom of Hungary, hereby give notice
that I have assumed and intend henceforth upon all occasions and at all
times to be known by the name of Rudolph Bloom.
What other objects relative to Rudolph Bloom (born Virag) were in the 2nd
drawer?
An indistinct daguerreotype of Rudolf Virag and his father Leopold Virag
executed in the year 1852 in the portrait atelier of their (respectively)
1st and 2nd cousin, Stefan Virag of Szesfehervar, Hungary. An ancient
haggadah book in which a pair of hornrimmed convex spectacles inserted
marked the passage of thanksgiving in the ritual prayers for Pessach
(Passover): a photocard of the Queen’s Hotel, Ennis, proprietor, Rudolph
Bloom: an envelope addressed: TO MY DEAR SON LEOPOLD.
What fractions of phrases did the lecture of those five whole words
evoke?
Tomorrow will be a week that I received... it is no use Leopold to be ...
with your dear mother ... that is not more to stand ... to her ... all
for me is out ... be kind to Athos, Leopold ... my dear son ... always
... of me ... DAS HERZ ... GOTT ... DEIN ...
What reminiscences of a human subject suffering from progressive
melancholia did these objects evoke in Bloom?
An old man, widower, unkempt of hair, in bed, with head covered, sighing:
an infirm dog, Athos: aconite, resorted to by increasing doses of grains
and scruples as a palliative of recrudescent neuralgia: the face in death
of a septuagenarian, suicide by poison.
Why did Bloom experience a sentiment of remorse?
Because in immature impatience he had treated with disrespect certain
beliefs and practices.
As?
The prohibition of the use of fleshmeat and milk at one meal: the
hebdomadary symposium of incoordinately abstract, perfervidly concrete
mercantile coexreligionist excompatriots: the circumcision of male
infants: the supernatural character of Judaic scripture: the ineffability
of the tetragrammaton: the sanctity of the sabbath.
How did these beliefs and practices now appear to him?
Not more rational than they had then appeared, not less rational than
other beliefs and practices now appeared.
What first reminiscence had he of Rudolph Bloom (deceased)?
Rudolph Bloom (deceased) narrated to his son Leopold Bloom (aged 6) a
retrospective arrangement of migrations and settlements in and between
Dublin, London, Florence, Milan, Vienna, Budapest, Szombathely with
statements of satisfaction (his grandfather having seen Maria Theresia,
empress of Austria, queen of Hungary), with commercial advice (having
taken care of pence, the pounds having taken care of themselves). Leopold
Bloom (aged 6) had accompanied these narrations by constant consultation
of a geographical map of Europe (political) and by suggestions for the
establishment of affiliated business premises in the various centres
mentioned.
Had time equally but differently obliterated the memory of these
migrations in narrator and listener?
In narrator by the access of years and in consequence of the use of
narcotic toxin: in listener by the access of years and in consequence of
the action of distraction upon vicarious experiences.
What idiosyncracies of the narrator were concomitant products of amnesia?
Occasionally he ate without having previously removed his hat.
Occasionally he drank voraciously the juice of gooseberry fool from an
inclined plate. Occasionally he removed from his lips the traces of food
by means of a lacerated envelope or other accessible fragment of paper.
What two phenomena of senescence were more frequent?
The myopic digital calculation of coins, eructation consequent upon
repletion.
What object offered partial consolation for these reminiscences?
The endowment policy, the bank passbook, the certificate of the
possession of scrip.
Reduce Bloom by cross multiplication of reverses of fortune, from which
these supports protected him, and by elimination of all positive values
to a negligible negative irrational unreal quantity.
Successively, in descending helotic order: Poverty: that of the outdoor
hawker of imitation jewellery, the dun for the recovery of bad and
doubtful debts, the poor rate and deputy cess collector. Mendicancy: that
of the fraudulent bankrupt with negligible assets paying 1s. 4d. in the
pound, sandwichman, distributor of throwaways, nocturnal vagrant,
insinuating sycophant, maimed sailor, blind stripling, superannuated
bailiffs man, marfeast, lickplate, spoilsport, pickthank, eccentric
public laughingstock seated on bench of public park under discarded
perforated umbrella. Destitution: the inmate of Old Man’s House (Royal
Hospital) Kilmainham, the inmate of Simpson’s Hospital for reduced but
respectable men permanently disabled by gout or want of sight. Nadir of
misery: the aged impotent disfranchised ratesupported moribund lunatic
pauper.
With which attendant indignities?
The unsympathetic indifference of previously amiable females, the
contempt of muscular males, the acceptance of fragments of bread, the
simulated ignorance of casual acquaintances, the latration of
illegitimate unlicensed vagabond dogs, the infantile discharge of
decomposed vegetable missiles, worth little or nothing, nothing or less
than nothing.
By what could such a situation be precluded?
By decease (change of state): by departure (change of place).
Which preferably?
The latter, by the line of least resistance.
What considerations rendered departure not entirely undesirable?
Constant cohabitation impeding mutual toleration of personal defects. The
habit of independent purchase increasingly cultivated. The necessity to
counteract by impermanent sojourn the permanence of arrest.
What considerations rendered departure not irrational?
The parties concerned, uniting, had increased and multiplied, which being
done, offspring produced and educed to maturity, the parties, if not
disunited were obliged to reunite for increase and multiplication, which
was absurd, to form by reunion the original couple of uniting parties,
which was impossible.
What considerations rendered departure desirable?
The attractive character of certain localities in Ireland and abroad, as
represented in general geographical maps of polychrome design or in
special ordnance survey charts by employment of scale numerals and
hachures.
In Ireland?
The cliffs of Moher, the windy wilds of Connemara, lough Neagh with
submerged petrified city, the Giant’s Causeway, Fort Camden and Fort
Carlisle, the Golden Vale of Tipperary, the islands of Aran, the pastures
of royal Meath, Brigid’s elm in Kildare, the Queen’s Island shipyard in
Belfast, the Salmon Leap, the lakes of Killarney.
Abroad?
Ceylon (with spicegardens supplying tea to Thomas Kernan, agent for
Pulbrook, Robertson and Co, 2 Mincing Lane, London, E. C., 5 Dame street,
Dublin), Jerusalem, the holy city (with mosque of Omar and gate of
Damascus, goal of aspiration), the straits of Gibraltar (the unique
birthplace of Marion Tweedy), the Parthenon (containing statues of nude
Grecian divinities), the Wall street money market (which controlled
international finance), the Plaza de Toros at La Linea, Spain (where
O’Hara of the Camerons had slain the bull), Niagara (over which no human
being had passed with impunity), the land of the Eskimos (eaters of
soap), the forbidden country of Thibet (from which no traveller returns),
the bay of Naples (to see which was to die), the Dead Sea.
Under what guidance, following what signs?
At sea, septentrional, by night the polestar, located at the point of
intersection of the right line from beta to alpha in Ursa Maior produced
and divided externally at omega and the hypotenuse of the rightangled
triangle formed by the line alpha omega so produced and the line alpha
delta of Ursa Maior. On land, meridional, a bispherical moon, revealed in
imperfect varying phases of lunation through the posterior interstice of
the imperfectly occluded skirt of a carnose negligent perambulating
female, a pillar of the cloud by day.
What public advertisement would divulge the occultation of the departed?
5 pounds reward, lost, stolen or strayed from his residence 7 Eccles
street, missing gent about 40, answering to the name of Bloom, Leopold
(Poldy), height 5 ft 9 1/2 inches, full build, olive complexion, may have
since grown a beard, when last seen was wearing a black suit. Above sum
will be paid for information leading to his discovery.
What universal binomial denominations would be his as entity and
nonentity?
Assumed by any or known to none. Everyman or Noman.
What tributes his?
Honour and gifts of strangers, the friends of Everyman. A nymph immortal,
beauty, the bride of Noman.
Would the departed never nowhere nohow reappear?
Ever he would wander, selfcompelled, to the extreme limit of his cometary
orbit, beyond the fixed stars and variable suns and telescopic planets,
astronomical waifs and strays, to the extreme boundary of space, passing
from land to land, among peoples, amid events. Somewhere imperceptibly he
would hear and somehow reluctantly, suncompelled, obey the summons of
recall. Whence, disappearing from the constellation of the Northern Crown
he would somehow reappear reborn above delta in the constellation of
Cassiopeia and after incalculable eons of peregrination return an
estranged avenger, a wreaker of justice on malefactors, a dark crusader,
a sleeper awakened, with financial resources (by supposition) surpassing
those of Rothschild or the silver king.
Continue...

This eBook of “Ulysses” by James Joyce belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
UlyssesBy James JoyceAt Amazon
