


[27] History of the Conflict between Religion and Science. by
John William Draper, M. D., LL. D. Fourth edition. New York: D.
Appleton & Co. 1875. 12mo, pp. xxii., 373. (International
Scientific Series, XII.)
Some twelve years ago, Dr. Draper published a bulky volume
entitled “A History of the Intellectual Development of Europe,"
in which his professed purpose was to show that nations or races
pass through certain definable epochs of development, analogous
to the periods of infancy, childhood, youth, manhood, and old age
in individuals. But while announced with due formality, the
carrying out of the argument was left for the most part to the
headings and running-titles of the several chapters, while in the
text the author peacefully meandered along down the stream of
time, giving us a succession of pleasant though somewhat
threadbare anecdotes, as well as a superabundance of detached and
fragmentary opinions on divers historical events, having
apparently quite forgotten that he had started with a thesis to
prove. In the arrangement of his “running heads,” some points
were sufficiently curious to require a word of explanation, as,
for example, when the early ages of Christianity were at one time
labelled as an epoch of progress and at another time as an epoch
of decrepitude. But the argument and the contents never got so
far en rapport with each other as to clear up such points as
this. On the contrary, each kept on the even tenour of its way
without much regard to the other. From the titles of the chapters
one was led to expect some comprehensive theory of European
civilization continuously expounded. But the text merely showed a
great quantity of superficial and second-hand information,
serving to illustrate the mental idiosyncrasies of the author.
Among these idiosyncrasies might be noted a very inadequate
understanding of the part played by Rome in the work of
civilization, a singular lack of appreciation of the political
and philosophical achievements of Greece under Athenian
leadership, a strong hostility to the Catholic Church, a curious
disposition to overrate semi-barbarous. or abortive
civilizations, such as those of the old Asiatic and native
American communities, at the expense of Europe, and, above all,
an undiscriminating admiration for everything, great or small,
that has ever worn the garb of Islam or been associated with the
career of the Saracens. The discovery that in some respects the
Mussulmans of the Middle Ages were more highly cultivated than
their Christian contemporaries, has made such an impression on
Dr. Draper’s mind that it seems to be as hard for him to get rid
of it as it was for Mr. Dick to keep the execution of Charles I.
out of his “Memorial.” Even in an essay on the “Civil Policy of
America,” the turbaned sage figures quite prominently; and it is
needless to add that he reappears, as large as life, when the
subject of discussion is the attitude of science toward religion.
Speaking briefly with regard to this matter, we may freely admit
that the work done by the Arabs, in scientific inquiry as well as
in the making of events, was very considerable. It was a work,
too, the value of which is not commonly appreciated in the
accounts of European history written for the general reader, and
we have no disposition to find fault with Dr. Draper for
describing it with enthusiasm. The philosophers of Bagdad and
Cordova did excellent service in keeping alive the traditions of
Greek physical inquiry at a time when Christian thinkers were too
exclusively occupied with transcendental speculations in theology
and logic. In some departments, as in chemistry and astronomy,
they made original discoveries of considerable value; and if we
turn from abstract knowledge to the arts of life, it cannot be
denied that the mediaeval Mussulmans had reached a higher plane
of material comfort than their Christian contemporaries. In
short, the work of all kinds done by these people would furnish
the judicious advocate of the claims of the Semitic race with
materials for a pleasing and instructive picture. Dr. Draper,
however, errs, though no doubt unintentionally, by so presenting
the case as to leave upon the reader’s mind the impression that
all this scientific and practical achievement was the work of
Islamism, and that the Mohammedan civilization was of a higher
type than the Christian. It is with an apparent feeling of regret
that he looks upon the ousting of the Moors from dominion in
Spain; but this is a mistaken view. As regards the first point,
it is a patent fact that scientific inquiry was conducted at the
cost of as much theological obloquy in the Mohammedan as in the
Christian world. It is true there was more actual tolerance of
heresy on the part of Moslem governments than was customary in
Europe in those days; but this is a superficial fact, which does
not indicate any superiority in Moslem popular sentiment. The
caliphate or emirate was a truly absolute despotism, such as the
Papacy has never been, and the conduct of a sceptical emir in
encouraging scientific inquiry goes but little way toward proving
anything like a general prevalence of tolerance or of
free-thinking. And this brings us to the second point,—that
Mohammedan civilization was, on the whole, rather a skin-deep
affair. It was superficial because of that extreme severance
between government and people which has never existed in European
nations within historic times, but which has always existed among
the principal races that have professed Moslemism. Nowhere in the
Mohammedan world has there ever been what we call a national
life, and nowhere do we find in its records any trace of such an
intellectual impulse, thrilling through every fibre of the people
and begetting prodigious achievements in art, poetry, and
philosophy, as was awakened in Europe in the thirteenth century
and again in the fifteenth. Under the peculiar form of unlimited
material and spiritual despotism exemplified in the caliphate, a
few men may discover gases or comment on Aristotle, but no
general movement toward political progress or philosophical
inquiry is possible. Such a society is rigid and inorganic at
bottom, whatever scanty signs of flexibility and life it may show
at the surface. There is no better illustration of this, when
well considered, than the fact that Moorish civilization
remained, politically and intellectually, a mere excrescence in
Spain, after having been fastened down over half the country for
nearly eight centuries.
But we are in danger of forgetting our main theme, as Dr. Draper
seems to do, while we linger with him over these interesting
wayside topics. We may perhaps be excused, however, if we have
not yet made any very explicit allusion to the “Conflict between
Religion and Science,” because this work seems to be in the main
a repetition en petit of the “Intellectual Development of
Europe,” and what we have said will apply as well to one as to
the other. In the little book, as in the big one, we hear a great
deal about the Arabs, and something about Columbus and Galileo,
who made men accept sundry truths in the teeth of clerical
opposition; and, as before, we float gently down the current of
history without being over well-informed as to the precise
didactic purpose of our voyage. Here, indeed, even our headings
and running-titles do not materially help us, for though we are
supposed to be witnessing, or mayhap assisting in, a perennial
conflict between “science” and “religion,” we are nowhere
enlightened as to what the cause or character of this conflict
is, nor are we enabled to get a good look at either of the
parties to the strife. With regard to it “religion” especially
are we left in the dark. What this dreadful thing is towards
which “science” is always playing the part of Herakles towards
the Lernaean Hydra, we are left to gather from the course of the
narrative. Yet, in a book with any valid claim to
clearsightedness, one would think such a point as this ought to
receive very explicit preliminary treatment.
The course of the narrative, however, leaves us in little doubt
as to what Dr. Draper means by a conflict between science and
religion. When he enlarges on the trite story of Galileo, and
alludes to the more modern quarrel between the Church and the
geologists, and does this in the belief that he is thereby
illustrating an antagonism between religion and science, it is
obvious that he identifies the cause of the anti-geologists and
the persecutors of Galileo with the cause of religion. The word
“religion” is to him a symbol which stands for unenlightened
bigotry or narrow-minded unwillingness to look facts in the face.
Such a conception of religion is common enough, and unhappily a
great deal has been done to strengthen it by the very persons to
whom the interests of religion are presumed to be a professional
care. It is nevertheless a very superficial conception, and no
book which is vitiated by it can have much philosophic value. It
is simply the crude impression which, in minds unaccustomed to
analysis, is left by the fact that theologians and other persons
interested in religion are usually alarmed at new scientific
truths, and resist them with emotions so highly wrought that they
are not only incapable of estimating evidence, but often also
have their moral sense impaired, and fight with foul means when
fair ones fail. If we reflect carefully on this class of
phenomena, we shall see that something besides mere pride of
opinion is involved in the struggle. At the bottom of changing
theological beliefs there lies something which men perennially
value, and for the sake of which they cling to the beliefs as
long as possible. That which they value is not itself a matter of
belief, but it is a matter of conduct; it is the searching after
goodness,—after a higher life than the mere satisfaction of
individual desires. All animals seek for fulness of life; but in
civilized man this craving has acquired a moral significance, and
has become a spiritual aspiration; and this emotional tendency,
more or less strong in the human race, we call religious feeling
or religion. Viewed in this light, religion is not only something
that mankind is never likely to get rid of, but it is
incomparably the most noble as well as the most useful attribute
of humanity.
Now, this emotional prompting toward completeness of life
requires, of course, that conduct should be guided, as far as
possible, in accordance with a true theory of the relations of
man to the world in which he lives. Hence, at any given era the
religious feeling will always be found enlisted in behalf of some
theory of the universe. At any time, whatever may be their
shortcomings in practice, religious men will aim at doing right
according to their conceptions of the order of the world. If
men’s conceptions of the order of nature remained constant, no
apparent conflict between their religious feelings and their
knowledge need ever arise. But with the first advance in our
knowledge of nature the case is altered. New and strange theories
are naturally regarded with fear and dislike by persons who have
always been accustomed to find the sanction and justification of
their emotional prompting toward righteousness in old familiar
theories which the new ones are seeking to supplant. Such persons
oppose the new doctrine because their engrained mental habits
compel them to believe that its establishment will in some way
lower men’s standard of life, and make them less careful of their
spiritual welfare. This is the case, at all events, when
theologians oppose scientific conclusions on religious grounds,
and not simply from mental dulness or rigidity. And, in so far as
it is religious feeling which thus prompts resistance to
scientific innovation, it may be said, with some appearance of
truth, that there is a conflict between religion and science.
But there must always be two parties to a quarrel, and our
statement has to be modified as soon as we consider what the
scientific innovator impugns. It is not the emotional prompting
toward righteousness, it is not the yearning to live im Guten,
Ganzen, Wahren, that he seeks to weaken; quite likely he has all
this as much at heart as the theologian who vituperates him. Nor
is it true that his discoveries, in spite of him, tend to destroy
this all-important mental attitude. It would be ridiculous to say
that the fate of religious feeling is really involved in the fate
of grotesque cosmogonies and theosophies framed in the infancy of
men’s knowledge of nature; for history shows us quite the
contrary. Religious feeling has survived the heliocentric theory
and the discoveries of geologists; and it will be none the worse
for the establishment of Darwinism. It is the merest truism to
say that religion strikes its roots deeper down into human nature
than speculative opinion, and is accordingly independent of any
particular set of beliefs. Since, then, the scientific innovator
does not, either voluntarily or involuntarily, attack religion,
it follows that there can be no such “conflict” as that of which
Dr. Draper has undertaken to write the history. The real contest
is between one phase of science and another; between the
more-crude knowledge of yesterday and the less-crude knowledge of
to-day. The contest, indeed, as presented in history, is simply
the measure of the difficulty which men find in exchanging old
views for new ones. All along, the practical question has been,
whether we should passively acquiesce in the crude
generalizations of our ancestors or venture actively to revise
them. But as for the religious sentiment, the perennial struggle
in which it has been engaged has not been with scientific
inquiry, but with the selfish propensities whose tendency is to
make men lead the lives of brutes.
The time is at hand when the interests of religion can no longer
be supposed to be subserved by obstinate adherence to crude
speculations bequeathed to us from pre-scientific antiquity. One
good result of the doctrine of evolution, which is now gaining
sway in all departments of thought, is the lesson that all our
opinions must be held subject to continual revision, and that
with none of them can our religious interests be regarded as
irretrievably implicated. To any one who has once learned this
lesson, a book like Dr. Draper’s can be neither interesting nor
useful. He who has not learned it can derive little benefit from
a work which in its very title keeps open an old and baneful
source of error and confusion.
  November. 1875.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
