


UP to this point, however remote from ordinary every-day thoughts
may be the region of speculation which we have been called upon
to traverse, we have still kept within the limits of legitimate
scientific hypothesis. Though we have ventured for a goodly
distance into the unknown, we have not yet been required to
abandon our base of operations in the known. Of the views
presented in the preceding paper, some are wellnigh certainly
established, some are probable, some have a sort of plausibility,
others—to which we have refrained from giving assent—may
possibly be true; but none are irretrievably beyond the
jurisdiction of scientific tests. No suggestion has so far been
broached which a very little further increase of our scientific
knowledge may not show to be either eminently probable or
eminently improbable. We have kept pretty clear of mere
subjective guesses, such as men may wrangle about forever without
coming to any conclusion. The theory of the nebular origin of our
planetary system has come to command the assent of all persons
qualified to appreciate the evidence on which it is based; and
the more immediate conclusions which we have drawn from that
theory are only such as are commonly drawn by astronomers and
physicists. The doctrine of an intermolecular and interstellar
ether is wrapped up in the well-established undulatory theory of
light. Such is by no means the case with Sir William Thomson’s
vortex-atom theory, which to-day is in somewhat the same
condition as the undulatory theory of Huyghens two centuries ago.
This, however, is none the less a hypothesis truly scientific in
conception, and in the speculations to which it leads us we are
still sure of dealing with views that admit at least of definite
expression and treatment. In other words, though our study of the
visible universe has led us to the recognition of a kind of
unseen world underlying the world of things that are seen, yet
concerning the economy of this unseen world we have not been led
to entertain any hypothesis that has not its possible
justification in our experiences of visible phenomena.
We are now called upon, following in the wake of our esteemed
authors, to venture on a different sort of exploration, in which
we must cut loose altogether from our moorings in the world of
which we have definite experience. We are invited to entertain
suggestions concerning the peculiar economy of the invisible
portion of the universe which we have no means of subjecting to
any sort of test of probability, either experimental or
deductive. These suggestions are, therefore, not to be regarded
as properly scientific; but, with this word of caution, we may
proceed to show what they are.
Compared with the life and death of cosmical systems which we
have heretofore contemplated, the life and death of individuals
of the human race may perhaps seem a small matter; yet because we
are ourselves the men who live and die, the small event is of
vastly greater interest to us than the grand series of events of
which it is part and parcel. It is natural that we should be more
interested in the ultimate fate of humanity than in the fate of a
world which is of no account to us save as our present
dwelling-place. Whether the human soul is to come to an end or
not is to us a more important question than whether the visible
universe, with its matter and energy, is to be absorbed in an
invisible ether. It is indeed only because we are interested in
the former question that we are so curious about the latter. If
we could dissociate ourselves from the material universe, our
habitat, we should probably speculate much less about its past
and future. We care very little what becomes of the black ball of
the earth, after all life has vanished from its surface; or, if
we care at all about it, it is only because our thoughts about
the career of the earth are necessarily mixed up with our
thoughts about life. Hence in considering the probable ultimate
destiny of the physical universe, our innermost purpose must be
to know what is to become of all this rich and wonderful life of
which the physical universe is the theatre. Has it all been
developed, apparently at almost infinite waste of effort, only to
be abolished again before it has attained to completeness, or
does it contain or shelter some indestructible element which
having drawn sustenance for a while from the senseless turmoil of
physical phenomena shall still survive their final decay? This
question is closely connected with the time-honoured question of
the meaning, purpose, or tendency of the world. In the career of
the world is life an end, or a means toward an end, or only an
incidental phenomenon in which we can discover no meaning?
Contemporary theologians seem generally to believe that one
necessary result of modern scientific inquiry must be the
destruction of the belief in immortal life, since against every
thoroughgoing expounder of scientific knowledge they seek to hurl
the charge of “materialism.” Their doubts, however, are not
shared by our authors, thorough men of science as they are,
though their mode of dealing with the question may not be such as
we can well adopt. While upholding the doctrine of evolution, and
all the so-called “materialistic” views of modern science, they
not only regard the hypothesis of a future life as admissible,
but they even go so far as to propound a physical theory as to
the nature of existence after death. Let us see what this
physical theory is.
As far as the visible universe is concerned, we do not find in it
any evidence of immortality or of permanence of any sort, unless
it be in the sum of potential and kinetic energies on the
persistency of which depends our principle of continuity. In
ordinary language “the stars in their courses” serve as symbols
of permanence, yet we have found reason to regard them as but
temporary phenomena. So, in the language of our authors, “if we
take the individual man, we find that he lives his short tale of
years, and that then the visible machinery which connects him
with the past, as well as that which enables him to act in the
present, falls into ruin and is brought to an end. If any germ or
potentiality remains, it is certainly not connected with the
visible order of things.” In like manner our race is pretty sure
to come to an end long before the destruction of the planet from
which it now gets its sustenance. And in our authors opinion even
the universe will by and by become “old and effete, no less truly
than the individual: it is a glorious garment this visible
universe, but not an immortal one; we must look elsewhere if we
are to be clothed with immortality as with a garment.”
It is at this point that our authors call attention to “the
apparently wasteful character of the arrangements of the visible
universe.” The fact is one which we have already sufficiently
described, but we shall do well to quote the words in which our
authors recur to it: “All but a very small portion of the sun’s
heat goes day by day into what we call empty space, and it is
only this very small remainder that is made use of by the various
planets for purposes of their own. Can anything be more
perplexing than this seemingly frightful expenditure of the very
life and essence of the system? That this vast store of
high-class energy should be doing nothing but travelling outwards
in space at the rate of 188,000 miles per second is hardly
conceivable, especially when the result of it is the inevitable
destruction of the visible universe.”
Pursuing this teleological argument, it is suggested that perhaps
this apparent waste of energy is “only an arrangement in virtue
of which our universe keeps up a memory of the past at the
expense of the present, inasmuch as all memory consists in an
investiture of present resources in order to keep a hold upon the
past.” Recourse is had to the ingenious argument in which Mr.
Babbage showed that “if we had power to follow and detect the
minutest effects of any disturbance, each particle of existing
matter must be a register of all that has happened. The track of
every canoe, of every vessel that has yet disturbed the surface
of the ocean, whether impelled by manual force or elemental
power, remains forever registered in the future movement of all
succeeding particles which may occupy its place. The furrow which
is left is, indeed, instantly filled up by the closing waters;
but they draw after them other and larger portions of the
surrounding element, and these again, once moved, communicate
motion to others in endless succession.” In like manner, “the air
itself is one vast library, on whose pages are forever written
all that man has ever said or even whispered. There in their
mutable but unerring characters, mixed with the earliest as well
as the latest sighs of mortality, stand forever recorded vows
unredeemed, promises unfulfilled, perpetuating in the united
movements of each particle the testimony of man’s changeful
will."[6] In some such way as this, records of every movement
that takes place in the world are each moment transmitted, with
the speed of light, through the invisible ocean of ether with
which the world is surrounded. Even the molecular displacements
which occur in our brains when we feel and think are thus
propagated in their effects into the unseen world. The world of
ether is thus regarded by our authors as in some sort the obverse
or complement of the world of sensible matter, so that whatever
energy is dissipated in the one is by the same act accumulated in
the other. It is like the negative plate in photography, where
light answers to shadow and shadow to light. Or, still better, it
is like the case of an equation in which whatever quantity you
take from one side is added to the other with a contrary sign,
while the relation of equality remains undisturbed. Thus, it will
be noticed, from the ingenious and subtle, but quite defensible
suggestion of Mr. Babbage, a leap is made to an assumption which
cannot be defended scientifically, but only teleologically. It is
one thing to say that every movement in the visible world
transmits a record of itself to the surrounding ether, in such a
way that from the undulation of the ether a sufficiently powerful
intelligence might infer the character of the generating movement
in the visible world. It is quite another thing to say that the
ether is organized in such a complex and delicate way as to be
like a negative image or counterpart of the world of sensible
matter. The latter view is no doubt ingenious, but it is
gratuitous. It is sustained not by scientific analogy, but by the
desire to find some assignable use for the energy which is
constantly escaping from visible matter into invisible ether. The
moment we ask how do we know that this energy is not really
wasted, or that it is not put to some use wholly undiscoverable
by human intelligence, this assumption of an organized ether is
at once seen to be groundless. It belongs not to the region of
science, but to that of pure mythology.
[6] Babbage, Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, p. 115; Jevons,
Principles of Science, Vol. II. p. 455.
In justice to our authors, however, it should be remembered that
this assumption is put forth not as something scientifically
probable, but as something which for aught we know to the
contrary may possibly be true. This, to be sure, we need not
deny; nor if we once allow this prodigious leap of inference,
shall we find much difficulty in reaching the famous conclusion
that “thought conceived to affect the matter of another universe
simultaneously with this may explain a future state.” This
proposition, quaintly couched in an anagram, like the discoveries
of old astronomers, was published last year in “Nature,” as
containing the gist of the forthcoming book. On the
negative-image hypothesis it is not hard to see how thought is
conceived to affect the seen and the unseen worlds
simultaneously. Every act of consciousness is accompanied by
molecular displacements in the brain, and these are of course
responded to by movements in the ethereal world. Thus as a series
of conscious states build up a continuous memory in strict
accordance with physical laws of motion,[7] so a correlative
memory is simultaneously built up in the ethereal world out of
the ethereal correlatives of the molecular displacements which go
on in our brains. And as there is a continual transfer of energy
from the visible world to the ether, the extinction of vital
energy which we call death must coincide in some way with the
awakening of vital energy in the correlative world; so that the
darkening of consciousness here is coincident with its dawning
there. In this way death is for the individual but a transfer
from one physical state of existence to another; and so, on the
largest scale, the death or final loss of energy by the whole
visible universe has its counterpart in the acquirement of a
maximum of life by the correlative unseen world.
There seems to be a certain sort of rigorous logical consistency
in this daring speculation; but really the propositions of which
it consists are so far from answering to anything within the
domain of human experience that we are unable to tell whether any
one of them logically follows from its predecessor or not. It is
evident that we are quite out of the region of scientific tests,
and to whatever view our authors may urge we can only languidly
assent that it is out of our power to disprove it.
[7] See my Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy, Vol. II. pp. 142-148.
The essential weakness of such a theory as this lies in the fact
that it is thoroughly materialistic in character. It is currently
assumed that the doctrine of a life after death cannot be
defended on materialistic grounds, but this is altogether too
hasty an assumption. Our authors, indeed, are not philosophical
materialists, like Dr. Priestley,—who nevertheless believed in a
future life,—but one of the primary doctrines of materialism
lies at the bottom of their argument. Materialism holds for one
thing that consciousness is a product of a peculiar organization
of matter, and for another thing that consciousness cannot
survive the disorganization of the material body with which it is
associated. As held by philosophical materialists, like Buchner
and Moleschott, these two opinions are strictly consistent with
each other; nay, the latter seems to be the inevitable inference
from the former, though Priestley did not so regard it. Now our
authors very properly refuse to commit themselves to the opinion
that mind is the product of matter, but their argument
nevertheless implies that some sort of material vehicle is
necessary for the continuance of mind in a future state of
existence. This material vehicle they seek to supply in the
theory which connects by invisible bonds of transmitted energy
the perishable material body with its counterpart in the world of
ether. The materialism of the argument is indeed partly veiled by
the terminology in which this counterpart is called a “spiritual
body,” but in this novel use or abuse of scriptural language
there seems to me to be a strange confusion of ideas. Bear in
mind that the “invisible universe” into which energy is
constantly passing is simply the luminiferous ether, which our
authors, to suit the requirements of their hypothesis, have
gratuitously endowed with a complexity and variety of structure
analogous to that of the visible world of matter. Their language
is not always quite so precise as one could desire, for while
they sometimes speak of the ether itself as the “unseen
universe,” they sometimes allude to a primordial medium yet
subtler in constitution and presumably more immaterial. Herein
lies the confusion. Why should the luminiferous ether, or any
primordial medium in which it may have been generated, be
regarded as in any way “spiritual”? Great physicists, like less
trained thinkers, are sometimes liable to be unconsciously
influenced by old associations of ideas which, ostensibly
repudiated, still lurk under cover of the words we use. I fear
that the old associations which led the ancients to describe the
soul as a breath or a shadow, and which account for the
etymologies of such words as “ghost” and “spirit,” have had
something to do with this spiritualization of the interstellar
ether. Some share may also have been contributed by the Platonic
notion of the “grossness” or “bruteness” of tangible matter,—a
notion which has survived in Christian theology, and which
educated men of the present day have by no means universally
outgrown. Save for some such old associations as these, why
should it be supposed that matter becomes “spriritualized” as it
diminishes in apparent substantiality? Why should matter be
pronounced respectable in the inverse ratio of its density or
ponderability? Why is a diamond any more chargeable with
“grossness” than a cubic centimetre of hydrogen? Obviously such
fancies are purely of mythologic parentage. Now the luminiferous
ether, upon which our authors make such extensive demands, may be
physically “ethereal” enough, in spite of the enormous elasticity
which leads Professor Jevons to characterize it as “adamantine";
but most assuredly we have not the slightest reason for speaking
of it as “immaterial” or “spiritual.” Though we are unable to
weigh it in the balance, we at least know it as a transmitter of
undulatory movements, the size and shape of which we can
accurately measure. Its force-relations with ponderable matter
are not only universally and incessantly maintained, but they
have that precisely quantitative character which implies an
essential identity between the innermost natures of the two
substances. We have seen reason for thinking it probable that
ether and ordinary matter are alike composed of vortex-rings in a
quasi-frictionless fluid; but whatever be the fate of this subtle
hypothesis, we may be sure that no theory will ever be
entertained in which the analysis of ether shall require
different symbols from that of ordinary matter. In our authors’
theory, therefore, the putting on of immortality is in no wise
the passage from a material to a spiritual state. It is the
passage from one kind of materially conditioned state to another.
The theory thus appeals directly to our experiences of the
behaviour of matter; and in deriving so little support as it does
from these experiences, it remains an essentially weak
speculation, whatever we may think of its ingenuity. For so long
as we are asked to accept conclusions drawn from our experiences
of the material world, we are justified in demanding something
more than mere unconditioned possibility. We require some
positive evidence, be it ever so little in amount; and no theory
which cannot furnish such positive evidence is likely to carry to
our minds much practical conviction.
This is what I meant by saying that the great weakness of the
hypothesis here criticized lies in its materialistic character.
In contrast with this we shall presently see that the assertion
of a future life which is not materially conditioned, though
unsupported by any item of experience whatever, may nevertheless
be an impregnable assertion. But first I would conclude the
foregoing criticism by ruling out altogether the sense in which
our authors use the expression “Unseen Universe.” Scientific
inference, however remote, is connected by such insensible
gradations with ordinary perception, that one may well question
the propriety of applying the term “unseen” to that which is
presented to “the mind’s eye” as inevitable matter of inference.
It is true that we cannot see the ocean of ether in which visible
matter floats; but there are many other invisible things which
yet we do not regard as part of the “unseen world.” I do not see
the air which I am now breathing within the four walls of my
study, yet its existence is sufficiently a matter of
sense-perception as it fills my lungs and fans my cheek. The
atoms which compose a drop of water are not only invisible, but
cannot in any way be made the objects of sense-perception; yet by
proper inferences from their behaviour we can single them out for
measurement, so that Sir William Thomson can tell us that if the
drop of water were magnified to the size of the earth, the
constituent atoms would be larger than peas, but not so large as
billiard-balls. If we do not see such atoms with our eyes, we
have one adequate reason in their tiny dimensions, though there
are further reasons than this. It would be hard to say why the
luminiferous ether should be relegated to the “unseen world” any
more than the material atom. Whatever we know as possessing
resistance and extension, whatever we can subject to mathematical
processes of measurement, we also conceive as existing in such
shape that, with appropriate eyes and under proper visual
conditions, we MIGHT see it, and we are not entitled to draw any
line of demarcation between such an object of inference and
others which may be made objects of sense-perception. To set
apart the ether as constituting an “unseen universe” is therefore
illegitimate and confusing. It introduces a distinction where
there is none, and obscures the fact that both invisible ether
and visible matter form but one grand universe in which the sum
of energy remains constant, though the order of its distribution
endlessly varies.
Very different would be the logical position of a theory which
should assume the existence of an “Unseen World” entirely
spiritual in constitution, and in which material conditions like
those of the visible world should have neither place nor meaning.
Such a world would not consist of ethers or gases or ghosts, but
of purely psychical relations akin to such as constitute thoughts
and feelings when our minds are least solicited by
sense-perceptions. In thus marking off the “Unseen World” from
the objective universe of which we have knowledge, our line of
demarcation would at least be drawn in the right place. The
distinction between psychical and material phenomena is a
distinction of a different order from all other distinctions
known to philosophy, and it immeasurably transcends all others.
The progress of modern discovery has in no respect weakened the
force of Descartes’s remark, that between that of which the
differential attribute is Thought and that of which the
differential attribute is Extension, there can be no similarity,
no community of nature whatever. By no scientific cunning of
experiment or deduction can Thought be weighed or measured or in
any way assimilated to such things as may be made the actual or
possible objects of sense-perception. Modern discovery, so far
from bridging over the chasm between Mind and Matter, tends
rather to exhibit the distinction between them as absolute. It
has, indeed, been rendered highly probable that every act of
consciousness is accompanied by a molecular motion in the cells
and fibres of the brain; and materialists have found great
comfort in this fact, while theologians and persons of little
faith have been very much frightened by it. But since no one ever
pretended that thought can go on, under the conditions of the
present life, without a brain, one finds it rather hard to
sympathize either with the self-congratulations of Dr. Buchner’s
disciples[8] or with the terrors of their opponents. But what has
been less commonly remarked is the fact that when the thought and
the molecular movement thus occur simultaneously, in no
scientific sense is the thought the product of the molecular
movement. The sun-derived energy of motion latent in the food we
eat is variously transformed within the organism, until some of
it appears as the motion of the molecules of a little globule of
nerve-matter in the brain. In a rough way we might thus say that
the chemical energy of the food indirectly produces the motion of
these little nerve-molecules. But does this motion of
nerve-molecules now produce a thought or state of consciousness?
By no means. It simply produces some other motion of
nerve-molecules, and this in turn produces motion of contraction
or expansion in some muscle, or becomes transformed into the
chemical energy of some secreting gland. At no point in the whole
circuit does a unit of motion disappear as motion to reappear as
a unit of consciousness. The physical process is complete in
itself, and the thought does not enter into it. All that we can
say is, that the occurrence of the thought is simultaneous with
that part of the physical process which consists of a molecular
movement in the brain.[9] To be sure, the thought is always there
when summoned, but it stands outside the dynamic circuit, as
something utterly alien from and incomparable with the events
which summon it. No doubt, as Professor Tyndall observes, if we
knew exhaustively the physical state of the brain, “the
corresponding thought or feeling might be inferred; or, given the
thought or feeling, the corresponding state of the brain might be
inferred. But how inferred? It would be at bottom not a case of
logical inference at all, but of empirical association. You may
reply that many of the inferences of science are of this
character; the inference, for example, that an electric current
of a given direction will deflect a magnetic needle in a definite
way; but the cases differ in this, that the passage from the
current to the needle, if not demonstrable, is thinkable, and
that we entertain no doubt as to the final mechanical solution of
the problem. But the passage from the physics of the brain to the
corresponding facts of consciousness is unthinkable. Granted that
a definite thought and a definite molecular action in the brain
occur simultaneously; we do not possess the intellectual organ,
nor apparently any rudiment of the organ, which would enable us
to pass by a process of reasoning from the one to the other. They
appear together, but we do not know why."[10]
[8] The Nation once wittily described these people as “people who
believe that they are going to die like the beasts, and who
congratulate themselves that they are going to die like the
beasts.”

[9] For a fuller exposition of this point, see my Outlines of
Cosmic Philosophy, Vol. II. pp. 436-445.

[10] Fragments of Science, p. 119.
An unseen world consisting of purely psychical or spiritual
phenomena would accordingly be demarcated by an absolute gulf
from what we call the material universe, but would not
necessarily be discontinuous with the psychical phenomena which
we find manifested in connection with the world of matter. The
transfer of matter, or physical energy, or anything else that is
quantitatively measurable, into such an unseen world, may be set
down as impossible, by reason of the very definition of such a
world. Any hypothesis which should assume such a transfer would
involve a contradiction in terms. But the hypothesis of a
survival of present psychical phenomena in such a world, after
being denuded of material conditions, is not in itself absurd or
self-contradictory, though it may be impossible to support it by
any arguments drawn from the domain of human experience. Such is
the shape which it seems to me that, in the present state of
philosophy, the hypothesis of a future life must assume. We have
nothing to say to gross materialistic notions of ghosts and
bogies, and spirits that upset tables and whisper to ignorant
vulgar women the wonderful information that you once had an aunt
Susan. The unseen world imagined in our hypothesis is not
connected with the present material universe by any such
“invisible bonds” as would allow Bacon and Addison to come to
Boston and write the silliest twaddle in the most ungrammatical
English before a roomful of people who have never learned how to
test what they are pleased to call the “evidence of their
senses.” Our hypothesis is expressly framed so as to exclude all
intercourse whatever between the unseen world of spirit
unconditioned by matter and the present world of spirit
conditioned by matter in which all our experiences have been
gathered. The hypothesis being framed in such a way, the question
is, What has philosophy to say to it? Can we, by searching our
experiences, find any reason for adopting such an hypothesis? Or,
on the other hand, supposing we can find no such reason, would
the total failure of experimental evidence justify us in
rejecting it?
The question is so important that I will restate it. I have
imagined a world made up of psychical phenomena, freed from the
material conditions under which alone we know such phenomena. Can
we adduce any proof of the possibility of such a world? Or if we
cannot, does our failure raise the slightest presumption that
such a world is impossible?
The reply to the first clause of the question is sufficiently
obvious. We have no experience whatever of psychical phenomena
save as manifested in connection with material phenomena. We know
of Mind only as a group of activities which are never exhibited
to us except through the medium of motions of matter. In all our
experience we have never encountered such activities save in
connection with certain very complicated groupings of highly
mobile material particles into aggregates which we call living
organisms. And we have never found them manifested to a very
conspicuous extent save in connection with some of those
specially organized aggregates which have vertebrate skeletons
and mammary glands. Nay, more, when we survey the net results of
our experience up to the present time, we find indisputable
evidence that in the past history of the visible universe
psychical phenomena have only begun to be manifested in
connection with certain complex aggregates of material phenomena.
As these material aggregates have age by age become more complex
in structure, more complex psychical phenomena have been
exhibited. The development of Mind has from the outset been
associated with the development of Matter. And to-day, though
none of us has any knowledge of the end of psychical phenomena in
his own case, yet from all the marks by which we recognize such
phenomena in our fellow-creatures, whether brute or human, we are
taught that when certain material processes have been gradually
or suddenly brought to an end, psychical phenomena are no longer
manifested. From first to last, therefore, our appeal to
experience gets but one response. We have not the faintest shadow
of evidence wherewith to make it seem probable that Mind can
exist except in connection with a material body. Viewed from this
standpoint of terrestrial experience, there is no more reason for
supposing that consciousness survives the dissolution of the
brain than for supposing that the pungent flavour of table-salt
survives its decomposition into metallic sodium and gaseous
chlorine.
Our answer from this side is thus unequivocal enough. Indeed, so
uniform has been the teaching of experience in this respect that
even in their attempts to depict a life after death, men have
always found themselves obliged to have recourse to materialistic
symbols. To the mind of a savage the future world is a mere
reproduction of the present, with its everlasting huntings and
fightings. The early Christians looked forward to a renovation of
the earth and the bodily resurrection from Sheol of the
righteous. The pictures of hell and purgatory, and even of
paradise, in Dante’s great poem, are so intensely materialistic
as to seem grotesque in this more spiritual age. But even to-day
the popular conceptions of heaven are by no means freed from the
notion of matter; and persons of high culture, who realize the
inadequacy of these popular conceptions, are wont to avoid the
difficulty by refraining from putting their hopes and beliefs
into any definite or describable form. Not unfrequently one sees
a smile raised at the assumption of knowledge or insight by
preachers who describe in eloquent terms the joys of a future
state; yet the smile does not necessarily imply any scepticism as
to the abstract probability of the soul’s survival. The
scepticism is aimed at the character of the description rather
than at the reality of the thing described. It implies a tacit
agreement, among cultivated people, that the unseen world must be
purely spiritual in constitution. The agreement is not habitually
expressed in definite formulas, for the reason that no mental
image of a purely spiritual world can be formed. Much stress is
commonly laid upon the recognition of friends in a future life;
and however deep a meaning may be given to the phrase “the love
of God,” one does not easily realize that a heavenly existence
could be worth the longing that is felt for it, if it were to
afford no further scope for the pure and tender household
affections which give to the present life its powerful though
indefinable charm. Yet the recognition of friends in a purely
spiritual world is something of which we can frame no conception
whatever. We may look with unspeakable reverence on the features
of wife or child, less because of their physical beauty than
because of the beauty of soul to which they give expression, but
to imagine the perception of soul by soul apart from the material
structure and activities in which soul is manifested, is
something utterly beyond our power. Nay, even when we try to
represent to ourselves the psychical activity of any single soul
by itself as continuing without the aid of the physical machinery
of sensation, we get into unmanageable difficulties. A great part
of the contents of our minds consists of sensuous (chiefly
visual) images, and though we may imagine reflection to go on
without further images supplied by vision or hearing, touch or
taste or smell, yet we cannot well see how fresh experiences
could be gained in such a state. The reader, if he require
further illustrations, can easily follow out this line of
thought. Enough has no doubt been said to convince him that our
hypothesis of the survival of conscious activity apart from
material conditions is not only utterly unsupported by any
evidence that can be gathered from the world of which we have
experience, but is utterly and hopelessly inconceivable.
It is inconceivable BECAUSE it is entirely without foundation in
experience. Our powers of conception are closely determined by
the limits of our experience. When a proposition, or combination
of ideas, is suggested, for which there has never been any
precedent in human experience, we find it to be UNTHINKABLE,—the
ideas will not combine. The proposition remains one which we may
utter and defend, and perhaps vituperate our neighbours for not
accepting, but it remains none the less an unthinkable
proposition. It takes terms which severally have meanings and
puts them together into a phrase which has no meaning.[11] Now
when we try to combine the idea of the continuance of conscious
activity with the idea of the entire cessation of material
conditions, and thereby to assert the existence of a purely
spiritual world, we find that we have made an unthinkable
proposition. We may defend our hypothesis as passionately as we
like, but when we strive coolly to realize it in thought we find
ourselves baulked at every step.
[11] See my Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy, Vol. I. pp. 64-67.
But now we have to ask, How much does this inconceivability
signify? In most cases, when we say that a statement is
inconceivable, we practically declare it to be untrue; when we
say that a statement is without warrant in experience, we plainly
indicate that we consider it unworthy of our acceptance. This is
legitimate in the majority of cases with which we have to deal in
the course of life, because experience, and the capacities of
thought called out and limited by experience, are our only guides
in the conduct of life. But every one will admit that our
experience is not infinite, and that our capacity of conception
is not coextensive with the possibilities of existence. It is not
only possible, but in the very highest degree probable, that
there are many things in heaven, if not on earth, which are
undreamed of in our philosophy. Since our ability to conceive
anything is limited by the extent of our experience, and since
human experience is very far from being infinite, it follows that
there may be, and in all probability is, an immense region of
existence in every way as real as the region which we know, yet
concerning which we cannot form the faintest rudiment of a
conception. Any hypothesis relating to such a region of existence
is not only not disproved by the total failure of evidence in its
favour, but the total failure of evidence does not raise even the
slightest prima facie presumption against its validity.
These considerations apply with great force to the hypothesis of
an unseen world in which psychical phenomena persist in the
absence of material conditions. It is true, on the one hand, that
we can bring up no scientific evidence in support of such an
hypothesis. But on the other hand it is equally true that in the
very nature of things no such evidence could be expected to be
forthcoming: even were there such evidence in abundance, it could
not be accessible to us. The existence of a single soul, or
congeries of psychical phenomena, unaccompanied by a material
body, would be evidence sufficient to demonstrate the hypothesis.
But in the nature of things, even were there a million such souls
round about us, we could not become aware of the existence of one
of them, for we have no organ or faculty for the perception of
soul apart from the material structure and activities in which it
has been manifested throughout the whole course of our
experience. Even our own self-consciousness involves the
consciousness of ourselves as partly material bodies. These
considerations show that our hypothesis is very different from
the ordinary hypotheses with which science deals. The entire
absence of testimony does not raise a negative presumption except
in cases where testimony is accessible. In the hypotheses with
which scientific men are occupied, testimony is always
accessible; and if we do not find any, the presumption is raised
that there is none. When Dr. Bastian tells us that he has found
living organisms to be generated in sealed flasks from which all
living germs had been excluded, we demand the evidence for his
assertion. The testimony of facts is in this case hard to elicit,
and only skilful reasoners can properly estimate its worth. But
still it is all accessible. With more or less labour it can be
got at; and if we find that Dr. Bastian has produced no evidence
save such as may equally well receive a different interpretation
from that which he has given it, we rightly feel that a strong
presumption has been raised against his hypothesis. It is a case
in which we are entitled to expect to find the favouring facts if
there are any, and so long as we do not find such, we are
justified in doubting their existence. So when our authors
propound the hypothesis of an unseen universe consisting of
phenomena which occur in the interstellar ether, or even in some
primordial fluid with which the ether has physical relations, we
are entitled to demand their proofs. It is not enough to tell us
that we cannot disprove such a theory. The burden of proof lies
with them. The interstellar ether is something concerning the
physical properties of which we have some knowledge; and surely,
if all the things are going on which they suppose in a medium so
closely related to ordinary matter, there ought to be some
traceable indications of the fact. At least, until the contrary
can be shown, we must refuse to believe that all the testimony in
a case like this is utterly inaccessible; and accordingly, so
long as none is found, especially so long as none is even
alleged, we feel that a presumption is raised against their
theory.
These illustrations will show, by sheer contrast, how different
it is with the hypothesis of an unseen world that is purely
spiritual. The testimony in such a case must, under the
conditions of the present life, be forever inaccessible. It lies
wholly outside the range of experience. However abundant it may
be, we cannot expect to meet with it. And accordingly our failure
to produce it does not raise even the slightest presumption
against our theory. When conceived in this way, the belief in a
future life is without scientific support; but at the same time
it is placed beyond the need of scientific support and beyond the
range of scientific criticism. It is a belief which no imaginable
future advance in physical discovery can in any way impugn. It is
a belief which is in no sense irrational, and which may be
logically entertained without in the least affecting our
scientific habit of mind or influencing our scientific
conclusions.
To take a brief illustration: we have alluded to the fact that in
the history of our present world the development of mental
phenomena has gone on hand in hand with the development of
organic life, while at the same time we have found it impossible
to explain mental phenomena as in any sense the product of
material phenomena. Now there is another side to all this. The
great lesson which Berkeley taught mankind was that what we call
material phenomena are really the products of consciousness
co-operating with some Unknown Power (not material) existing
beyond consciousness. We do very well to speak of “matter” in
common parlance, but all that the word really means is a group of
qualities which have no existence apart from our minds. Modern
philosophers have quite generally accepted this conclusion, and
every attempt to overturn Berkeley’s reasoning has hitherto
resulted in complete and disastrous failure. In admitting this,
we do not admit the conclusion of Absolute Idealism, that nothing
exists outside of consciousness. What we admit as existing
independently of our own consciousness is the Power that causes
in us those conscious states which we call the perception of
material qualities. We have no reason for regarding this Power as
in itself material: indeed, we cannot do so, since by the theory
material qualities have no existence apart from our minds. I have
elsewhere sought to show that less difficulty is involved in
regarding this Power outside of us as quasi-psychical, or in some
measure similar to the mental part of ourselves; and I have gone
on to conclude that this Power may be identical with what men
have, in all times and by the aid of various imperfect symbols,
endeavoured to apprehend as Deity.[12] We are thus led to a view
of things not very unlike the views entertained by Spinoza and
Berkeley. We are led to the inference that what we call the
material universe is but the manifestation of infinite Deity to
our finite minds. Obviously, on this view, Matter—the only thing
to which materialists concede real existence—is simply an
orderly phantasmagoria; and God and the Soul—which materialists
regard as mere fictions of the imagination—are the only
conceptions that answer to real existences.
[12] See my Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy, Part I. Chap. IV.;
Part III. Chaps. III., IV.
In the foregoing paragraph I have been setting down opinions with
which I am prepared to agree, and which are not in conflict with
anything that our study of the development of the objective world
has taught us. In so far as that study may be supposed to bear on
the question of a future life, two conclusions are open to us.
First we may say that since the phenomena of mind appear and run
their course along with certain specialized groups of material
phenomena, so, too, they must disappear when these specialized
groups are broken up. Or, in other words, we may say that every
living person is an organized whole; consciousness is something
which pertains to this organized whole, as music belongs to the
harp that is entire; but when the harp is broken it is silent,
and when the organized whole of personality falls to pieces
consciousness ceases forever. To many well-disciplined minds this
conclusion seems irresistible; and doubtless it would be a sound
one—a good Baconian conclusion—if we were to admit, with the
materialists, that the possibilities of existence are limited by
our tiny and ephemeral experience.
But now, supposing some Platonic speculator were to come along
and insist upon our leaving room for an alternative conclusion;
suppose he were to urge upon us that all this process of material
development, with the discovery of which our patient study has
been rewarded, may be but the temporary manifestation of
relations otherwise unknown between ourselves and the infinite
Deity; suppose he were to argue that psychical qualities may be
inherent in a spiritual substance which under certain conditions
becomes incarnated in matter, to wear it as a perishable garment
for a brief season, but presently to cast it off and enter upon
the freedom of a larger existence;—what reply should we be bound
to make, bearing in mind that the possibilities of existence are
in no wise limited by our experience? Obviously we should be
bound to admit that in sound philosophy this conclusion is just
as likely to be true as the other. We should, indeed, warn him
not to call on us to help him to establish it by scientific
arguments; and we should remind him that he must not make illicit
use of his extra-experiential hypotheses by bringing them into
the treatment of scientific questions that lie within the range
of experience. In science, for example, we make no use of the
conception of a “spiritual substance” (or of a “material
substance” either), because we can get along sufficiently well by
dealing solely with qualities. But with this general
understanding we should feel bound to concede the impregnableness
of his main position.
I have supposed this theory only as an illustration, not as a
theory which I am prepared to adopt. My present purpose is not to
treat as an advocate the question of a future life, but to
endeavour to point out what conditions should be observed in
treating the question philosophically. It seems to me that a
great deal is gained when we have distinctly set before us what
are the peculiar conditions of proof in the case of such
transcendental questions. We have gained a great deal when we
have learned how thoroughly impotent, how truly irrelevant, is
physical investigation in the presence of such a question. If we
get not much positive satisfaction for our unquiet yearnings, we
occupy at any rate a sounder philosophic position when we
recognize the limits within which our conclusions, whether
positive or negative, are valid.
It seems not improbable that Mr. Mill may have had in mind
something like the foregoing considerations when he suggested
that there is no reason why one should not entertain the belief
in a future life if the belief be necessary to one’s spiritual
comfort. Perhaps no suggestion in Mr. Mill’s richly suggestive
posthumous work has been more generally condemned as
unphilosophical, on the ground that in matters of belief we must
be guided, not by our likes and dislikes, but by the evidence
that is accessible. The objection is certainly a sound one so far
as it relates to scientific questions where evidence is
accessible. To hesitate to adopt a well-supported theory because
of some vague preference for a different view is in scientific
matters the one unpardonable sin,—a sin which has been only too
often committed. Even in matters which lie beyond the range of
experience, where evidence is inaccessible, desire is not to be
regarded as by itself an adequate basis for belief. But it seems
to me that Mr. Mill showed a deeper knowledge of the limitations
of scientific method than his critics, when he thus hinted at the
possibility of entertaining a belief not amenable to scientific
tests. The hypothesis of a purely spiritual unseen world, as
above described, is entirely removed from the jurisdiction of
physical inquiry, and can only be judged on general
considerations of what has been called “moral probability"; and
considerations of this sort are likely, in the future as in the
past, to possess different values for different minds. He who, on
such considerations, entertains a belief in a future life may not
demand that his sceptical neighbour shall be convinced by the
same considerations; but his neighbour is at the same time
estopped from stigmatizing his belief as unphilosophical.
The consideration which must influence most minds in their
attitude toward this question, is the craving, almost universally
felt, for some teleological solution to the problem of existence.
Why we are here now is a question of even profounder interest
than whether we are to live hereafter. Unfortunately its solution
carries us no less completely beyond the range of experience! The
belief that all things are working together for some good end is
the most essential expression of religious faith: of all
intellectual propositions it is the one most closely related to
that emotional yearning for a higher and better life which is the
sum and substance of religion. Yet all the treatises on natural
theology that have ever been written have barely succeeded in
establishing a low degree of scientific probability for this
belief. In spite of the eight Bridgewater Treatises, and the
“Ninth” beside, dysteleology still holds full half the field as
against teleology. Most of this difficulty, however, results from
the crude anthropomorphic views which theologians have held
concerning God. Once admitting that the Divine attributes may be
(as they must be) incommensurably greater than human attributes,
our faith that all things are working together for good may
remain unimpugned.
To many minds such a faith will seem incompatible with belief in
the ultimate destruction of sentiency amid the general doom of
the material universe. A good end can have no meaning to us save
in relation to consciousness that distinguishes and knows the
good from the evil. There could be no better illustration of how
we are hemmed in than the very inadequacy of the words with which
we try to discuss this subject. Such words have all gained their
meanings from human experience, and hence of necessity carry
anthropomorphic implications. But we cannot help this. We must
think with the symbols with which experience has furnished us;
and when we so think, there does seem to be little that is even
intellectually satisfying in the awful picture which science
shows us, of giant worlds concentrating out of nebulous vapour,
developing with prodigious waste of energy into theatres of all
that is grand and sacred in spiritual endeavour, clashing and
exploding again into dead vapour-balls, only to renew the same
toilful process without end,—a senseless bubble-play of Titan
forces, with life, love, and aspiration brought forth only to be
extinguished. The human mind, however “scientific” its training,
must often recoil from the conclusion that this is all; and there
are moments when one passionately feels that this cannot be all.
On warm June mornings in green country lanes, with sweet
pine-odours wafted in the breeze which sighs through the
branches, and cloud-shadows flitting over far-off blue mountains,
while little birds sing their love-songs, and golden-haired
children weave garlands of wild roses; or when in the solemn
twilight we listen to wondrous harmonies of Beethoven and Chopin
that stir the heart like voices from an unseen world; at such
times one feels that the profoundest answer which science can
give to our questionings is but a superficial answer after all.
At these moments, when the world seems fullest of beauty, one
feels most strongly that it is but the harbinger of something
else,—that the ceaseless play of phenomena is no mere sport of
Titans, but an orderly scene, with its reason for existing, its
Difficult as it is to disentangle the elements of reasoning that
enter into these complex groups of feeling, one may still see, I
think, that it is speculative interest in the world, rather than
anxious interest in self, that predominates. The desire for
immortality in its lowest phase is merely the outcome of the
repugnance we feel toward thinking of the final cessation of
vigorous vital activity. Such a feeling is naturally strong with
healthy people. But in the mood which I have above tried to
depict, this feeling, or any other which is merely
self-regarding, is lost sight of in the feeling which associates
a future life with some solution of the burdensome problem of
existence. Had we but faith enough to lighten the burden of this
problem, the inferior question would perhaps be less absorbing.
Could we but know that our present lives are working together
toward some good end, even an end in no wise anthropomorphic, it
would be of less consequence whether we were individually to
endure. To the dog under the knife of the experimenter, the world
is a world of pure evil; yet could the poor beast but understand
the alleviation of human suffering to which he is contributing,
he would be forced to own that this is not quite true; and if he
were also a heroic or Christian dog, the thought would perhaps
take away from death its sting. The analogy may be a crude one;
but the reasonableness of the universe is at least as far above
our comprehension as the purposes of man surpass the
understanding of the dog. Believing, however, though as a simple
act of trust, that the end will crown the work, we may rise
superior to the question which has here concerned us, and
exclaim, in the supreme language of faith, “Though He slay me,
yet will I trust in Him!”
  July, 1875.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
