


“What are you, where did you come from, and whither are you
bound?"—the question which from Homer’s days has been put to the
wayfarer in strange lands—is likewise the all-absorbing question
which man is ever asking of the universe of which he is himself
so tiny yet so wondrous a part. From the earliest times the
ultimate purpose of all scientific research has been to elicit
fragmentary or partial responses to this question, and philosophy
has ever busied itself in piecing together these several bits of
information according to the best methods at its disposal, in
order to make up something like a satisfactory answer. In old
times the best methods which philosophy had at its disposal for
this purpose were such as now seem very crude, and accordingly
ancient philosophers bungled considerably in their task, though
now and then they came surprisingly near what would to-day be
called the truth. It was natural that their methods should be
crude, for scientific inquiry had as yet supplied but scanty
materials for them to work with, and it was only after a very
long course of speculation and criticism that men could find out
what ways of going to work are likely to prove successful and
what are not. The earliest thinkers, indeed, were further
hindered from accomplishing much by the imperfections of the
language by the aid of which their thinking was done; for science
and philosophy have had to make a serviceable terminology by dint
of long and arduous trial and practice, and linguistic processes
fit for expressing general or abstract notions accurately grew up
only through numberless failures and at the expense of much
inaccurate thinking and loose talking. As in most of nature’s
processes, there was a great waste of energy before a good result
could be secured. Accordingly primitive men were very wide of the
mark in their views of nature. To them the world was a sort of
enchanted ground, peopled with sprites and goblins; the quaint
notions with which we now amuse our children in fairy tales
represent a style of thinking which once was current among grown
men and women, and which is still current wherever men remain in
a savage condition. The theories of the world wrought out by
early priest-philosophers were in great part made up of such
grotesque notions; and having become variously implicated with
ethical opinions as to the nature and consequences of right and
wrong behaviour, they acquired a kind of sanctity, so that any
thinker who in the light of a wider experience ventured to alter
or amend the primitive theory was likely to be vituperated as an
irreligious man or atheist. This sort of inference has not yet
been wholly abandoned, even in civilized communities. Even to-day
books are written about “the conflict between religion and
science,” and other books are written with intent to reconcile
the two presumed antagonists. But when we look beneath the
surface of things, we see that in reality there has never been
any conflict between religion and science, nor is any
reconciliation called for where harmony has always existed. The
real historical conflict, which has been thus curiously misnamed,
has been the conflict between the more-crude opinions belonging
to the science of an earlier age and the less-crude opinions
belonging to the science of a later age. In the course of this
contest the more-crude opinions have usually been defended in the
name of religion, and the less-crude opinions have invariably won
the victory; but religion itself, which is not concerned with
opinion, but with the aspiration which leads us to strive after a
purer and holier life, has seldom or never been attacked. On the
contrary, the scientific men who have conducted the battle on
behalf of the less-crude opinions have generally been influenced
by this religious aspiration quite as strongly as the apologists
of the more-crude opinions, and so far from religious feeling
having been weakened by their perennial series of victories, it
has apparently been growing deeper and stronger all the time. The
religious sense is as yet too feebly developed in most of us; but
certainly in no preceding age have men taken up the work of life
with more earnestness or with more real faith in the unseen than
at the present day, when so much of what was once deemed
all-important knowledge has been consigned to the limbo of
mythology.
The more-crude theories of early times are to be chiefly
distinguished from the less-crude theories of to-day as being
largely the products of random guesswork. Hypothesis, or
guesswork, indeed, lies at the foundation of all scientific
knowledge. The riddle of the universe, like less important
riddles, is unravelled only by approximative trials, and the most
brilliant discoverers have usually been the bravest guessers.
Kepler’s laws were the result of indefatigable guessing, and so,
in a somewhat different sense, was the wave-theory of light. But
the guesswork of scientific inquirers is very different now from
what it was in older times. In the first place, we have slowly
learned that a guess must be verified before it can be accepted
as a sound theory; and, secondly, so many truths have been
established beyond contravention, that the latitude for
hypothesis is much less than it once was. Nine tenths of the
guesses which might have occurred to a mediaeval philosopher
would now be ruled out as inadmissible, because they would not
harmonize with the knowledge which has been acquired since the
Middle Ages. There is one direction especially in which this
continuous limitation of guesswork by ever-accumulating
experience has manifested itself. From first to last, all our
speculative successes and failures have agreed in teaching us
that the most general principles of action which prevail to-day,
and in our own corner of the universe, have always prevailed
throughout as much of the universe as is accessible to our
research. They have taught us that for the deciphering of the
past and the predicting of the future, no hypotheses are
admissible which are not based upon the actual behaviour of
things in the present. Once there was unlimited facility for
guessing as to how the solar system might have come into
existence; now the origin of the sun and planets is adequately
explained when we have unfolded all that is implied in the
processes which are still going on in the solar system. Formerly
appeals were made to all manner of violent agencies to account
for the changes which the earth’s surface has undergone since our
planet began its independent career; now it is seen that the same
slow working of rain and tide, of wind and wave and frost, of
secular contraction and of earthquake pulse, which is visible
to-day, will account for the whole. It is not long since it was
supposed that a species of animals or plants could be swept away
only by some unusual catastrophe, while for the origination of
new species something called an act of “special creation” was
necessary; and as to the nature of such extraordinary events
there was endless room for guesswork; but the discovery of
natural selection was the discovery of a process, going on
perpetually under our very eyes, which must inevitably of itself
extinguish some species and bring new ones into being. In these
and countless other ways we have learned that all the rich
variety of nature is pervaded by unity of action, such as we
might expect to find if nature is the manifestation of an
infinite God who is without variableness or shadow of turning,
but quite incompatible with the fitful behaviour of the
anthropomorphic deities of the old mythologies. By thus
abstaining from all appeal to agencies that are extra-cosmic, or
not involved in the orderly system of events that we see
occurring around us, we have at last succeeded in eliminating
from philosophic speculation the character of random guesswork
which at first of necessity belonged to it. Modern scientific
hypothesis is so far from being a haphazard mental proceeding
that it is perhaps hardly fair to classify it with guesses. It is
lifted out of the plane of guesswork, in so far as it has
acquired the character of inevitable inference from that which
now is to that which has been or will be. Instead of the
innumerable particular assumptions which were once admitted into
cosmic philosophy, we are now reduced to the one universal
assumption which has been variously described as the “principle
of continuity,” the “uniformity of nature,” the “persistence of
force,” or the “law of causation,” and which has been variously
explained as a necessary datum for scientific thinking or as a
net result of all induction. I am not unwilling, however, to
adopt the language of a book which has furnished the occasion for
the present discussion, and to say that this grand assumption is
a supreme act of faith, the definite expression of a trust that
the infinite Sustainer of the universe “will not put us to
permanent intellectual confusion.” For in this mode of statement
the harmony between the scientific and the religious points of
view is well brought out. It is as affording the only outlet from
permanent intellectual confusion that inquirers have been driven
to appeal to the principle of continuity; and it is by unswerving
reliance upon this principle that we have obtained such insight
into the past, present, and future of the world as we now
possess.
The work just mentioned[1] is especially interesting as an
attempt to bring the probable destiny of the human soul into
connection with the modern theories which explain the past and
future career of the physical universe in accordance with the
principle of continuity. Its authorship is as yet unknown, but it
is believed to be the joint production of two of the most eminent
physicists in Great Britain, and certainly the accurate knowledge
and the ingenuity and subtlety of thought displayed in it are
such as to lend great probability to this conjecture. Some
account of the argument it contains may well precede the
suggestions presently to be set forth concerning the Unseen
World; and we shall find it most convenient to begin, like our
authors, with a brief statement of what the principle of
continuity teaches as to the proximate beginning and end of the
visible universe. I shall in the main set down only results,
having elsewhere[2] given a simple exposition of the arguments
upon which these results are founded.
[1] The Unseen Universe; or, Physical Speculations on a Future
State. [Attributed to Professors TAIT and BALFOUR STEWART.] New
York: Macmillan & Co. 1875. 8vo. pp. 212.

[2] Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy, based on the Doctrine of
Evolution. Boston: J. R. Osgood & Co. 1875. 2 vols. 8vo.
The first great cosmological speculation which has been raised
quite above the plane of guesswork by making no other assumption
than that of the uniformity of nature, is the well-known Nebular
Hypothesis. Every astronomer knows that the earth, like all other
cosmical bodies which are flattened at the poles, was formerly a
mass of fluid, and consequently filled a much larger space than
at present. It is further agreed, on all hands, that the sun is a
contracting body, since there is no other possible way of
accounting for the enormous quantity of heat which he generates.
The so-called primeval nebula follows as a necessary inference
from these facts. There was once a time when the earth was
distended on all sides away out to the moon and beyond it, so
that the matter now contained in the moon was then a part of our
equatorial zone. And at a still remoter date in the past, the
mass of the sun was diffused in every direction beyond the orbit
of Neptune, and no planet had an individual existence, for all
were indistinguishable parts of the solar mass. When the great
mass of the sun, increased by the relatively small mass of all
the planets put together, was spread out in this way, it was a
rare vapour or gas. At the period where the question is taken up
in Laplace’s treatment of the nebular theory, the shape of this
mass is regarded as spheroidal; but at an earlier period its
shape may well have been as irregular as that of any of the
nebulae which we now see in distant parts of the heavens, for,
whatever its primitive shape, the equalization of its rotation
would in time make it spheroidal. That the QUANTITY of rotation
was the same then as now is unquestionable; for no system of
particles, great or small, can acquire or lose rotation by any
action going on within itself, any more than a man could pick
himself up by his waistband and lift himself over a stone wale So
that the primitive rotating spheroidal solar nebula is not a
matter of assumption, but is just what must once have existed,
provided there has been no breach of continuity in nature’s
operations. Now proceeding to reason back from the past to the
present, it has been shown that the abandonment of successive
equatorial belts by the contracting solar mass must have ensued
in accordance with known mechanical laws; and in similar wise,
under ordinary circumstances. each belt must have parted into
fragments, and the fragments chasing each other around the same
orbit, must have at last coalesced into a spheroidal planet. Not
only this, but it has also been shown that as the result of such
a process the relative sizes of the planets would be likely to
take the order which they now follow; that the ring immediately
succeeding that of Jupiter would be likely to abort and produce a
great number of tiny planets instead of one good-sized one; that
the outer planets would be likely to have many moons, and that
Saturn, besides having the greatest number of moons, would be
likely to retain some of his inner rings unbroken; that the earth
would be likely to have a long day and Jupiter a short one; that
the extreme outer planets would be not unlikely to rotate in a
retrograde direction; and so on, through a long list of
interesting and striking details. Not only, therefore, are we
driven to the inference that our solar system was once a vaporous
nebula, but we find that the mere contraction of such a nebula,
under the influence of the enormous mutual gravitation of its
particles, carries with it the explanation of both the more
general and the more particular features of the present system.
So that we may fairly regard this stupendous process as veritable
matter of history, while we proceed to study it under some
further aspects and to consider what consequences are likely to
follow.
Our attention should first be directed to the enormous waste of
energy which has accompanied this contraction of the solar
nebula. The first result of such a contraction is the generation
of a great quantity of heat, and when the heat thus generated has
been lost by radiation into surrounding space it becomes possible
for the contraction to continue. Thus, as concentration goes on,
heat is incessantly generated and incessantly dissipated. How
long this process is to endure depends chiefly on the size of the
contracting mass, as small bodies radiate heat much faster than
large ones. The moon seems to be already thoroughly refrigerated,
while Jupiter and Saturn are very much hotter than the earth, as
is shown by the tremendous atmospheric phenomena which occur on
their surfaces. The sun, again, generates heat so rapidly, owing
to his great energy of contraction, and loses it so slowly, owing
to his great size, that his surface is always kept in a state of
incandescence. His surface-temperature is estimated at some three
million degrees of Fahrenheit, and a diminution of his diameter
far too small to be detected by the finest existing instruments
would suffice to maintain the present supply of heat for more
than fifty centuries. These facts point to a very long future
during which the sun will continue to warm the earth and its
companion planets, but at the same time they carry on their face
the story of inevitable ultimate doom. If things continue to go
on as they have all along gone on, the sun must by and by grow
black and cold, and all life whatever throughout the solar system
must come to an end. Long before this consummation, however, life
will probably have become extinct through the refrigeration of
each of the planets into a state like the present state of the
moon, in which the atmosphere and oceans have disappeared from
the surface. No doubt the sun will continue to give out heat a
long time after heat has ceased to be needed for the support of
living organisms. For the final refrigeration of the sun will
long be postponed by the fate of the planets themselves. The
separation of the planets from their parent solar mass seems to
be after all but a temporary separation. So nicely balanced are
they now in their orbits that they may well seem capable of
rolling on in their present courses forever. But this is not the
case. Two sets of circumstances are all the while striving, the
one to drive the planets farther away from the sun, the other to
draw them all into it. On the one hand, every body in our system
which contains fluid matter has tides raised upon its surface by
the attraction of neighbouring bodies. All the planets raise
tides upon the surface of the sun and the periodicity of
sun-spots (or solar cyclones) depends upon this fact. These tidal
waves act as a drag or brake upon the rotation of the sun,
somewhat diminishing its rapidity. But, in conformity with a
principle of mechanics well known to astronomers, though not
familiar to the general reader, all the motion of rotation thus
lost by the sun is added to the planets in the shape of annual
motion of revolution, and thus their orbits all tend to
enlarge,—they all tend to recede somewhat from the sun. But this
state of things, though long-enduring enough, is after all only
temporary, and will at any rate come to an end when the sun and
planets have become solid. Meanwhile another set of circumstances
is all the time tending to bring the planets nearer to the sun,
and in the long run must gain the mastery. The space through
which the planets move is filled with a kind of matter which
serves as a medium for the transmission of heat and light, and
this kind of matter, though different in some respects from
ordinary ponderable matter, is yet like it in exerting friction.
This friction is almost infinitely little, yet it has a wellnigh
infinite length of time to work in, and during all this wellnigh
infinite length of time it is slowly eating up the momentum of
the planets and diminishing their ability to maintain their
distances from the sun. Hence in course of time the planets will
all fall into the sun, one after another, so that the solar
system will end, as it began, by consisting of a single mass of
matter.
But this is by no means the end of the story. When two bodies
rush together, each parts with some of its energy of motion, and
this lost energy of motion reappears as heat. In the concussion
of two cosmical bodies, like the sun and the earth, an enormous
quantity of motion is thus converted into heat. Now heat, when
not allowed to radiate, or when generated faster than it can be
radiated, is transformed into motion of expansion. Hence the
shock of sun and planet would at once result in the vaporization
of both bodies; and there can be no doubt that by the time the
sun has absorbed the outermost of his attendant planets, he will
have resumed something like his original nebulous condition. He
will have been dilated into a huge mass of vapour, and will have
become fit for a new process of contraction and for a new
production of life-bearing planets.
We are now, however, confronted by an interesting but difficult
question. Throughout all this grand past and future career of the
solar system which we have just briefly traced, we have been
witnessing a most prodigal dissipation of energy in the shape of
radiant heat. At the outset we had an enormous quantity of what
is called “energy of position,” that is, the outer parts of our
primitive nebula had a very long distance through which to travel
towards one another in the slow process of concentration; and
this distance was the measure of the quantity of work possible to
our system. As the particles of our nebula drew nearer and nearer
together, the energy of position continually lost reappeared
continually as heat, of which the greater part was radiated off,
but of which a certain amount was retained. All the gigantic
amount of work achieved in the geologic development of our earth
and its companion planets, and in the development of life
wherever life may exist in our system, has been the product of
this retained heat. At the present day the same wasteful process
is going on. Each moment the sun’s particles are losing energy of
position as they draw closer and closer together, and the heat
into which this lost energy is metamorphosed is poured out most
prodigally in every direction. Let us consider for a moment how
little of it gets used in our system. The earth’s orbit is a
nearly circular figure more than five hundred million miles in
circumference, while only eight thousand miles of this path are
at any one time occupied by the earth’s mass. Through these eight
thousand miles the sun’s radiated energy is doing work, but
through the remainder of the five hundred million it is idle and
wasted. But the case is far more striking when we reflect that it
is not in the plane of the earth’s orbit only that the sun’s
radiance is being poured out. It is not an affair of a circle,
but of a sphere. In order to utilize all the solar rays, we
should need to have an immense number of earths arranged so as to
touch each other, forming a hollow sphere around the sun, with
the present radius of the earth’s orbit. We may well believe
Professor Tyndall, therefore, when he tells us that all the solar
radiance we receive is less than a two-billionth part of what is
sent flying through the desert regions of space. Some of the
immense residue of course hits other planets stationed in the way
of it, and is utilized upon their surfaces; but the planets, all
put together, stop so little of the total quantity that our
startling illustration is not materially altered by taking them
into the account. Now this two-billionth part of the solar
radiance poured out from moment to moment suffices to blow every
wind, to raise every cloud, to drive every engine, to build up
the tissue of every plant, to sustain the activity of every
animal, including man, upon the surface of our vast and stately
globe. Considering the wondrous richness and variety of the
terrestrial life wrought out by the few sunbeams which we catch
in our career through space, we may well pause overwhelmed and
stupefied at the thought of the incalculable possibilities of
existence which are thrown away with the potent actinism that
darts unceasingly into the unfathomed abysms of immensity. Where
it goes to or what becomes of it, no one of us can surmise.
Now when, in the remote future, our sun is reduced to vapour by
the impact of the several planets upon his surface, the resulting
nebulous mass must be a very insignificant affair compared with
the nebulous mass with which we started. In order to make a
second nebula equal in size and potential energy to the first
one, all the energy of position at first existing should have
been retained in some form or other. But nearly all of it has
been lost, and only an insignificant fraction remains with which
to endow a new system. In order to reproduce, in future ages,
anything like that cosmical development which is now going on in
the solar system, aid must be sought from without. We must
endeavour to frame some valid hypothesis as to the relation of
our solar system to other systems.
Thus far our view has been confined to the career of a single
star,—our sun,—with the tiny, easily-cooling balls which it has
cast off in the course of its development. Thus far, too, our
inferences have been very secure, for we have been dealing with a
circumscribed group of phenomena, the beginning and end of which
have been brought pretty well within the compass of our
imagination. It is quite another thing to deal with the actual or
probable career of the stars in general, inasmuch as we do not
even know how many stars there are, which form parts of a common
system, or what. are their precise dynamic relations to one
another. Nevertheless we have knowledge of a few facts which may
support some cautious inferences. All the stars which we can see
are undoubtedly bound together by relations of gravitation. No
doubt our sun attracts all the other stars within our ken, and is
reciprocally attracted by them. The stars, too, lie mostly in or
around one great plane, as is the case with the members of the
solar system. Moreover, the stars are shown by the spectroscope
to consist of chemical elements identical with those which are
found in the solar system. Such facts as these make it probable
that the career of other stars, when adequately inquired into,
would be found to be like that of our own sun. Observation daily
enhances this probability, for our study of the sidereal universe
is continually showing us stars in all stages of development. We
find irregular nebulae, for example; we find spiral and
spheroidal nebulae; we find stars which have got beyond the
nebulous stage, but are still at a whiter heat than our sun; and
we also find many stars which yield the same sort of spectrum as
our sun. The inference seems forced upon us that the same process
of concentration which has gone on in the case of our solar
nebula has been going on in the case of other nebulae. The
history of the sun is but a type of the history of stars in
general. And when we consider that all other visible stars and
nebulae are cooling and contracting bodies, like our sun, to what
other conclusion could we very well come? When we look at Sirius,
for instance, we do not see him surrounded by planets, for at
such a distance no planet could be visible, even Sirius himself,
though fourteen times larger than our sun, appearing only as a
“twinkling little star.” But a comparative survey of the heavens
assures us that Sirius can hardly have arrived at his present
stage of concentration without detaching, planet-forming rings,
for there is no reason for supposing that mechanical laws out
there are at all different from what they are in our own system.
And the same kind of inference must apply to all the matured
stars which we see in the heavens.
When we duly take all these things into the account, the case of
our solar system will appear as only one of a thousand cases of
evolution and dissolution with which the heavens furnish us.
Other stars, like our sun, have undoubtedly started as vaporous
masses, and have thrown off planets in contracting. The inference
may seem a bold one, but it after all involves no other
assumption than that of the continuity of natural phenomena. It
is not likely, therefore, that the solar system will forever be
left to itself. Stars which strongly gravitate toward each other,
while moving through a perennially resisting medium, must in time
be drawn together. The collision of our extinct sun with one of
the Pleiades, after this manner, would very likely suffice to
generate even a grander nebula than the one with which we
started. Possibly the entire galactic system may, in an
inconceivably remote future, remodel itself in this way; and
possibly the nebula from which our own group of planets has been
formed may have owed its origin to the disintegration of systems
which had accomplished their career in the depths of the bygone
eternity.
When the problem is extended to these huge dimensions, the
prospect of an ultimate cessation of cosmical work is
indefinitely postponed, but at the same time it becomes
impossible for us to deal very securely with the questions we
have raised. The magnitudes and periods we have introduced are so
nearly infinite as to baffle speculation itself: One point,
however, we seem dimly to discern. Supposing the stellar universe
not to be absolutely infinite in extent, we may hold that the day
of doom, so often postponed, must come at last. The concentration
of matter and dissipation of energy, so often checked, must in
the end prevail, so that, as the final outcome of things, the
entire universe will be reduced to a single enormous ball, dead
and frozen, solid and black, its potential energy of motion
having been all transformed into heat and radiated away. Such a
conclusion has been suggested by Sir William Thomson, and it is
quite forcibly stated by the authors of “The Unseen Universe."
They remind us that “if there be any one form of energy less
readily or less completely transformable than the others, and if
transformations constantly go on, more and more of the whole
energy of the universe will inevitably sink into this lower grade
as time advances.” Now radiant heat, as we have seen, is such a
lower grade of energy. “At each transformation of heat-energy
into work, a large portion is degraded, while only a small
portion is transformed into work. So that while it is very easy
to change all of our mechanical or useful energy into heat, it is
only possible to transform a portion of this heat-energy back
again into work. After each change, too, the heat becomes more
and more dissipated or degraded, and less and less available for
any future transformation. In other words,” our authors continue,
“the tendency of heat is towards equalization; heat is par
excellence the communist of our universe, and it will no doubt
ultimately bring the system to an end. .... It is absolutely
certain that life, so far as it is physical, depends essentially
upon transformations of energy; it is also absolutely certain
that age after age the possibility of such transformations is
becoming less and less; and, so far as we yet know, the final
state of the present universe must be an aggregation (into one
mass) of all the matter it contains, i. e. the potential energy
gone, and a practically useless state of kinetic energy, i. e.
uniform temperature throughout that mass.” Thus our authors
conclude that the visible universe began in time and will in time
come to an end; and they add that under the physical conditions
of such a universe “immortality is impossible.”
Concerning the latter inference we shall by and by have something
to say. Meanwhile this whole speculation as to the final
cessation of cosmical work seems to me—as it does to my friend,
Professor Clifford[3]—by no means trustworthy. The conditions of
the problem so far transcend our grasp that any such speculation
must remain an unverifiable guess. I do not go with Professor
Clifford in doubting whether the laws of mechanics are absolutely
the same throughout eternity; I cannot quite reconcile such a
doubt with faith in the principle of continuity. But it does seem
to me needful, before we conclude that radiated energy is
absolutely and forever wasted, that we should find out what
becomes of it. What we call radiant heat is simply transverse
wave-motion, propagated with enormous velocity through an ocean
of subtle ethereal matter which bathes the atoms of all visible
or palpable bodies and fills the whole of space, extending beyond
the remotest star which the telescope can reach. Whether there
are any bounds at all to this ethereal ocean, or whether it is as
infinite as space itself, we cannot surmise. If it be limited,
the possible dispersion of radiant energy is limited by its
extent. Heat and light cannot travel through emptiness. If the
ether is bounded by surrounding emptiness, then a ray of heat, on
arriving at this limiting emptiness, would be reflected back as
surely as a ball is sent back when thrown against a solid wall.
If this be the case, it will not affect our conclusions
concerning such a tiny region of space as is occupied by the
solar system, but it will seriously modify Sir William Thomson’s
suggestion as to the fate of the universe as a whole. The
radiance thrown away by the sun is indeed lost so far as the
future of our system is concerned, but not a single unit of it is
lost from the universe. Sooner or later, reflected back in all
directions, it must do work in one quarter or another, so that
ultimate stagnation be comes impossible. It is true that no such
return of radiant energy has been detected in our corner of the
world; but we have not yet so far disentangled all the
force-relations of the universe that we are entitled to regard
such a return as impossible. This is one way of escape from the
consummation of things depicted by our authors. Another way of
escape is equally available, if we suppose that while the ether
is without bounds the stellar universe also extends to infinity.
For in this case the reproduction of nebulous masses fit for
generating new systems of worlds must go on through space that is
endless, and consequently the process can never come to an end
and can never have had a beginning. We have, therefore, three
alternatives: either the visible universe is finite, while the
ether is infinite; or both are finite; or both are infinite. Only
on the first supposition, I think, do we get a universe which
began in time and must end in time. Between such stupendous
alternatives we have no grounds for choosing. But it would seem
that the third, whether strictly true or not, best represents the
state of the case relatively to our feeble capacity of
comprehension. Whether absolutely infinite or not, the dimensions
of the universe must be taken as practically infinite, so far as
human thought is concerned. They immeasurably transcend the
capabilities of any gauge we can bring to bear on them.
Accordingly all that we are really entitled to hold, as the
outcome of sound speculation, is the conception of innumerable
systems of worlds concentrating out of nebulous masses, and then
rushing together and dissolving into similar masses, as bubbles
unite and break up—now here, now there—in their play on the
surface of a pool, and to this tremendous series of events we can
assign neither a beginning nor an end.
[3] Fortnightly Review, April, 1875.
We must now make some more explicit mention of the ether which
carries through space the rays of heat and light. In closest
connection with the visible stellar universe, the vicissitudes of
which we have briefly traced, the all-pervading ether constitutes
a sort of unseen world remarkable enough from any point of view,
but to which the theory of our authors ascribes capacities
hitherto unsuspected by science. The very existence of an ocean
of ether enveloping the molecules of material bodies has been
doubted or denied by many eminent physicists, though of course
none have called in question the necessity for some interstellar
medium for the transmission of thermal and luminous vibrations.
This scepticism has been, I think, partially justified by the
many difficulties encompassing the conception, into which,
however, we need not here enter. That light and heat cannot be
conveyed by any of the ordinary sensible forms of matter is
unquestionable. None of the forms of sensible matter can be
imagined sufficiently elastic to propagate wave-motion at the
rate of one hundred and eighty-eight thousand miles per second.
Yet a ray of light is a series of waves, and implies some
substance in which the waves occur. The substance required is one
which seems to possess strangely contradictory properties. It is
commonly regarded as an “ether” or infinitely rare substance;
but, as Professor Jevons observes, we might as well regard it as
an infinitely solid “adamant.” “Sir John Herschel has calculated
the amount of force which may be supposed, according to the
undulatory theory of light, to be exerted at each point in space,
and finds it to be 1,148,000,000,000 times the elastic force of
ordinary air at the earth’s surface, so that the pressure of the
ether upon a square inch of surface must be about
17,000,000,000,000, or seventeen billions of pounds."[4] Yet at
the same time the resistance offered by the ether to the
planetary motions is too minute to be appreciable. “All our
ordinary notions,” says Professor Jevons, “must be laid aside in
contemplating such an hypothesis; yet [it is] no more than the
observed phenomena of light and heat force us to accept. We
cannot deny even the strange suggestion of Dr. Young, that there
may be independent worlds, some possibly existing in different
parts of space, but others perhaps pervading each other, unseen
and unknown, in the same space. For if we are bound to admit the
conception of this adamantine firmament, it is equally easy to
admit a plurality of such.”
[4] Jevons’s Principles of Science, Vol. II. p. 145. The figures,
which in the English system of numeration read as seventeen
billions, would in the American system read as seventeen
trillions.
The ether, therefore, is unlike any of the forms of matter which
we can weigh and measure. In some respects it resembles a fluid,
in some respects a solid. It is both hard and elastic to an
almost inconceivable degree. It fills all material bodies like a
sea in which the atoms of the material bodies are as islands, and
it occupies the whole of what we call empty space. It is so
sensitive that a disturbance in any part of it causes a “tremour
which is felt on the surface of countless worlds.” Our old
experiences of matter give us no account of any substance like
this; yet the undulatory theory of light obliges us to admit such
a substance, and that theory is as well established as the theory
of gravitation. Obviously we have here an enlargement of our
experience of matter. The analysis of the phenomena of light and
radiant heat has brought us into mental relations with matter in
a different state from any in which we previously knew it. For
the supposition that the ether may be something essentially
different from matter is contradicted by all the terms we have
used in describing it. Strange and contradictory as its
properties may seem, are they any more strange than the
properties of a gas would seem if we were for the first time to
discover a gas after heretofore knowing nothing but solids and
liquids? I think not; and the conclusion implied by our authors
seems to me eminently probable, that in the so-called ether we
have simply a state of matter more primitive than what we know as
the gaseous state. Indeed, the conceptions of matter now current,
and inherited from barbarous ages, are likely enough to be crude
in the extreme. It is not strange that the study of such subtle
agencies as heat and light should oblige us to modify them; and
it will not be strange if the study of electricity should entail
still further revision of our ideas.
We are now brought to one of the profoundest speculations of
modern times, the vortex-atom theory of Helmholtz and Thomson, in
which the evolution of ordinary matter from ether is plainly
indicated. The reader first needs to know what vortex-motion is;
and this has been so beautifully explained by Professor Clifford,
that I quote his description entire: “Imagine a ring of
india-rubber, made by joining together the ends of a cylindrical
piece (like a lead-pencil before it is cut), to be put upon a
round stick which it will just fit with a little stretching. Let
the stick be now pulled through the ring while the latter is kept
in its place by being pulled the other way on the outside. The
india-rubber has then what is called vortex-motion. Before the
ends were joined together, while it was straight, it might have
been made to turn around without changing position, by rolling it
between the hands. Just the same motion of rotation it has on the
stick, only that the ends are now joined together. All the inside
surface of the ring is going one way, namely, the way the stick
is pulled; and all the outside is going the other way. Such a
vortex-ring is made by the smoker who purses his lips into a
round hole and sends out a puff of smoke. The outside of the ring
is kept back by the friction of his lips while the inside is
going forwards; thus a rotation is set up all round the
smoke-ring as it travels out into the air.” In these cases, and
in others as we commonly find it, vortex-motion owes its origin
to friction and is after a while brought to an end by friction.
But in 1858 the equations of motion of an incompressible
frictionless fluid were first successfully solved by Helmholtz,
and among other things he proved that, though vortex-motion could
not be originated in such a fluid, yet supposing it once to
exist, it would exist to all eternity and could not be diminished
by any mechanical action whatever. A vortex-ring, for example, in
such a fluid, would forever preserve its own rotation, and would
thus forever retain its peculiar individuality, being, as it
were, marked off from its neighbour vortex-rings. Upon this
mechanical truth Sir William Thomson based his wonderfully
suggestive theory of the constitution of matter. That which is
permanent or indestructible in matter is the ultimate homogeneous
atom; and this is probably all that is permanent, since chemists
now almost unanimously hold that so-called elementary molecules
are not really simple, but owe their sensible differences to the
various groupings of an ultimate atom which is alike for all.
Relatively to our powers of comprehension the atom endures
eternally; that is, it retains forever unalterable its definite
mass and its definite rate of vibration. Now this is just what a
vortex-ring would do in an incompressible frictionless fluid.
Thus the startling question is suggested, Why may not the
ultimate atoms of matter be vortex-rings forever existing in such
a frictionless fluid filling the whole of space? Such a
hypothesis is not less brilliant than Huyghens’s conjectural
identification of light with undulatory motion; and it is
moreover a legitimate hypothesis, since it can be brought to the
test of verification. Sir William Thomson has shown that it
explains a great many of the physical properties of matter: it
remains to be seen whether it can explain them all.
Of course the ether which conveys thermal and luminous
undulations is not the frictionless fluid postulated by Sir
William Thomson. The most conspicuous property of the ether is
its enormous elasticity, a property which we should not find in a
frictionless fluid. “To account for such elasticity,” says
Professor Clifford (whose exposition of the subject is still more
lucid than that of our authors), “it has to be supposed that even
where there are no material molecules the universal fluid is full
of vortex-motion, but that the vortices are smaller and more
closely packed than those of [ordinary] matter, forming
altogether a more finely grained structure. So that the
difference between matter and ether is reduced to a mere
difference in the size and arrangement of the component
vortex-rings. Now, whatever may turn out to be the ultimate
nature of the ether and of molecules, we know that to some extent
at least they obey the same dynamic laws, and that they act upon
one another in accordance with these laws. Until, therefore, it
is absolutely disproved, it must remain the simplest and most
probable assumption that they are finally made of the same stuff,
that the material molecule is some kind of knot or coagulation of
ether."[5]
[5] Fortnightly Review, June, 1875, p. 784.
Another interesting consequence of Sir William Thomson’s pregnant
hypothesis is that the absolute hardness which has been
attributed to material atoms from the time of Lucretius downward
may be dispensed with. Somewhat in the same way that a loosely
suspended chain becomes rigid with rapid rotation, the hardness
and elasticity of the vortex-atom are explained as due to the
swift rotary motion of a soft and yielding fluid. So that the
vortex-atom is really indivisible, not by reason of its hardness
or solidity, but by reason of the indestructibleness of its
motion.
Supposing, now, that we adopt provisionally the vortex
theory,—the great power of which is well shown by the
consideration just mentioned,—we must not forget that it is
absolutely essential to the indestructibleness of the material
atom that the universal fluid in which it has an existence as a
vortex-ring should be entirely destitute of friction. Once admit
even the most infinitesimal amount of friction, while retaining
the conception of vortex-motion in a universal fluid, and the
whole case is so far altered that the material atom can no longer
be regarded as absolutely indestructible, but only as
indefinitely enduring. It may have been generated, in bygone
eternity, by a natural process of evolution, and in future
eternity may come to an end. Relatively to our powers of
comprehension the practical difference is perhaps not great.
Scientifically speaking, Helmholtz and Thomson are as well
entitled to reason upon the assumption of a perfectly
frictionless fluid as geometers in general are entitled to assume
perfect lines without breadth and perfect surfaces without
thickness. Perfect lines and surfaces do not exist within the
region of our experience; yet the conclusions of geometry are
none the less true ideally, though in any particular concrete
instance they are only approximately realized. Just so with the
conception of a frictionless fluid. So far as experience goes,
such a thing has no more real existence than a line without
breadth; and hence an atomic theory based upon such an assumption
may be as true ideally as any of the theorems of Euclid, but it
can give only an approximatively true account of the actual
universe. These considerations do not at all affect the
scientific value of the theory; but they will modify the tenour
of such transcendental inferences as may be drawn from it
regarding, the probable origin and destiny of the universe.
The conclusions reached in the first part of this paper, while we
were dealing only with gross visible matter, may have seemed bold
enough; but they are far surpassed by the inference which our
authors draw from the vortex theory as they interpret it. Our
authors exhibit various reasons, more or less sound, for
attributing to the primordial fluid some slight amount of
friction; and in support of this view they adduce Le Sage’s
explanation of gravitation as a differential result of pressure,
and Struve’s theory of the partial absorption of light-rays by
the ether,—questions with which our present purpose does not
require us to meddle. Apart from such questions it is every way
probable that the primary assumption of Helmholtz and Thomson is
only an approximation to the truth. But if we accredit the
primordial fluid with even an infinitesimal amount of friction,
then we are required to conceive of the visible universe as
developed from the invisible and as destined to return into the
invisible. The vortex-atom, produced by infinitesimal friction
operating through wellnigh infinite time, is to be ultimately
abolished by the agency which produced it. In the words of our
authors, “If the visible universe be developed from an invisible
which is not a perfect fluid, then the argument deduced by Sir
William Thomson in favour of the eternity of ordinary matter
disappears, since this eternity depends upon the perfect fluidity
of the invisible. In fine, if we suppose the material universe to
be composed of a series of vortex-rings developed from an
invisible universe which is not a perfect fluid, it will be
ephemeral, just as the smoke-ring which we develop from air, or
that which we develop from water, is ephemeral, the only
difference being in duration, these lasting only for a few
seconds, and the others it may be for billions of years.” Thus,
as our authors suppose that “the available energy of the visible
universe will ultimately be appropriated by the invisible,” they
go on to imagine, “at least as a possibility, that the separate
existence of the visible universe will share the same fate, so
that we shall have no huge, useless, inert mass existing in after
ages to remind the passer-by of a form of energy and a species of
matter that is long since out of date and functionally effete.
Why should not the universe bury its dead out of sight?”
In one respect perhaps no more stupendous subject of
contemplation than this has ever been offered to the mind of man.
In comparison with the length of time thus required to efface the
tiny individual atom, the entire cosmical career of our solar
system, or even that of the whole starry galaxy, shrinks into
utter nothingness. Whether we shall adopt the conclusion
suggested must depend on the extent of our speculative audacity.
We have seen wherein its probability consists, but in reasoning
upon such a scale we may fitly be cautious and modest in
accepting inferences, and our authors, we may be sure, would be
the first to recommend such modesty and caution. Even at the
dimensions to which our theorizing has here grown, we may for
instance discern the possible alternative of a simultaneous or
rhythmically successive generation and destruction of
vortex-atoms which would go far to modify the conclusion just
suggested. But here we must pause for a moment, reserving for a
second paper the weightier thoughts as to futurity which our
authors have sought to enwrap in these sublime physical
speculations.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
