


[31] History of the United Netherlands: from the Death of William
the Silent to the Twelve Years’ Truce, 1609. By John Lothrop
Motley, D. C. L. In four volumes. Vols. III. and IV. New York.
1868.
Tandem fit surculus arbor: the twig which Mr. Motley in his
earlier volumes has described as slowly putting forth its leaves
and rootless, while painfully struggling for existence in a
hostile soil, has at last grown into a mighty tree of liberty,
drawing sustenance from all lands, and protecting all civilized
peoples with its pleasant shade. We congratulate Mr. Motley upon
the successful completion of the second portion of his great
work; and we think that the Netherlanders of our time have reason
to be grateful to the writer who has so faithfully and eloquently
told the story of their country’s fearful struggle against civil
and ecclesiastical tyranny, and its manifold contributions to the
advancement of European civilization.
Mr. Motley has been fortunate in his selection of a subject upon
which to write. Probably no century of modern times lends itself
to the purposes of the descriptive historian so well as the
sixteenth. While on the one hand the problems which it presents
are sufficiently near for us to understand them without too great
an effort of the imagination, on the other hand they are
sufficiently remote for us to study them without passionate and
warping prejudice. The contest between Catholicism and the
reformed religion—between ecclesiastical autocracy and the right
of private investigation—has become a thing of the past, and
constitutes a closed chapter in human history. The epoch which
begins where Mr. Motley’s history is designed to close—at the
peace of Westphalia—is far more complicated. Since the middle of
the seventeenth century a double movement has been going on in
religion and philosophy, society and politics,—a movement of
destruction typified by Voltaire and Rousseau, and a constructive
movement represented by Diderot and Lessing. We are still living
in the midst of this great epoch: the questions which it presents
are liable to disturb our prejudices as well as to stimulate our
reason; the results to which it must sooner or later attain can
now be only partially foreseen; and even its present tendencies
are generally misunderstood, and in many quarters wholly ignored.
With the sixteenth century, as we have said, the case is far
different. The historical problem is far less complex. The issues
at stake are comparatively simple, and the historian has before
him a straightforward story.
From the dramatic, or rather from the epic, point of view, the
sixteenth century is pre-eminent. The essentially transitional
character of modern history since the breaking up of the papal
and feudal systems is at no period more distinctly marked. In
traversing the sixteenth century we realize that we have fairly
got out of one state of things and into another. At the outset,
events like the challenge of Barletta may make us doubt whether
we have yet quite left behind the Middle Ages. The belief in the
central position of the earth is still universal, and the belief
in its rotundity not yet, until the voyage of Magellan, generally
accepted. We find England—owing partly to the introduction of
gunpowder and the consequent disuse of archery, partly to the
results of the recent integration of France under Louis
XI.—fallen back from the high relative position which it had
occupied under the rule of the Plantagenets; and its policy still
directed in accordance with reminiscences of Agincourt, and
garnet, and Burgundian alliances. We find France just beginning
her ill-fated career of intervention in the affairs of Italy; and
Spain, with her Moors finally vanquished and a new world beyond
the ocean just added to her domain, rapidly developing into the
greatest empire which had been seen since the days of the first
Caesars. But at the close of the century we find feudal life in
castles changed into modern life in towns; chivalric defiances
exchanged for over-subtle diplomacy; Maurices instead of Bayards;
a Henry IV. instead of a Gaston de Foix. We find the old theory
of man’s central position in the universe—the foundation of the
doctrine of final causes and of the whole theological method of
interpreting nature—finally overthrown by Copernicus. Instead of
the circumnavigability of the earth, the discovery of a Northwest
passage—as instanced by the heroic voyage of Barendz, so nobly
described by Mr. Motley—is now the chief geographical problem.
East India Companies, in place of petty guilds of weavers and
bakers, bear witness to the vast commercial progress. We find
England, fresh from her stupendous victory over the whole power
of Spain, again in the front rank of nations; France, under the
most astute of modern sovereigns, taking her place for a time as
the political leader of the civilized world; Spain, with her evil
schemes baffled in every quarter, sinking into that terrible
death-like lethargy, from which she has hardly yet awakened, and
which must needs call forth our pity, though it is but the
deserved retribution for her past behaviour. While the little
realm of the Netherlands, filched and cozened from the
unfortunate Jacqueline by the “good” Duke of Burgundy, carried
over to Austria as the marriage-portion of Lady Mary, sent down
to Spain as the personal inheritance of the “prudent” Philip, and
by him intolerably tormented with an Inquisition, a
Blood-Council, and a Duke of Alva, has after a forty years’ war
of independence taken its position for a time as the greatest of
commercial nations, with the most formidable navy and one of the
best disciplined armies yet seen upon the earth.
But the central phenomenon of the sixteenth century is the
culmination of the Protestant movement in its decisive
proclamation by Luther. For nearly three hundred years already
the power of the Church had been declining, and its function as a
civilizing agency had been growing more and more obsolete. The
first great blow at its supremacy had been directed with partial
success in the thirteenth century by the Emperor Frederick II.
Coincident with this attack from without, we find a reformation
begun within, as exemplified in the Dominican and Franciscan
movements. The second great blow was aimed by Philip IV. of
France, and this time it struck with terrible force. The removal
of the Papacy to Avignon, in 1305, was the virtual though
unrecognized abdication of its beneficent supremacy. Bereft of
its dignity and independence, from that time forth it ceased to
be the defender of national unity against baronial anarchy, of
popular rights against monarchical usurpation, and became a
formidable instrument of despotism and oppression. Through the
vicissitudes of the great schism in the fourteenth century, and
the refractory councils in the fifteenth, its position became
rapidly more and more retrograde and demoralized. And when, in
1530, it joined its forces with those of Charles V., in crushing
the liberties of the worthiest of mediaeval republics, it became
evident that the cause of freedom and progress must henceforth be
intrusted to some more faithful champion. The revolt of Northern
Europe, led by Luther and Henry VIII. was but the articulate
announcement of this altered state of affairs. So long as the
Roman Church had been felt to be the enemy of tyrannical monarchs
and the steadfast friend of the people, its encroachments, as
represented by men like Dunstan and Becket, were regarded with
popular favour. The strength of the Church lay ever in its
democratic instincts; and when these were found to have abandoned
it, the indignant protest of Luther sufficed to tear away half of
Europe from its allegiance.
By the end of the sixteenth century, we find the territorial
struggle between the Church and the reformed religion
substantially decided. Protestantism and Catholicism occupied
then the same respective areas which they now occupy. Since 1600
there has been no instance of a nation passing from one form of
worship to the other; and in all probability there never will be.
Since the wholesale dissolution of religious beliefs wrought in
the last century, the whole issue between Romanism and
Protestantism, regarded as dogmatic systems, is practically dead.
M. Renan is giving expression to an almost self-evident truth,
when he says that religious development is no longer to proceed
by way of sectarian proselytism, but by way of harmonious
internal development. The contest is no longer between one
theology and another, but it is between the theological and the
scientific methods of interpreting natural phenomena. The
sixteenth century has to us therefore the interest belonging to a
rounded and completed tale. It contains within itself
substantially the entire history of the final stage of the
theological reformation.
This great period falls naturally into two divisions, the first
corresponding very nearly with the reigns of Charles V. and Henry
VIII., and the second with the age of Philip II. and Elizabeth.
The first of these periods was filled with the skirmishes which
were to open the great battle of the Reformation. At first the
strength and extent of the new revolution were not altogether
apparent. While the Inquisition was vigorously crushing out the
first symptoms of disaffection in Spain, it at one time seemed as
if the Reformers were about to gain the whole of the Empire,
besides acquiring an excellent foothold in France. Again, while
England was wavering between the old and the new faith, the last
hopes of the Reform in Germany seemed likely to be destroyed by
the military genius of Charles. But in Maurice, the red-bearded
hero of Saxony, Charles found more than his match. The picture of
the rapid and desperate march of Maurice upon Innspruck, and of
the great Emperor flying for his life at the very hour of his
imagined triumph, has still for us an intenser interest than
almost any other scene of that age; for it was the event which
proved that Protestantism was not a mere local insurrection which
a monarch like Charles could easily put down, but a gigantic
revolution against which all the powers in the world might well
strive in vain.
With the abdication of Charles in 1556 the new period may be said
to begin, and it is here that Mr. Motley’s history commences.
Events crowded thick and fast. In 1556 Philip II., a prince bred
and educated for the distinct purpose of suppressing heresy,
succeeded to the rule of the most powerful empire which had been
seen since the days of the Antonines. In the previous year a new
era had begun at the court of Rome. The old race of pagan
pontiffs, the Borgias, the Farneses, and the Medicis, had come to
an end, and the papal throne was occupied by the puritanical
Caraffa, as violent a fanatic as Robespierre, and a foe of
freedom as uncompromising as Philip II. himself. Under his
auspices took place the great reform in the Church signalized by
the rise of the Jesuits, as the reform in the thirteenth century
had been attended by the rise of the Cordeliers and Dominicans.
His name should not be forgotten, for it is mainly owing to the
policy inaugurated by him that Catholicism was enabled to hold
its ground as well as it did. In 1557 the next year, the strength
of France was broken at St. Quentin, and Spain was left with her
hands free to deal with the Protestant powers. In 1558, by the
accession of Elizabeth, England became committed to the cause of
Reform. In 1559 the stormy administration of Margaret began in
the Netherlands. In 1560 the Scotch nobles achieved the
destruction of Catholicism in North Britain. By this time every
nation except France, had taken sides in the conflict which was
to last, with hardly any cessation, during two generations.
Mr. Motley, therefore, in describing the rise and progress of the
united republic of the Netherlands, is writing not Dutch but
European history. On his pages France, Spain, and England make
almost as large a figure as Holland itself. He is writing the
history of the Reformation during its concluding epoch, and he
chooses the Netherlands as his main subject, because during that
period the Netherlands were the centre of the movement. They
constituted the great bulwark of freedom, and upon the success or
failure of their cause the future prospect of Europe and of
mankind depended. Spain and the Netherlands, Philip II. and
William the Silent, were the two leading antagonists and were
felt to be such by the other nations and rulers that came to
mingle in the strife. It is therefore a stupid criticism which we
have seen made upon Mr. Motley, that, having brought his
narrative down to the truce of 1609, he ought, instead of
describing the Thirty Years’ War, to keep on with Dutch history,
and pourtray the wars against Cromwell and Charles II., and the
struggle of the second William of Orange against Louis XIV. By so
doing he would only violate the unity of his narrative. The wars
of the Dutch against England and France belong to an entirely
different epoch in European history,—a modern epoch, in which
political and commercial interests were of prime importance, and
theological interests distinctly subsidiary. The natural terminus
of Mr. Motley’s work is the Peace of Westphalia. After bringing
down his history to the time when the independence of the
Netherlands was virtually acknowledged, after describing the
principal stages of the struggle against Catholicism and
universal monarchy, as carried on in the first generation by
Elizabeth and William, and in the second by Maurice and Henry, he
will naturally go on to treat of the epilogue as conducted by
Richelieu and Gustavus, ending in the final cessation of
religious wars throughout Europe.
The conflict in the Netherlands was indeed far more than a mere
religious struggle. In its course was distinctly brought into
prominence the fact which we have above signalized, that since
the Roman Church had abandoned the liberties of the people they
had found a new defender in the reformed religion. The Dutch
rebellion is peculiarly interesting, because it was a revolt not
merely against the Inquisition, but also against the temporal
sovereignty of Philip. Besides changing their religion, the
sturdy Netherlanders saw fit to throw off the sway of their
legitimate ruler, and to proclaim the thrice heretical doctrine
of the sovereignty of the people. In this one respect their views
were decidedly more modern than those of Elizabeth and Henry IV.
These great monarchs apparently neither understood nor relished
the republican theories of the Hollanders; though it is hardly
necessary for Mr. Motley to sneer at them quite so often because
they were not to an impossible degree in advance of their age.
The proclamation of a republic in the Netherlands marked of
itself the beginning of a new era,—an era when flourishing
communities of men were no longer to be bought and sold,
transferred and bequeathed like real estate and chattels, but
were to have and maintain the right of choosing with whom and
under whom they should transact their affairs. The interminable
negotiations for a truce, which fill nearly one third of Mr.
Motley’s concluding volume, exhibit with striking distinctness
the difference between the old and new points of view. Here again
we think Mr. Motley errs slightly, in calling too much attention
to the prevaricating diplomacy of the Spanish court, and too
little to its manifest inability to comprehend the demands of the
Netherlanders. How should statesmen brought up under Philip II.
and kept under the eye of the Inquisition be expected to
understand a claim for liberty originating in the rights of the
common people and not in the gracious benevolence or intelligent
policy of the King? The very idea must have been practically
inconceivable by them. Accordingly, they strove by every
available device of chicanery to wheedle the Netherlanders into
accepting their independence as a gift from the King of Spain.
But to such a piece of self-stultification the clear-sighted
Dutchmen could by no persuasion be brought to consent. Their
independence, they argued, was not the King’s to give. They had
won it from him and his father, in a war of forty years, during
which they had suffered atrocious miseries, and all that the King
of Spain could do was to acknowledge it as their right, and cease
to molest them in future. Over this point, so simple to us but
knotty enough in those days, the commissioners wrangled for
nearly two years. And when the Spanish government, unable to
carry on the war any longer without risk of utter bankruptcy, and
daily crippled in its resources by the attacks of the Dutch navy,
grudgingly a reed to a truce upon the Netherlanders’ terms, it
virtually acknowledged its own defeat and the downfall of the
principles for which it had so obstinately fought. By the truce
of 1609 the republican principle was admitted by the most
despotic of governments.
Here was the first great triumph of republicanism over monarchy;
and it was not long in bearing fruits. For the Dutch revolution,
the settlement of America by English Puritans, the great
rebellion of the Commons, the Revolution of 1688, the revolt of
the American Colonies, and the general overthrow of feudalism in
1789, are but successive acts in the same drama William the
Silent was the worthy forerunner of Cromwell and Washington; and
but for the victory which he won, during his life and after his
untimely death, the subsequent triumphs of civil liberty might
have been long, postponed.
Over the sublime figure of William—saevis tranquillus in
undis—we should be glad to dwell, but we are not reviewing the
“Rise of the Dutch Republic,” and in Mr. Motley’s present volumes
the hero of toleration appears no longer. His antagonist,
however,—the Philip whom God for some inscrutable purpose
permitted to afflict Europe during a reign of forty-two
years,—accompanies us nearly to the end of the present work,
dying just in time for the historian to sum up the case against
him, and pronounce final judgment. For the memory of Philip II.
Mr. Motley cherishes no weak pity. He rarely alludes to him
without commenting upon his total depravity, and he dismisses him
with the remark that “if there are vices—as possibly there
are—from which he was exempt, it is because it is not permitted
to human nature to attain perfection in evil.” The verdict is
none the less just because of its conciseness. If there ever was
a strife between Hercules and Cacus, between Ormuzd and Ahriman,
between the Power of Light and the Power of Darkness, it was
certainly the strife between the Prince of Orange and the Spanish
Monarch. They are contrasted like the light and shade in one of
Dore’s pictures. And yet it is perhaps unnecessary for Mr. Motley
to say that if Philip had been alive when Spinola won for him the
great victory of Ostend, “he would have felt it his duty to make
immediate arrangements for poisoning him.” Doubtless the
imputation is sufficiently justified by what we know of Philip;
but it is uncalled for. We do not care to hear about what the
despot might have done. We know what he did do, and the record is
sufficiently damning. There is no harm in our giving the Devil
his due, or as Llorente wittily says, “Il ne faut pas calomnier
meme l’Inquisition.”
Philip inherited all his father’s bad qualities, without any of
his good ones; and so it is much easier to judge him than his
father. Charles, indeed, is one of those characters whom one
hardly knows whether to love or hate, to admire or despise. He
had much bad blood in him. Charles the Bold and Ferdinand of
Aragon were not grandparents to be proud of. Yet with all this he
inherited from his grandmother Isabella much that one can like,
and his face, as preserved by Titian, in spite of its frowning
brow and thick Burgundian lip, is rather prepossessing, while the
face of Philip is simply odious. In intellect he must probably be
called great, though his policy often betrayed the pettiness of
selfishness. If, in comparison with the mediaeval emperor whose
fame he envied, he may justly be called Charles the Little, he
may still, when compared to a more modern emulator of
Charlemagne,—the first of the Bonapartes,—be considered great
and enlightened. If he could lie and cheat more consummately than
any contemporary monarch, not excepting his rival, Francis, he
could still be grandly magnanimous, while the generosity of
Francis flowed only from the shallow surface of a maudlin
good-nature. He spoke many languages and had the tastes of a
scholar, while his son had only the inclinations of an unfeeling
pedagogue. He had an inkling of urbanity, and could in a measure
become all things to all men, while Philip could never show
himself except as a gloomy, impracticable bigot. It is for some
such reasons as these, I suppose, that Mr. Buckle—no friend to
despots—speaks well of Charles, and that Mr. Froude is moved to
tell the following anecdote: While standing by the grave of
Luther, and musing over the strange career of the giant monk
whose teachings had gone so far to wreck his most cherished
schemes and render his life a failure, some fanatical bystander
advised the Emperor to have the body taken up and burned in the
market-place. “There was nothing,” says Mr. Froude, “unusual in
the proposal; it was the common practice of the Catholic Church
with the remains of heretics, who were held unworthy to be left
in repose in hallowed ground. There was scarcely, perhaps another
Catholic prince who would have hesitated to comply. But Charles
was one of nature’s gentlemen. He answered, ’I war not with the
dead.’ “ Mr. Motley takes a less charitable view of the great
Emperor. His generous indignation against all persecutors makes
him severe; and in one of his earlier volumes, while speaking of
the famous edicts for the suppression of heresy in the
Netherlands, he somewhere uses the word “murder.” Without
attempting to palliate the crime of persecution, I doubt if it is
quite fair to Charles to call him a murderer. We must not forget
that persecution, now rightly deemed an atrocious crime, was once
really considered by some people a sacred duty; that it was none
other than the compassionate Isabella who established the Spanish
Inquisition; and that the “bloody” Mary Tudor was a woman who
would not wilfully have done wrong. With the progress of
civilization the time will doubtless come when warfare, having
ceased to be necessary, will be thought highly criminal; yet it
will not then be fair to hold Marlborough or Wellington
accountable for the lives lost in their great battles. We still
live in an age when war is, to the imagination of some persons,
surrounded with false glories; and the greatest of modern
generals[32] has still many undiscriminating admirers. Yet the
day is no less certainly at hand when the edicts of Charles V.
will be deemed a more pardonable offence against humanity than
the wanton march to Moscow.
[32] This was written before the deeds of Moltke had eclipsed
those of Napoleon.
Philip II. was different from his father in capacity as a
drudging clerk, like Boutwell, is different from a brilliant
financier like Gladstone. In organization he differed from him as
a boor differs from a gentleman. He seemed made of a coarser
clay. The difference between them is well indicated by their
tastes at the table. Both were terrible gluttons, a fact which
puritanic criticism might set down as equally to the discredit of
each of them. But even in intemperance there are degrees of
refinement, and the impartial critic of life and manners will no
doubt say that if one must get drunk, let it be on Chateau
Margaux rather than on commissary whiskey. Pickled partridges,
plump capons, syrups of fruits, delicate pastry, and rare fish
went to make up the diet of Charles in his last days at Yuste.
But the beastly Philip would make himself sick with a surfeit of
underdone pork.
Whatever may be said of the father, we can hardly go far wrong in
ascribing the instincts of a murderer to the son. He not only
burned heretics, but he burned them with an air of enjoyment and
self-complacency. His nuptials with Elizabeth of France were
celebrated by a vast auto-da-fe. He studied murder as a fine art,
and was as skilful in private assassinations as Cellini was in
engraving on gems. The secret execution of Montigny, never
brought to light until the present century, was a veritable chef
d’oeuvre of this sort. The cases of Escobedo and Antonio Perez
may also be cited in point. Dark suspicions hung around the
premature death of Don John of Austria, his too brilliant and
popular half-brother. He planned the murder of William the
Silent, and rewarded the assassin with an annuity furnished by
the revenues of the victim’s confiscated estates. He kept a staff
of ruffians constantly in service for the purpose of taking off
Elizabeth, Henry IV., Prince Maurice, Olden-Barneveldt, and St.
Aldegonde. He instructed Alva to execute sentence of death upon
the whole population of the Netherlands. He is partly responsible
for the martyrdoms of Ridley and Latimer, and the judicial murder
of Cranmer. He first conceived the idea of the wholesale massacre
of St. Bartholomew, many years before Catharine de’ Medici
carried it into operation. His ingratitude was as dangerous as
his revengeful fanaticism. Those who had best served his
interests were the least likely to escape the consequences of his
jealousy. He destroyed Egmont, who had won for him the splendid
victories of St. Quentin and Gravelines; and “with minute and
artistic treachery” he plotted “the disgrace and ruin” of
Farnese, “the man who was his near blood-relation, and who had
served him most faithfully from earliest youth.” Contemporary
opinion even held him accountable for the obscure deaths of his
wife Elizabeth and his son Carlos; but M. Gachard has shown that
this suspicion is unfounded. Philip appears perhaps to better
advantage in his domestic than in his political relations. Yet he
was addicted to vulgar and miscellaneous incontinence; toward the
close of his life he seriously contemplated marrying his own
daughter Isabella; and he ended by taking for his fourth wife his
niece, Anne of Austria, who became the mother of his half-idiotic
son and successor. We know of no royal family, unless it may be
the Claudians of Rome, in which the transmission of moral and
intellectual qualities is more thoroughly illustrated than in
this Burgundian race which for two centuries held the sceptre of
Spain. The son Philip and the grandmother Isabella are both
needful in order to comprehend the strange mixture of good and
evil in Charles. But the descendants of Philip—two generations
of idiocy, and a third of utter impotence—are a sufficient
commentary upon the organization and character of their
progenitor.
Such was the man who for two generations had been considered the
bulwark of the Catholic Church; who, having been at the bottom of
nearly all the villany that had been wrought in Europe for half a
century, was yet able to declare upon his death-bed that “in all
his life he had never consciously done wrong to any one.” At a
ripe old age he died of a fearful disease. Under the influence of
a typhus fever, supervening upon gout, he had begun to decompose
while yet alive. “His sufferings,” says Mr. Motley, “were
horrible, but no saint could have manifested in them more gentle
resignation or angelic patience. He moralized on the condition to
which the greatest princes might thus be brought at last by the
hand of God, and bade the Prince observe well his father’s
present condition, in order that when he too should be laid thus
low, he might likewise be sustained by a conscience void of
offence.” What more is needed to complete the disgusting picture?
Philip was fanatical up to the point where fanaticism borders
upon hypocrisy. He was possessed with a “great moral idea,” the
idea of making Catholicism the ruler of the world, that he might
be the ruler of Catholicism. Why, it may be said, shall the
charge of fanaticism be allowed to absolve Isabella and extenuate
the guilt of Charles, while it only strengthens the case against
Philip? Because Isabella persecuted heretics in order to save
their souls from a worse fate, while Philip burnt them in order
to get them out of his way. Isabella would perhaps have gone to
the stake herself, if thereby she might have put an end to
heresy. Philip would have seen every soul in Europe consigned to
eternal perdition before he would have yielded up an iota of his
claims to universal dominion. He could send Alva to browbeat the
Pope, as well as to oppress the Netherlanders. He could compass
the destruction of the orthodox Egmont and Farnese, as well as of
the heretical William. His unctuous piety only adds to the
abhorrence with which we regard him; and his humility in face of
death is neither better nor worse than the assumed humility which
had become second nature to Uriah Heep. In short, take him for
all in all, he was probably the most loathsome character in all
European history. He has frequently been called, by Protestant
historians, an incarnate devil; but we do not think that
Mephistopheles would acknowledge him. He should rather be classed
among those creatures described by Dante as “a Dio spiacenti ed
ai nemici sui.”
The abdication of Charles V. left Philip ruler over wider
dominions than had ever before been brought together under the
sway of one man. In his own right Philip was master not only of
Spain, but of the Netherlands, Franche Comte, Lombardy, Naples,
and Sicily, with the whole of North and South America; besides
which he was married to the Queen of England. In the course of
his reign he became possessed of Portugal, with all its vast
domains in the East Indies. His revenues were greater than those
of any other contemporary monarch; his navy was considered
invincible, and his army was the best disciplined in Europe. All
these great advantages he was destined to throw to the winds. In
the strife for universal monarchy, in the mad endeavour to
subject England, Scotland, and France to his own dominion and the
tyranny of the Inquisition, besides re-conquering the
Netherlands, all his vast resources were wasted. The Dutch war
alone, like a bottomless pit, absorbed all that he could pour
into it. Long before the war was over, or showed signs of drawing
to an end, his revenues were wasted, and his troops in Flanders
were mutinous for want of pay. He had to rely upon energetic
viceroys like Farnese and the Spinolas to furnish funds out of
their own pockets. Finally, he was obliged to repudiate all his
debts; and when he died the Spanish empire was in such a beggarly
condition that it quaked at every approach of a hostile Dutch
fleet. Such a result is not evidence of a statesmanlike ability;
but Philip’s fanatical selfishness was incompatible with
statesmanship. He never could be made to believe that his
projects had suffered defeat. No sooner had the Invincible Armada
been sent to the bottom by the guns of the English fleet and the
gales of the German Ocean, than he sent orders to Farnese to
invade England at once with the land force under his command! He
thought to obtain Scotland, when, after the death of Mary, it had
passed under the undisputed control of the Protestant noblemen.
He dreamed of securing for his family the crown of France, even
after Henry, with free consent of the Pope, had made his
triumphal entry into Paris. He asserted complete and entire
sovereignty over the Netherlands, even after Prince Maurice had
won back from him the last square foot of Dutch territory. Such
obstinacy as this can only be called fatuity. If Philip had lived
in Pagan times, he would doubtless, like Caligula, have demanded
recognition of his own divinity.
The miserable condition of the Spanish people under this terrible
reign, and the causes of their subsequent degeneracy, have been
well treated by Mr. Motley. The causes of the failure of Spanish
civilization are partly social and partly economical; and they
had been operating for eight hundred years when Philip succeeded
to the throne. The Moorish conquest in 711 had practically
isolated Spain from the rest of Europe. In the Crusades she took
no part, and reaped none of the signal advantages resulting from
that great movement. Her whole energies were directed toward
throwing off the yoke of her civilized but “unbelieving"
oppressors. For a longer time than has now elapsed since the
Norman Conquest of England, the entire Gothic population of Spain
was engaged in unceasing religious and patriotic warfare. The
unlimited power thus acquired by an unscrupulous clergy, and the
spirit of uncompromising bigotry thus imparted to the whole
nation, are in this way readily accounted for. But in spite of
this, the affairs of Spain at the accession of Charles V. were
not in an unpromising condition. The Spanish Visigoths had been
the least barbarous of the Teutonic settlers within the limits of
the Empire; their civil institutions were excellent; their cities
had obtained municipal liberties at an earlier date than those of
England; and their Parliaments indulged in a liberty of speech
which would have seemed extravagant even to De Montfort. So late
as the time of Ferdinand, the Spaniards were still justly proud
of their freedom; and the chivalrous ambition which inspired the
marvellous expedition of Cortes to Mexico, and covered the soil
of Italy with Spanish armies, was probably in the main a healthy
one. But the forces of Spanish freedom were united at too late an
epoch; in 1492, the power of despotism was already in the
ascendant. In England the case was different. The barons were
enabled to combine and wrest permanent privileges from the crown,
at a time when feudalism was strong. But the Spanish communes
waited for combined action until feudalism had become weak, and
modern despotism, with its standing armies and its control of the
spiritual power, was arrayed in the ranks against them. The War
of the Communes, early in the reign of Charles V., irrevocably
decided the case in favour of despotism, and from that date the
internal decline of Spain may be said to have begun.
But the triumphant consolidation of the spiritual and temporal
powers of despotism, and the abnormal development of loyalty and
bigotry, were not the only evil results of the chronic struggle
in which Spain had been engaged. For many centuries, while
Christian Spain had been but a fringe of debatable border-land on
the skirts of the Moorish kingdom, perpetual guerilla warfare had
rendered consecutive labour difficult or impracticable; and the
physical configuration of the country contributed in bringing
about this result. To plunder the Moors across the border was
easier than to till the ground at home. Then as the Spaniards,
exemplifying the military superiority of the feudal over the
sultanic form of social organization, proceeded steadily to
recover dominion over the land, the industrious Moors, instead of
migrating backward before the advance of their conquerors,
remained at home and submitted to them. Thus Spanish society
became compounded of two distinct castes,—the Moorish Spaniards,
who were skilled labourers, and the Gothic Spaniards, by whom all
labour, crude or skilful, was deemed the stigma of a conquered
race, and unworthy the attention of respectable people. As Mr.
Motley concisely says:—
“The highest industrial and scientific civilization that had been
exhibited upon Spanish territory was that of Moors and Jews. When
in the course of time those races had been subjugated, massacred,
or driven into exile, not only was Spain deprived of its highest
intellectual culture and its most productive labour, but
intelligence, science, and industry were accounted degrading,
because the mark of inferior and detested peoples.”
This is the key to the whole subsequent history of Spain.
Bigotry, loyalty, and consecrated idleness are the three factors
which have made that great country what it is to-day,—the most
backward region in Europe. In view of the circumstances just
narrated, it is not surprising to learn that in Philip II.’s time
a vast portion of the real estate of the country was held by the
Church in mortmain; that forty-nine noble families owned all the
rest; that all great estates were held in tail; and that the
property of the aristocracy and the clergy was completely exempt
from taxation. Thus the accumulation and the diffusion of capital
were alike prevented; and the few possessors of property wasted
it in unproductive expenditure. Hence the fundamental error of
Spanish political economy, that wealth is represented solely by
the precious metals; an error which well enough explains the
total failure, in spite of her magnificent opportunities, of
Spain’s attempts to colonize the New World. Such was the
frightful condition of Spanish society under Philip II.; and as
if this state of things were not bad enough, the next king,
Philip III., at the instigation of the clergy, decided to drive
into banishment the only class of productive labourers yet
remaining in the country. In 1610, this stupendous crime and
blunder—unparalleled even in Spanish history—was perpetrated.
The entire Moorish population were expelled from their homes and
driven into the deserts of Africa. For the awful consequences of
this mad action no remedy was possible. No system of native
industry could be created on demand, to take the place of that
which had been thus wantonly crushed forever. From this epoch
dates the social ruin of Spain. In less than a century her people
were riotous with famine; and every sequestered glen and mountain
pathway throughout the country had become a lurking-place for
robbers. Whoever would duly realize to what a lamentable
condition this beautiful peninsula had in the seventeenth century
been reduced, let him study the immortal pages of Lesage. He will
learn afresh the lesson, not yet sufficiently regarded in the
discussion of social problems, that the laws of nature cannot be
violated without entailing a penalty fearful in proportion to the
extent of the violation. But let him carefully remember also that
the Spaniards are not and never have been a despicable people. If
Spain has produced one of the lowest characters in history, she
has also produced one of the highest. That man was every inch a
Spaniard who, maimed, diseased, and poor, broken down by long
captivity, and harassed by malignant persecution, lived
nevertheless a life of grandeur and beauty fit to be a pattern
for coming generations,—the author of a book which has had a
wider fame than any other in the whole range of secular
literature, and which for delicate humour, exquisite pathos, and
deep ethical sentiment, remains to-day without a peer or a rival.
If Philip II. was a Spaniard, so, too, was Cervantes.
Spain could not be free, for she violated every condition by
which freedom is secured to a people. “Acuteness of intellect,
wealth of imagination, heroic qualities of heart and hand and
brain, rarely surpassed in any race and manifested on a thousand
battle-fields, and in the triumphs of a magnificent and most
original literature, had not been able to save a whole nation
from the disasters and the degradation which the mere words
Philip II. and the Holy Inquisition suggest to every educated
mind.” Nor could Spain possibly become rich, for, as Mr. Motley
continues, “nearly every law, according to which the prosperity
of a country becomes progressive, was habitually violated.” On
turning to the Netherlands we find the most complete contrast,
both in historical conditions and in social results; and the
success of the Netherlands in their long struggle becomes easily
intelligible. The Dutch and Flemish provinces had formed a part
of the renovated Roman Empire of Charles the Great and the Othos.
Taking advantage of the perennial contest for supremacy between
the popes and the Roman emperors, the constituent baronies and
municipalities of the Empire succeeded in acquiring and
maintaining a practical though unrecognized independence; and
this is the original reason why Italy and Germany, unlike the
three western European communities, have remained fragmentary
until our own time. By reason of the practical freedom of action
thus secured, the Italian civic republics, the Hanse towns, and
the cities of Holland and Flanders, were enabled gradually to
develop a vast commerce. The outlying position of the
Netherlands, remote from the imperial authorities, and on the
direct line of commerce between Italy and England, was another
and a peculiar advantage. Throughout the Middle Ages the Flemish
and Dutch cities were of considerable political importance, and
in the fifteenth century the Netherland provinces were the most
highly civilized portion of Europe north of the Alps. For several
generations they had enjoyed, and had known how to maintain,
civic liberties, and when Charles and Philip attempted to fasten
upon them their “peculiar institution,” the Spanish Inquisition,
they were ripe for political as well as theological revolt.
Natural laws were found to operate on the Rhine as well as on the
Tagus, and at the end of the great war of independence, Holland
was not only better equipped than Spain for a European conflict,
but was rapidly ousting her from the East Indian countries which
she had in vain attempted to colonize.
But if we were to take up all the interesting and instructive
themes suggested by Mr. Motley’s work, we should never come to an
end. We must pass over the exciting events narrated in these last
volumes; the victory of Nieuport, the siege of Ostend, the
marvellous career of Maurice, the surprising exploits of Spinola.
We have attempted not so much to describe Mr. Motley’s book as to
indulge in sundry reflections suggested by the perusal of it. But
we cannot close without some remarks upon a great man, whose
character Mr. Motley seems to have somewhat misconceived.
If Mr. Motley exhibits any serious fault, it is perhaps the
natural tendency to TAKE SIDES in the events which he is
describing, which sometimes operates as a drawback to complete
and thoroughgoing criticism. With every intention to do justice
to the Catholics, Mr. Motley still writes as a Protestant,
viewing all questions from the Protestant side. He praises and
condemns like a very fair-minded Huguenot, but still like a
Huguenot. It is for this reason that he fails to interpret
correctly the very complex character of Henry IV., regarding him
as a sort of selfish renegade whom he cannot quite forgive for
accepting the crown of France at the hands of the Pope. Now this
very action of Henry, in the eye of an impartial criticism, must
seem to be one of his chief claims to the admiration and
gratitude of posterity. Henry was more than a mere Huguenot: he
was a far-seeing statesman. He saw clearly what no ruler before
him, save William the Silent, had even dimly discerned, that not
Catholicism and not Protestantism, but absolute spiritual freedom
was the true end to be aimed at by a righteous leader of opinion.
It was as a Catholic sovereign that he could be most useful even
to his Huguenot subjects; and he shaped his course accordingly.
It was as an orthodox sovereign, holding his position by the
general consent of Europe, that he could best subserve the
interests of universal toleration. This principle he embodied in
his admirable edict of Nantes. What a Huguenot prince might have
done, may be seen from the shameful way in which the French
Calvinists abused the favour which Henry—and Richelieu
afterwards—accorded to them. Remembering how Calvin himself
“dragooned” Geneva, let us be thankful for the fortune which, in
one of the most critical periods of history, raised to the
highest position in Christendom a man who was something more than
a sectarian.
With this brief criticism, we must regretfully take leave of Mr.
Motley’s work. Much more remains to be said about a historical
treatise which is, on the whole, the most valuable and important
one yet produced by an American; but we have already exceeded our
limits. We trust that our author will be as successful in the
future as he has been in the past; and that we shall soon have an
opportunity of welcoming the first instalment of his “History of
the Thirty Years’ War.”
  March, 1868.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
