


[28] Nathan the Wise: A Dramatic Poem, by Gotthold Ephraim
Lessing. Translated by Ellen Frothingham. Preceded by a brief
account of the poet and his works, and followed by an essay on
the poem by Kuno Fischer. Second edition. New York: Leypoldt &
Holt. 1868.
Le Christianisme Moderne. etude sur Lessing. Par Ernest Fontanes.
Paris: Bailliere. 1867.
The fame of Lessing is steadily growing. Year by year he is
valued more highly, and valued by a greater number of people. And
he is destined, like his master and forerunner Spinoza, to
receive a yet larger share of men’s reverence and gratitude when
the philosophic spirit which he lived to illustrate shall have
become in some measure the general possession of the civilized
part of mankind. In his own day, Lessing, though widely known and
greatly admired, was little understood or appreciated. He was
known to be a learned antiquarian, a terrible controversialist,
and an incomparable writer. He was regarded as a brilliant
ornament to Germany; and a paltry Duke of Brunswick thought a few
hundred thalers well spent in securing the glory of having such a
man to reside at his provincial court. But the majority of
Lessing’s contemporaries understood him as little perhaps as did
the Duke of Brunswick. If anything were needed to prove this, it
would he the uproar which was made over the publication of the
“Wolfenbuttel Fragments,” and the curious exegesis which was
applied to the poem of “Nathan” on its first appearance. In order
to understand the true character of this great poem, and of
Lessing’s religious opinions as embodied in it, it will be
necessary first to consider the memorable theological controversy
which preceded it.
During Lessing’s residence at Hamburg, he had come into
possession of a most important manuscript, written by Hermann
Samuel Reimarus, a professor of Oriental languages, and bearing
the title of an “Apology for the Rational Worshippers of God."
Struck with the rigorous logic displayed in its arguments, and
with the quiet dignity of its style, while yet unable to accept
its most general conclusions, Lessing resolved to publish the
manuscript, accompanying it with his own comments and strictures.
Accordingly in 1774, availing himself of the freedom from
censorship enjoyed by publications drawn from manuscripts
deposited in the Ducal Library at Wolfenbuttel, of which he was
librarian, Lessing published the first portion of this work,
under the title of “Fragments drawn from the Papers of an
Anonymous Writer.” This first Fragment, on the “Toleration of
Deists,” awakened but little opposition; for the eighteenth
century, though intolerant enough, did not parade its bigotry,
but rather saw fit to disclaim it. A hundred years before,
Rutherford, in his “Free Disputation,” had declared “toleration
of alle religions to bee not farre removed from blasphemie."
Intolerance was then a thing to be proud of, but in Lessing’s
time some progress had been achieved, and men began to think it a
good thing to seem tolerant. The succeeding Fragments were to
test this liberality and reveal the flimsiness of the stuff of
which it was made. When the unknown disputant began to declare
“the impossibility of a revelation upon which all men can rest a
solid faith,” and when he began to criticize the evidences of
Christ’s resurrection, such a storm burst out in the theological
world of Germany as had not been witnessed since the time of
Luther. The recent Colenso controversy in England was but a
gentle breeze compared to it. Press and pulpit swarmed with
“refutations,” in which weakness of argument and scantiness of
erudition were compensated by strength of acrimony and
unscrupulousness of slander. Pamphlets and sermons, says M.
Fontanes, “were multiplied, to denounce the impious blasphemer,
who, destitute alike of shame and of courage, had sheltered
himself behind a paltry fiction, in order to let loose upon
society an evil spirit of unbelief.” But Lessing’s artifice had
been intended to screen the memory of Reimarus, rather than his
own reputation. He was not the man to quail before any amount of
human opposition; and it was when the tempest of invective was
just at its height that he published the last and boldest
Fragment of all,—on “the Designs of Jesus and his Disciples.”
The publication of these Fragments led to a mighty controversy.
The most eminent, both for uncompromising zeal and for worldly
position, of those who had attacked Lessing, was Melchior Goetze,
“pastor primarius” at the Hamburg Cathedral. Though his name is
now remembered only because of his connection with Lessing,
Goetze was not destitute of learning and ability. He was a
collector of rare books, an amateur in numismatics, and an
antiquarian of the narrow-minded sort. Lessing had known him
while at Hamburg, and had visited him so constantly as to draw
forth from his friends malicious insinuations as to the
excellence of the pastor’s white wine. Doubtless Lessing, as a
wise man, was not insensible to the attractions of good Moselle;
but that which he chiefly liked in this theologian was his
logical and rigorously consistent turn of mind. “He always,” says
M. Fontanes, “cherished a holy horror of loose, inconsequent
thinkers; and the man of the past, the inexorable guardian of
tradition, appeared to him far more worthy of respect than the
heterodox innovator who stops in mid-course, and is faithful
neither to reason nor to faith.”
But when Lessing published these unhallowed Fragments, the hour
of conflict had sounded, and Goetze cast himself into the arena
with a boldness and impetuosity which Lessing, in his artistic
capacity, could not fail to admire. He spared no possible means
of reducing his enemy to submission. He aroused against him all
the constituted authorities, the consistories, and even the Aulic
Council of the Empire, and he even succeeded in drawing along
with him the chief of contemporary rationalists, Semler, who so
far forgot himself as to declare that Lessing, for what he had
done, deserved to be sent to the madhouse. But with all Goetze’s
orthodox valour, he was no match for the antagonist whom he had
excited to activity. The great critic replied with pamphlet after
pamphlet, invincible in logic and erudition, sparkling with wit,
and irritating in their utter coolness. Such pamphlets had not
been seen since Pascal published the “Provincial Letters.” Goetze
found that he had taken up arms against a master in the arts of
controversy, and before long he became well aware that he was
worsted. Having brought the case before the Aulic Council, which
consisted in great part of Catholics, the stout pastor,
forgetting that judgment had not yet been rendered, allowed
himself to proclaim that all who do not recognize the Bible as
the only source of Christianity are not fit to be called
Christians at all. Lessing was not slow to profit by this unlucky
declaration. Questioned, with all manner of ferocious
vituperation, by Goetze, as to what sort of Christianity might
have existed prior to and independently of the New Testament
canon, Lessing imperturbably answered: “By the Christian religion
I mean all the confessions of faith contained in the collection
of creeds of the first four centuries of the Christian Church,
including, if you wish it, the so-called creed of the apostles,
as well as the creed of Athanasius. The content of these
confessions is called by the earlier Fathers the regula fidei, or
rule of faith. This rule of faith is not drawn from the writings
of the New Testament. It existed before any of the books in the
New Testament were written. It sufficed not only for the first
Christians of the age of the apostles, but for their descendants
during four centuries. And it is, therefore, the veritable
foundation upon which the Church of Christ is built; a foundation
not based upon Scripture.” Thus, by a master-stroke, Lessing
secured the adherence of the Catholics constituting a majority of
the Aulic Council of the Empire. Like Paul before him, he divided
the Sanhedrim. So that Goetze, foiled in his attempts at using
violence, and disconcerted by the patristic learning of one whom
he had taken to be a mere connoisseur in art and writer of plays
for the theatre, concluded that discretion was the surest kind of
valour, and desisted from further attacks.
Lessing’s triumph came opportunely; for already the ministry of
Brunswick had not only confiscated the Fragments, but had
prohibited him from publishing anything more on the subject
without first obtaining express authority to do so. His last
replies to Goetze were published at Hamburg; and as he held
himself in readiness to depart from Wolfenbuttel, he wrote to
several friends that he had conceived the design of a drama, with
which he would tear the theologians in pieces more than with a
dozen Fragments. “I will try and see,” said he, “if they will let
me preach in peace from my old pulpit, the theatre.” In this way
originated “Nathan the Wise.” But it in no way answered to the
expectations either of Lessing’s friends or of his enemies. Both
the one and the other expected to see the controversy with Goetze
carried on, developed, and generalized in the poem. They looked
for a satirical comedy, in which orthodoxy should be held up for
scathing ridicule, or at least for a direful tragedy, the moral
of which, like that of the great poem of Lucretius, should be
Had Lessing produced such a poem, he would doubtless have
gratified his free-thinking friends and wreaked due literary
vengeance upon his theological persecutors. He would, perhaps,
have given articulate expression to the radicalism of his own
time, and, like Voltaire, might have constituted himself the
leader of the age, the incarnation of its most conspicuous
tendencies. But Lessing did nothing of the kind; and the
expectations formed of him by friends and enemies alike show how
little he was understood by either. “Nathan the Wise” was, as we
shall see, in the eighteenth century an entirely new phenomenon;
and its author was the pioneer of a quite new religious
philosophy.
Reimarus, the able author of the Fragments, in his attack upon
the evidences of revealed religion, had taken the same ground as
Voltaire and the old English deists. And when we have said this,
we have sufficiently defined his position, for the tenets of the
deists are at the present day pretty well known, and are,
moreover, of very little vital importance, having long since been
supplanted by a more just and comprehensive philosophy. Reimarus
accepted neither miracles nor revelation; but in accordance with
the rudimentary state of criticism in his time, he admitted the
historical character of the earliest Christian records, and was
thus driven to the conclusion that those writings must have been
fraudulently composed. How such a set of impostors as the
apostles must on this hypothesis have been, should have succeeded
in inspiring large numbers of their contemporaries with higher
and grander religious notions than had ever before been
conceived; how they should have laid the foundations of a
theological system destined to hold together the most enlightened
and progressive portion of human society for seventeen or
eighteen centuries,—does not seem to have entered his mind.
Against such attacks as this, orthodoxy was comparatively safe;
for whatever doubt might be thrown upon some of its leading
dogmas, the system as a whole was more consistent and rational
than any of the theories which were endeavouring to supplant it.
And the fact that nearly all the great thinkers of the eighteenth
century adopted this deistic hypothesis, shows, more than
anything else, the crudeness of their psychological knowledge,
and their utter lack of what is called “the historical sense.”
Lessing at once saw the weak point in Reimarus’s argument, but
his method of disposing of it differed signally from that adopted
by his orthodox contemporaries. The more advanced German
theologians of that day, while accepting the New Testament
records as literally historical, were disposed to rationalize the
accounts of miracles contained in them, in such a way as to get
rid of any presumed infractions of the laws of nature. This
method of exegesis, which reached its perfection in Paulus, is
too well known to need describing. Its unsatisfactory character
was clearly shown, thirty years ago, by Strauss, and it is now
generally abandoned, though some traces of it may still be seen
in the recent works of Renan. Lessing steadily avoided this
method of interpretation. He had studied Spinoza to some purpose,
and the outlines of Biblical criticism laid down by that
remarkable thinker Lessing developed into a system wonderfully
like that now adopted by the Tubingen school. The cardinal
results which Baur has reached within the past generation were
nearly all hinted at by Lessing, in his commentaries on the
Fragments. The distinction between the first three, or synoptic
gospels, and the fourth, the later age of the fourth, and the
method of composition of the first three, from earlier documents
and from oral tradition, are all clearly laid down by him. The
distinct points of view from which the four accounts were
composed, are also indicated,—the Judaizing disposition of
“Matthew,” the Pauline sympathies of “Luke,” the compromising or
Petrine tendencies of “Mark,” and the advanced Hellenic character
of “John.” Those best acquainted with the results of modern
criticism in Germany will perhaps be most surprised at finding
such speculations in a book written many years before either
Strauss or Baur were born.
But such results, as might have been expected, did not satisfy
the pastor Goetze or the public which sympathized with him. The
valiant pastor unhesitatingly declared that he read the
objections which Lessing opposed to the Fragmentist with more
horror and disgust than the Fragments themselves; and in the
teeth of the printed comments he declared that the editor was
craftily upholding his author in his deistical assault upon
Christian theology. The accusation was unjust, because untrue.
There could be no genuine cooperation between a mere iconoclast
like Reimarus, and a constructive critic like Lessing. But the
confusion was not an unnatural one on Goetze’s part, and I cannot
agree with M. Fontanes in taking it as convincing proof of the
pastor’s wrong-headed perversity. It appears to me that Goetze
interpreted Lessing’s position quite as accurately as M.
Fontanes. The latter writer thinks that Lessing was a Christian
of the liberal school since represented by Theodore Parker in
this country and by M. Reville in France; that his real object
was to defend and strengthen the Christian religion by relieving
it of those peculiar doctrines which to the freethinkers of his
time were a stumbling-block and an offence. And, in spite of
Lessing’s own declarations, he endeavours to show that he was an
ordinary theist,—a follower of Leibnitz rather than of Spinoza.
But I do not think he has made out his case. Lessing’s own
confession to Jacobi is unequivocal enough, and cannot well be
argued away. In that remarkable conversation, held toward the
close of his life, he indicates clearly enough that his faith was
neither that of the ordinary theist, the atheist, nor the
pantheist, but that his religious theory of the universe was
identical with that suggested by Spinoza, adopted by Goethe, and
recently elaborated in the first part of the “First Principles"
of Mr. Herbert Spencer. Moreover, while Lessing cannot be
considered an antagonist of Christianity, neither did he assume
the attitude of a defender. He remained outside the theological
arena; looking at theological questions from the point of view of
a layman, or rather, as M. Cherbuliez has happily expressed it,
of a Pagan. His mind was of decidedly antique structure. He had
the virtues of paganism: its sanity, its calmness, and its
probity; but of the tenderness of Christianity, and its
quenchless aspirations after an indefinable ideal, of that
feeling which has incarnated itself in Gothic cathedrals, masses
and oratorios, he exhibited but scanty traces. His intellect was
above all things self-consistent and incorruptible. He had that
imperial good-sense which might have formed the ideal alike of
Horace and of Epictetus. No clandestine preference for certain
conclusions could make his reason swerve from the straight paths
of logic. And he examined and rejected the conclusions of
Reimarus in the same imperturbable spirit with which he examined
and rejected the current theories of the French classic drama.
Such a man can have had but little in common with a preacher like
Theodore Parker, or with a writer like M. Fontanes, whose whole
book is a noble specimen of lofty Christian eloquence. His
attribute was light, not warmth. He scrutinized, but did not
attack or defend. He recognized the transcendent merits of the
Christian faith, but made no attempt to reinstate it where it had
seemed to suffer shock. It was therefore with the surest of
instincts, with that same instinct of self-preservation which had
once led the Church to anathematize Galileo, that Goetze.
proclaimed Lessing a more dangerous foe to orthodoxy than the
deists who had preceded him. Controversy, he doubtless thought,
may be kept up indefinitely, and blows given and returned
forever; but before the steady gaze of that scrutinizing eye
which one of us shall find himself able to stand erect? It has
become fashionable to heap blame and ridicule upon those who
violently defend an antiquated order of things; and Goetze has
received at the hands of posterity his full share of abuse. His
wrath contrasted unfavourably with Lessing’s calmness; and it was
his misfortune to have taken up arms against an opponent who
always knew how to keep the laugh upon his own side. For my own
part I am constrained to admire the militant pastor, as Lessing
himself admired him. From an artistic point of view he is not an
uninteresting figure to contemplate. And although his attempts to
awaken persecution were reprehensible, yet his ardour in
defending what he believed to be vital truth is none the less to
be respected. He had the acuteness to see that Lessing’s
refutation of deism did not make him a Christian, while the new
views proposed as a substitute for those of Reimarus were such as
Goetze and his age could in no wise comprehend.
Lessing’s own views of dogmatic religion are to be found in his
work entitled, “The Education of the Human Race.” These views
have since so far become the veriest commonplaces of criticism,
that one can hardly realize that, only ninety years ago, they
should have been regarded as dangerous paradoxes. They may be
summed up in the statement that all great religions are good in
their time and place; that, “as there is a soul of goodness in
things evil, so also there is a soul of truth in things
erroneous.” According to Lessing, the successive phases of
religious belief constitute epochs in the mental evolution of the
human race. So that the crudest forms of theology, even
fetishism, now to all appearance so utterly revolting, and
polytheism, so completely inadequate, have once been the best,
the natural and inevitable results of man’s reasoning powers and
appliances for attaining truth. The mere fact that a system of
religious thought has received the willing allegiance of large
masses of men shows that it must have supplied some consciously
felt want, some moral or intellectual craving. And the mere fact
that knowledge and morality are progressive implies that each
successive system may in due course of time be essentially
modified or finally supplanted. The absence of any reference to a
future state of retribution, in the Pentateuch and generally in
the sacred writings of the Jews, and the continual appeal to
hopes and fears of a worldly character, have been pronounced by
deists an irremediable defect in the Jewish religion. It is
precisely this, however, says Lessing, which constitutes one of
its signal excellences. “That thy days may be long in the land
which Jehovah thy God giveth thee,” was an appeal which the
uncivilized Jew could understand, and which could arouse him to
action; while the need of a future world, to rectify the
injustices of this, not yet being felt, the doctrine would have
been of but little service. But in later Hebrew literature, many
magnificent passages revealed the despair felt by prophet and
thinker over the insoluble problem presented by the evil fate of
the good and the triumphant success of the wicked; and a solution
was sought in the doctrine of a Messianic kingdom, until
Christianity with its proclamation of a future life set the
question entirely aside. By its appeal to what has been aptly
termed “other-worldliness,” Christianity immeasurably intensified
human responsibility, besides rendering clearer its nature and
limits. But according to Lessing, yet another step remains to be
taken; and here we come upon the gulf which separates him from
men of the stamp of Theodore Parker. For, says Lessing, the
appeal to unearthly rewards and punishments is after all an
appeal to our lower feelings; other-worldliness is but a refined
selfishness; and we are to cherish virtue for its own sake not
because it will lead us to heaven. Here is the grand principle of
Stoicism. Lessing believed, with Mr. Mill, that the less we think
about getting rewarded either on earth or in heaven the better.
He was cast in the same heroic mould as Muhamad Efendi, who when
led to the stake exclaimed: “Though I have no hope of recompense
hereafter, yet the love of truth constraineth me to die in its
defence!”
With the truth or completeness of these views of Lessing we are
not here concerned; our business being not to expound our own
opinions, but to indicate as clearly as possible Lessing’s
position. Those who are familiar with the general philosophical
spirit of the present age, as represented by writers otherwise so
different as Littre and Sainte-Beuve, will best appreciate the
power and originality of these speculations. Coming in the last
century, amid the crudities of deism, they made a well-defined
epoch. They inaugurated the historical method of criticism, and
they robbed the spirit of intolerance of its only philosophical
excuse for existing. Hitherto the orthodox had been intolerant
toward the philosophers because they considered them heretics;
and the philosophers had been intolerant toward the orthodox
because they considered them fools. To Voltaire it naturally
seemed that a man who could believe in the reality of miracles
must be what in French is expressively termed a sot. But
henceforth, to the disciple of Lessing, men of all shade of
opinion were but the representatives and exponents of different
phases in the general evolution of human intelligence, not
necessarily to be disliked or despised if they did not happen to
represent the maturest phase.
Religion, therefore, from this point of view, becomes clearly
demarcated from theology. It consists no longer in the mental
assent to certain prescribed formulas, but in the moral obedience
to the great rule of life; the great commandment laid down and
illustrated by the Founder of the Christian religion, and
concerning which the profoundest modern philosophy informs us
that the extent to which a society has learned to conform to it
is the test and gauge of the progress in civilization which that
society has achieved. The command “to love one another,” to check
the barbarous impulses inherited from the pre-social state, while
giving free play to the beneficent impulses needful for the
ultimate attainment of social equilibrium,—or as Tennyson
phrases it, to “move upward, working out the beast, and letting
the ape and tiger die,"—was, in Lessing’s view, the task set
before us by religion. The true religious feeling was thus, in
his opinion, what the author of “Ecce Homo” has finely termed
“the enthusiasm of humanity.” And we shall find no better
language than that of the writer just mentioned, in which to
describe Lessing’s conception of faith:—
“He who, when goodness is impressively put before him, exhibits
an instinctive loyalty to it, starts forward to take its side,
trusts himself to it, such a man has faith, and the root of the
matter is in such a man. He may have habits of vice, but the
loyal and faithful instinct in him will place him above many that
practice virtue. He may be rude in thought and character, but he
will unconsciously gravitate toward what is right. Other virtues
can scarcely thrive without a fine natural organization and a
happy training. But the most neglected and ungifted of men may
make a beginning with faith. Other virtues want civilization, a
certain amount of knowledge, a few books; but in half-brutal
countenances faith will light up a glimmer of nobleness. The
savage, who can do little else, can wonder and worship and
enthusiastically obey. He who cannot know what is right can know
that some one else knows; he who has no law may still have a
master; he who is incapable of justice may be capable of
fidelity; he who understands little may have his sins forgiven
because he loves much.”
Such was Lessing’s religion, so far as it can be ascertained from
the fragmentary writings which he has left on the subject.
Undoubtedly it lacked completeness. The opinions which we have
here set down, though constituting something more than a mere
theory of morality, certainly do not constitute a complete theory
of religion. Our valiant knight has examined but one side of the
shield,—the bright side, turned toward us, whose marvellous
inscriptions the human reason can by dint of unwearied effort
decipher. But the dark side, looking out upon infinity, and
covered with hieroglyphics the meaning of which we can never
know, he has quite forgotten to consider. Yet it is this side
which genuine religious feeling ever seeks to contemplate. It is
the consciousness that there is about us an omnipresent Power, in
which we live and move and have our being, eternally manifesting
itself throughout the whole range of natural phenomena, which has
ever disposed men to be religious, and lured them on in the vain
effort to construct adequate theological systems. We may, getting
rid of the last traces of fetishism, eliminate arbitrary volition
as much as we will or can. But there still remains the
consciousness of a divine Life in the universe, of a Power which
is beyond and above our comprehension, whose goings out and
comings in no man can follow. The more we know, the more we reach
out for that which we cannot know. And who can realize this so
vividly as the scientific philosopher? For our knowledge being,
according to the familiar comparison, like a brilliant sphere,
the more we increase it the greater becomes the number of
peripheral points at which we are confronted by the impenetrable
darkness beyond. I believe that this restless yearning,—vague
enough in the description, yet recognizable by all who, communing
with themselves or with nature, have felt it,—this constant
seeking for what cannot be found, this persistent knocking at
gates which, when opened, but reveal others yet to be passed,
constitutes an element which no adequate theory of religion can
overlook. But of this we find nothing in Lessing. With him all is
sunny, serene, and pagan. Not the dim aisle of a vast cathedral,
but the symmetrical portico of an antique temple, is the
worshipping-place into which he would lead us.
But if Lessing’s theology must be considered imperfect, it is
none the less admirable as far as it goes. With its peculiar
doctrines of love and faith, it teaches a morality far higher
than any that Puritanism ever dreamed of. And with its theory of
development it cuts away every possible logical basis for
intolerance. It is this theology to which Lessing has given
concrete expression in his immortal poem of “Nathan.”
The central idea of “Nathan” was suggested to Lessing by
Boccaccio’s story of “The Three Rings,” which is supposed to have
had a Jewish origin. Saladin, pretending to be inspired by a
sudden, imperious whim, such as is “not unbecoming in a Sultan,"
demands that Nathan shall answer him on the spur of the moment
which of the three great religions then known—Judaism,
Mohammedanism, Christianity—is adjudged by reason to be the true
one. For a moment the philosopher is in a quandary. If he does
not pronounce in favour of his own religion, Judaism, he
stultifies himself; but if he does not award the precedence to
Mohammedanism, he will apparently insult his sovereign. With true
Oriental tact he escapes from the dilemma by means of a parable.
There was once a man, says Nathan, who possessed a ring of
inestimable value. Not only was the stone which it contained
incomparably fine, but it possessed the marvellous property of
rendering its owner agreeable both to God and to men. The old man
bequeathed this ring to that one of his sons whom he loved the
most; and the son, in turn, made a similar disposition of it. So
that, passing from hand to hand, the ring finally came into the
possession of a father who loved his three sons equally well.
Unto which one should he leave it? To get rid of the perplexity,
he had two other rings made by a jeweller, exactly like the
original, and to each of his three sons he bequeathed one. Each
then thinking that he had obtained the true talisman, they began
violently to quarrel, and after long contention agreed to carry
their dispute before the judge. But the judge said: “Quarrelsome
fellows! You are all three of you cheated cheats. Your three
rings are alike counterfeit. For the genuine ring is lost, and to
conceal the loss, your father had made these three substitutes."
At this unexpected denouement the Sultan breaks out in
exclamations of delight; and it is interesting to learn that when
the play was brought upon the stage at Constantinople a few years
ago, the Turkish audience was similarly affected. There is in the
story that quiet, stealthy humour which is characteristic of many
mediaeval apologues, and in which Lessing himself loved to deal.
It is humour of the kind which hits the mark, and reveals the
truth. In a note upon this passage, Lessing himself said: “The
opinion of Nathan upon all positive religions has for a long time
been my own.” Let him who has the genuine ring show it by making
himself loved of God and man. This is the central idea of the
poem. It is wholly unlike the iconoclasm of the deists, and,
coming in the eighteenth century, it was like a veritable
evangel.
“Nathan” was not brought out until three years after Lessing’s
death, and it kept possession of the stage for but a short time.
In a dramatic point of view, it has hardly any merits. Whatever
plot there is in it is weak and improbable. The decisive
incidents seem to be brought in like the deus ex machina of the
later Greek drama. There is no movement, no action, no
development. The characters are poetically but not dramatically
conceived. Considered as a tragedy, “Nathan” would be weak;
considered as a comedy, it would be heavy. With full knowledge of
these circumstances, Lessing called it not a drama, but a
dramatic poem; and he might have called it still more accurately
a didactic poem, for the only feature which it has in common with
the drama is that the personages use the oratio directa.
“Nathan” is a didactic poem: it is not a mere philosophic
treatise written in verse, like the fragments of Xenophanes. Its
lessons are conveyed concretely and not abstractly; and its
characters are not mere lay figures, but living poetical
conceptions. Considered as a poem among classic German poems, it
must rank next to, though immeasurably below, Goethe’s “Faust.”
There are two contrasted kinds of genius, the poetical and the
philosophical; or, to speak yet more generally, the artistic and
the critical. The former is distinguished by a concrete, the
latter by an abstract, imagination. The former sees things
synthetically, in all their natural complexity; the latter pulls
things to pieces analytically, and scrutinizes their relations.
The former sees a tree in all its glory, where the latter sees an
exogen with a pair of cotyledons. The former sees wholes, where
the latter sees aggregates.
Corresponding with these two kinds of genius there are two
classes of artistic productions. When the critical genius writes
a poem or a novel, he constructs his plot and his characters in
conformity to some prearranged theory, or with a view to
illustrate some favourite doctrine. When he paints a picture, he
first thinks how certain persons would look under certain given
circumstances, and paints them accordingly. When he writes a
piece of music, he first decides that this phrase expresses joy,
and that phrase disappointment, and the other phrase disgust, and
he composes accordingly. We therefore say ordinarily that he does
not create, but only constructs and combines. It is far different
with the artistic genius, who, without stopping to think, sees
the picture and hears the symphony with the eyes and ears of
imagination, and paints and plays merely what he has seen and
heard. When Dante, in imagination, arrived at the lowest circle
of hell, where traitors like Judas and Brutus are punished, he
came upon a terrible frozen lake, which, he says,—
I have always considered this line a marvellous instance of the
intensity of Dante’s imagination. It shows, too, how Dante
composed his poem. He did not take counsel of himself and say:
“Go to, let us describe the traitors frozen up to their necks in
a dismal lake, for that will be most terrible.” But the picture
of the lake, in all its iciness, with the haggard faces staring
out from its glassy crust, came unbidden before his mind with
such intense reality that, for the rest of his life, he could not
look at a frozen pool without a shudder of horror. He described
it exactly as he saw it; and his description makes us shudder who
read it after all the centuries that have intervened. So Michael
Angelo, a kindred genius, did not keep cutting and chipping away,
thinking how Moses ought to look, and what sort of a nose he
ought to have, and in what position his head might best rest upon
his shoulders. But, he looked at the rectangular block of Carrara
marble, and beholding Moses grand and lifelike within it, knocked
away the environing stone, that others also might see the mighty
figure. And so Beethoven, an artist of the same colossal order,
wrote out for us those mysterious harmonies which his ear had for
the first time heard; and which, in his mournful old age, it
heard none the less plainly because of its complete physical
deafness. And in this way Shakespeare wrote his “Othello";
spinning out no abstract thoughts about jealousy and its fearful
effects upon a proud and ardent nature, but revealing to us the
living concrete man, as his imperial imagination had
spontaneously fashioned him.
Modern psychology has demonstrated that this is the way in which
the creative artistic imagination proceeds. It has proved that a
vast portion of all our thinking goes on unconsciously; and that
the results may arise into consciousness piecemeal and gradually,
checking each other as they come; or that they may come all at
once, with all the completeness and definiteness of perceptions
presented from without. The former is the case with the critical,
and the latter with the artistic intellect. And this we recognize
imperfectly when we talk of a genius being “inspired.” All of us
probably have these two kinds of imagination to a certain extent.
It is only given to a few supremely endowed persons like Goethe
to possess them both to an eminent degree. Perhaps of no other
man can it be said that he was a poet of the first order, and as
great a critic as poet.
It is therefore apt to be a barren criticism which studies the
works of creative geniuses in order to ascertain what theory lies
beneath them. How many systems of philosophy, how many subtle
speculations, have we not seen fathered upon Dante, Cervantes,
Shakespeare, and Goethe! Yet their works are, in a certain sense,
greater than any systems. They partake of the infinite complexity
and variety of nature, and no more than nature itself can they be
narrowed down to the limits of a precise formula.
Lessing was wont to disclaim the title of poet; but, as Goethe
said, his immortal works refute him. He had not only poetical,
but dramatic genius; and his “Emilia Galotti” has kept the stage
until to-day. Nevertheless, he knew well what he meant when he
said that he was more of a critic than a poet. His genius was
mainly of the critical order; and his great work, “Nathan the
Wise,” was certainly constructed rather than created. It was
intended to convey a doctrine, and was carefully shaped for the
purpose. And when we have pronounced it the greatest of all poems
that have been written for a set purpose, and admit of being
expressed in a definite formula, we have classified it with
sufficient accuracy.
For an analysis of the characters in the poem, nothing can be
better than the essay by Kuno Fischer, appended to the present
volume. The work of translation has been admirably done; and
thanks are due to Miss Frothingham for her reproduction of this
beautiful poem.
  June, 1868.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
