


[24] These comments on Mr. Henry Rogers’s review of M. Renan’s
Les Apotres, contained in a letter to Mr. Lewes, were shortly
afterwards published by him in the Fortnightly Review, September
15, 1866,
It is the lot of every book which attempts to treat the origin
and progress of Christianity in a sober and scientific spirit, to
meet with unsparing attacks. Critics in plenty are always to be
found, who, possessed with the idea that the entire significance
and value of the Christian religion are demolished unless we
regard it as a sort of historical monstrosity, are only too eager
to subject the offending work to a scathing scrutiny, displaying
withal a modicum of righteous indignation at the unblushing
heresy of the author, not unmixed with a little scornful pity at
his inability to believe very preposterous stories upon very
meagre evidence. “Conservative” polemics of this sort have
doubtless their function. They serve to purge scientific
literature of the awkward and careless statements too often made
by writers not sufficiently instructed or cautious, which in the
absence of hostile criticism might get accepted by the unthinking
reader along with the truths which they accompany. Most
scientific and philosophical works have their defects; and it is
fortunate that there is such a thing as dogmatic ardour in the
world, ever sharpening its wits to the utmost, that it may spy
each lurking inaccuracy and ruthlessly drag it to light. But this
useful spirit is wont to lead those who are inspired by it to
shoot beyond the mark, and after pointing out the errors of
others, to commit fresh mistakes of their own. In the skilful
criticism of M. Renan’s work on the Apostles, in No. 29 of the
“Fortnightly Review” there is now and then a vulnerable spot
through which a controversial shaft may perhaps be made to
pierce.
It may be true that Lord Lyttelton’s tract on the Conversion of
St. Paul, as Dr. Johnson and Dr. Rogers have said, has never yet
been refuted; but if I may judge from my own recollection of the
work, I should say that this must be because no competent writer
ever thought it worth his pains to criticize it. Its argument
contains about as much solid consistency as a distended balloon,
and collapses as readily at the first puncture. It attempts to
prove, first, that the conversion of St. Paul cannot be made
intelligible except on the assumption that there was a miracle in
the case; and secondly, that if Paul was converted by a miracle,
the truth of Christianity is impregnable. Now, if the first of
these points be established, the demonstration is not yet
complete, for the second point must be proved independently. But
if the first point be overthrown, the second loses its prop, and
falls likewise.
Great efforts are therefore made to show that no natural
influences could have intervened to bring about a change in the
feelings of Paul. He was violent, “thorough,” unaffected by pity
or remorse; and accordingly he could not have been so completely
altered as he was, had he not actually beheld the risen Christ:
such is the argument which Mr. Rogers deems so conclusive. I do
not know that from any of Paul’s own assertions we are entitled
to affirm that no shade of remorse had ever crossed his mind
previous to the vision near Damascus. But waiving this point, I
do maintain that, granting Paul’s feelings to have been as Mr.
Rogers thinks they were, his conversion is inexplicable, even on
the hypothesis of a miracle. He that is determined not to
believe, will not believe, though one should rise from the dead.
To make Paul a believer, it was not enough that he should meet
his Lord face to face he must have been already prepared to
believe. Otherwise he would have easily found means of explaining
the miracle from his own point of view. He would certainly have
attributed it to the wiles of the demon, even as the Pharisees
are said to have done with regard to the miraculous cures
performed by Jesus. A “miraculous” occurrence in those days did
not astonish as it would at present. “Miracles” were rather the
order of the day, and in fact were lavished with such extreme
bounty on all hands, that their convincing power was very slight.
Neither side ever thought of disputing the reality of the
miracles supposed to be performed on the other; but each side
considered the miracles of its antagonist to be the work of
diabolic agencies. Such being the case, it is useless to suppose
that Paul could have distinguished between a true and a false
miracle, or that a real miracle could of itself have had any
effect in inducing him to depart from his habitual course of
belief and action. As far as Paul’s mental operations were
concerned, it could have made no difference whether he met with
his future Master in person, or merely encountered him in a
vision. The sole point to be considered is whether or not he
BELIEVED in the Divine character and authority of the event which
had happened. What the event might have really been was of no
practical consequence to him or to any one else. What he believed
it to be was of the first importance. And since he did believe
that he had been divinely summoned to cease persecuting, and
commence preaching the new faith, it follows that his state of
mind must have been more or less affected by circumstances other
than the mere vision. Had he not been ripe for change, neither
shadow nor substance could have changed him.
This view of the case is by no means so extravagant as Mr. Rogers
would have us suppose. There is no reason for believing that
Paul’s character was essentially different afterwards from what
it had been before. The very fervour which caused him, as a
Pharisee, to exclude all but orthodox Jews from the hope of
salvation, would lead him, as a Christian, to carry the Christian
idea to its extreme development, and admit all persons whatever
to the privileges of the Church. The same zeal for the truth
which had urged him to persecute the Christians unto the death
afterwards led him to spare no toil and shun no danger which
might bring about the triumph of their cause. It must not be
forgotten that the persecutor and the martyr are but one and the
same man under different circumstances. He who is ready to die
for his own faith will sometimes think it fair to make other men
die for theirs. Men of a vehement and fiery temperament,
moreover,—such as Paul always was,—never change their opinions
slowly, never rest in philosophic doubt, never take a middle
course. If they leave one extreme for an instant, they are drawn
irresistibly to the other; and usually very little is needed to
work the change. The conversion of Omar is a striking instance in
point, and has been cited by M. Renan himself. The character of
Omar bears a strong likeness to that of Paul. Previous to his
conversion, he was a conscientious and virulent persecutor of
Mohammedanism.[25] After his conversion, he was Mohammed’s most
efficient disciple, and it may be safely asserted that for
disinterestedness and self-abnegation he was not inferior to the
Apostle of the Gentiles. The change in his case was, moreover,
quite as sudden and unexpected as it was with Paul; it was
neither more nor less incomprehensible; and if Paul’s conversion
needs a miracle to explain it, Omar’s must need one likewise. But
in truth, there is no difficulty in the case, save that which
stupid dogmatism has created. The conversions of Paul and Omar
are paralleled by innumerable events which occur in every period
of religious or political excitement. Far from being
extraordinary, or inexplicable on natural grounds, such phenomena
are just what might occasionally be looked for.
[25] Saint-Hilaire: Mahomet et le Coran, p. 109.
But, says Mr. Rogers, “is it possible for a moment to imagine the
doting and dreaming victim of hallucinations (which M. Renan’s
theory represents Paul) to be the man whose masculine sense,
strong logic, practical prudence, and high administrative talent
appear in the achievements of his life, and in the Epistles he
has left behind him?” M. Renan’s theory does not, however,
represent Paul as the “victim of hallucinations “to a greater
degree than Mohammed. The latter, as every one knows, laboured
during much of his life under almost constant “hallucination";
yet “masculine sense, strong logic,” etc., were qualities quite
as conspicuous in him as in St. Paul.
Here, as throughout his essay, Mr. Rogers shows himself totally
unable to comprehend the mental condition of men in past ages. If
an Apostle has a dream or sees a vision, and interprets it
according to the ideas of his time and country, instead of
according to the ideas of scientific England in the nineteenth
century Mr. Rogers thinks he must needs be mad: and when
according to the well-known law that mental excitement is
contagious,[26] several persons are said to have concurred in
interpreting some phenomenon supernaturally, Mr. Rogers cannot
see why so many people should all go mad at once! “To go mad,” in
fact is his favourite designation for a mental act, which nearly
all the human race have habitually performed in all ages; the act
of mistaking subjective impressions for outward realities. The
disposition to regard all strange phenomena as manifestations of
supernatural power was universally prevalent in the first century
of Christianity, and long after. Neither greatness of intellect
nor thoroughness of scepticism gave exemption. Even Julius
Caesar, the greatest practical genius that ever lived, was
somewhat superstitious, despite his atheism and his Vigorous
common-sense. It is too often argued that the prevalence of
scepticism in the Roman Empire must have made men scrupulous
about accepting miracles. By no means. Nothing but physical
science ever drives out miracles: mere doctrinal scepticism is
powerless to do it. In the age of the Apostles, little if any
radical distinction was drawn between a miracle and an ordinary
occurrence. No one supposed a miracle to be an infraction of the
laws of nature, for no one had a clear idea that there were such
things as laws of nature. A miracle was simply an extraordinary
act, exhibiting the power of the person who performed it. Blank,
indeed, would the evangelists have looked, had any one told them
what an enormous theory of systematic meddling with nature was
destined to grow out of their beautiful and artless narratives.
[26] Hecker’s Epidemics of the Middle Ages, pp. 87-152.
The incapacity to appreciate this frame of mind renders the
current arguments in behalf of miracles utterly worthless. From
the fact that Celsus and others never denied the reality of the
Christian miracles, it is commonly inferred that those miracles
must have actually happened. The same argument would, however,
equally apply to the miracles of Apollonius and Simon Magus, for
the Christians never denied the reality of these. What these
facts really prove is that the state of human intelligence was as
I have just described it: and the inference to be drawn from them
is that no miraculous account emanating from an author of such a
period is worthy of serious attention. When Mr. Rogers supposes
that if the miracles had not really happened they would have been
challenged, he is assuming that a state of mind existed in which
it was possible for miracles to be challenged; and thus commits
an anachronism as monstrous as if he had attributed the knowledge
of some modern invention, such as steamboats, to those early
ages.
Mr. Rogers seems to complain of M. Renan for “quietly assuming"
that miracles are invariably to be rejected. Certainly a
historian of the present day who should not make such an
assumption would betray his lack of the proper qualifications for
his profession. It is not considered necessary for every writer
to begin his work by setting out to prove the first principles of
historical criticism. They are taken for granted. And, as M.
Renan justly says, a miracle is one of those things which must be
disbelieved until it is proved. The onus probandi lies on the
assertor of a fact which conflicts with universal experience.
Nevertheless, the great number of intelligent persons who, even
now, from dogmatic reasons, accept the New Testament miracles,
forbids that they should be passed over in silence like similar
phenomena elsewhere narrated. But, in the present state of
historical science, the arguing against miracles is, as Colet
remarked of his friend Erasmus’s warfare against the Thomists and
Scotists of Cambridge, “a contest more necessary than glorious or
difficult.” To be satisfactorily established, a miracle needs at
least to be recorded by an eyewitness; and the mental attainments
of the witness need to be thoroughly known besides. Unless he has
a clear conception of the difference between the natural and the
unnatural order of events, his testimony, however unimpeachable
on the score of honesty, is still worthless. To say that this
condition was fulfilled by those who described the New Testament
miracles, would be absurd. And in the face of what German
criticism has done for the early Christian documents, it would be
an excess of temerity to assert that any one of the supernatural
accounts contained in them rests on contemporary authority. Of
all history, the miraculous part should be attested by the
strongest testimony, whereas it is invariably attested by the
weakest. And the paucity of miracles wherever we have
contemporary records, as in the case of primitive Islamism, is a
most significant fact.
In attempting to defend his principle of never accepting a
miracle, M. Renan has indeed got into a sorry plight, and Mr.
Rogers, in controverting him, has not greatly helped the matter.
By stirring M. Renan’s bemuddled pool, Mr. Rogers has only
bemuddled it the more. Neither of these excellent writers seems
to suspect that transmutation of species, the geologic
development of the earth, and other like phenomena do not present
features conflicting with ordinary experience. Sir Charles Lyell
and Mr. Darwin would be greatly astonished to be told that their
theories of inorganic and organic evolution involved any agencies
not known to exist in the present course of nature. The great
achievement of these writers has been to show that all past
changes of the earth and its inhabitants are to be explained as
resulting from the continuous action of causes like those now in
operation, and that throughout there has been nothing even
faintly resembling a miracle. M. Renan may feel perfectly safe in
extending his principle back to the beginning of things; and Mr.
Rogers’s argument, even if valid against M. Renan, does not help
his own case in the least.
On some points, indeed, M. Renan has laid himself open to severe
criticism, and on other points he has furnished good handles for
his orthodox opponents. His views in regard to the authorship of
the Fourth Gospel and the Acts are not likely to be endorsed by
many scholars; and his revival of the rationalistic absurdities
of Paulus merits in most instances all that Mr. Rogers has said
about it. As was said at the outset, orthodox criticisms upon
heterodox books are always welcome. They do excellent service.
And with the feeling which impels their authors to defend their
favourite dogmas with every available weapon of controversy I for
one can heartily sympathize. Their zeal in upholding what they
consider the truth is greatly to be respected and admired. But so
much cannot always be said for the mode of argumentation they
adopt, which too often justifies M. Renan’s description, when he
says, “Raisonnements triomphants sur des choses que l’adversaire
n’a pas dites, cris de victoire sur des erreurs qu’il n’a pas
commises, rien ne parait deloyal a celui qui croft tenir en main
les interets de la verite absolue.”
  August, 1866.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
