


[15] The Jesus of History. Anonymous. 8vo. pp. 426. London:
Williams & Norgate, 1869.
In republishing this and the following article on “The Christ of
Dogma,” I am aware that they do but scanty justice to their very
interesting subjects. So much ground is covered that it would be
impossible to treat it satisfactorily in a pair of
review-articles; and in particular the views adopted with regard
to the New Testament literature are rather indicated than
justified. These defects I hope to remedy in a future work on
“Jesus of Nazareth, and the Founding of Christianity,” for which
the present articles must be regarded as furnishing only a few
introductory hints. This work has been for several years on my
mind, but as it may still be long before I can find the leisure
needful for writing it out, it seemed best to republish these
preliminary sketches which have been some time out of print. The
projected work, however, while covering all the points here
treated, will have a much wider scope, dealing on the one hand
with the natural genesis of the complex aggregate of beliefs and
aspirations known as Christianity, and on the other hand with the
metamorphoses which are being wrought in this aggregate by modern
knowledge and modern theories of the world.
The views adopted in the present essay as to the date of the
Synoptic Gospels may seem over-conservative to those who accept
the ably-argued conclusions of “Supernatural Religion.” Quite
possibly in a more detailed discussion these briefly-indicated
data may require revision; but for the present it seems best to
let the article stand as it was written. The author of
“Supernatural Religion” would no doubt admit that, even if the
synoptic gospels had not assumed their present form before the
end of the second century, nevertheless the body of tradition
contained in them had been committed to writing very early in
that century. So much appears to be proved by the very variations
of text upon which his argument relies. And if this be granted,
the value of the synoptics as HISTORICAL evidence is not
materially altered. With their value as testimony to so-called
SUPERNATURAL events, the present essay is in no way concerned.
Of all the great founders of religions, Jesus is at once the best
known and the least known to the modern scholar. From the
dogmatic point of view he is the best known, from the historic
point of view he is the least known. The Christ of dogma is in
every lineament familiar to us from early childhood; but
concerning the Jesus of history we possess but few facts resting
upon trustworthy evidence, and in order to form a picture of him
at once consistent, probable, and distinct in its outlines, it is
necessary to enter upon a long and difficult investigation, in
the course of which some of the most delicate apparatus of modern
criticism is required. This circumstance is sufficiently singular
to require especial explanation. The case of Sakyamuni, the
founder of Buddhism, which may perhaps be cited as parallel, is
in reality wholly different. Not only did Sakyamuni live five
centuries earlier than Jesus, among a people that have at no time
possessed the art of insuring authenticity in their records of
events, and at an era which is at best but dimly discerned
through the mists of fable and legend, but the work which he
achieved lies wholly out of the course of European history, and
it is only in recent times that his career has presented itself
to us as a problem needing to be solved. Jesus, on the other
hand, appeared in an age which is familiarly and in many respects
minutely known to us, and among a people whose fortunes we can
trace with historic certainty for at least seven centuries
previous to his birth; while his life and achievements have
probably had a larger share in directing the entire subsequent
intellectual and moral development of Europe than those of any
other man who has ever lived. Nevertheless, the details of his
personal career are shrouded in an obscurity almost as dense as
that which envelops the life of the remote founder of Buddhism.
This phenomenon, however, appears less strange and paradoxical
when we come to examine it more closely. A little reflection will
disclose to us several good reasons why the historical records of
the life of Jesus should be so scanty as they are. In the first
place, the activity of Jesus was private rather than public.
Confined within exceedingly narrow limits, both of space and of
duration, it made no impression whatever upon the politics or the
literature of the time. His name does not occur in the pages of
any contemporary writer, Roman, Greek, or Jewish. Doubtless the
case would have been wholly different, had he, like Mohammed,
lived to a ripe age, and had the exigencies of his peculiar
position as the Messiah of the Jewish people brought him into
relations with the Empire; though whether, in such case, the
success of his grand undertaking would have been as complete as
it has actually been, may well be doubted.
Secondly, Jesus did not, like Mohammed and Paul, leave behind him
authentic writings which might serve to throw light upon his
mental development as well as upon the external facts of his
career. Without the Koran and the four genuine Epistles of Paul,
we should be nearly as much in the dark concerning these great
men as we now are concerning the historical Jesus. We should be
compelled to rely, in the one case, upon the untrustworthy gossip
of Mussulman chroniclers, and in the other case upon the garbled
statements of the “Acts of the Apostles,” a book written with a
distinct dogmatic purpose, sixty or seventy years after the
occurrence of the events which it professes to record.
It is true, many of the words of Jesus, preserved by hearsay
tradition through the generation immediately succeeding his
death, have come down to us, probably with little alteration, in
the pages of the three earlier evangelists. These are priceless
data, since, as we shall see, they are almost the only materials
at our command for forming even a partial conception of the
character of Jesus’ work. Nevertheless, even here the cautious
inquirer has only too often to pause in face of the difficulty of
distinguishing the authentic utterances of the great teacher from
the later interpolations suggested by the dogmatic necessities of
the narrators. Bitterly must the historian regret that Jesus had
no philosophic disciple, like Xenophon, to record his
Memorabilia. Of the various writings included in the New
Testament, the Apocalypse alone (and possibly the Epistle of
Jude) is from the pen of a personal acquaintance of Jesus; and
besides this, the four epistles of Paul, to the Galatians,
Corinthians, and Romans, make up the sum of the writings from
which we may expect contemporary testimony. Yet from these we
obtain absolutely nothing of that for which we are seeking. The
brief writings of Paul are occupied exclusively with the internal
significance of Jesus’ work. The epistle of Jude—if it be really
written by Jesus’ brother of that name, which is doubtful—is
solely a polemic directed against the innovations of Paul. And
the Apocalypse, the work of the fiery and imaginative disciple
John, is confined to a prophetic description of the Messiah’s
anticipated return, and tells us nothing concerning the deeds of
that Messiah while on the earth.
Here we touch upon our third consideration,—the consideration
which best enables us to see why the historic notices of Jesus
are so meagre. Rightly considered, the statement with which we
opened this article is its own explanation. The Jesus of history
is so little known just because the Christ of dogma is so well
known.[16] Other teachers—Paul, Mohammed, Sakyamuni—have come
merely as preachers of righteousness, speaking in the name of
general principles with which their own personalities were not
directly implicated. But Jesus, as we shall see, before the close
of his life, proclaimed himself to be something more than a
preacher of righteousness. He announced himself—and justly, from
his own point of view—as the long-expected Messiah sent by
Jehovah to liberate the Jewish race. Thus the success of his
religious teachings became at once implicated with the question
of his personal nature and character. After the sudden and
violent termination of his career, it immediately became
all-important with his followers to prove that he was really the
Messiah, and to insist upon the certainty of his speedy return to
the earth. Thus the first generation of disciples dogmatized
about him, instead of narrating his life,—a task which to them
would have seemed of little profit. For them the all-absorbing
object of contemplation was the immediate future rather than the
immediate past. As all the earlier Christian literature informs
us, for nearly a century after the death of Jesus, his followers
lived in daily anticipation of his triumphant return to the
earth. The end of all things being so near at hand, no attempt
was made to insure accurate and complete memoirs for the use of a
posterity which was destined, in Christian imagination, never to
arrive. The first Christians wrote but little; even Papias, at
the end of a century, preferring second-hand or third-hand oral
tradition to the written gospels which were then beginning to
come into circulation.[17] Memoirs of the life and teachings of
Jesus were called forth by the necessity of having a written
standard of doctrine to which to appeal amid the growing
differences of opinion which disturbed the Church. Thus the
earlier gospels exhibit, though in different degrees, the
indications of a modifying, sometimes of an overruling dogmatic
purpose. There is, indeed, no conscious violation of historic
truth, but from the varied mass of material supplied by
tradition, such incidents are selected as are fit to support the
views of the writers concerning the personality of Jesus.
Accordingly, while the early gospels throw a strong light upon
the state of Christian opinion at the dates when they were
successively composed, the information which they give concerning
Jesus himself is, for that very reason, often vague, uncritical,
and contradictory. Still more is this true of the fourth gospel,
written late in the second century, in which historic tradition
is moulded in the interests of dogma until it becomes no longer
recognizable, and in the place of the human Messiah of the
earlier accounts, we have a semi-divine Logos or Aeon, detached
from God, and incarnate for a brief season in the likeness of
man.
[16] “Wer einmal vergottert worden ist, der hat seine Mensetheit
unwiederbringlich eingebusst."—Strauss, Der alte und der neue
Glaube, p. 76.

[17] “Roger was the attendant of Thomas [Becket] during his
sojourn at Pontigny. We might have expected him to be very full
on that part of his history; but, writing doubtless mainly for
the monks of Pontigny, he says that HE WILL NOT ENLARGE UPON WHAT
EVERY ONE KNOWS, and cuts that part very short."—Freeman,
Historical Essays, 1st series, p. 90.
Not only was history subordinated to dogma by the writers of the
gospel-narratives, but in the minds of the Fathers of the Church
who assisted in determining what writings should be considered
canonical, dogmatic prepossession went very much further than
critical acumen. Nor is this strange when we reflect that
critical discrimination in questions of literary authenticity is
one of the latest acquisitions of the cultivated human mind. In
the early ages of the Church the evidence of the genuineness of
any literary production was never weighed critically; writings
containing doctrines acceptable to the majority of Christians
were quoted as authoritative while writings which supplied no
dogmatic want were overlooked, or perhaps condemned as
apocryphal. A striking instance of this is furnished by the
fortunes of the Apocalypse. Although perhaps the best
authenticated work in the New Testament collection, its
millenarian doctrines caused it to become unpopular as the Church
gradually ceased to look for the speedy return of the Messiah,
and, accordingly, as the canon assumed a definite shape, it was
placed among the “Antilegomena,” or doubtful books, and continued
to hold a precarious position until after the time of the
Protestant Reformation. On the other hand, the fourth gospel,
which was quite unknown and probably did not exist at the time of
the Quartodeciman controversy (A. D. 168), was accepted with
little hesitation, and at the beginning of the third century is
mentioned by Irenaeus, Clement, and Tertullian, as the work of
the Apostle John. To this uncritical spirit, leading to the
neglect of such books as failed to answer the dogmatic
requirements of the Church, may probably be attributed the loss
of so many of the earlier gospels. It is doubtless for this
reason that we do not possess the Aramaean original of the
“Logia” of Matthew, or the “Memorabilia” of Mark, the companion
of Peter,—two works to which Papias (A. D. 120) alludes as
containing authentic reports of the utterances of Jesus.
These considerations will, we believe, sufficiently explain the
curious circumstance that, while we know the Christ of dogma so
intimately, we know the Jesus of history so slightly. The
literature of early Christianity enables us to trace with
tolerable completeness the progress of opinion concerning the
nature of Jesus, from the time of Paul’s early missions to the
time of the Nicene Council; but upon the actual words and deeds
of Jesus it throws a very unsteady light. The dogmatic purpose
everywhere obscures the historic basis.
This same dogmatic prepossession which has rendered the data for
a biography of Jesus so scanty and untrustworthy, has also until
comparatively recent times prevented any unbiassed critical
examination of such data as we actually possess. Previous to the
eighteenth century any attempt to deal with the life of Jesus
upon purely historical methods would have been not only contemned
as irrational, but stigmatized as impious. And even in the
eighteenth century, those writers who had become wholly
emancipated from ecclesiastic tradition were so destitute of all
historic sympathy and so unskilled in scientific methods of
criticism, that they utterly failed to comprehend the
requirements of the problem. Their aims were in the main polemic,
not historical. They thought more of overthrowing current dogmas
than of impartially examining the earliest Christian literature
with a view of eliciting its historic contents; and, accordingly,
they accomplished but little. Two brilliant exceptions must,
however, be noticed. Spinoza, in the seventeenth century, and
Lessing, in the eighteenth, were men far in advance of their age.
They are the fathers of modern historical criticism; and to
Lessing in particular, with his enormous erudition and
incomparable sagacity, belongs the honour of initiating that
method of inquiry which, in the hands of the so-called Tubingen
School, has led to such striking and valuable conclusions
concerning, the age and character of all the New Testament
literature. But it was long before any one could be found fit to
bend the bow which Lessing and Spinoza had wielded. A succession
of able scholars—Semler, Eichhorn, Paulus, Schleiermacher
Bretschneider, and De Wette—were required to examine, with
German patience and accuracy, the details of the subject, and to
propound various untenable hypotheses, before such a work could
be performed as that of Strauss. The “Life of Jesus,” published
by Strauss when only twenty-six years of age, is one of the
monumental works of the nineteenth century, worthy to rank, as a
historical effort, along with such books as Niebuhr’s “History of
Rome,” Wolf’s “Prolegomena,” or Bentley’s “Dissertations on
Phalaris.” It instantly superseded and rendered antiquated
everything which had preceded it; nor has any work on early
Christianity been written in Germany for the past thirty years
which has not been dominated by the recollection of that
marvellous book. Nevertheless, the labours of another generation
of scholars have carried our knowledge of the New Testament
literature far beyond the point which it had reached when Strauss
first wrote. At that time the dates of but few of the New
Testament writings had been fixed with any approach to certainty;
the age and character of the fourth gospel, the genuineness of
the Pauline epistles, even the mutual relations of the three
synoptics, were still undetermined; and, as a natural. result of
this uncertainty, the progress of dogma during the first century
was ill understood. At the present day it is impossible to read
the early work of Strauss without being impressed with the
necessity of obtaining positive data as to the origin and
dogmatic character of the New Testament writings, before
attempting to reach any conclusions as to the probable career of
Jesus. These positive data we owe to the genius and diligence of
the Tubingen School, and, above all, to its founder, Ferdinand
Christian Baur. Beginning with the epistles of Paul, of which he
distinguished four as genuine, Baur gradually worked his way
through the entire New Testament collection, detecting—with that
inspired insight which only unflinching diligence can impart to
original genius—the age at which each book was written, and the
circumstances which called it forth. To give any account of
Baur’s detailed conclusions, or of the method by which he reached
them, would require a volume. They are very scantily presented in
Mr. Mackay’s work on the “Tubingen School and its Antecedents,"
to which we may refer the reader desirous of further information.
We can here merely say that twenty years of energetic controversy
have only served to establish most of Baur’s leading conclusions
more firmly than ever. The priority of the so-called gospel of
Matthew, the Pauline purpose of “Luke,” the second in date of our
gospels, the derivative and second-hand character of “Mark,” and
the unapostolic origin of the fourth gospel, are points which may
for the future be regarded as wellnigh established by
circumstantial evidence. So with respect to the pseudo-Pauline
epistles, Baur’s work was done so thoroughly that the only
question still left open for much discussion is that concerning
the date and authorship of the first and second
“Thessalonians,"—a point of quite inferior importance, so far as
our present subject is concerned. Seldom have such vast results
been achieved by the labour of a single scholar. Seldom has any
historical critic possessed such a combination of analytic and of
co-ordinating powers as Baur. His keen criticism and his
wonderful flashes of insight exercise upon the reader a truly
poetic effect like that which is felt in contemplating the
marvels of physical discovery.
The comprehensive labours of Baur were followed up by Zeller’s
able work on the “Acts of the Apostles,” in which that book was
shown to have been partly founded upon documents written by Luke,
or some other companion of Paul, and expanded and modified by a
much later writer with the purpose of covering up the traces of
the early schism between the Pauline and the Petrine sections of
the Church. Along with this, Schwegler’s work on the
“Post-Apostolic Times” deserves mention as clearing up many
obscure points relating to the early development of dogma.
Finally, the “New Life of Jesus,” by Strauss, adopting and
utilizing the principal discoveries of Baur and his followers,
and combining all into one grand historical picture, worthily
completes the task which the earlier work of the same author had
inaugurated.
The reader will have noticed that, with the exception of Spinoza,
every one of the names above cited in connection with the
literary analysis and criticism of the New Testament is the name
of a German. Until within the last decade, Germany has indeed
possessed almost an absolute monopoly of the science of Biblical
criticism; other countries having remained not only unfamiliar
with its methods, but even grossly ignorant of its conspicuous
results, save when some German treatise of more than ordinary
popularity has now and then been translated. But during the past
ten years France has entered the lists; and the writings of
Reville, Reuss, Nicolas, D’Eichthal, Scherer, and Colani testify
to the rapidity with which the German seed has fructified upon
her soil.[18]
[18] But now, in annexing Alsace, Germany has “annexed” pretty
much the whole of this department of French scholarship,—a
curious incidental consequence of the late war.
None of these books, however, has achieved such wide-spread
celebrity, or done so much toward interesting the general public
in this class of historical inquiries, as the “Life of Jesus,” by
Renan. This pre-eminence of fame is partly, but not wholly,
deserved. From a purely literary point of view, Renan’s work
doubtless merits all the celebrity it has gained. Its author
writes a style such as is perhaps surpassed by that of no other
living Frenchman. It is by far the most readable book which has
ever been written concerning the life of Jesus. And no doubt some
of its popularity is due to its very faults, which, from a
critical point of view, are neither few nor small. For Renan is
certainly very faulty, as a historical critic, when he
practically ignores the extreme meagreness of our positive
knowledge of the career of Jesus, and describes scene after scene
in his life as minutely and with as much confidence as if he had
himself been present to witness it all. Again and again the
critical reader feels prompted to ask, How do you know all this?
or why, out of two or three conflicting accounts, do you quietly
adopt some particular one, as if its superior authority were
self-evident? But in the eye of the uncritical reader, these
defects are excellences; for it is unpleasant to be kept in
ignorance when we are seeking after definite knowledge, and it is
disheartening to read page after page of an elaborate discussion
which ends in convincing us that definite knowledge cannot be
gained.
In the thirteenth edition of the “Vie de Jesus,” Renan has
corrected some of the most striking errors of the original work,
and in particular has, with praiseworthy candour, abandoned his
untenable position with regard to the age and character of the
fourth gospel. As is well known, Renan, in his earlier editions,
ascribed to this gospel a historical value superior to that of
the synoptics, believing it to have been written by an eyewitness
of the events which it relates; and from this source,
accordingly, he drew the larger share of his materials. Now, if
there is any one conclusion concerning the New Testament
literature which must be regarded as incontrovertibly established
by the labours of a whole generation of scholars, it is this,
that the fourth gospel was utterly unknown until about A. D. 170,
that it was written by some one who possessed very little direct
knowledge of Palestine, that its purpose was rather to expound a
dogma than to give an accurate record of events, and that as a
guide to the comprehension of the career of Jesus it is of far
less value than the three synoptic gospels. It is impossible, in
a brief review like the present, to epitomize the evidence upon
which this conclusion rests, which may more profitably be sought
in the Rev. J. J. Tayler’s work on “The Fourth Gospel,” or in
Davidson’s “Introduction to the New Testament.” It must suffice
to mention that this gospel is not cited by Papias; that Justin,
Marcion, and Valentinus make no allusion to it, though, since it
furnishes so much that is germane to their views, they would
gladly have appealed to it, had it been in existence, when those
views were as yet under discussion; and that, finally, in the
great Quartodeciman controversy, A. D. 168, the gospel is not
only not mentioned, but the authority of John is cited by
Polycarp in flat contradiction of the view afterwards taken by
this evangelist. Still more, the assumption of Renan led at once
into complicated difficulties with reference to the Apocalypse.
The fourth gospel, if it does not unmistakably announce itself as
the work of John, at least professes to be Johannine; and it
cannot for a moment be supposed that such a book, making such
claims, could have gained currency during John’s lifetime without
calling forth his indignant protest. For, in reality, no book in
the New Testament collection would so completely have shocked the
prejudices of the Johannine party. John’s own views are well
known to us from the Apocalypse. John was the most enthusiastic
of millenarians and the most narrow and rigid of Judaizers. In
his antagonism to the Pauline innovations he went farther than
Peter himself. Intense hatred of Paul and his followers appears
in several passages of the Apocalypse, where they are stigmatized
as “Nicolaitans,” “deceivers of the people,” “those who say they
are apostles and are not,” “eaters of meat offered to idols,"
“fornicators,” “pretended Jews,” “liars,” “synagogue of Satan,"
etc. (Chap. II.). On the other hand, the fourth gospel contains
nothing millenarian or Judaical; it carries Pauline universalism
to a far greater extent than Paul himself ventured to carry it,
even condemning the Jews as children of darkness, and by
implication contrasting them unfavourably with the Gentiles; and
it contains a theory of the nature of Jesus which the Ebionitish
Christians, to whom John belonged, rejected to the last.
In his present edition Renan admits the insuperable force of
these objections, and abandons his theory of the apostolic origin
of the fourth gospel. And as this has necessitated the omission
or alteration of all such passages as rested upon the authority
of that gospel, the book is to a considerable extent rewritten,
and the changes are such as greatly to increase its value as a
history of Jesus. Nevertheless, the author has so long been in
the habit of shaping his conceptions of the career of Jesus by
the aid of the fourth gospel, that it has become very difficult
for him to pass freely to another point of view. He still clings
to the hypothesis that there is an element of historic tradition
contained in the book, drawn from memorial writings which had
perhaps been handed down from John, and which were inaccessible
to the synoptists. In a very interesting appendix, he collects
the evidence in favour of this hypothesis, which indeed is not
without plausibility, since there is every reason for supposing
that the gospel was written at Ephesus, which a century before
had been John’s place of residence. But even granting most of
Renan’s assumptions, it must still follow that the authority of
this gospel is far inferior to that of the synoptics, and can in
no case be very confidently appealed to. The question is one of
the first importance to the historian of early Christianity. In
inquiring into the life of Jesus, the very first thing to do is
to establish firmly in the mind the true relations of the fourth
gospel to the first three. Until this has been done, no one is
competent to write on the subject; and it is because he has done
this so imperfectly, that Renan’s work is, from a critical point
of view, so imperfectly successful.
The anonymous work entitled “The Jesus of History,” which we have
placed at the head of this article, is in every respect
noteworthy as the first systematic attempt made in England to
follow in the footsteps of German criticism in writing a life of
Jesus. We know of no good reason why the book should be published
anonymously; for as a historical essay it possesses extraordinary
merit, and does great credit not only to its author, but to
English scholarship and acumen.[19] It is not, indeed, a book
calculated to captivate the imagination of the reading public.
Though written in a clear, forcible, and often elegant style, it
possesses no such wonderful rhetorical charm as the work of
Renan; and it will probably never find half a dozen readers where
the “Vie de Jesus” has found a hundred. But the success of a book
of this sort is not to be measured by its rhetorical excellence,
or by its adaptation to the literary tastes of an uncritical and
uninstructed public, but rather by the amount of critical
sagacity which it brings to bear upon the elucidation of the many
difficult and disputed points in the subject of which it treats.
Measured by this standard, “The Jesus of History” must rank very
high indeed. To say that it throws more light upon the career of
Jesus than any work which has ever before been written in English
would be very inadequate praise, since the English language has
been singularly deficient in this branch of historical
literature. We shall convey a more just idea of its merits if we
say that it will bear comparison with anything which even Germany
has produced, save only the works of Strauss, Baur, and Zeller.
[19] “The Jesus of History” is now known to have been written by
Sir Richard Hanson, Chief Justice of South Australia.
The fitness of our author for the task which he has undertaken is
shown at the outset by his choice of materials. In basing his
conclusions almost exclusively upon the statements contained in
the first gospel, he is upheld by every sound principle of
criticism. The times and places at which our three synoptic
gospels were written have been, through the labours of the
Tubingen critics, determined almost to a certainty. Of the three,
“Mark” is unquestionably the latest; with the exception of about
twenty verses, it is entirely made up from “Matthew” and “Luke,"
the diverse Petrine and Pauline tendencies of which it strives to
neutralize in conformity to the conciliatory disposition of the
Church at Rome, at the epoch at which this gospel was written,
about A. D. 130. The third gospel was also written at Rome, some
fifteen years earlier. In the preface, its author describes it as
a compilation from previously existing written materials. Among
these materials was certainly the first gospel, several passages
of which are adopted word for word by the author of “Luke.” Yet
the narrative varies materially from that of the first gospel in
many essential points. The arrangement of events is less natural,
and, as in the “Acts of the Apostles,” by the same author, there
is apparent throughout the design of suppressing the old discord
between Paul and the Judaizing disciples, and of representing
Christianity as essentially Pauline from the outset. How far Paul
was correct in his interpretation of the teachings of Jesus, it
is difficult to decide. It is, no doubt, possible that the first
gospel may have lent to the words of Jesus an Ebionite colouring
in some instances, and that now and then the third gospel may
present us with a truer account. To this supremely important
point we shall by and by return. For the present it must suffice
to observe that the evidences of an overruling dogmatic purpose
are generally much more conspicuous in the third synoptist than
in the first; and that the very loose manner in which this writer
has handled his materials in the “Acts” is not calculated to
inspire us with confidence in the historical accuracy of his
gospel. The writer who, in spite of the direct testimony of Paul
himself could represent the apostle to the Gentiles as acting
under the direction of the disciples at Jerusalem, and who puts
Pauline sentiments into the mouth of Peter, would certainly have
been capable of unwarrantably giving a Pauline turn to the
teachings of Jesus himself. We are therefore, as a last resort,
brought back to the first gospel, which we find to possess, as a
historical narrative, far stronger claims upon our attention than
the second and third. In all probability it had assumed nearly
its present shape before A. D. 100, its origin is unmistakably
Palestinian; it betrays comparatively few indications of dogmatic
purpose; and there are strong reasons for believing that the
speeches of Jesus recorded in it are in substance taken from the
genuine “Logia” of Matthew mentioned by Papias, which must have
been written as early as A. D. 60-70, before the destruction of
Jerusalem. Indeed, we are inclined to agree with our author that
the gospel, even in its present shape (save only a few
interpolated passages), may have existed as early as A. D. 80,
since it places the time of Jesus’ second coming immediately
after the destruction of Jerusalem; whereas the third evangelist,
who wrote forty-five years after that event, is careful to tell
us, “The end is NOT immediately.” Moreover, it must have been
written while the Paulo-Petrine controversy was still raging, as
is shown by the parable of the “enemy who sowed the tares,” which
manifestly refers to Paul, and also by the allusions to “false
prophets” (vii. 15), to those who say “Lord, Lord,” and who “cast
out demons in the name of the Lord” (vii. 21-23), teaching men to
break the commandments (v. 17-20). There is, therefore, good
reason for believing that we have here a narrative written not
much more than fifty years after the death of Jesus, based partly
upon the written memorials of an apostle, and in the main
trustworthy, save where it relates occurrences of a marvellous
and legendary character. Such is our author’s conclusion, and in
describing the career of the Jesus of history, he relies almost
exclusively upon the statements contained in the first gospel.
Let us now after this long but inadequate introduction, give a
brief sketch of the life of Jesus, as it is to be found in our
author.
Concerning the time and place of the birth of Jesus, we know next
to nothing. According to uniform tradition, based upon a
statement of the third gospel, he was about thirty years of age
at the time when he began teaching. The same gospel states, with
elaborate precision, that the public career of John the Baptist
began in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, or A. D. 28. In the
winter of A. D. 35-36, Pontius Pilate was recalled from Judaea,
so that the crucifixion could not have taken place later than in
the spring of 35. Thus we have a period of about six years during
which the ministry of Jesus must have begun and ended; and if the
tradition with respect to his age be trustworthy, we shall not be
far out of the way in supposing him to have been born somewhere
between B. C. 5 and A. D. 5. He is everywhere alluded to in the
gospels as Jesus of Nazareth in Galilee, where lived also his
father, mother brothers and sisters, and where very likely he was
born. His parents’ names are said to have been Joseph and Mary.
His own name is a Hellenized form of Joshua, a name very common
among the Jews. According to the first gospel (xiii. 55), he had
four brothers,—Joseph and Simon; James, who was afterwards one
of the heads of the church at Jerusalem, and the most formidable
enemy of Paul; and Judas or Jude, who is perhaps the author of
the anti-Pauline epistle commonly ascribed to him.
Of the early youth of Jesus, and of the circumstances which
guided his intellectual development, we know absolutely nothing,
nor have we the data requisite for forming any plausible
hypothesis. He first appears in history about A. D. 29 or 30, in
connection with a very remarkable person whom the third
evangelist describes as his cousin, and who seems, from his mode
of life, to have been in some way connected with or influenced by
the Hellenizing sect of Essenes. Here we obtain our first clew to
guide us in forming a consecutive theory of the development of
Jesus’ opinions. The sect of Essenes took its rise in the time of
the Maccabees, about B. C. 170. Upon the fundamental doctrines of
Judaism it had engrafted many Pythagorean notions, and was
doubtless in the time of Jesus instrumental in spreading Greek
ideas among the people of Galilee, where Judaism was far from
being so narrow and rigid as at Jerusalem. The Essenes attached
but little importance to the Messianic expectations of the
Pharisees, and mingled scarcely at all in national politics. They
lived for the most part a strictly ascetic life, being indeed the
legitimate predecessors of the early Christian hermits and monks.
But while pre-eminent for sanctity of life, they heaped ridicule
upon the entire sacrificial service of the Temple, despised the
Pharisees as hypocrites, and insisted upon charity toward all men
instead of the old Jewish exclusiveness.
It was once a favourite theory that both John the Baptist and
Jesus were members of the Essenian brotherhood; but that theory
is now generally abandoned. Whatever may have been the case with
John, who is said to have lived like an anchorite in the desert,
there seems to have been but little practical Essenism in Jesus,
who is almost uniformly represented as cheerful and social in
demeanour, and against whom it was expressly urged that he came
eating and drinking, making no presence of puritanical holiness.
He was neither a puritan, like the Essenes, nor a ritualist, like
the Pharisees. Besides which, both John and Jesus seem to have
begun their careers by preaching the un-Essene doctrine of the
speedy advent of the “kingdom of heaven,” by which is meant the
reign of the Messiah upon the earth. Nevertheless, though we
cannot regard Jesus as actually a member of the Essenian
community or sect, we can hardly avoid the conclusion that he, as
well as John the Baptist, had been at some time strongly
influenced by Essenian doctrines. The spiritualized conception of
the “kingdom of heaven” proclaimed by him was just what would
naturally and logically arise from a remodelling of the Messianic
theories of the Pharisees in conformity to advanced Essenian
notions. It seems highly probable that some such refined
conception of the functions of the Messiah was reached by John,
who, stigmatizing the Pharisees and Sadducees as a “generation of
vipers,” called aloud to the people to repent of their sins, in
view of the speedy advent of the Messiah, and to testify to their
repentance by submitting to the Essenian rite of baptism. There
is no positive evidence that Jesus was ever a disciple of John;
yet the account of the baptism, in spite of the legendary
character of its details, seems to rest upon a historical basis;
and perhaps the most plausible hypothesis which can be framed is,
that Jesus received baptism at John’s hands, became for a while
his disciple, and acquired from him a knowledge of Essenian
doctrines.
The career of John seems to have been very brief. His stern
puritanism brought him soon into disgrace with the government of
Galilee. He was seized by Herod, thrown into prison, and
beheaded. After the brief hints given as to the intercourse
between Jesus and John, we next hear of Jesus alone in the
desert, where, like Sakyamuni and Mohammed, he may have brooded
in solitude over his great project. Yet we do not find that he
had as yet formed any distinct conception of his own Messiahship.
The total neglect of chronology by our authorities[20] renders it
impossible to trace the development of his thoughts step by step;
but for some time after John’s catastrophe we find him calling
upon the people to repent, in view of the speedy approach of the
Messiah, speaking with great and commanding personal authority,
but using no language which would indicate that he was striving
to do more than worthily fill the place and add to the good work
of his late master. The Sermon on the Mount, which the first
gospel inserts in this place, was perhaps never spoken as a
continuous discourse; but it no doubt for the most part contains
the very words of Jesus, and represents the general spirit of his
teaching during this earlier portion of his career. In this is
contained nearly all that has made Christianity so powerful in
the domain of ethics. If all the rest of the gospel were taken
away, or destroyed in the night of some future barbarian
invasion, we should still here possess the secret of the
wonderful impression which Jesus made upon those who heard him
speak. Added to the Essenian scorn of Pharisaic formalism, and
the spiritualized conception of the Messianic kingdom, which
Jesus may probably have shared with John the Baptist, we have
here for the first time the distinctively Christian conception of
the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of men, which
ultimately insured the success of the new religion. The special
point of originality in Jesus was his conception of Deity. As
Strauss well says, “He conceived of God, in a moral point of
view, as being identical in character with himself in the most
exalted moments of his religious life, and strengthened in turn
his own religious life by this ideal. But the most exalted
religious tendency in his own consciousness was exactly that
comprehensive love, overpowering the evil only by the good, which
he therefore transferred to God as the fundamental tendency of
His nature.” From this conception of God, observes Zeller, flowed
naturally all the moral teaching of Jesus, the insistence upon
spiritual righteousness instead of the mere mechanical observance
of Mosaic precepts, the call to be perfect even as the Father is
perfect, the principle of the spiritual equality of men before
God, and the equal duties of all men toward each other.
[20] “The biographers [of Becket] are commonly rather careless as
to the order of time. Each .... recorded what struck him most or
what he best knew, one set down one event and another; and none
of them paid much regard to the order of details."—Freeman,
Historical Essays, 1st series, p. 94.
How far, in addition to these vitally important lessons, Jesus
may have taught doctrines of an ephemeral or visionary character,
it is very difficult to decide. We are inclined to regard the
third gospel as of some importance in settling this point. The
author of that gospel represents Jesus as decidedly hostile to
the rich. Where Matthew has “Blessed are the poor in spirit,"
Luke has “Blessed are ye poor.” In the first gospel we read,
“Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they will be filled"; but in the third gospel we find, “Blessed
are ye that hunger now, for ye will be filled"; and this
assurance is immediately followed by the denunciation, “Woe to
you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation! Woe to
you that are full now, for ye will hunger.” The parable of Dives
and Lazarus illustrates concretely this view of the case, which
is still further corroborated by the account, given in both the
first and the third gospels, of the young man who came to seek
everlasting life. Jesus here maintains that righteousness is
insufficient unless voluntary poverty be superadded. Though the
young man has strictly fulfilled the greatest of the
commandments,—to love his neighbour as himself,—he is required,
as a needful proof of his sincerity, to distribute all his vast
possessions among the poor. And when he naturally manifests a
reluctance to perform so superfluous a sacrifice, Jesus observes
that it will be easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle than for a rich man to share in the glories of the
anticipated Messianic kingdom. It is difficult to escape the
conclusion that we have here a very primitive and probably
authentic tradition; and when we remember the importance which,
according to the “Acts,” the earliest disciples attached to the
principle of communism, as illustrated in the legend of Ananias
and Sapphira, we must admit strong reasons for believing that
Jesus himself held views which tended toward the abolition of
private property. On this point, the testimony of the third
evangelist singly is of considerable weight; since at the time
when he wrote, the communistic theories of the first generation
of Christians had been generally abandoned, and in the absence of
any dogmatic motives, he could only have inserted these
particular traditions because he believed them to possess
historical value. But we are not dependent on the third gospel
alone. The story just cited is attested by both our authorities,
and is in perfect keeping with the general views of Jesus as
reported by the first evangelist. Thus his disciples are enjoined
to leave all, and follow him; to take no thought for the morrow;
to think no more of laying up treasures on the earth, for in the
Messianic kingdom they shall have treasures in abundance, which
can neither be wasted nor stolen. On making their journeys, they
are to provide neither money, nor clothes, nor food, but are to
live at the expense of those whom they visit; and if any town
refuse to harbour them, the Messiah, on his arrival, will deal
with that town more severely than Jehovah dealt with the cities
of the plain. Indeed, since the end of the world was to come
before the end of the generation then living (Matt. xxiv. 34; 1
Cor. xv. 51-56, vii. 29), there could be no need for acquiring
property or making arrangements for the future; even marriage
became unnecessary. These teachings of Jesus have a marked
Essenian character, as well as his declaration that in the
Messianic kingdom there was to be no more marriage, perhaps no
distinction of sex (Matt. xxii. 30). The sect of Ebionites, who
represented the earliest doctrine and practice of Christianity
before it had been modified by Paul, differed from the Essenes in
no essential respect save in the acknowledgment of Jesus as the
Messiah, and the expectation of his speedy return to the earth.
How long, or with what success, Jesus continued to preach the
coming of the Messiah in Galilee, it is impossible to conjecture.
His fellow-townsmen of Nazareth appear to have ridiculed him in
his prophetical capacity; or, if we may trust the third
evangelist, to have arisen against him with indignation, and made
an attempt upon his life. To them he was but a carpenter, the son
of a carpenter (Matt. xiii. 55; Mark vi. 3), who told them
disagreeable truths. Our author represents his teaching in
Galilee to have produced but little result, but the gospel
narratives afford no definite data for deciding this point. We
believe the most probable conclusion to be that Jesus did attract
many followers, and became famous throughout Galilee; for Herod
is said to have regarded him as John the Baptist risen from the
grave. To escape the malice of Herod, Jesus then retired to
Syro-Phoenicia, and during this eventful journey the
consciousness of his own Messiahship seems for the first time to
have distinctly dawned upon him (Matt. xiv. 1, 13; xv. 21; xvi.
13-20). Already, it appears, speculations were rife as to the
character of this wonderful preacher. Some thought he was John
the Baptist, or perhaps one of the prophets of the Assyrian
period returned to the earth. Some, in accordance with a
generally-received tradition, supposed him to be Elijah, who had
never seen death, and had now at last returned from the regions
above the firmament to announce the coming of the Messiah in the
clouds. It was generally admitted, among enthusiastic hearers,
that he who spake as never man spake before must have some divine
commission to execute. These speculations, coming to the ears of
Jesus during his preaching in Galilee, could not fail to excite
in him a train of self-conscious reflections. To him also must
have been presented the query as to his own proper character and
functions; and, as our author acutely demonstrates, his only
choice lay between a profitless life of exile in Syro-Phoenicia,
and a bold return to Jewish territory in some pronounced
character. The problem being thus propounded, there could hardly
be a doubt as to what that character should be. Jesus knew well
that he was not John the Baptist; nor, however completely he may
have been dominated by his sublime enthusiasm, was it likely that
he could mistake himself for an ancient prophet arisen from the
lower world of shades, or for Elijah descended from the sky. But
the Messiah himself he might well be. Such indeed was the almost
inevitable corollary from his own conception of Messiahship. We
have seen that he had, probably from the very outset, discarded
the traditional notion of a political Messiah, and recognized the
truth that the happiness of a people lies not so much in
political autonomy as in the love of God and the sincere practice
of righteousness. The people were to be freed from the bondage of
sin, of meaningless formalism, of consecrated hypocrisy,—a
bondage more degrading than the payment of tribute to the
emperor. The true business of the Messiah, then, was to deliver
his people from the former bondage; it might be left to Jehovah,
in his own good time, to deliver them from the latter. Holding
these views, it was hardly possible that it should not sooner or
later occur to Jesus that he himself was the person destined to
discharge this glorious function, to liberate his countrymen from
the thraldom of Pharisaic ritualism, and to inaugurate the real
Messianic kingdom of spiritual righteousness. Had he not already
preached the advent of this spiritual kingdom, and been
instrumental in raising many to loftier conceptions of duty, and
to a higher and purer life? And might he not now, by a grand
attack upon Pharisaism in its central stronghold, destroy its
prestige in the eyes of the people, and cause Israel to adopt a
nobler religious and ethical doctrine? The temerity of such a
purpose detracts nothing from its sublimity. And if that purpose
should be accomplished, Jesus would really have performed the
legitimate work of the Messiah. Thus, from his own point of view,
Jesus was thoroughly consistent and rational in announcing
himself as the expected Deliverer; and in the eyes of the
impartial historian his course is fully justified.
“From that time,” says the first evangelist, “Jesus began to show
to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many
things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be put
to death, and rise again on the third day.” Here we have,
obviously, the knowledge of the writer, after the event,
reflected back and attributed to Jesus. It is of course
impossible that Jesus should have predicted with such
definiteness his approaching death; nor is it very likely that he
entertained any hope of being raised from the grave “on the third
day.” To a man in that age and country, the conception of a
return from the lower world of shades was not a difficult one to
frame; and it may well be that Jesus’ sense of his own exalted
position was sufficiently great to inspire him with the
confidence that, even in case of temporary failure, Jehovah would
rescue him from the grave and send him back with larger powers to
carry out the purpose of his mission. But the difficulty of
distinguishing between his own words and the interpretation put
upon them by his disciples becomes here insuperable; and there
will always be room for the hypothesis that Jesus had in view no
posthumous career of his own, but only expressed his unshaken
confidence in the success of his enterprise, even after and in
spite of his death.
At all events, the possibility of his death must now have been
often in his mind. He was undertaking a wellnigh desperate
task,—to overthrow the Pharisees in Jerusalem itself. No other
alternative was left him. And here we believe Mr. F. W. Newman to
be singularly at fault in pronouncing this attempt of Jesus upon
Jerusalem a foolhardy attempt. According to Mr. Newman, no man
has any business to rush upon certain death, and it is only a
crazy fanatic who will do so.[21] But such “glittering
generalizations” will here help us but little. The historic data
show that to go to Jerusalem, even at the risk of death, was
absolutely necessary to the realization of Jesus’ Messianic
project. Mr. Newman certainly would not have had him drag out an
inglorious and baffled existence in Syro-Phoenicia. If the
Messianic kingdom was to be fairly inaugurated, there was work to
be done in Jerusalem, and Jesus must go there as one in
authority, cost what it might. We believe him to have gone there
in a spirit of grand and careless bravery, yet seriously and
soberly, and under the influence of no fanatical delusion. He
knew the risks, but deliberately chose to incur them, that the
will of Jehovah might be accomplished.
We next hear of Jesus travelling down to Jerusalem by way of
Jericho, and entering the sacred city in his character of
Messiah, attended by a great multitude. It was near the time of
the Passover, when people from all parts of Galilee and Judaea
were sure to be at Jerusalem, and the nature of his reception
seems to indicate that he had already secured a considerable
number of followers upon whose assistance he might hope to rely,
though it nowhere appears that he intended to use other than
purely moral weapons to insure a favourable reception. We must
remember that for half a century many of the Jewish people had
been constantly looking for the arrival of the Messiah, and there
can be little doubt that the entry of Jesus riding upon an ass in
literal fulfilment of prophecy must have wrought powerfully upon
the imagination of the multitude. That the believers in him were
very numerous must be inferred from the cautious, not to say
timid, behaviour of the rulers at Jerusalem, who are represented
as desiring to arrest him, but as deterred from taking active
steps through fear of the people. We are led to the same
conclusion by his driving the money-changers out of the Temple;
an act upon which he could hardly have ventured, had not the
popular enthusiasm in his favour been for the moment
overwhelming. But the enthusiasm of a mob is short-lived, and
needs to be fed upon the excitement of brilliant and dramatically
arranged events. The calm preacher of righteousness, or even the
fiery denouncer of the scribes and Pharisees, could not hope to
retain undiminished authority save by the display of
extraordinary powers to which, so far as we know, Jesus (like
Mohammed) made no presence (Matt. xvi. 1-4). The ignorant and
materialistic populace could not understand the exalted
conception of Messiahship which had been formed by Jesus, and as
day after day elapsed without the appearance of any marvellous
sign from Jehovah, their enthusiasm must naturally have cooled
down. Then the Pharisees appear cautiously endeavouring to entrap
him into admissions which might render him obnoxious to the Roman
governor. He saw through their design, however, and foiled them
by the magnificent repartee, “Render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s.” Nothing
could more forcibly illustrate the completely non-political
character of his Messianic doctrines. Nevertheless, we are told
that, failing in this attempt, the chief priests suborned false
witnesses to testify against him: this Sabbath-breaker, this
derider of Mosaic formalism, who with his Messianic pretensions
excited the people against their hereditary teachers, must at all
events be put out of the way. Jesus must suffer the fate which
society has too often had in store for the reformer; the fate
which Sokrates and Savonarola, Vanini and Bruno, have suffered
for being wiser than their own generation. Messianic adventurers
had already given much trouble to the Roman authorities, who were
not likely to scrutinize critically the peculiar claims of Jesus.
And when the chief priests accused him before Pilate of
professing to be “King of the Jews,” this claim could in Roman
apprehension bear but one interpretation. The offence was
treason, punishable, save in the case of Roman citizens, by
crucifixion.
[21] Phases of Faith, pp. 158-164.
Such in its main outlines is the historic career of Jesus, as
constructed by our author from data furnished chiefly by the
first gospel. Connected with the narrative there are many
interesting topics of discussion, of which our rapidly
diminishing space will allow us to select only one for comment.
That one is perhaps the most important of all, namely, the
question as to how far Jesus anticipated the views of Paul in
admitting Gentiles to share in the privileges of the Messianic
kingdom. Our author argues, with much force, that the designs of
Jesus were entirely confined to the Jewish people, and that it
was Paul who first, by admitting Gentiles to the Christian fold
without requiring them to live like Jews, gave to Christianity
the character of a universal religion. Our author reminds us that
the third gospel is not to be depended upon in determining this
point, since it manifestly puts Pauline sentiments into the mouth
of Jesus, and in particular attributes to Jesus an acquaintance
with heretical Samaria which the first gospel disclaims. He
argues that the apostles were in every respect Jews, save in
their belief that Jesus was the Messiah; and he pertinently asks,
if James, who was the brother of Jesus, and Peter and John, who
were his nearest friends, unanimously opposed Paul and
stigmatized him as a liar and heretic, is it at all likely that
Jesus had ever distinctly sanctioned such views as Paul
maintained?
In the course of many years’ reflection upon this point, we have
several times been inclined to accept the narrow interpretation
of Jesus’ teaching here indicated; yet, on the whole, we do not
believe it can ever be conclusively established. In the first
place it must be remembered that if the third gospel throws a
Pauline colouring over the events which it describes, the first
gospel also shows a decidedly anti-Pauline bias, and the one
party was as likely as the other to attribute its own views to
Jesus himself. One striking instance of this tendency has been
pointed out by Strauss, who has shown that the verses Matt. v.
17-20 are an interpolation. The person who teaches men to break
the commandments is undoubtedly Paul, and in order to furnish a
text against Paul’s followers, the “Nicolaitans,” Jesus is made
to declare that he came not to destroy one tittle of the law, but
to fulfil the whole in every particular. Such an utterance is in
manifest contradiction to the spirit of Jesus’ teaching, as shown
in the very same chapter, and throughout a great part of the same
gospel. He who taught in his own name and not as the scribes, who
proclaimed himself Lord over the Sabbath, and who manifested from
first to last a more than Essenian contempt for rites and
ceremonies, did not come to fulfil the law of Mosaism, but to
supersede it. Nor can any inference adverse to this conclusion be
drawn from the injunction to the disciples (Matt. x. 5-7) not to
preach to Gentiles and Samaritans, but only “to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel"; for this remark is placed before the
beginning of Jesus’ Messianic career, and the reason assigned for
the restriction is merely that the disciples will not have time
even to preach to all the Jews before the coming of the Messiah,
whose approach Jesus was announcing (Matt. x. 23)
These examples show that we must use caution in weighing the
testimony even of the first gospel, and must not too hastily cite
it as proof that Jesus supposed his mission to be restricted to
the Jews. When we come to consider what happened a few years
after the death of Jesus, we shall be still less ready to insist
upon the view defended by our anonymous author. Paul, according
to his own confession, persecuted the Christians unto death. Now
what, in the theories or in the practice of the Jewish disciples
of Jesus, could have moved Paul to such fanatic behaviour?
Certainly not their spiritual interpretation of Mosaism, for Paul
himself belonged to the liberal school of Gamaliel, to the views
of which the teachings and practices of Peter, James, and John
might easily be accommodated. Probably not their belief in Jesus
as the Messiah, for at the riot in which Stephen was murdered and
all the Hellenist disciples driven from Jerusalem, the Jewish
disciples were allowed to remain in the city unmolested. (See
Acts viii. 1, 14.) This marked difference of treatment indicates
that Paul regarded Stephen and his friends as decidedly more
heretical and obnoxious than Peter, James, and John, whom,
indeed, Paul’s own master Gamaliel had recently (Acts v. 34)
defended before the council. And this inference is fully
confirmed by the account of Stephen’s death, where his murderers
charge him with maintaining that Jesus had founded a new religion
which was destined entirely to supersede and replace Judaism
(Acts vi. 14). The Petrine disciples never held this view of the
mission of Jesus; and to this difference it is undoubtedly owing
that Paul and his companions forbore to disturb them. It would
thus appear that even previous to Paul’s conversion, within five
or six years after the death of Jesus, there was a prominent
party among the disciples which held that the new religion was
not a modification but an abrogation of Judaism; and their name
“Hellenists” sufficiently shows either that there were Gentiles
among them or that they held fellowship with Gentiles. It was
this which aroused Paul to persecution, and upon his sudden
conversion it was with these Hellenistic doctrines that he
fraternized, taking little heed of the Petrine disciples
(Galatians i. 17), who were hardly more than a Jewish sect.
Now the existence of these Hellenists at Jerusalem so soon after
the death of Jesus is clear proof that he had never distinctly
and irrevocably pronounced against the admission of Gentiles to
the Messianic kingdom, and it makes it very probable that the
downfall of Mosaism as a result of his preaching was by no means
unpremeditated. While, on the other hand, the obstinacy of the
Petrine party in adhering to Jewish customs shows equally that
Jesus could not have unequivocally committed himself in favour of
a new gospel for the Gentiles. Probably Jesus was seldom brought
into direct contact with others than Jews, so that the questions
concerning the admission of Gentile converts did not come up
during his lifetime; and thus the way was left open for the
controversy which soon broke out between the Petrine party and
Paul. Nevertheless, though Jesus may never have definitely
pronounced upon this point, it will hardly be denied that his
teaching, even as reported in the first gospel, is in its utter
condemnation of formalism far more closely allied to the Pauline
than to the Petrine doctrines. In his hands Mosaism became
spiritualized until it really lost its identity, and was
transformed into a code fit for the whole Roman world. And we do
not doubt that if any one had asked Jesus whether circumcision
were an essential prerequisite for admission to the Messianic
kingdom, he would have given the same answer which Paul
afterwards gave. We agree with Zeller and Strauss that, “as
Luther was a more liberal spirit than the Lutheran divines of the
succeeding generation, and Sokrates a more profound thinker than
Xenophon or Antisthenes, so also Jesus must be credited with
having raised himself far higher above the narrow prejudices of
his nation than those of his disciples who could scarcely
understand the spread of Christianity among the heathen when it
had become an accomplished fact.”
  January, 1870.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
