


Few of those who find pleasure in frequenting bookstores can have
failed to come across one or more of the profusely illustrated
volumes in which M. Louis Figuier has sought to render dry
science entertaining to the multitude. And of those who may have
casually turned over their pages, there are probably none,
competent to form an opinion, who have not speedily perceived
that these pretentious books belong to the class of pests and
unmitigated nuisances in literature. Antiquated views, utter lack
of comprehension of the subjects treated, and shameless
unscrupulousness as to accuracy of statement, are faults but ill
atoned for by sensational pictures of the “dragons of the prime
that tare each other in their slime,” or of the Newton-like brow
and silken curls of that primitive man in contrast with whom the
said dragons have been likened to “mellow music.”
Nevertheless, the sort of scientific reputation which these
discreditable performances have gained for M. Figuier among an
uncritical public is such as to justify us in devoting a few
paragraphs to a book[13] which, on its own merits, is unworthy of
any notice whatever. “The To-morrow of Death"—if one were to put
his trust in the translator’s prefatory note—discusses a grave
question upon “purely scientific methods.” We are glad to see
this remark, because it shows what notions may be entertained by
persons of average intelligence with reference to “scientific
methods.” Those—and they are many—who vaguely think that
science is something different from common-sense, and that any
book is scientific which talks about perihelia and asymptotes and
cetacea, will find their vague notions here well corroborated.
Quite different will be the impression made upon those—and they
are yet too few—who have learned that the method of science is
the common-sense method of cautiously weighing evidence and
withholding judgment where evidence is not forthcoming. If
talking about remote and difficult subjects suffice to make one
scientific, then is M. Figuier scientific to a quite terrible
degree. He writes about the starry heavens as if he had been
present at the hour of creation, or had at least accompanied the
Arabian prophet on his famous night-journey. Nor is his knowledge
of physiology and other abstruse sciences at all less remarkable.
But these things will cease to surprise us when we learn the
sources, hitherto suspected only in mythology, from which
favoured mortals can obtain a knowledge of what is going on
outside of our planet.
[13] The To-morrow of Death; or, The Future Life according to
Science. By Louis Figuier. Translated from the French by S. R.
Crocker. Boston: Roberts Brothers. 1872.
The four inner planets being nearly alike in size (?) and in
length of day, M. Figuier infers, by strictly scientific methods,
that whatever is true of one of them, as our earth, will be true
of the others (p. 34). Hence, they are all inhabited by human
beings. It is true that human beings must find Venus rather warm,
and are not unlikely to be seriously incommoded by the tropical
climate of Mercury. But we must remember that “the men of Venus
and Mercury are made by nature to resist heat, as those of
Jupiter and Saturn are made to endure cold, and those of the
Earth and Mars to live in a mean temperature: OTHERWISE THEY
COULD NOT EXIST” (p. 72). In view of this charming specimen of a
truly scientific inference, it is almost too bad to call
attention to the fact that M. Figuier is quite behind the age in
his statement of facts. So far from Jupiter and Saturn being
cold, observation plainly indicates that they are prodigiously
hot, if not even incandescent and partly self-luminous; the
explanation being that, by reason of their huge bulk, they still
retain much of the primitive heat which smaller planets have more
quickly radiated away. As for M. Figuier’s statement, that polar
snows have been witnessed on these planets, it is simply untrue;
no such thing has ever been seen there. Mars, on the other hand,
has been observed to resemble in many important respects its near
neighbour, the Earth; whence our author declares that if an
aeronaut were to shoot clear of terrestrial gravitation and land
upon Mars, he would unquestionably suppose himself to be still
upon the earth. For aerolites, it seems, are somehow fired down
upon our planet both from Mars and from Venus; and aerolites
sometimes contain vegetable matter (?). Therefore, Mars has a
vegetation, and very likely its red colour is caused by its
luxuriant autumnal foliage! (p. 47.) To return to Jupiter: this
planet, indeed, has inconveniently short days. “In his ’Picture
of the Heavens,’ the German astronomer, Littrow (these Germans
think of nothing but gormandizing), asks how the people of
Jupiter order their meals in the short interval of five hours."
Nevertheless, says our author, the great planet is compensated
for this inconvenience by its equable and delicious climate.
In view, however, of our author’s more striking and original
disclosures, one would suppose that all this discussion of the
physical conditions of existence on the various planets might
have been passed over without detriment to the argument. After
these efforts at proving (for M. Figuier presumably regards this
rigmarole as proof) that all the members of our solar system are
habitable, the interplanetary ether is forthwith peopled thickly
with “souls,” without any resort to argument. This, we suppose,
is one of those scientific truths which as M. Figuier tells us,
precede and underlie demonstration. Upon this impregnable basis
is reared the scientific theory of a future life. When we die our
soul passes into some other terrestrial body, unless we have been
very good, in which case we at once soar aloft and join the noble
fraternity of the ether-folk. Bad men and young children, on
dying, must undergo renewed probation here below, but ultimately
all pass away into the interplanetary ether. The dweller in ether
is chiefly distinguished from the mundane mortal by his acute
senses and his ability to subsist without food. He can see as if
through a telescope and microscope combined. His intelligence is
so great that in comparison an Aristotle would seem idiotic. It
should not be forgotten, too, that he possesses eighty-five per
cent of soul to fifteen per cent of body, whereas in terrestrial
man the two elements are mixed in equal proportions. There is no
sex among the ether-folk, their numbers being kept up by the
influx of souls from the various planets. “Alimentation, that
necessity which tyrannizes over men and animals, is not imposed
upon the inhabitants of ether. Their bodies must be repaired and
sustained by the simple respiration of the fluid in which they
are immersed, that is, of ether.” Most likely, continues our
scientific author, the physiological functions of the ether-folk
are confined to respiration, and that it is possible to breathe
“without numerous organs is proved by the fact that in all of a
whole class of animals—the batrachians—the mere bare skin
constitutes the whole machinery of respiration” (p. 95). Allowing
for the unfortunate slip of the pen by which “batrachians” are
substituted for “fresh-water polyps,” how can we fail to admire
the severity of the scientific method employed in reaching these
interesting conclusions?
But the King of Serendib must die, nor will the relentless scythe
of Time spare our Etherians, with all their exalted attributes.
They will die repeatedly; and after having through sundry periods
of probation attained spiritual perfection, they will all pour
into the sun. Since it is the sun which originates life and
feeling and thought upon the surface of our earth, “why may we
not declare that the rays transmitted by the sun to the earth and
the other planets are nothing more nor less than the emanations
of these souls?” And now we may begin to form an adequate
conception, of the rigorously scientific character of our
author’s method. There have been many hypotheses by which to
account for the supply of solar radiance. One of the most
ingenious and probable of these hypotheses is that of Helmholtz,
according to which the solar radiance is due to the arrested
motion of the sun’s constituent particles toward their common
centre of gravity. But this is too fanciful to satisfy M.
Figuier. The speculations of Helmholtz “have the disadvantage of
resting on the idea of the sun’s nebulosity,—an hypothesis which
would need to be more closely examined before serving as a basis
for so important a deduction.” Accordingly, M. Figuier propounds
an explanation which possesses the signal advantage that there is
nothing hypothetical in it. “In our opinion, the solar radiation
is sustained by the continual influx of souls into the sun."
This, as the reader will perceive, is the well-known theory of
Mayer, that the solar heat is due to a perennial bombardment of
the sun by meteors, save that, in place of gross materialistic
meteors, M. Figuier puts ethereal souls. The ether-folk are daily
raining into the solar orb in untold millions, and to the
unceasing concussion is due the radiation which maintains life in
the planets, and thus the circle is complete.
In spite of their exalted position, the ether-folk do not disdain
to mingle with the affairs of terrestrial mortals. They give us
counsel in dreams, and it is from this source, we presume, that
our author has derived his rigid notions as to scientific method.
In evidence of this dream-theory we have the usual array of
cases, “a celebrated journalist, M. R——,” “M. L——, a lawyer,"
etc., etc., as in most books of this kind.
M. Figuier is not a Darwinian: the derivation of our bodies from
the bodies of apes is a conception too grossly materialistic for
him. Our souls, however, he is quite willing to derive from the
souls of lower animals. Obviously we have pre-existed; how are we
to account for Mozart’s precocity save by supposing his
pre-existence? He brought with him the musical skill acquired in
a previous life. In general, the souls of musical children come
from nightingales, while the souls of great architects have
passed into them from beavers (p. 247). We do not remember these
past existences, it is true; but when we become ether-folk, we
shall be able to look back in recollection over the whole series.
Amid these sublime inquiries, M. Figuier is sometimes notably
oblivious of humbler truths, as might indeed be expected. Thus he
repeatedly alludes to Locke as the author of the doctrine of
innate ideas (!!),[14] and he informs us that Kepler never
quitted Protestant England (p. 336), though we believe that the
nearest Kepler ever came to living in England was the refusing of
Sir Henry Wotton’s request that he should move thither.
[14] Pages 251, 252, 287. So in the twenty-first century some
avatar of M. Figuier will perhaps describe the late professor
Agassiz as the author of the Darwinian theory.
And lastly, we are treated to a real dialogue, with quite a
dramatic mise en scene. The author’s imaginary friend,
Theophilus, enters, “seats himself in a comfortable chair, places
an ottoman under his feet, a book under his elbow to support it,
and a cigarette of Turkish tobacco between his lips, and sets
himself to the task of listening with a grave air of
collectedness, relieved by a certain touch of suspicious
severity, as becomes the arbiter in a literary and philosophic
matter.” “And so,” begins our author, “you wish to know, my dear
Theophilus, WHERE I LOCATE GOD? I locate him in the centre of the
universe, or, in better phrase, at the central focus, which must
exist somewhere, of all the stars that make the universe, and
which, borne onward in a common movement, gravitate together
around this focus.”
Much more, of an equally scientific character, follows; but in
fairness to the reader, who is already blaming us for wasting the
precious moments over such sorry trash, we may as well conclude
our sketch of this new line of speculation.
  May, 1872.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
