


[22] Saint-Paul, par Ernest Renan. Paris, 1869.
Histoire du Dogme de la Divinite de Jesus-Christ, par Albert
Reville. Paris, 1869.
The End of the World and the Day of Judgment. Two Discourses by
the Rev. W. R. Alger. Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1870.
The meagreness of our information concerning the historic career
of Jesus stands in striking contrast with the mass of information
which lies within our reach concerning the primitive character of
Christologic speculation. First we have the four epistles of
Paul, written from twenty to thirty years after the crucifixion,
which, although they tell us next to nothing about what Jesus
did, nevertheless give us very plain information as to the
impression which he made. Then we have the Apocalypse, written by
John, A. D. 68, which exhibits the Messianic theory entertained
by the earliest disciples. Next we have the epistles to the
Hebrews, Philippians, Colossians, and Ephesians, besides the four
gospels, constituting altogether a connected chain of testimony
to the progress of Christian doctrine from the destruction of
Jerusalem to the time of the Quartodeciman controversy (A. D.
70-170). Finally, there is the vast collection of apocryphal,
heretical, and patristic literature, from the writings of Justin
Martyr, the pseudo-Clement, and the pseudo-Ignatius, down to the
time of the Council of Nikaia, when the official theories of
Christ’s person assumed very nearly the shape which they have
retained, within the orthodox churches of Christendom, down to
the present day. As we pointed out in the foregoing essay, while
all this voluminous literature throws but an uncertain light upon
the life and teachings of the founder of Christianity, it
nevertheless furnishes nearly all the data which we could desire
for knowing what the early Christians thought of the master of
their faith. Having given a brief account of the historic career
of Jesus, so far as it can now be determined, we propose here to
sketch the rise and progress of Christologic doctrine, in its
most striking features, during the first three centuries.
Beginning with the apostolic view of the human Messiah sent to
deliver Judaism from its spiritual torpor, and prepare it for the
millennial kingdom, we shall briefly trace the progressive
metamorphosis of this conception until it completely loses its
identity in the Athanasian theory, according to which Jesus was
God himself, the Creator of the universe, incarnate in human
flesh.
The earliest dogma held by the apostles concerning Jesus was that
of his resurrection from the grave after death. It was not only
the earliest, but the most essential to the success of the new
religion. Christianity might have overspread the Roman Empire,
and maintained its hold upon men’s faith until to-day, without
the dogmas of the incarnation and the Trinity; but without the
dogma of the resurrection it would probably have failed at the
very outset. Its lofty morality would not alone have sufficed to
insure its success. For what men needed then, as indeed they
still need, and will always need, was not merely a rule of life
and a mirror to the heart, but also a comprehensive and
satisfactory theory of things, a philosophy or theosophy. The
times demanded intellectual as well as moral consolation; and the
disintegration of ancient theologies needed to be repaired, that
the new ethical impulse imparted by Christianity might rest upon
a plausible speculative basis. The doctrine of the resurrection
was but the beginning of a series of speculative innovations
which prepared the way for the new religion to emancipate itself
from Judaism, and achieve the conquest of the Empire. Even the
faith of the apostles in the speedy return of their master the
Messiah must have somewhat lost ground, had it not been supported
by their belief in his resurrection from the grave and his
consequent transfer from Sheol, the gloomy land of shadows, to
the regions above the sky.
The origin of the dogma of the resurrection cannot be determined
with certainty. The question has, during the past century, been
the subject of much discussion, upon which it is not necessary
for us here to comment. Such apparent evidence as there is in
favour of the old theory of Jesus’ natural recovery from the
effects of the crucifixion may be found in Salvador’s
“Jesus-Christ et sa Doctrine"; but, as Zeller has shown, the
theory is utterly unsatisfactory. The natural return of Jesus to
his disciples never could have given rise to the notion of his
resurrection, since the natural explanation would have been the
more obvious one; besides which, if we were to adopt this
hypothesis, we should be obliged to account for the fact that the
historic career of Jesus ends with the crucifixion. The most
probable explanation, on the whole, is the one suggested by the
accounts in the gospels, that the dogma of the resurrection is
due originally to the excited imagination of Mary of Magdala.[23]
The testimony of Paul may also be cited in favour of this view,
since he always alludes to earlier Christophanies in just the
same language which he uses in describing his own vision on the
road to Damascus.
[23] See Taine, De l’Intelligence, II. 192.
But the question as to how the belief in the resurrection of
Jesus originated is of less importance than the question as to
how it should have produced the effect that it did. The dogma of
the resurrection has, until recent times, been so rarely treated
from the historical point of view, that the student of history at
first finds some difficulty in thoroughly realizing its import to
the minds of those who first proclaimed it. We cannot hope to
understand it without bearing in mind the theories of the Jews
and early Christians concerning the structure of the world and
the cosmic location of departed souls. Since the time of
Copernicus modern Christians no longer attempt to locate heaven
and hell; they are conceived merely as mysterious places remote
from the earth. The theological universe no longer corresponds to
that which physical science presents for our contemplation. It
was quite different with the Jew. His conception of the abode of
Jehovah and the angels, and of departed souls, was exceedingly
simple and definite. In the Jewish theory the universe is like a
sort of three-story house. The flat earth rests upon the waters,
and under the earth’s surface is the land of graves, called
Sheol, where after death the souls of all men go, the righteous
as well as the wicked, for the Jew had not arrived at the
doctrine of heaven and hell. The Hebrew Sheol corresponds
strictly to the Greek Hades, before the notions of Elysium and
Tartarus were added to it,—a land peopled with flitting shadows,
suffering no torment, but experiencing no pleasure, like those
whom Dante met in one of the upper circles of his Inferno. Sheol
is the first story of the cosmic house; the earth is the second.
Above the earth is the firmament or sky, which, according to the
book of Genesis (chap. i. v. 6, Hebrew text), is a vast plate
hammered out by the gods, and supports a great ocean like that
upon which the earth rests. Rain is caused by the opening of
little windows or trap-doors in the firmament, through which
pours the water of this upper ocean. Upon this water rests the
land of heaven, where Jehovah reigns, surrounded by hosts of
angels. To this blessed land two only of the human race had ever
been admitted,—Enoch and Elijah, the latter of whom had ascended
in a chariot of fire, and was destined to return to earth as the
herald and forerunner of the Messiah. Heaven forms the third
story of the cosmic house. Between the firmament and the earth is
the air, which is the habitation of evil demons ruled by Satan,
the “prince of the powers of the air.”
Such was the cosmology of the ancient Jew; and his theology was
equally simple. Sheol was the destined abode of all men after
death, and no theory of moral retribution was attached to the
conception. The rewards and punishments known to the authors of
the Pentateuch and the early Psalms are all earthly rewards and
punishments. But in course of time the prosperity of the wicked
and the misfortunes of the good man furnished a troublesome
problem for the Jewish thinker; and after the Babylonish
Captivity, we find the doctrine of a resurrection from Sheol
devised in order to meet this case. According to this
doctrine—which was borrowed from the Zarathustrian theology of
Persia—the Messiah on his arrival was to free from Sheol all the
souls of the righteous, causing them to ascend reinvested in
their bodies to a renewed and beautiful earth, while on the other
hand the wicked were to be punished with tortures like those of
the valley of Hinnom, or were to be immersed in liquid brimstone,
like that which had rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah. Here we get
the first announcement of a future state of retribution. The
doctrine was peculiarly Pharisaic, and the Sadducees, who were
strict adherents to the letter of Mosaism, rejected it to the
last. By degrees this doctrine became coupled with the Messianic
theories of the Pharisees. The loss of Jewish independence under
the dominion of Persians, Macedonians, and Romans, caused the
people to look ever more earnestly toward the expected time when
the Messiah should appear in Jerusalem to deliver them from their
oppressors. The moral doctrines of the Psalms and earlier
prophets assumed an increasingly political aspect. The Jews were
the righteous “under a cloud,” whose sufferings were symbolically
depicted by the younger Isaiah as the afflictions of the “servant
of Jehovah"; while on the other hand, the “wicked” were the
Gentile oppressors of the holy people. Accordingly the Messiah,
on his arrival, was to sit in judgment in the valley of
Jehoshaphat, rectifying the wrongs of his chosen ones, condemning
the Gentile tyrants to the torments of Gehenna, and raising from
Sheol all those Jews who had lived and died during the evil times
before his coming. These were to find in the Messianic kingdom
the compensation for the ills which they had suffered in their
first earthly existence. Such are the main outlines of the theory
found in the Book of Enoch, written about B. C. 100, and it is
adopted in the Johannine Apocalypse, with little variation, save
in the recognition of Jesus as the Messiah, and in the
transferrence to his second coming of all these wonderful
proceedings. The manner of the Messiah’s coming had been
variously imagined. According to an earlier view, he was to enter
Jerusalem as a King of the house of David, and therefore of human
lineage. According to a later view, presented in the Book of
Daniel, he was to descend from the sky, and appear among the
clouds. Both these views were adopted by the disciples of Jesus,
who harmonized them by referring the one to his first and the
other to his second appearance.
Now to the imaginations of these earliest disciples the belief in
the resurrection of Jesus presented itself as a needful guarantee
of his Messiahship. Their faith, which must have been shaken by
his execution and descent into Sheol, received welcome
confirmation by the springing up of the belief that he had been
again seen upon the face of the earth. Applying the imagery of
Daniel, it became a logical conclusion that he must have ascended
into the sky, whence he might shortly be expected to make his
appearance, to enact the scenes foretold in prophecy. That such
was the actual process of inference is shown by the legend of the
Ascension in the first chapter of the “Acts,” and especially by
the words, “This Jesus who hath been taken up from you into
heaven, will come in the same manner in which ye beheld him going
into heaven.” In the Apocalypse, written A. D. 68, just after the
death of Nero, this second coming is described as something
immediately to happen, and the colours in which it is depicted
show how closely allied were the Johannine notions to those of
the Pharisees. The glories of the New Jerusalem are to be
reserved for Jews, while for the Roman tyrants of Judaea is
reserved a fearful retribution. They are to be trodden underfoot
by the Messiah, like grapes in a wine-press, until the gushing
blood shall rise to the height of the horse’s bridle.
In the writings of Paul the dogma of the resurrection assumes a
very different aspect. Though Paul, like the older apostles, held
that Jesus, as the Messiah, was to return to the earth within a
few years, yet to his catholic mind this anticipated event had
become divested of its narrow Jewish significance. In the eyes of
Paul, the religion preached by Jesus was an abrogation of
Mosaism, and the truths contained in it were a free gift to the
Gentile as well as to the Jewish world. According to Paul, death
came into the world as a punishment for the sin of Adam. By this
he meant that, had it not been for the original transgression,
all men escaping death would either have remained upon earth or
have been conveyed to heaven, like Enoch and Elijah, in
incorruptible bodies. But in reality as a penance for
disobedience, all men, with these two exceptions, had suffered
death, and been exiled to the gloomy caverns of Sheol. The Mosaic
ritual was powerless to free men from this repulsive doom, but it
had nevertheless served a good purpose in keeping men’s minds
directed toward holiness, preparing them, as a schoolmaster would
prepare his pupils, to receive the vitalizing truths of Christ.
Now, at last, the Messiah or Christ had come as a second Adam,
and being without sin had been raised by Jehovah out of Sheol and
taken up into heaven, as testimony to men that the power of sin
and death was at last defeated. The way henceforth to avoid death
and escape the exile to Sheol was to live spiritually like Jesus,
and with him to be dead to sensual requirements. Faith, in Paul’s
apprehension, was not an intellectual assent to definitely
prescribed dogmas, but, as Matthew Arnold has well pointed out,
it was an emotional striving after righteousness, a developing
consciousness of God in the soul, such as Jesus had possessed,
or, in Paul’s phraseology, a subjugation of the flesh by the
spirit. All those who should thus seek spiritual perfection
should escape the original curse. The Messiah was destined to
return to the earth to establish the reign of spiritual holiness,
probably during Paul’s own lifetime (1 Cor. xv. 51). Then the
true followers of Jesus should be clothed in ethereal bodies,
free from the imperfections of “the flesh,” and should ascend to
heaven without suffering death, while the righteous dead should
at the same time be released from Sheol, even as Jesus himself
had been released.
To the doctrine of the resurrection, in which ethical and
speculative elements are thus happily blended by Paul, the new
religion doubtless owed in great part its rapid success. Into an
account of the causes which favoured the spreading of
Christianity, it is not our purpose to enter at present. But we
may note that the local religions of the ancient pagan world had
partly destroyed each other by mutual intermingling, and had lost
their hold upon people from the circumstance that their ethical
teaching no longer corresponded to the advanced ethical feeling
of the age. Polytheism, in short, was outgrown. It was outgrown
both intellectually and morally. People were ceasing to believe
in its doctrines, and were ceasing to respect its precepts. The
learned were taking refuge in philosophy, the ignorant in
mystical superstitions imported from Asia. The commanding ethical
motive of ancient republican times had been patriotism,—devotion
to the interests of the community. But Roman dominion had
destroyed patriotism as a guiding principle of life, and thus in
every way the minds of men were left in a sceptical, unsatisfied
state,—craving after a new theory of life, and craving after a
new stimulus to right action. Obviously the only theology which
could now be satisfactory to philosophy or to common-sense was
some form of monotheism;—some system of doctrines which should
represent all men as spiritually subjected to the will of a
single God, just as they were subjected to the temporal authority
of the Emperor. And similarly the only system of ethics which
could have a chance of prevailing must be some system which
should clearly prescribe the mutual duties of all men without
distinction of race or locality. Thus the spiritual morality of
Jesus, and his conception of God as a father and of all men as
brothers, appeared at once to meet the ethical and speculative
demands of the time.
Yet whatever effect these teachings might have produced, if
unaided by further doctrinal elaboration, was enhanced myriadfold
by the elaboration which they received at the hands of Paul.
Philosophic Stoics and Epicureans had arrived at the conception
of the brotherhood of men, and the Greek hymn of Kleanthes had
exhibited a deep spiritual sense of the fatherhood of God. The
originality of Christianity lay not so much in its enunciation of
new ethical precepts as in the fact that it furnished a new
ethical sanction,—a commanding incentive to holiness of living.
That it might accomplish this result, it was absolutely necessary
that it should begin by discarding both the ritualism and the
narrow theories of Judaism. The mere desire for a monotheistic
creed had led many pagans, in Paul’s time, to embrace Judaism, in
spite of its requirements, which to Romans and Greeks were
meaningless, and often disgusting; but such conversions could
never have been numerous. Judaism could never have conquered the
Roman world; nor is it likely that the Judaical Christianity of
Peter, James, and John would have been any more successful. The
doctrine of the resurrection, in particular, was not likely to
prove attractive when accompanied by the picture of the Messiah
treading the Gentiles in the wine-press of his righteous
indignation. But here Paul showed his profound originality The
condemnation of Jewish formalism which Jesus had pronounced, Paul
turned against the older apostles, who insisted upon
circumcision. With marvellous flexibility of mind, Paul placed
circumcision and the Mosaic injunctions about meats upon a level
with the ritual observances of pagan nations, allowing each
feeble brother to perform such works as might tickle his fancy,
but bidding all take heed that salvation was not to be obtained
after any such mechanical method, but only by devoting the whole
soul to righteousness, after the example of Jesus.
This was the negative part of Paul’s work. This was the knocking
down of the barriers which had kept men, and would always have
kept them, from entering into the kingdom of heaven. But the
positive part of Paul’s work is contained in his theory of the
salvation of men from death through the second Adam, whom Jehovah
rescued from Sheol for his sinlessness. The resurrection of Jesus
was the visible token of the escape from death which might be
achieved by all men who, with God’s aid, should succeed in
freeing themselves from the burden of sin which had encumbered
all the children of Adam. The end of the world was at hand, and
they who would live with Christ must figuratively die with
Christ, must become dead to sin. Thus to the pure and spiritual
ethics contained in the teachings of Jesus, Paul added an
incalculably powerful incentive to right action, and a theory of
life calculated to satisfy the speculative necessities of the
pagan or Gentile world. To the educated and sceptical Athenian,
as to the critical scholar of modern times, the physical
resurrection of Jesus from the grave, and his ascent through the
vaulted floor of heaven, might seem foolishness or naivete. But
to the average Greek or Roman the conception presented no serious
difficulty. The cosmical theories upon which the conception was
founded were essentially the same among Jews and Gentiles, and
indeed were but little modified until the establishment of the
Copernican astronomy. The doctrine of the Messiah’s second coming
was also received without opposition, and for about a century men
lived in continual anticipation of that event, until hope long
deferred produced its usual results; the writings in which that
event was predicted were gradually explained away, ignored, or
stigmatized as uncanonical; and the Church ended by condemning as
a heresy the very doctrine which Paul and the Judaizing apostles,
who agreed in little else, had alike made the basis of their
speculative teachings. Nevertheless, by the dint of allegorical
interpretation, the belief has maintained an obscure existence
even down to the present time; the Antiochus of the Book of
Daniel and the Nero of the Apocalypse having given place to the
Roman Pontiff or to the Emperor of the French.
But as the millenarism of the primitive Church gradually died out
during the second century, the essential principles involved in
it lost none of their hold on men’s minds. As the generation
contemporary with Paul died away and was gathered into Sheol, it
became apparent that the original theory must be somewhat
modified, and to this question the author of the second epistle
to the Thessalonians addresses himself. Instead of literal
preservation from death, the doctrine of a resurrection from the
grave was gradually extended to the case of the new believers,
who were to share in the same glorious revival with the righteous
of ancient times. And thus by slow degrees the victory over
death, of which the resurrection of Jesus was a symbol and a
witness, became metamorphosed into the comparatively modern
doctrine of the rest of the saints in heaven, while the
banishment of the unrighteous to Sheol was made still more
dreadful by coupling with the vague conception of a gloomy
subterranean cavern the horrible imagery of the lake of fire and
brimstone borrowed from the apocalyptic descriptions of Gehenna.
But in this modification of the original theory, the fundamental
idea of a future state of retribution was only the more
distinctly emphasized; although, in course of time, the original
incentive to righteousness supplied by Paul was more and more
subordinated to the comparatively degrading incentive involved in
the fear of damnation. There can hardly be a doubt that the
definiteness and vividness of the Pauline theory of a future life
contributed very largely to the rapid spread of the Christian
religion; nor can it be doubted that to the desire to be holy
like Jesus, in order to escape death and live with Jesus, is due
the elevating ethical influence which, even in the worst times of
ecclesiastic degeneracy, Christianity has never failed to exert.
Doubtless, as Lessing long, ago observed, the notion of future
reward and punishment needs to be eliminated in order that the
incentive to holiness may be a perfectly pure one. The highest
virtue is that which takes no thought of reward or punishment;
but for a conception of this sort the mind of antiquity was not
ready, nor is the average mind of to-day yet ready; and the
sudden or premature dissolution of the Christian theory—which is
fortunately impossible—might perhaps entail a moral
retrogradation.
The above is by no means intended as a complete outline of the
religious philosophy of Paul. We have aimed only at a clear
definition of the character and scope of the doctrine of the
resurrection of Jesus, at the time when it was first elaborated.
We have now to notice the influence of that doctrine upon the
development of Christologic speculation.
In neither or the four genuine epistles of Paul is Jesus
described as superhuman, or as differing in nature from other
men, save in his freedom from sin. As Baur has shown, “the proper
nature of the Pauline Christ is human. He is a man, but a
spiritual man, one in whom spirit or pneuma was the essential
principle, so that he was spirit as well as man. The principle of
an ideal humanity existed before Christ in the bright form of a
typical man, but was manifested to mankind in the person of
Christ.” Such, according to Baur, is Paul’s interpretation of the
Messianic idea. Paul knows nothing of the miracles, of the
supernatural conception, of the incarnation, or of the Logos. The
Christ whom he preaches is the man Jesus, the founder of a new
and spiritual order of humanity, as Adam was the father of
humanity after the flesh. The resurrection is uniformly described
by him as a manifestation of the power of Jehovah, not of Jesus
himself. The later conception of Christ bursting the barred gates
of Sheol, and arising by his own might to heaven, finds no
warrant in the expressions of Paul. Indeed, it was essential to
Paul’s theory of the Messiah as a new Adam, that he should be
human and not divine; for the escape of a divine being from Sheol
could afford no precedent and furnish no assurance of the future
escape of human beings. It was expressly because the man Jesus
had been rescued from the grave because of his spirituality, that
other men might hope, by becoming spiritual like him, to be
rescued also. Accordingly Paul is careful to state that “since
through man came death, through man came also the resurrection of
the dead” (1 Cor. xv. 21); a passage which would look like an
express denial of Christ’s superhuman character, were it probable
that any of Paul’s contemporaries had ever conceived of Jesus as
other than essentially human.
But though Paul’s Christology remained in this primitive stage,
it contained the germs of a more advanced theory. For even Paul
conceived of Jesus as a man wholly exceptional in spiritual
character; or, in the phraseology of the time, as consisting to a
larger extent of pneuma than any man who had lived before him.
The question was sure to arise, Whence came this pneuma or
spiritual quality? Whether the question ever distinctly presented
itself to Paul’s mind cannot be determined. Probably it did not.
In those writings of his which have come down to us, he shows
himself careless of metaphysical considerations. He is mainly
concerned with exhibiting the unsatisfactory character of Jewish
Christianity, and with inculcating a spiritual morality, to which
the doctrine of Christ’s resurrection is made to supply a
surpassingly powerful sanction. But attempts to solve the problem
were not long in coming. According to a very early tradition, of
which the obscured traces remain in the synoptic gospels, Jesus
received the pneuma at the time of his baptism, when the Holy
Spirit, or visible manifestation of the essence of Jehovah,
descended upon him and became incarnate in him. This theory,
however, was exposed to the objection that it implied a sudden
and entire transformation of an ordinary man into a person
inspired or possessed by the Deity. Though long maintained by the
Ebionites or primitive Christians, it was very soon rejected by
the great body of the Church, which asserted instead that Jesus
had been inspired by the Holy Spirit from the moment of his
conception. From this it was but a step to the theory that Jesus
was actually begotten by or of the Holy Spirit; a notion which
the Hellenic mind, accustomed to the myths of Leda, Anchises, and
others, found no difficulty in entertaining. According to the
Gospel of the Hebrews, as cited by Origen, the Holy Spirit was
the mother of Jesus, and Joseph was his father. But according to
the prevailing opinion, as represented in the first and third
synoptists, the relationship was just the other way. With greater
apparent plausibility, the divine aeon was substituted for the
human father, and a myth sprang up, of which the materialistic
details furnished to the opponents of the new religion an
opportunity for making the most gross and exasperating
insinuations. The dominance of this theory marks the era at which
our first and third synoptic gospels were composed,—from sixty
to ninety years after the death of Jesus. In the luxuriant
mythologic growth there exhibited, we may yet trace the various
successive phases of Christologic speculation but imperfectly
blended. In “Matthew” and “Luke” we find the original Messianic
theory exemplified in the genealogies of Jesus, in which,
contrary to historic probability (cf. Matt. xxii. 41-46), but in
accordance with a time-honoured tradition, his pedigree is traced
back to David; “Matthew” referring him to the royal line of
Judah, while “Luke” more cautiously has recourse to an assumed
younger branch. Superposed upon this primitive mythologic
stratum, we find, in the same narratives, the account of the
descent of the pneuma at the time of the baptism; and crowning
the whole, there are the two accounts of the nativity which,
though conflicting in nearly all their details, agree in
representing the divine pneuma as the father of Jesus. Of these
three stages of Christology, the last becomes entirely
irreconcilable with the first; and nothing can better illustrate
the uncritical character of the synoptists than the fact that the
assumed descent of Jesus from David through his father Joseph is
allowed to stand side by side with the account of the miraculous
conception which completely negatives it. Of this difficulty
“Matthew” is quite unconscious, and “Luke,” while vaguely
noticing it (iii. 23), proposes no solution, and appears
undisturbed by the contradiction.
Thus far the Christology with which we have been dealing is
predominantly Jewish, though to some extent influenced by
Hellenic conceptions. None of the successive doctrines presented
in Paul, “Matthew,” and “Luke” assert or imply the pre-existence
of Jesus. At this early period he was regarded as a human being
raised to participation in certain attributes of divinity; and
this was as far as the dogma could be carried by the Jewish
metaphysics. But soon after the date of our third gospel, a
Hellenic system of Christology arose into prominence, in which
the problem was reversed, and Jesus was regarded as a semi-divine
being temporarily lowered to participation in certain attributes
of humanity. For such a doctrine Jewish mythology supplied no
precedents; but the Indo-European mind was familiar with the
conception of deity incarnate in human form, as in the avatars of
Vishnu, or even suffering III the interests of humanity, as in
the noble myth of Prometheus. The elements of Christology
pre-existing in the religious conceptions of Greece, India, and
Persia, are too rich and numerous to be discussed here. A very
full account of them is given in Mr. R. W. Mackay’s acute and
learned treatise on the “Religious Development of the Greeks and
Hebrews{.}”
It was in Alexandria, where Jewish theology first came into
contact with Hellenic and Oriental ideas, that the way was
prepared for the dogma of Christ’s pre-existence. The attempt to
rationalize the conception of deity as embodied in the Jehovah of
the Old Testament gave rise to the class of opinions described as
Gnosis, or Gnosticism. The signification of Gnosis is simply
“rationalism,"—the endeavour to harmonize the materialistic
statements of an old mythology with the more advanced
spiritualistic philosophy of the time. The Gnostics rejected the
conception of an anthropomorphic deity who had appeared visibly
and audibly to the patriarchs; and they were the authors of the
doctrine, very widely spread during the second and third
centuries, that God could not in person have been the creator of
the world. According to them, God, as pure spirit, could not act
directly upon vile and gross matter. The difficulty which
troubled them was curiously analogous to that which disturbed the
Cartesians and the followers of Leibnitz in the seventeenth
century; how was spirit to act upon matter, without ceasing, pro
tanto, to be spirit? To evade this difficulty, the Gnostics
postulated a series of emanations from God, becoming successively
less and less spiritual and more and more material, until at the
lowest end of the scale was reached the Demiurgus or Jehovah of
the Old Testament, who created the world and appeared, clothed in
material form, to the patriarchs. According to some of the
Gnostics this lowest aeon or emanation was identical with the
Jewish Satan, or the Ahriman of the Persians, who is called “the
prince of this world,” and the creation of the world was an
essentially evil act. But all did not share in these extreme
opinions. In the prevailing, theory, this last of the divine
emanations was identified with the “Sophia,” or personified
“Wisdom,” of the Book of Proverbs (viii. 22-30), who is described
as present with God before the foundation of the world. The
totality of these aeons constituted the pleroma, or “fulness of
God” (Coloss. i. 20; Eph. i. 23), and in a corollary which bears
unmistakable marks of Buddhist influence, it was argued that, in
the final consummation of things, matter should be eliminated and
all spirit reunited with God, from whom it had primarily flowed.
It was impossible that such views as these should not soon be
taken up and applied to the fluctuating Christology of the time.
According to the “Shepherd of Hermas,” an apocalyptic writing
nearly contemporary with the gospel of “Mark,” the aeon or son of
God who existed previous to the creation was not the Christ, or
the Sophia, but the Pneuma or Holy Spirit, represented in the Old
Testament as the “angel of Jehovah.” Jesus, in reward for his
perfect goodness, was admitted to a share in the privileges of
this Pneuma (Reville, p. 39). Here, as M. Reville observes,
though a Gnostic idea is adopted, Jesus is nevertheless viewed as
ascending humanity, and not as descending divinity. The author of
the “Clementine Homilies” advances a step farther, and clearly
assumes the pre-existence of Jesus, who, in his opinion, was the
pure, primitive man, successively incarnate in Adam, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and finally in the Messiah or
Christ. The author protests, in vehement language, against those
Hellenists who, misled by their polytheistic associations, would
elevate Jesus into a god. Nevertheless, his own hypothesis of
pre-existence supplied at once the requisite fulcrum for those
Gnostics who wished to reconcile a strict monotheism with the
ascription of divine attributes to Jesus. Combining with this
notion of pre-existence the pneumatic or spiritual quality
attributed to Jesus in the writings of Paul, the Gnosticizing
Christians maintained that Christ was an aeon or emanation from
God, redeeming men from the consequences entailed by their
imprisonment in matter. At this stage of Christologic speculation
appeared the anonymous epistle to the “Hebrews,” and the
pseudo-Pauline epistles to the “Colossians,” “Ephesians,” and
“Philippians” (A. D. 130). In these epistles, which originated
among the Pauline Christians, the Gnostic theosophy is skilfully
applied to the Pauline conception of the scope and purposes of
Christianity. Jesus is described as the creator of the world
(Coloss. i. 16), the visible image of the invisible God, the
chief and ruler of the “throues, dominions, principalities, and
powers,” into which, in Gnostic phraseology, the emanations of
God were classified. Or, according to “Colossians” and
“Philippians,” all the aeons are summed up in him, in whom dwells
the pleroma, or “fulness of God.” Thus Jesus is elevated quite
above ordinary humanity, and a close approach is made to
ditheism, although he is still emphatically subordinated to God
by being made the creator of the world,—an office then regarded
as incompatible with absolute divine perfection. In the
celebrated passage, “Philippians” ii. 6-11, the aeon Jesus is
described as being the form or visible manifestation of God, yet
as humbling himself by taking on the form or semblance of
humanity, and suffering death, in return for which he is to be
exalted even above the archangels. A similar view is taken in
“Hebrews"; and it is probable that to the growing favour with
which these doctrines were received, we owe the omission of the
miraculous conception from the gospel of “Mark,"—a circumstance
which has misled some critics into assigning to that gospel an
earlier date than to “Matthew” and “Luke.” Yet the fact that in
this gospel Jesus is implicitly ranked above the angels (Mark
xiii. 32), reveals a later stage of Christologic doctrine than
that reached by the first and third synoptists; and it is
altogether probable that, in accordance with the noticeable
conciliatory disposition of this evangelist, the supernatural
conception is omitted out of deference to the Gnosticizing
theories of “Colossians” and “Philippians,” in which this
materialistic doctrine seems to have had no assignable place. In
“Philippians” especially, many expressions seem to verge upon
Docetism, the extreme form of Gnosticism, according to which the
human body of Jesus was only a phantom. Valentinus, who was
contemporary with the Pauline writers of the second century,
maintained that Jesus was not born of Mary by any process of
conception, but merely passed through her, as light traverses a
translucent substance. And finally Marcion (A. D. 140) carried
the theory to its extreme limits by declaring that Jesus was the
pure Pneuma or Spirit, who contained nothing in common with
carnal humanity.
The pseudo-Pauline writers steered clear of this extravagant
doctrine, which erred by breaking entirely with historic
tradition, and was consequently soon condemned as heretical.
Their language, though unmistakably Gnostic, was sufficiently
neutral and indefinite to allow of their combination with earlier
and later expositions of dogma, and they were therefore
eventually received into the canon, where they exhibit a stage of
opinion midway between that of Paul and that of the fourth
gospel.
For the construction of a durable system of Christology, still
further elaboration was necessary. The pre-existence of Jesus, as
an emanation from God, in whom were summed up the attributes of
the pleroma or full scale of Gnostic aeons, was now generally
conceded. But the relation of this pleroqma to the Godhead of
which it was the visible manifestation, needed to be more
accurately defined. And here recourse was had to the conception
of the “Logos,"—a notion which Philo had borrowed from Plato,
lending to it a theosophic significance. In the Platonic
metaphysics objective existence was attributed to general terms,
the signs of general notions. Besides each particular man, horse,
or tree, and besides all men, horses, and trees, in the
aggregate, there was supposed to exist an ideal Man, Horse, and
Tree. Each particular man, horse, or tree consisted of abstract
existence plus a portion of the ideal man, horse, or tree.
Sokrates, for instance, consisted of Existence, plus Animality,
plus Humanity, plus Sokraticity. The visible world of particulars
thus existed only by virtue of its participation in the
attributes of the ideal world of universals. God created the
world by encumbering each idea with an envelopment or clothing of
visible matter; and since matter is vile or imperfect, all things
are more or less perfect as they partake more or less fully of
the idea. The pure unencumbered idea, the “Idea of ideas,” is the
Logos, or divine Reason, which represents the sum-total of the
activities which sustain the world, and serves as a mediator
between the absolutely ideal God and the absolutely non-ideal
matter. Here we arrive at a Gnostic conception, which the
Philonists of Alexandria were not slow to appropriate. The Logos,
or divine Reason, was identified with the Sophia, or divine
Wisdom of the Jewish Gnostics, which had dwelt with God before
the creation of the world. By a subtle play upon the double
meaning of the Greek term (logos = “reason” or “word”), a
distinction was drawn between the divine Reason and the divine
Word. The former was the archctypal idea or thought of God,
existing from all eternity; the latter was the external
manifestation or realization of that idea which occurred at the
moment of creation, when, according to Genesis, God SPOKE, and
the world was.
In the middle of the second century, this Philonian theory was
the one thing needful to add metaphysical precision to the
Gnostic and Pauline speculations concerning the nature of Jesus.
In the writings of Justin Martyr (A. D. 150-166), Jesus is for
the first time identified with the Philonian Logos or “Word of
God.” According to Justin, an impassable abyss exists between the
Infinite Deity and the Finite World; the one cannot act upon the
other; pure spirit cannot contaminate itself by contact with
impure matter. To meet this difficulty, God evolves from himself
a secondary God, the Logos,—yet without diminishing himself any
more than a flame is diminished when it gives birth to a second
flame. Thus generated, like light begotten of light (lumen de
lumine), the Logos creates the world, inspires the ancient
prophets with their divine revelations, and finally reveals
himself to mankind in the person of Christ. Yet Justin sedulously
guards himself against ditheism, insisting frequently and
emphatically upon the immeasurable inferiority of the Logos as
compared with the actual God (gr o ontws qeos).
We have here reached very nearly the ultimate phase of New
Testament speculation concerning Jesus. The doctrines enunciated
by Justin became eventually, with slight modification, the
official doctrines of the Church; yet before they could thus be
received, some further elaboration was needed. The pre-existing
Logos-Christ of Justin was no longer the human Messiah of the
first and third gospels, born of a woman, inspired by the divine
Pneuma, and tempted by the Devil. There was danger that
Christologic speculation might break quite loose from historic
tradition, and pass into the metaphysical extreme of Docetism.
Had this come to pass, there might perhaps have been a fatal
schism in the Church. Tradition still remained Ebionitish; dogma
had become decidedly Gnostic; how were the two to be moulded into
harmony with each other? Such was the problem which presented
itself to the author of the fourth gospel (A. D. 170-180). As M.
Reville observes, “if the doctrine of the Logos were really to be
applied to the person of Jesus, it was necessary to remodel the
evangelical history.” Tradition must be moulded so as to fit the
dogma, but the dogma must be restrained by tradition from running
into Docetic extravagance. It must be shown historically how “the
Word became flesh” and dwelt on earth (John i. 14), how the deeds
of Jesus of Nazareth were the deeds of the incarnate Logos, in
whom was exhibited the pleroma or fulness of the divine
attributes. The author of the fourth gospel is, like Justin, a
Philonian Gnostic; but he differs from Justin in his bold and
skilful treatment of the traditional materials supplied by the
earlier gospels. The process of development in the theories and
purposes of Jesus, which can be traced throughout the Messianic
descriptions of the first gospel, is entirely obliterated in the
fourth. Here Jesus appears at the outset as the creator of the
world, descended from his glory, but destined soon to be
reinstated. The title “Son of Man” has lost its original
significance, and become synonymous with “Son of God.” The
temptation, the transfiguration, the scene in Gethsemane, are
omitted, and for the latter is substituted a Philonian prayer.
Nevertheless, the author carefully avoids the extremes of
Docetism or ditheism. Not only does he represent the human life
of Jesus as real, and his death as a truly physical death, but he
distinctly asserts the inferiority of the Son to the Father (John
xiv. 28). Indeed, as M. Reville well observes, it is part of the
very notion of the Logos that it should be imperfect relatively
to the absolute God; since it is only its relative imperfection
which allows it to sustain relations to the world and to men
which are incompatible with absolute perfection, from the
Philonian point of view. The Athanasian doctrine of the Trinity
finds no support in the fourth gospel, any more than in the
earlier books collected in the New Testament.
The fourth gospel completes the speculative revolution by which
the conception of a divine being lowered to humanity was
substituted for that of a human being raised to divinity. We have
here travelled a long distance from the risen Messiah of the
genuine Pauline epistles, or the preacher of righteousness in the
first gospel. Yet it does not seem probable that the Church of
the third century was thoroughly aware of the discrepancy. The
authors of the later Christology did not regard themselves as
adding new truths to Christianity, but merely as giving a fuller
and more consistent interpretation to what must have been known
from the outset. They were so completely destitute of the
historic sense, and so strictly confined to the dogmatic point of
view, that they projected their own theories back into the past,
and vituperated as heretics those who adhered to tradition in its
earlier and simpler form. Examples from more recent times are not
wanting, which show that we are dealing here with an inveterate
tendency of the human mind. New facts and new theories are at
first condemned as heretical or ridiculous; but when once firmly
established, it is immediately maintained that every one knew
them before. After the Copernican astronomy had won the day, it
was tacitly assumed that the ancient Hebrew astronomy was
Copernican, and the Biblical conception of the universe as a kind
of three-story house was ignored, and has been, except by
scholars, quite forgotten. When the geologic evidence of the
earth’s immense antiquity could no longer be gainsaid, it was
suddenly ascertained that the Bible had from the outset asserted
that antiquity; and in our own day we have seen an elegant
popular writer perverting the testimony of the rocks and
distorting the Elohistic cosmogony of the Pentateuch, until the
twain have been made to furnish what Bacon long ago described as
“a heretical religion and a false philosophy.” Now just as in the
popular thought of the present day the ancient Elohist is
accredited with a knowledge of modern geology and astronomy, so
in the opinion of the fourth evangelist and his contemporaries
the doctrine of the Logos-Christ was implicitly contained in the
Old Testament and in the early traditions concerning Jesus, and
needed only to be brought into prominence by a fresh
interpretation. Hence arose the fourth gospel, which was no more
a conscious violation of historic data than Hugh Miller’s
imaginative description of the “Mosaic Vision of Creation.” Its
metaphysical discourses were readily accepted as equally
authentic with the Sermon on the Mount. Its Philonian doctrines
were imputed to Paul and the apostles, the pseudo-Pauline
epistles furnishing the needful texts. The Ebionites—who were
simply Judaizing Christians, holding in nearly its original form
the doctrine of Peter, James, and John—were ejected from the
Church as the most pernicious of heretics; and so completely was
their historic position misunderstood and forgotten, that, in
order to account for their existence, it became necessary to
invent an eponymous heresiarch, Ebion, who was supposed to have
led them astray from the true faith!
The Christology of the fourth gospel is substantially the same as
that which was held in the next two centuries by Tertullian,
Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and Arius. When the doctrine of
the Trinity was first announced by Sabellius (A. D. 250-260), it
was formally condemned as heretical, the Church being not yet
quite prepared to receive it. In 269 the Council of Antioch
solemnly declared that the Son was NOT consubstantial with the
Father,—a declaration which, within sixty years, the Council of
Nikaia was destined as solemnly to contradict. The Trinitarian
Christology struggled long for acceptance, and did not finally
win the victory until the end of the fourth century. Yet from the
outset its ultimate victory was hardly doubtful. The peculiar
doctrines of the fourth gospel could retain their integrity only
so long as Gnostic ideas were prevalent. When Gnosticism declined
in importance, and its theories faded out of recollection, its
peculiar phraseology received of necessity a new interpretation.
The doctrine that God could not act directly upon the world sank
gradually into oblivion as the Church grew more and more hostile
to the Neo-Platonic philosophy. And when this theory was once
forgotten, it was inevitable that the Logos, as the creator of
the world, should be raised to an equality or identity with God
himself. In the view of the fourth evangelist, the Creator was
necessarily inferior to God; in the view of later ages, the
Creator could be none other than God. And so the very phrases
which had most emphatically asserted the subordination of the Son
were afterward interpreted as asserting his absolute divinity. To
the Gnostic formula, lumen de lumine, was added the Athanasian
scholium, Deum verum de Deo vero; and the Trinitarian dogma of
the union of persons in a single Godhead became thus the only
available logical device for preserving the purity of monotheism.
  February, 1870.
Continue...

This complete text of The Unseen World and Other Essays by John Fiske is in the public domain.


This title at Amazon.com.


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on April 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The unseen world, and other essays, by John Fiske.By Michigan Historical Reprint SeriesAt Amazon
