




The road by which William James arrived at his position of
leadership among American philosophers was, during his childhood,
youth and early maturity, quite as circuitous and unpredictable
as were his father’s ideas on the training of his children. That
Swedenborgian theologian foresaw neither the career of novelist
for his son Henry, nor that of pragmatist philosopher for the
older William.  The father’s migrations between New York, Europe
and Newport meant that William’s education had variety if it did
not have fixed direction.  From 13 to 18 he studied in Europe and
returned to Newport, Rhode Island, to study painting under the
guidance of John La Farge.  After a year, he gave up art for
science and entered Harvard University, where his most
influential teachers were Louis Agassiz and Charles W. Eliot. 
In 1863, William James began the study of medicine, and in 1865
he joined an expedition to the Amazon. Before long, he wrote: 
“If there is anything I hate, it is collecting.” His studies
constantly interrupted by ill health, James returned to Germany
and began hearing lectures and reading voluminously in
philosophy.  He won his medical degree at Harvard in 1870.  For
four years he was an invalid in Cambridge, but finally, in 1873,
he passed his gravest physical and spiritual crises and began the
career by which he was to influence so profoundly generations of
American students.  From 1880 to 1907 he was successively
assistant professor of philosophy, professor of psychology and
professor of philosophy at Harvard.  In 1890, the publication of
his Principles of Psycholog brought him the acknowledged
leadership in the field of functional psychology.  The selection
of William James to deliver the Gifford lectures in Edinburgh was
at once a tribute to him and a reward for the university that
sponsored the undertaking.  These lectures, collected in this
volume, have since become famous as the standard scientific work
on the psychology of the religious impulse.  Death ended his
career on August 27th, 1910.
 

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
