




Most books on the philosophy of religion try to begin with a
precise definition of what its essence consists of.  Some of
these would-be definitions may possibly come before us in later
portions of this course, and I shall not be pedantic enough to
enumerate any of them to you now. Meanwhile the very fact that
they are so many and so different from one another is enough to
prove that the word “religion” cannot stand for any single
principle or essence, but is rather a collective name.  The
theorizing mind tends always to the oversimplification of its
materials.  This is the root of all that absolutism and one-sided
dogmatism by which both philosophy and religion have been
infested.  Let us not fall immediately into a one-sided view of
our subject, but let us rather admit freely at the outset that we
may very likely find no one essence, but many characters which
may alternately be equally important to religion.  If we should
inquire for the essence of “government,” for example, one man
might tell us it was authority, another submission, an other
police, another an army, another an assembly, an other a system
of laws; yet all the while it would be true that no concrete
government can exist without all these things, one of which is
more important at one moment and others at another.  The man who
knows governments most completely is he who troubles himself
least about a definition which shall give their essence. 
Enjoying an intimate acquaintance with all their particularities
in turn, he would naturally regard an abstract conception in
which these were unified as a thing more misleading than
enlightening.  And why may not religion be a conception equally
complex?[9]
[9]  I can do no better here than refer my readers to the
extended and admirable remarks on the futility of all these
definitions of religion, in an article by Professor Leuba,
published in the Monist for January, 1901, after my own text was
written.
Consider also the “religious sentiment” which we see referred to
in so many books, as if it were a single sort of mental entity. 
In the psychologies and in the philosophies of religion, we find
the authors attempting to specify just what entity it is.  One
man allies it to the feeling of dependence; one makes it a
derivative from fear; others connect it with the sexual life;
others still identify it with the feeling of the infinite; and so
on.  Such different ways of conceiving it ought of themselves to
arouse doubt as to whether it possibly can be one specific thing;
and the moment we are willing to treat the term “religious
sentiment” as a collective name for the many sentiments which
religious objects may arouse in alternation, we see that it
probably contains nothing whatever of a psychologically specific
nature. There is religious fear, religious love, religious awe,
religious joy, and so forth.  But religious love is only man’s
natural emotion of love directed to a religious object; religious
fear is only the ordinary fear of commerce, so to speak, the
common quaking of the human breast, in so far as the notion of
divine retribution may arouse it; religious awe is the same
organic thrill which we feel in a forest at twilight, or in a
mountain gorge; only this time it comes over us at the thought of
our supernatural relations; and similarly of all the various
sentiments which may be called into play in the lives of
religious persons.  As concrete states of mind, made up of a
feeling PLUS a specific sort of object, religious emotions of
course are psychic entities distinguishable from other concrete
emotions; but there is no ground for assuming a simple abstract
“religious emotion” to exist as a distinct elementary mental
affection by itself, present in every religious experience
without exception.
As there thus seems to be no one elementary religious emotion,
but only a common storehouse of emotions upon which religious
objects may draw, so there might conceivably also prove to he no
one specific and essential kind of religious object, and no one
specific and essential kind of religious act.
The field of religion being as wide as this, it is manifestly
impossible that I should pretend to cover it.  My lectures must
be limited to a fraction of the subject.  And, although it would
indeed be foolish to set up an abstract definition of religion’s
essence, and then proceed to defend that definition against all
comers, yet this need not prevent me from taking my own narrow
view of what religion shall consist in FOR THE PURPOSE OF THESE
LECTURES, or, out of the many meanings of the word, from choosing
the one meaning in which I wish to interest you particularly, and
proclaiming arbitrarily that when I say “religion” I mean THAT. 
This, in fact, is what I must do, and I will now preliminarily
seek to mark out the field I choose.
One way to mark it out easily is to say what aspects of the
subject we leave out.  At the outset we are struck by one great
partition which divides the religious field.  On the one side of
it lies institutional, on the other personal religion. As M. P.
Sabatier says, one branch of religion keeps the divinity, another
keeps man most in view.  Worship and sacrifice, procedures for
working on the dispositions of the deity, theology and ceremony
and ecclesiastical organization, are the essentials of religion
in the institutional branch. Were we to limit our view to it, we
should have to define religion as an external art, the art of
winning the favor of the gods.  In the more personal branch of
religion it is on the contrary the inner dispositions of man
himself which form the center of interest, his conscience, his
deserts, his helplessness, his incompleteness.  And although the
favor of the God, as forfeited or gained, is still an essential
feature of the story, and theology plays a vital part therein,
yet the acts to which this sort of religion prompts are personal
not ritual acts, the individual transacts the business by himself
alone, and the ecclesiastical organization, with its priests and
sacraments and other go-betweens, sinks to an altogether
secondary place.  The relation goes direct from heart to heart,
from soul to soul, between man and his maker.
Now in these lectures I propose to ignore the institutional
branch entirely, to say nothing of the ecclesiastical
organization, to consider as little as possible the systematic
theology and the ideas about the gods themselves, and to confine
myself as far as I can to personal religion pure and simple.  To
some of you personal religion, thus nakedly considered, will no
doubt seem too incomplete a thing to wear the general name.  “It
is a part of religion,” you will say, “but only its unorganized
rudiment; if we are to name it by itself, we had better call it
man’s conscience or morality than his religion.  The name
’religion’ should be reserved for the fully organized system of
feeling, thought, and institution, for the Church, in short, of
which this personal religion, so called, is but a fractional
element.”
But if you say this, it will only show the more plainly how much
the question of definition tends to become a dispute about names.
Rather than prolong such a dispute, I am willing to accept almost
any name for the personal religion of which I propose to treat. 
Call it conscience or morality, if you yourselves prefer, and not
religion–under either name it will be equally worthy of our
study.  As for myself, I think it will prove to contain some
elements which morality pure and simple does not contain, and
these elements I shall soon seek to point out; so I will myself
continue to apply the word “religion” to it; and in the last
lecture of all, I will bring in the theologies and the
ecclesiasticisms, and say something of its relation to them.
In one sense at least the personal religion will prove itself
more fundamental than either theology or ecclesiasticism.
Churches, when once established, live at second-hand upon
tradition; but the FOUNDERS of every church owed their power
originally to the fact of their direct personal communion with
the divine.  Not only the superhuman founders, the Christ, the
Buddha, Mahomet, but all the originators of Christian sects have
been in this case;–so personal religion should still seem the
primordial thing, even to those who continue to esteem it
incomplete.
There are, it is true, other things in religion chronologically
more primordial than personal devoutness in the moral sense. 
Fetishism and magic seem to have preceded inward piety
historically–at least our records of inward piety do not reach
back so far.  And if fetishism and magic be regarded as stages of
religion, one may say that personal religion in the inward sense
and the genuinely spiritual ecclesiasticisms which it founds are
phenomena of secondary or even tertiary order.  But, quite apart
from the fact that many anthropologists–for instance, Jevons and
Frazer –expressly oppose “religion” and “magic” to each other,
it is certain that the whole system of thought which leads to
magic, fetishism, and the lower superstitions may just as well be
called primitive science as called primitive religion. The
question thus becomes a verbal one again; and our knowledge of
all these early stages of thought and feeling is in any case so
conjectural and imperfect that farther discussion would not be
worth while.
Religion, therefore, as I now ask you arbitrarily to take it,
shall mean for us THE FEELINGS, ACTS, AND EXPERIENCES OF
INDIVIDUAL MEN IN THEIR SOLITUDE, SO FAR AS THEY APPREHEND
THEMSELVES TO STAND IN RELATION TO WHATEVER THEY MAY CONSIDER THE
DIVINE.  Since the relation may be either moral, physical, or
ritual, it is evident that out of religion in the sense in which
we take it, theologies, philosophies, and ecclesiastical
organizations may secondarily grow.  In these lectures, however,
as I have already said, the immediate personal experiences will
amply fill our time, and we shall hardly consider theology or
ecclesiasticism at all.
We escape much controversial matter by this arbitrary definition
of our field.  But, still, a chance of controversy comes up over
the word “divine,” if we take the definition in too narrow a
sense.  There are systems of thought which the world usually
calls religious, and yet which do not positively assume a God. 
Buddhism is in this case.  Popularly, of course, the Buddha
himself stands in place of a God; but in strictness the
Buddhistic system is atheistic.  Modern transcendental idealism,
Emersonianism, for instance, also seems to let God evaporate into
abstract Ideality.  Not a deity in concreto, not a superhuman
person, but the immanent divinity in things, the essentially
spiritual structure of the universe, is the object of the
transcendentalist cult.  In that address to the graduating class
at Divinity College in 1838 which made Emerson famous, the frank
expression of this worship of mere abstract laws was what made
the scandal of the performance.
“These laws,” said the speaker, “execute themselves.  They are
out of time, out of space, and not subject to circumstance: 
Thus, in the soul of man there is a justice whose retributions
are instant and entire.  He who does a good deed is instantly
ennobled.  He who does a mean deed is by the action itself
contracted.  He who puts off impurity thereby puts on purity.  If
a man is at heart just, then in so far is he God; the safety of
God, the immortality of God, the majesty of God, do enter into
that man with justice.  If a man dissemble, deceive, he deceives
himself, and goes out of acquaintance with his own being. 
Character is always known.  Thefts never enrich; alms never
impoverish; murder will speak out of stone walls.  The least
admixture of a lie–for example, the taint of vanity, any attempt
to make a good impression, a favorable appearance–will instantly
vitiate the effect.  But speak the truth, and all things alive or
brute are vouchers, and the very roots of the grass underground
there do seem to stir and move to bear your witness.  For all
things proceed out of the same spirit, which is differently named
love, justice, temperance, in its different applications, just as
the ocean receives different names on the several shores which it
washes.  In so far as he roves from these ends, a man bereaves
himself of power, of auxiliaries.  His being shrinks .  . . he
becomes less and less, a mote, a point, until absolute badness is
absolute death.  The perception of this law awakens in the mind a
sentiment which we call the religious sentiment, and which makes
our highest happiness.  Wonderful is its power to charm and to
command.  It is a mountain air.  It is the embalmer of the world.
It makes the sky and the hills sublime, and the silent song of
the stars is it.  It is the beatitude of man.  It makes him
illimitable.  When he says ’I ought’; when love warns him; when
he chooses, warned from on high, the good and great deed; then,
deep melodies wander through his soul from supreme wisdom.  Then
he can worship, and be enlarged by his worship; for he can never
go behind this sentiment.  All the expressions of this sentiment
are sacred and permanent in proportion to their purity.  [They]
affect us more than all other compositions. The sentences of the
olden time, which ejaculate this piety, are still fresh and
fragrant.  And the unique impression of Jesus upon mankind, whose
name is not so much written as ploughed into the history of this
world, is proof of the subtle virtue of this infusion."[10]
[10] Miscellanies, 1868, p. 120 (abridged).
Such is the Emersonian religion.  The universe has a divine soul
of order, which soul is moral, being also the soul within the
soul of man.  But whether this soul of the universe be a mere
quality like the eye’s brilliancy or the skin’s softness, or
whether it be a self-conscious life like the eye’s seeing or the
skin’s feeling, is a decision that never unmistakably appears in
Emerson’s pages.  It quivers on the boundary of these things,
sometimes leaning one way sometimes the other, to suit the
literary rather than the philosophic need.  Whatever it is,
though, it is active.  As much as if it were a God, we can trust
it to protect all ideal interests and keep the world’s balance
straight.  The sentences in which Emerson, to the very end, gave
utterance to this faith are as fine as anything in literature: 
“If you love and serve men, you cannot by any hiding or stratagem
escape the remuneration.  Secret retributions are always
restoring the level, when disturbed, of the divine justice.  It
is impossible to tilt the beam.  All the tyrants and proprietors
and monopolists of the world in vain set their shoulders to heave
the bar.  Settles forevermore the ponderous equator to its line,
and man and mote, and star and sun, must range to it, or be
pulverized by the recoil."[11]
[11] Lectures and Biographical Sketches, 1868, p. 186.
Now it would be too absurd to say that the inner experiences that
underlie such expressions of faith as this and impel the writer
to their utterance are quite unworthy to be called religious
experiences.  The sort of appeal that Emersonian optimism, on the
one hand, and Buddhistic pessimism, on the other, make to the
individual and the son of response which he makes to them in his
life are in fact indistinguishable from, and in many respects
identical with, the best Christian appeal and response.  We must
therefore, from the experiential point of view, call these
godless or quasi-godless creeds “religions"; and accordingly when
in our definition of religion we speak of the individual’s
relation to “what he considers the divine,” we must interpret the
term “divine” very broadly, as denoting any object that is god-
LIKE, whether it be a concrete deity or not.  But the term
“godlike,” if thus treated as a floating general quality, becomes
exceedingly vague, for many gods have flourished in religious
history, and their attributes have been discrepant enough.  What
then is that essentially godlike quality–be it embodied in a
concrete deity or not–our relation to which determines our
character as religious men?  It will repay us to seek some answer
to this question before we proceed farther.
For one thing, gods are conceived to be first things in the way
of being and power.  They overarch and envelop, and from them
there is no escape.  What relates to them is the first and last
word in the way of truth.  Whatever then were most primal and
enveloping and deeply true might at this rate be treated as
godlike, and a man’s religion might thus be identified with his
attitude, whatever it might be, toward what he felt to be the
primal truth.
Such a definition as this would in a way be defensible. Religion,
whatever it is, is a man’s total reaction upon life, so why not
say that any total reaction upon life is a religion? Total
reactions are different from casual reactions, and total
attitudes are different from usual or professional attitudes.  To
get at them you must go behind the foreground of existence and
reach down to that curious sense of the whole residual cosmos as
an everlasting presence, intimate or alien, terrible or amusing,
lovable or odious, which in some degree everyone possesses.  This
sense of the world’s presence, appealing as it does to our
peculiar individual temperament, makes us either strenuous or
careless, devout or blasphemous, gloomy or exultant, about life
at large; and our reaction, involuntary and inarticulate and
often half unconscious as it is, is the completest of all our
answers to the question, “What is the character of this universe
in which we dwell?”  It expresses our individual sense of it in
the most definite way.  Why then not call these reactions our
religion, no matter what specific character they may have? 
Non-religious as some of these reactions may be, in one sense of
the word “religious,” they yet belong to THE GENERAL SPHERE OF
THE RELIGIOUS LIFE, and so should generically be classed as
religious reactions.  “He believes in No-God, and he worships
him,” said a colleague of mine of a student who was manifesting a
fine atheistic ardor; and the more fervent opponents of Christian
doctrine have often enough shown a temper which, psychologically
considered, is indistinguishable from religious zeal.
But so very broad a use of the word “religion” would be
inconvenient, however defensible it might remain on logical
grounds.  There are trifling, sneering attitudes even toward the
whole of life; and in some men these attitudes are final and
systematic.  It would strain the ordinary use of language too
much to call such attitudes religious, even though, from the
point of view of an unbiased critical philosophy, they might
conceivably be perfectly reasonable ways of looking upon life. 
Voltaire, for example, writes thus to a friend, at the age of
seventy-three:  “As for myself,” he says, “weak as I am, I carry
on the war to the last moment, I get a hundred pike-thrusts, I
return two hundred, and I laugh.  I see near my door Geneva on
fire with quarrels over nothing, and I laugh again; and, thank
God, I can look upon the world as a farce even when it becomes as
tragic as it sometimes does. All comes out even at the end of the
day, and all comes out still more even when all the days are
over.”
Much as we may admire such a robust old gamecock spirit in a
valetudinarian, to call it a religious spirit would be odd.  Yet
it is for the moment Voltaire’s reaction on the whole of life. 
Je me’n fiche is the vulgar French equivalent for our English
ejaculation “Who cares?”   And the happy term je me’n fichisme
recently has been invented to designate the systematic
determination not to take anything in <37> life too solemnly. 
“All is vanity” is the relieving word in all difficult crises for
this mode of thought, which that exquisite literary genius Renan
took pleasure, in his later days of sweet decay, in putting into
coquettishly sacrilegious forms which remain to us as excellent
expressions of the “all is vanity” state of mind.  Take the
following passage, for example–we must hold to duty, even
against the evidence, Renan says–but he then goes on:–
“There are many chances that the world may be nothing but a fairy
pantomime of which no God has care.  We must therefore arrange
ourselves so that on neither hypothesis we shall be completely
wrong.  We must listen to the superior voices, but in such a way
that if the second hypothesis were true we should not have been
too completely duped.  If in effect the world be not a serious
thing, it is the dogmatic people who will be the shallow ones,
and the worldly minded whom the theologians now call frivolous
will be those who are really wise.
“In utrumque paratus, then.  Be ready for anything–that perhaps
is wisdom.  Give ourselves up, according to the hour, to
confidence, to skepticism, to optimism, to irony and we may be
sure that at certain moments at least we shall be with the truth.
. . .  Good-humor is a philosophic state of mind; it seems to say
to Nature that we take her no more seriously than she takes us. 
I maintain that one should always talk of philosophy with a
smile.  We owe it to the Eternal to be virtuous but we have the
right to add to this tribute our irony as a sort of personal
reprisal.  In this way we return to the right quarter jest for
jest; we play the trick that has been played on us. Saint
Augustine’s phrase:  Lord, if we arc deceived, it is by thee!
remains a fine one, well suited to our modern feeling.  Only we
wish the Eternal to know that if we accept the fraud, we accept
it knowingly and willingly.  We are resigned in advance to losing
the interest on our investments of virtue, but we wish not to
appear ridiculous by having counted on them too securely."[12]
[12] Feuilles detachees, pp. 394-398 (abridged).
Surely all the usual associations of the word “religion” would
have to be stripped away if such a systematic parti pris of irony
were also to be denoted by the name.  For common men “religion,"
whatever more special meanings it may have, signifies always a
SERIOUS state of mind.  If any one phrase could gather its
universal message, that phrase would be, “All is not vanity in
this Universe, whatever the appearances may suggest.”  If it can
stop anything, religion as commonly apprehended can stop just
such chaffing talk as Renan’s.  It favors gravity, not pertness;
it says “hush” to all vain chatter and smart wit.
But if hostile to light irony, religion is equally hostile to
heavy grumbling and complaint.  The world appears tragic enough
in some religions, but the tragedy is realized as purging, and a
way of deliverance is held to exist. We shall see enough of the
religious melancholy in a future lecture; but melancholy,
according to our ordinary use of language, forfeits all title to
be called religious when, in Marcus Aurelius’s racy words, the
sufferer simply lies kicking and screaming after the fashion of a
sacrificed pig.  The mood of a Schopenhauer or a Nietzsche–and
in a less degree one may sometimes say the same of our own sad
Carlyle–though often an ennobling sadness, is almost as often
only peevishness running away with the bit between its teeth. 
The sallies of the two German authors remind one, half the time,
of the sick shriekings of two dying rats.  They lack the
purgatorial note which religious sadness gives forth.
There must be something solemn, serious, and tender about any
attitude which we denominate religious.  If glad, it must not
grin or snicker; if sad, it must not scream or curse.  It is
precisely as being SOLEMN experiences that I wish to interest you
in religious experiences.  So I propose–arbitrarily again, if
you please–to narrow our definition once more by saying that the
word “divine,” as employed therein, shall mean for us not merely
the primal and enveloping and real, for that meaning if taken
without restriction might prove too broad.  The divine shall mean
for us only such a primal reality as the individual feels
impelled to respond to solemnly and gravely, and neither by a
curse nor a jest.
But solemnity, and gravity, and all such emotional attributes,
admit of various shades; and, do what we will with our defining,
the truth must at last be confronted that we are dealing with a
field of experience where there is not a single conception that
can be sharply drawn.  The pretension, under such conditions, to
be rigorously “scientific” or “exact” in our terms would only
stamp us as lacking in understanding of our task.  Things are
more or less divine, states of mind are more or less religious,
reactions are more or less total, but the boundaries are always
misty, and it is everywhere a question of amount and degree. 
Nevertheless, at their extreme of development, there can never be
any question as to what experiences are religious.  The divinity
of the object and the solemnity of the reaction are too well
marked for doubt.  Hesitation as to whether a state of mind is
“religious,” or “irreligious,” or “moral,” or “philosophical,” is
only likely to arise when the state of mind is weakly
characterized, but in that case it will be hardly worthy of our
study at all.  With states that can only by courtesy be called
religious we need have nothing to do, our only profitable
business being with what nobody can possibly feel tempted to call
anything else.  I said in my former lecture that we learn most
about a thing when we view it under a microscope, as it were, or
in its most exaggerated form.  This is as true of religious
phenomena as of any other kind of fact.  The only cases likely to
be profitable enough to repay our attention will therefore be
cases where the religious spirit is unmistakable and extreme. 
Its fainter manifestations we may tranquilly pass by.  Here, for
example, is the total reaction upon life of Frederick Locker
Lampson, whose autobiography, entitled  “Confidences,” proves him
to have been a most amiable man.
“I am so far resigned to my lot that I feel small pain at the
thought of having to part from what has been called the pleasant
habit of existence, the sweet fable of life.  I would not care to
live my wasted life over again, and so to prolong my span. 
Strange to say, I have but little wish to be younger.  I submit
with a chill at my heart.  I humbly submit because it is the
Divine Will, and my appointed destiny.  I dread the increase of
infirmities that will make me a burden to those around me, those
dear to me.  No! let me slip away as quietly and comfortably as I
can.  Let the end come, if peace come with it.
“I do not know that there is a great deal to be said for this
world, or our sojourn here upon it; but it has pleased God so to
place us, and it must please me also.  I ask you, what is human
life?  Is not it a maimed happiness–care and weariness,
weariness and care, with the baseless expectation, the strange
cozenage of a brighter to-morrow?  At best it is but a froward
child, that must be played with and humored, to keep it quiet
till it falls asleep, and then the care is over."[13]
[13] Op. cit., pp. 314, 313.
This is a complex, a tender, a submissive, and a graceful state
of mind.  For myself, I should have no objection to calling it on
the whole a religious state of mind, although I dare say that to
many of you it may seem too listless and half-hearted to merit so
good a name.  But what matters it in the end whether we call such
a state of mind religious or not?  It is too insignificant for
our instruction in any case; and its very possessor wrote it down
in terms which he would not have used unless he had been thinking
of more energetically religious moods in others, with which he
found himself unable to compete.  It is with these more energetic
states that our sole business lies, and we can perfectly well
afford to let the minor notes and the uncertain border go.  It
was the extremer cases that I had in mind a little while ago
when I said that personal religion, even without theology or
ritual, would prove to embody some elements that morality pure
and simple does not contain.  You may remember that I promised
shortly to point out what those elements were.  In a general way
I can now say what I had in mind.
“I accept the universe” is reported to have been a favorite
utterance of our New England transcendentalist, Margaret Fuller;
and when some one repeated this phrase to Thomas Carlyle, his
sardonic comment is said to have been:  “Gad! she’d better!”  At
bottom the whole concern of both morality and religion is with
the manner of our acceptance of the universe.  Do we accept it
only in part and grudgingly, or heartily and altogether?  Shall
our protests against certain things in it be radical and
unforgiving, or shall we think that, even with evil, there are
ways of living that must lead to good?  If we accept the whole,
shall we do so as if stunned into submission–as Carlyle would
have us–"Gad! we’d better!"–or shall we do so with enthusiastic
assent?  Morality pure and simple accepts the law of the whole
which it finds reigning, so far as to acknowledge and obey it,
but it may obey it with the heaviest and coldest heart, and never
cease to feel it as a yoke.  But for religion, in its strong and
fully developed manifestations, the service of the highest never
is felt as a yoke.  Dull submission is left far behind, and a
mood of welcome, which may fill any place on the scale between
cheerful serenity and enthusiastic gladness, has taken its place.
It makes a tremendous emotional and practical difference to one
whether one accept the universe in the drab discolored way of
stoic resignation to necessity, or with the passionate happiness
of Christian saints.  The difference is as great as that between
passivity and activity, as that between the defensive and the
aggressive mood.  Gradual as are the steps by which an individual
may grow from one state into the other, many as are the
intermediate stages which different individuals represent, yet
when you place the typical extremes beside each other for
comparison, you feel that two discontinuous psychological
universes confront you, and that in passing from one to the other
a “critical point” has been overcome.
If we compare stoic with Christian ejaculations we see much more
than a difference of doctrine; rather is it a difference of
emotional mood that parts them.  When Marcus Aurelius reflects on
the eternal reason that has ordered things, there is a frosty
chill about his words which you rarely find in a Jewish, and
never in a Christian piece of religious writing.  The universe is
“accepted” by all these writers; but how devoid of passion or
exultation the spirit of the Roman Emperor is!  Compare his fine
sentence:  “If gods care not for me or my children, here is a
reason for it,” with Job’s cry:  “Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him!” and you immediately see the difference I mean. 
The anima mundi, to whose disposal of his own personal destiny
the Stoic consents, is there to be respected and submitted to,
but the Christian God is there to be loved; and the difference of
emotional atmosphere is like that between an arctic climate and
the tropics, though the outcome in the way of accepting actual
conditions uncomplainingly may seem in abstract terms to be much
the same.
“It is a man’s duty,” says Marcus Aurelius, “to comfort himself
and wait for the natural dissolution, and not to be vexed, but to
find refreshment solely in these thoughts–first that nothing
will happen to me which is not conformable to the nature of the
universe; and secondly that I need do nothing contrary to the God
and deity within me; for there is no man who can compel me to
transgress.  He is an abscess on the universe who withdraws
and separates himself from the reason of our common nature,
through being displeased with the things which happen.  For the
same nature produces these, and has produced thee too.  And so
accept everything which happens, even if it seem disagreeable,
because it leads to this, the health of the universe and to the
prosperity and felicity of Zeus.  For he would not have brought
on any man what he has brought if it were not useful for the
whole.  The integrity of the whole is mutilated if thou cuttest
off anything.  And thou dost cut off, as far as it is in thy
power, when thou art dissatisfied, and in a manner triest to put
anything out of the way."[14]
[14] Book V., ch. ix. (abridged).
Compare now this mood with that of the old Christian author of
the Theologia Germanica:–
“Where men are enlightened with the true light, they renounce all
desire and choice, and commit and commend themselves and all
things to the eternal Goodness, so that every enlightened man
could say:  ’I would fain be to the Eternal Goodness what his own
hand is to a man.’  Such men are in a state of freedom, because
they have lost the fear of pain or hell, and the hope of reward
or heaven, and are living in pure submission to the eternal
Goodness, in the perfect freedom of fervent love.  When a man
truly perceiveth and considereth himself, who and what he is, and
findeth himself utterly vile and wicked and unworthy, he falleth
into such a deep abasement that it seemeth to him reasonable that
all creatures in heaven and earth should rise up against him. 
And therefore he will not and dare not desire any consolation and
release; but he is willing to be unconsoled and unreleased; and
he doth not grieve over his sufferings, for they are right in his
eyes, and he hath nothing to say against them.  This is what is
meant by true repentance for sin; and he who in this present time
entereth into this hell, none may console him.  Now God hath not
forsaken a man in this hell, but He is laying his hand upon him,
that the man may not desire nor regard anything but the eternal
Good only.  And then, when the man neither careth for nor
desireth anything but the eternal Good alone, and seeketh not
himself nor his own things, but the honour of God only, he is
made a partaker of all manner of joy, bliss, peace, rest, and
consolation, and so the man is henceforth in the kingdom of
heaven.  This hell and this heaven are two good safe ways for a
man, and happy is he who truly findeth them."[15]
[15] Chaps. x., xi.  (abridged):  Winkworth’s translation.
How much more active and positive the impulse of the Christian
writer to accept his place in the universe is! Marcus Aurelius
agrees TO the scheme–the German theologian agrees WITH it.  He
literally ABOUNDS in agreement, he runs out to embrace the divine
decrees.
Occasionally, it is true, the stoic rises to something like a
Christian warmth of sentiment, as in the often quoted passage of
Marcus Aurelius:–
“Everything harmonizes with me which is harmonious to thee, O
Universe.  Nothing for me is too early nor too late, which is in
due time for thee.  Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons
bring, O Nature:  from thee are all things, in thee are all
things, to thee all things return.  The poet says, Dear City of
Cecrops; and wilt thou not say, Dear City of Zeus?"[16]
[16] Book IV., 523
But compare even as devout a passage as this with a genuine
Christian outpouring, and it seems a little cold. Turn, for
instance, to the Imitation of Christ:–
“Lord, thou knowest what is best; let this or that be according
as thou wilt.  Give what thou wilt, so much as thou wilt, when
thou wilt.  Do with me as thou knowest best, and as shall be most
to thine honour.  Place me where thou wilt, and freely work thy
will with me in all things. . . .  When could it be evil when
thou wert near?  I had rather be poor for thy sake than rich
without thee.  I choose rather to be a pilgrim upon the earth
with thee, than without thee to possess heaven.  Where thou art,
there is heaven; and where thou art not, behold there death and
hell."[17]
[17] Benham’s translation:  Book III., chaps.  xv., lix.  Compare
Mary Moody Emerson:  “Let me be a blot on this fair world, the
obscurest the loneliest sufferer, with one proviso–that I know
it is His agency.  I will love Him though He shed frost and
darkness on every way of mine.”  R. W. Emerson:  Lectures and
Biographical Sketches, p. 188.
It is a good rule in physiology, when we are studying the meaning
of an organ, to ask after its most peculiar and characteristic
sort of performance, and to seek its office in that one of its
functions which no other organ can possibly exert.  Surely the
same maxim holds good in our present quest.  The essence of
religious experiences, the thing by which we finally must judge
them, must be that element or quality in them which we can meet
nowhere else.  And such a quality will be of course most
prominent and easy to notice in those religious experiences which
are most one-sided, exaggerated, and intense.
Now when we compare these intenser experiences with the
experiences of tamer minds, so cool and reasonable that we are
tempted to call them philosophical rather than religious, we find
a character that is perfectly distinct.  That character, it seems
to me, should be regarded as the practically important
differentia of religion for our purpose; and just what it is can
easily be brought out by comparing the mind of an abstractly
conceived Christian with that of a moralist similarly conceived.
A life is manly, stoical, moral, or philosophical, we say, in
proportion as it is less swayed by paltry personal considerations
and more by objective ends that call for energy, even though that
energy bring personal loss and pain.  This is the good side of
war, in so far as it calls for “volunteers.”  And for morality
life is a war, and the service of the highest is a sort of cosmic
patriotism which also calls for volunteers.  Even a sick man,
unable to be militant outwardly, can carry on the moral warfare. 
He can willfully turn his attention away from his own future,
whether in this world or the next.  He can train himself to
indifference to his present drawbacks and immerse himself in
whatever objective interests still remain accessible.  He can
follow public news, and sympathize with other people’s affairs. 
He can cultivate cheerful manners, and be silent about his
miseries. He can contemplate whatever ideal aspects of existence
his philosophy is able to present to him, and practice whatever
duties, such as patience, resignation, trust, his ethical system
requires.  Such a man lives on his loftiest, largest plane.  He
is a high-hearted freeman and no pining slave.  And yet he lacks
something which the Christian par excellence, the mystic and
ascetic saint, for example, has in abundant measure, and which
makes of him a human being of an altogether different
denomination.
The Christian also spurns the pinched and mumping sick-room
attitude, and the lives of saints are full of a kind of
callousness to diseased conditions of body which probably no
other human records show.  But whereas the merely moralistic
spurning takes an effort of volition, the Christian spurning is
the result of the excitement of a higher kind of emotion, in the
presence of which no exertion of volition is required.  The
moralist must hold his breath and keep his muscles tense; and so
long as this athletic attitude is possible all goes
well–morality suffices.  But the athletic attitude tends ever to
break down, and it inevitably does break down even in the most
stalwart when the organism begins to decay, or when morbid fears
invade the mind.  To suggest personal will and effort to one all
sicklied o’er with the sense of irremediable impotence is to
suggest the most impossible of things.  What he craves is to be
consoled in his very powerlessness, to feel that the spirit of
the universe <47> recognizes and secures him, all decaying and
failing as he is.  Well, we are all such helpless failures in the
last resort.  The sanest and best of us are of one clay with
lunatics and prison inmates, and death finally runs the robustest
of us down.  And whenever we feel this, such a sense of the
vanity and provisionality of our voluntary career comes over us
that all our morality appears but as a plaster hiding a sore it
can never cure, and all our well-doing as the hollowest
substitute for that well-BEING that our lives ought to be
grounded in, but, alas! are not.
And here religion comes to our rescue and takes our fate into her
hands.  There is a state of mind, known to religious men, but to
no others, in which the will to assert ourselves and hold our own
has been displaced by a willingness to close our mouths and be as
nothing in the floods and waterspouts of God.  In this state of
mind, what we most dreaded has become the habitation of our
safety, and the hour of our moral death has turned into our
spiritual birthday.  The time for tension in our soul is over,
and that of happy relaxation, of calm deep breathing, of an
eternal present, with no discordant future to be anxious about,
has arrived.  Fear is not held in abeyance as it is by mere
morality, it is positively expunged and washed away.
We shall see abundant examples of this happy state of mind in
later lectures of this course.  We shall see how infinitely
passionate a thing religion at its highest flights can be.  Like
love, like wrath, like hope, ambition, jealousy, like every other
instinctive eagerness and impulse, it adds to life an enchantment
which is not rationally or logically deducible from anything
else.  This enchantment, coming as a gift when it does come–a
gift of our organism, the physiologists will tell us, a gift of
God’s grace, the theologians say –is either there or not there
for us, and there are persons who can no more become possessed by
it than they can fall in love with a given woman by mere word of
command.  Religious feeling is thus an absolute addition to the
Subject’s range of life.  It gives him a new sphere of power.
When the outward battle is lost, and the outer world disowns him,
it redeems and vivifies an interior world which otherwise would
be an empty waste.
If religion is to mean anything definite for us, it seems to me
that we ought to take it as meaning this added dimension of
emotion, this enthusiastic temper of espousal, in regions where
morality strictly so called can at best but bow its head and
acquiesce.  It ought to mean nothing short of this new reach of
freedom for us, with the struggle over, the keynote of the
universe sounding in our ears, and everlasting possession spread
before our eyes.[18]
[18] Once more, there are plenty of men, constitutionally sombre
men, in whose religious life this rapturousness is lacking.  They
are religious in the wider sense, yet in this acutest of all
senses they are not so, and it is religion in the acutest sense
that I wish, without disputing about words, to study first, so as
to get at its typical differentia.
This sort of happiness in the absolute and everlasting is what we
find nowhere but in religion.  It is parted off from all mere
animal happiness, all mere enjoyment of the present, by that
element of solemnity of which I have already made so much
account.  Solemnity is a hard thing to define abstractly, but
certain of its marks are patent enough. A solemn state of mind is
never crude or simple–it seems to contain a certain measure of
its own opposite in solution. A solemn joy preserves a sort of
bitter in its sweetness; a solemn sorrow is one to which we
intimately consent.  But there are writers who, realizing that
happiness of a supreme sort is the prerogative of religion,
forget this complication, and call all happiness, as such,
religious.  Mr. Havelock Ellis, for example, identifies religion
with the entire field of the soul’s liberation from oppressive
moods.
“The simplest functions of physiological life,” he writes may be
its ministers.  Every one who is at all acquainted with the
Persian mystics knows how wine may be regarded as an instrument
of religion.  Indeed, in all countries and in all ages some form
of physical enlargement–singing, dancing, drinking, sexual
excitement–has been intimately associated with worship. Even the
momentary expansion of the soul in laughter is, to however slight
an extent, a religious exercise. . . . Whenever an impulse from
the world strikes against the organism, and the resultant is not
discomfort or pain, not even the muscular contraction of
strenuous manhood, but a joyous expansion or aspiration of the
whole soul–there is religion. It is the infinite for which we
hunger, and we ride gladly on every little wave that promises to
bear us towards it."[19]
[19] The New Spirit, p. 232.
But such a straight identification of religion with any and every
form of happiness leaves the essential peculiarity of religious
happiness out.  The more commonplace happinesses which we get are
“reliefs,” occasioned by our momentary escapes from evils either
experienced or threatened. But in its most characteristic
embodiments, religious happiness is no mere feeling of escape. 
It cares no longer to escape.  It consents to the evil outwardly
as a form of sacrifice–inwardly it knows it to be permanently
overcome. If you ask HOW religion thus falls on the thorns and
faces death, and in the very act annuls annihilation, I cannot
explain the matter, for it is religion’s secret, and to
understand it you must yourself have been a religious man of the
extremer type.  In our future examples, even of the simplest and
healthiest-minded type of religious consciousness, we shall find
this complex sacrificial constitution, in which a higher
happiness holds a lower unhappiness in check.  In the Louvre
there is a picture, by Guido Reni, of St. Michael with his foot
on Satan’s neck.  The richness of the picture is in large part
due to the fiend’s figure being there.  The richness of its
allegorical meaning also is due to his being there–that is, the
world is all the richer for having a devil in it, SO LONG AS WE
KEEP OUR FOOT UPON HIS NECK.  In the religious consciousness,
that is just the position in which the fiend, the negative or
tragic principle, is found; and for that very reason the
religious consciousness is so rich from the emotional point of
view.[20]  We shall see how in certain men and women it takes on
a monstrously ascetic form.  There are saints who have literally
fed on the negative principle, on humiliation and privation, and
the thought of suffering and death–their souls growing in
happiness just in proportion as their outward state grew more
intolerable.  No other emotion than religious emotion can bring a
man to this peculiar pass.  And it is for that reason that when
we ask our question about the value of religion for human life, I
think we ought to look for the answer among these violenter
examples rather than among those of a more moderate hue.
[20] I owe this allegorical illustration to my lamented colleague
and Friend, Charles Carroll Everett.
Having the phenomenon of our study in its acutest possible form
to start with, we can shade down as much as we please later.  And
if in these cases, repulsive as they are to our ordinary worldly
way of judging, we find ourselves compelled to acknowledge
religion’s value and treat it with respect, it will have proved
in some way its value for life at large.  By subtracting and
toning down extravagances we may thereupon proceed to trace the
boundaries of its legitimate sway.
To be sure, it makes our task difficult to have to deal so muck
with eccentricities and extremes.  “How CAN religion on the whole
be the most important of all human functions,” you may ask, “if
every several manifestation of it in turn have to be corrected
and sobered down and pruned away?”  
Such a thesis seems a paradox impossible to sustain
reasonably–yet I believe that something like it will have to be
our final contention.  That personal attitude which the
individual finds himself impelled to take up towards what he
apprehends to be the divine–and you will remember that this was
our definition–will prove to be both a helpless and a
sacrificial attitude.  That is, we shall have to confess to at
least some amount of dependence on sheer mercy, and to practice
some amount of renunciation, great or small, to save our souls
alive.  The constitution of the world we live in requires it:–
          “Entbehren sollst du! sollst entbehren!
           Das ist der ewige Gesang
           Der jedem an die Ohren klingt,
           Den, unser ganzes Leben lang
           Uns heiser jede Stunde singt.”
For when all is said and done, we are in the end absolutely
dependent on the universe; and into sacrifices and surrenders of
some sort, deliberately looked at and accepted, we are drawn and
pressed as into our only permanent positions of repose.  Now in
those states of mind which fall short of religion, the surrender
is submitted to as an imposition of necessity, and the sacrifice
is undergone at the very best without complaint.  In the
religious life, on the contrary, surrender and sacrifice are
positively espoused:  even unnecessary givings-up are added in
order that the happiness may increase.  Religion thus makes easy
and felicitous what in any case is necessary; and if it be the
only agency that can accomplish this result, its vital importance
as a human faculty stands vindicated beyond dispute.  It becomes
an essential organ of our life, performing a function which no
other portion of our nature can so successfully fulfill.  From
the merely biological point of view, so to call it, this is a
conclusion to which, so far as I can now see, we shall inevitably
be led, and led moreover by following the purely empirical method
of demonstration which I sketched to you in the first lecture. 
Of the farther office of religion as a metaphysical revelation I
will say nothing now.
But to foreshadow the terminus of one’s investigations is one
thing, and to arrive there safely is another.  In the next
lecture, abandoning the extreme generalities which have engrossed
us hitherto, I propose that we begin our actual journey by
addressing ourselves directly to the concrete facts.
Continue...

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003. Also see Part II of this book.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Varieties of Religious ExperienceBy William JamesAt Amazon
