




The subject of Saintliness left us face to face with the
question, Is the sense of divine presence a sense of anything
objectively true?  We turned first to mysticism for an answer,
and found that although mysticism is entirely willing to
corroborate religion, it is too private (and also too various) in
its utterances to be able to claim a universal authority.  But
philosophy publishes results which claim to be universally valid
if they are valid at all, so we now turn with our question to
philosophy.  Can philosophy stamp a warrant of veracity upon the
religious man’s sense of the divine?
I imagine that many of you at this point begin to indulge in
guesses at the goal to which I am tending.  I have undermined the
authority of mysticism, you say, and the next thing I shall
probably do is to seek to discredit that of philosophy. 
Religion, you expect to hear me conclude, is nothing but an
affair of faith, based either on vague sentiment, or on that
vivid sense of the reality of things unseen of which in my second
lecture and in the lecture on Mysticism I gave so many examples. 
It is essentially private and individualistic; it always exceeds
our powers of formulation; and although attempts to pour its
contents into a philosophic mould will probably always go on, men
being what they are, yet these attempts are always secondary
processes which in no way add to the authority, or warrant the
veracity, of the sentiments from which they derive their own
stimulus and borrow whatever glow of conviction they may
themselves possess.  
In short, you suspect that I am planning to defend feeling at the
expense of reason, to rehabilitate the primitive and
unreflective, and to dissuade you from the hope of any Theology
worthy of the name.
To a certain extent I have to admit that you guess rightly. I do
believe that feeling is the deeper source of religion, and that
philosophic and theological formulas are secondary products, like
translations of a text into another tongue.  But all such
statements are misleading from their brevity, and it will take
the whole hour for me to explain to you exactly what I mean.
When I call theological formulas secondary products, I mean that
in a world in which no religious feeling had ever existed, I
doubt whether any philosophic theology could ever have been
framed.  I doubt if dispassionate intellectual contemplation of
the universe, apart from inner unhappiness and need of
deliverance on the one hand and mystical emotion on the other,
would ever have resulted in religious philosophies such as we now
possess.  Men would have begun with animistic explanations of
natural fact, and criticised these away into scientific ones, as
they actually have done. In the science they would have left a
certain amount of “psychical research,” even as they now will
probably have to re-admit a certain amount.  But high-flying
speculations like those of either dogmatic or idealistic
theology, these they would have had no motive to venture on,
feeling no need of commerce with such deities.  These
speculations must, it seems to me, be classed as over-beliefs,
buildings-out performed by the intellect into directions of which
feeling originally supplied the hint.
But even if religious philosophy had to have its first hint
supplied by feeling, may it not have dealt in a superior way with
the matter which feeling suggested?  Feeling is private and dumb,
and unable to give an account of itself.  It allows that its
results are mysteries and enigmas, declines to justify them
rationally, and on occasion is willing that they should even
pass for paradoxical and absurd.  Philosophy takes just the
opposite attitude.  Her aspiration is to reclaim from mystery and
paradox whatever territory she touches.  To find an escape from
obscure and wayward personal persuasion to truth objectively
valid for all thinking men has ever been the intellect’s most
cherished ideal.  To redeem religion from unwholesome privacy,
and to give public status and universal right of way to its
deliverances, has been reason’s task.
I believe that philosophy will always have opportunity to labor
at this task.[288] We are thinking beings, and we cannot exclude
the intellect from participating in any of our functions.  Even
in soliloquizing with ourselves, we construe our feelings
intellectually.  Both our personal ideals and our religious and
mystical experiences must be interpreted congruously with the
kind of scenery which our thinking mind inhabits.  The
philosophic climate of our time inevitably forces its own
clothing on us.  Moreover, we must exchange our feelings with one
another, and in doing so we have to speak, and to use general and
abstract verbal formulas. Conceptions and constructions are thus
a necessary part of our religion; and as moderator amid the clash
of hypotheses, and mediator among the criticisms of one man’s
constructions by another, philosophy will always have much to do.
It would be strange if I disputed this, when these very lectures
which I am giving are (as you will see more clearly from now
onwards) a laborious attempt to extract from the privacies of
religious experience some general facts which can be defined in
formulas upon which everybody may agree.
[288] Compare Professor W. Wallace’s Gifford Lectures, in
Lectures and Essays, Oxford, 1898, pp. 17 ff.
Religious experience, in other words, spontaneously and
inevitably engenders myths, superstitions, dogmas, creeds, and
metaphysical theologies, and criticisms of one set of these by
the adherents of another.  Of late, impartial classifications and
comparisons have become possible, alongside of the denunciations
and anathemas by which the commerce between creeds used
exclusively to be carried on.  We have the beginnings of a
“Science of Religions,” so-called; and if these lectures could
ever be accounted a crumb-like contribution to such a science, I
should be made very happy.
But all these intellectual operations, whether they be
constructive or comparative and critical, presuppose immediate
experiences as their subject-matter.  They are interpretative and
inductive operations, operations after the fact, consequent upon
religious feeling, not coordinate with it, not independent of
what it ascertains.
The intellectualism in religion which I wish to discredit
pretends to be something altogether different from this.  It
assumes to construct religious objects out of the resources of
logical reason alone, or of logical reason drawing rigorous
inference from non-subjective facts.  It calls its conclusions
dogmatic theology, or philosophy of the absolute, as the case may
be; it does not call them science of religions.  It reaches them
in an a priori way, and warrants their veracity.
Warranted systems have ever been the idols of aspiring souls. 
All-inclusive, yet simple; noble, clean, luminous, stable,
rigorous, true;–what more ideal refuge could there be than such
a system would offer to spirits vexed by the muddiness and
accidentality of the world of sensible things? Accordingly, we
find inculcated in the theological schools of to-day, almost as
much as in those of the fore-time, a disdain for merely possible
or probable truth, and of results that only private assurance can
grasp. Scholastics and idealists both express this disdain. 
Principal John Caird, for example, writes as follows in his
Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion:–
“Religion must indeed be a thing of the heart, but in order to
elevate it from the region of subjective caprice and waywardness,
and to distinguish between that which is true and false in
religion, we must appeal to an objective standard.  That which
enters the heart must first be discerned by the intelligence to
be TRUE.  It must be seen as having in its own nature a RIGHT to
dominate feeling, and as constituting the principle by which
feeling must be judged.[289] In estimating the religious
character of individuals, nations, or races, the first question
is, not how they feel, but what they think and believe–not
whether their religion is one which manifests itself in emotions,
more or less vehement and enthusiastic, but what are the
CONCEPTIONS of God and divine things by which these emotions are
called forth.  Feeling is necessary in religion, but it is by the
CONTENT or intelligent basis of a religion, and not by feeling,
that its character and worth are to be determined."[290]
[289] Op. cit., p. 174, abridged.
[290] Ibid., p. 186, abridged and italicized.
Cardinal Newman, in his work, The Idea of a University, gives
more emphatic expression still to this disdain for
sentiment.[291] Theology, he says, is a science in the strictest
sense of the word.  I will tell you, he says, what it is not–
not “physical evidences” for God, not “natural religion,” for
these are but vague subjective interpretations:–
[291] Discourse II.  Section 7.
“If,” he continues, “the Supreme Being is powerful or skillful,
just so far as the telescope shows power, or the microscope shows
skill, if his moral law is to be ascertained simply by the
physical processes of the animal frame, or his will gathered from
the immediate issues of human affairs, if his Essence is just as
high and deep and broad as the universe and no more if this be
the fact, then will I confess that there is no specific science
about God, that theology is but a name, and a protest in its
behalf an hypocrisy.  Then, pious as it is to think of Him while
the pageant of experiment or abstract reasoning passes by, still
such piety is nothing more than a poetry of thought, or an
ornament of language, a certain view taken of Nature which one
man has and another has not, which gifted minds strike out, which
others see to be admirable and ingenious, and which all would be
the better for adopting.  It is but the theology of Nature, just
as we talk of the PHILOSOPHY or the ROMANCE of history, or the
POETRY of childhood, or the picturesque or the sentimental or the
humorous, or any other abstract quality which the genius or the
caprice of the individual, or the fashion of the day, or the
consent of the world, recognizes in any set of objects which are
subjected to its contemplation.  I do not see much difference
between avowing that there is no God, and implying that nothing
definite can be known for certain about Him.”
What I mean by Theology, continues Newman, is none of these
things:  “I simply mean the SCIENCE OF GOD, or the truths we know
about God, put into a system, just as we have a science of the
stars and call it astronomy, or of the crust of the earth and
call it geology.”
In both these extracts we have the issue clearly set before us: 
Feeling valid only for the individual is pitted against reason
valid universally.  The test is a perfectly plain one of fact. 
Theology based on pure reason must in point of fact convince men
universally.  If it did not, wherein would its superiority
consist?  If it only formed sects and schools, even as sentiment
and mysticism form them, how would it fulfill its programme of
freeing us from personal caprice and waywardness?  This perfectly
definite practical test of the pretensions of philosophy to found
religion on universal reason simplifies my procedure to-day.  I
need not discredit philosophy by laborious criticism of its
arguments. It will suffice if I show that as a matter of history
it fails to prove its pretension to be “objectively” convincing. 
In fact, philosophy does so fail.  It does not banish
differences; it founds schools and sects just as feeling does.  I
believe, in fact, that the logical reason of man operates in this
field of divinity exactly as it has always operated in love, or
in patriotism, or in politics, or in any other of the wider
affairs of life, in which our passions or our mystical intuitions
fix our beliefs beforehand.  It finds arguments for our
conviction, for indeed it HAS to find them.  It amplifies and
defines our faith, and dignifies it and lends it words and
plausibility.  It hardly ever engenders it; it cannot now secure
it.[292]
[292] As regards the secondary character of intellectual
constructions, and the primacy of feeling and instinct in
founding religious beliefs see the striking work of H. Fielding,
The Hearts of Men, London, 1902, which came into my hands after
my text was written.  “Creeds,” says the author, “are the grammar
of religion, they are to religion what grammar is to speech. 
Words are the expression of our wants grammar is the theory
formed afterwards.  Speech never proceeded from grammar, but the
reverse.  As speech progresses and changes from unknown causes,
grammar must follow” (p. 313).  The whole book, which keeps
unusually close to concrete facts, is little more than an
amplification of this text.
Lend me your attention while I run through some of the points of
the older systematic theology.  You find them in both Protestant
and Catholic manuals, best of all in the innumerable text-books
published since Pope Leo’s Encyclical recommending the study of
Saint Thomas.  I glance first at the arguments by which dogmatic
theology establishes God’s existence, after that at those by
which it establishes his nature.[293]
[293] For convenience’ sake, I follow the order of A. Stockl’s
Lehrbuch der Philosophie, 5te Autlage, Mainz, 1881, Band ii.  B. 
Boedder’s Natural Theology, London, 1891, is a handy English
Catholic Manual; but an almost identical doctrine is given by
such Protestant theologians as C. Hodge:  Systematic Theology,
New York, 1873, or A. H. Strong:  Systematic Theology, 5th
edition, New York, 1896.
The arguments for God’s existence have stood for hundreds of
years with the waves of unbelieving criticism breaking against
them, never totally discrediting them in the ears of the
faithful, but on the whole slowly and surely washing out the
mortar from between their joints.  If you have a God already whom
you believe in, these arguments confirm you. If you are
atheistic, they fail to set you right.  The proofs are various. 
The “cosmological” one, so-called, reasons from the contingence
of the world to a First Cause which must contain whatever
perfections the world itself contains.  The “argument
from design” reasons, from the fact that Nature’s laws are
mathematical, and her parts benevolently adapted to each other,
that this cause is both intellectual and benevolent. The “moral
argument” is that the moral law presupposes a lawgiver.  The
“argument ex consensu gentium” is that the belief in God is so
widespread as to be grounded in the rational nature of man, and
should therefore carry authority with it.
As I just said, I will not discuss these arguments technically.
The bare fact that all idealists since Kant have felt entitled
either to scout or to neglect them shows that they are not solid
enough to serve as religion’s all-sufficient foundation. 
Absolutely impersonal reasons would be in duty bound to show more
general convincingness.  Causation is indeed too obscure a
principle to bear the weight of the whole structure of theology. 
As for the argument from design, see how Darwinian ideas have
revolutionized it.  Conceived as we now conceive them, as so many
fortunate escapes from almost limitless processes of destruction,
the benevolent adaptations which we find in Nature suggest a
deity very different from the one who figured in the earlier
versions of the argument.[294] The fact is that these arguments 
do but follow the combined suggestions of the facts and of our
feeling.  They prove nothing rigorously.  They only corroborate
our preexistent partialities.
[294] It must not be forgotten that any form of DISorder in the
world might, by the design argument, suggest a God for just that
kind of disorder.  The truth is that any state of things whatever
that can be named is logically susceptible of teleological
interpretation. The ruins of the earthquake at Lisbon, for
example:  the whole of past history had to be planned exactly as
it was to bring about in the fullness of time just that
particular arrangement of debris of masonry, furniture, and once
living bodies.  No other train of causes would have been
sufficient.  And so of any other arrangement, bad or good, which
might as a matter of fact be found resulting anywhere from
previous conditions.  To avoid such pessimistic consequences and
save its beneficent designer, the design argument accordingly
invokes two other principles, restrictive in their operation. 
The first is physical:  Nature’s forces tend of their own accord
only to disorder and destruction, to heaps of ruins, not to
architecture.
This principle, though plausible at first sight, seems, in the
light of recent biology, to be more and more improbable.  The
second principle is one of anthropomorphic interpretation.  No
arrangement that for us is “disorderly” can possibly have been an
object of design at all.  This principle is of course a mere
assumption in the interests of anthropomorphic Theism.
When one views the world with no definite theological bias one
way or the other, one sees that order and disorder, as we now
recognize them, are purely human inventions.  We are interested
in certain types of arrangement, useful, aesthetic, or moral–so
interested that whenever we find them realized, the fact
emphatically rivets our attention.  The result is that we work
over the contents of the world selectively.  It is overflowing
with disorderly arrangements from our point of view, but order is
the only thing we care for and look at, and by choosing, one can
always find some sort of orderly arrangement in the midst of any
chaos.  If I should throw down a thousand beans at random upon a
table, I could doubtless, by eliminating a sufficient number of
them, leave the rest in almost any geometrical pattern you might
propose to me, and you might then say that that pattern was the
thing prefigured beforehand, and that the other beans were mere
irrelevance and packing material.  Our dealings with Nature are
just like this.  She is a vast plenum in which our attention
draws capricious lines in innumerable directions.  We count and
name whatever lies upon the special lines we trace, whilst the
other things and the untraced lines are neither named nor
counted. There are in reality infinitely more things “unadapted"
to each other in this world than there are things “adapted";
infinitely more things with irregular relations than with regular
relations between them.  But we look for the regular kind of
thing exclusively, and ingeniously discover and preserve it in
our memory.  It accumulates with other regular kinds, until the
collection of them fills our encyclopaedias.  Yet all the while
between and around them lies an infinite anonymous chaos of
objects that no one ever thought of together, of relations that
never yet attracted our attention.
The facts of order from which the physico-theological argument
starts are thus easily susceptible of interpretation as arbitrary
human products.  So long as this is the case, although of course
no argument against God follows, it follows that the argument for
him will fail to constitute a knockdown proof of his existence. 
It will be convincing only to those who on other grounds believe
in him already.
If philosophy can do so little to establish God’s existence, how
stands it with her efforts to define his attributes?  It is worth
while to look at the attempts of systematic theology in this
direction.
Since God is First Cause, this science of sciences says, he
differs from all his creatures in possessing existence a se. 
From this “a-se-ity” on God’s part, theology deduces by mere
logic most of his other perfections.  For instance, he must be
both NECESSARY and ABSOLUTE, cannot not be, and cannot in any way
be determined by anything else.  This makes Him absolutely
unlimited from without, and unlimited also from within; for
limitation is non-being; and God is being itself.  This
unlimitedness makes God infinitely perfect.  Moreover, God is
ONE, and ONLY, for the infinitely perfect can admit no peer.  He
is SPIRITUAL, for were He composed of physical parts, some other
power would have to combine them into the total, and his aseity
would thus be contradicted.  He is therefore both simple and
non-physical in nature.  He is SIMPLE METAPHYSICALLY also, that
is to say, his nature and his existence cannot be distinct, as
they are in finite substances which share their formal natures
with one another, and are individual only in their material
aspect.  Since God is one and only, his essentia and his esse
must be given at one stroke.  This excludes from his being all
those distinctions, so familiar in the world of finite things,
between potentiality and actuality, substance and accidents,
being and activity, existence and attributes.  We can talk, it is
true, of God’s powers, acts, and attributes, but these
discriminations are only “virtual,” and made from the human point
of view.  In God all these points of view fall into an absolute
identity of being.
This absence of all potentiality in God obliges Him to be
IMMUTABLE.  He is actuality, through and through.  Were there
anything potential about Him, He would either lose or gain by its
actualization, and either loss or gain would contradict his
perfection.  He cannot, therefore, change.  Furthermore, He is
IMMENSE, BOUNDLESS; for could He be outlined in space, He would
be composite, and this would contradict his indivisibility. He is
therefore OMNIPRESENT, indivisibly there, at every point of
space.  He is similarly wholly present at every point of time–in
other words ETERNAL.  For if He began in time, He would need a
prior cause, and that would contradict his aseity.  If He ended
it would contradict his necessity.  If He went through any
succession, it would contradict his immutability.
He has INTELLIGENCE and WILL and every other creature-
perfection, for we have them, and effectus nequit superare
causam.  In Him, however, they are absolutely and eternally in
act, and their OBJECT, since God can be bounded by naught that is
external, can primarily be nothing else than God himself.  He
knows himself, then, in one eternal indivisible act, and wills
himself with an infinite self-pleasure.[295] Since He must of
logical necessity thus love and will himself, He cannot be called
“free” ad intra, with the freedom of contrarieties that
characterizes finite creatures.  Ad extra, however, or with
respect to his creation, God is free.  He cannot NEED to create,
being perfect in being and in happiness already.  He WILLS to
create, then, by an absolute freedom.
[295] For the scholastics the facultas appetendi embraces
feeling, desire, and will.
Being thus a substance endowed with intellect and will and
freedom, God is a PERSON; and a LIVING person also, for He is
both object and subject of his own activity, and to be this
distinguishes the living from the lifeless.  He is thus
absolutely SELF-SUFFICIENT:  his SELF-KNOWLEDGE and SELF-LOVE are
both of them infinite and adequate, and need no extraneous
conditions to perfect them.
He is OMNISCIENT, for in knowing himself as Cause He knows all
creature things and events by implication.  His knowledge is
previsive, for He is present to all time.  Even our free acts are
known beforehand to Him, for otherwise his wisdom would admit of
successive moments of enrichment, and this would contradict his
immutability.  He is OMNIPOTENT for everything that does not
involve logical contradiction.  He can make BEING –in other
words his power includes CREATION.  If what He creates were made
of his own substance, it would have to be infinite in essence, as
that substance is; but it is finite; so it must be non-divine in
substance.  If it were made of a substance, an eternally existing
matter, for example, which God found there to his hand, and to
which He simply gave its form, that would contradict God’s
definition as First Cause, and make Him a mere mover of something
caused already.  The things he creates, then, He creates ex
nihilo, and gives them absolute being as so many finite
substances additional to himself.  The forms which he imprints
upon them have their prototypes in his ideas.  But as in God
there is no such thing as multiplicity, and as these ideas for us
are manifold, we must distinguish the ideas as they are in God
and the way in which our minds externally imitate them.  We must
attribute them to Him only in a TERMINATIVE sense, as differing
aspects, from the finite point of view, of his unique essence.
God of course is holy, good, and just.  He can do no evil, for He
is positive being’s fullness, and evil is negation.  It is true
that He has created physical evil in places, but only as a means
of wider good, for bonum totius praeeminet bonum partis. Moral
evil He cannot will, either as end or means, for that would
contradict his holiness.  By creating free beings He PERMITS it
only, neither his justice nor his goodness obliging Him to
prevent the recipients of freedom from misusing the gift.
As regards God’s purpose in creating, primarily it can only have
been to exercise his absolute freedom by the manifestation to
others of his glory.  From this it follows that the others must
be rational beings, capable in the first place of knowledge,
love, and honor, and in the second place of happiness, for the
knowledge and love of God is the mainspring of felicity.  In so
far forth one may say that God’s secondary purpose in creating is
LOVE.
I will not weary you by pursuing these metaphysical
determinations farther, into the mysteries of God’s Trinity, for
example.  What I have given will serve as a specimen of the
orthodox philosophical theology of both Catholics and
Protestants.  Newman, filled with enthusiasm at God’s list of
perfections, continues the passage which I began to quote to you
by a couple of pages of a rhetoric so magnificent that I can
hardly refrain from adding them, in spite of the inroad they
would make upon our time.[296]  He first enumerates God’s
attributes sonorously, then celebrates his ownership of
everything in earth and Heaven, and the dependence of all that
happens upon his permissive will.  He gives us scholastic
philosophy “touched with emotion,” and every philosophy should be
touched with emotion to be rightly understood.  Emotionally,
then, dogmatic theology is worth something to minds of the type
of Newman’s.  It will aid us to estimate what it is worth
intellectually, if at this point I make a short digression.
[296] Op. cit., Discourse III. Section 7.
What God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. The
Continental schools of philosophy have too often overlooked the
fact that man’s thinking is organically connected with his
conduct.  It seems to me to be the chief glory of English and
Scottish thinkers to have kept the organic connection in view. 
The guiding principle of British philosophy has in fact been that
every difference must MAKE a difference, every theoretical
difference somewhere issue in a practical difference, and that
the best method of discussing points of theory is to begin by
ascertaining what practical difference would result from one
alternative or the other being true.  What is the particular
truth in question KNOWN AS?  In what facts does it result?  What
is its cash-value in terms of particular experience?  This is the
characteristic English way of taking up a question.  In this way,
you remember, Locke takes up the question of personal identity.
What you mean by it is just your chain of particular memories,
says he.  That is the only concretely verifiable part of its
significance.  All further ideas about it, such as the oneness or
manyness of the spiritual substance on which it is based, are
therefore void of intelligible meaning; and propositions touching
such ideas may be indifferently affirmed or denied.  So Berkeley
with his “matter.”
The cash-value of matter is our physical sensations.  That is
what it is known as, all that we concretely verify of its
conception.  That, therefore, is the whole meaning of the term
“matter"–any other pretended meaning is mere wind of words. 
Hume does the same thing with causation.  It is known as habitual
antecedence, and as tendency on our part to look for something
definite to come.  Apart from this practical meaning it has no
significance whatever, and books about it may be committed to the
flames, says Hume.  Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown, James Mill,
John Mill, and Professor Bain, have followed more or less
consistently the same method; and Shadworth Hodgson has used the
principle with full explicitness.  When all is said and done, it
was English and Scotch writers, and not Kant, who introduced “the
critical method” into philosophy, the one method fitted to make
philosophy a study worthy of serious men.  For what seriousness
can possibly remain in debating philosophic propositions that
will never make an appreciable difference to us in action?  And
what could it matter, if all propositions were practically
indifferent, which of them we should agree to call true or which
false?
An American philosopher of eminent originality, Mr. Charles
Sanders Peirce, has rendered thought a service by disentangling
from the particulars of its application the principle by which
these men were instinctively guided, and by singling it out as
fundamental and giving to it a Greek name.  He calls it the
principle of PRAGMATISM, and he defends it somewhat as
follows:[297]–
[297] In an article, How to make our Ideas Clear, in the Popular
Science Monthly for January, 1878, vol. xii. p. 286.
Thought in movement has for its only conceivable motive the
attainment of belief, or thought at rest.  Only when our thought
about a subject has found its rest in belief can our action on
the subject firmly and safely begin.  Beliefs, in short, are
rules for action; and the whole function of thinking is but one
step in the production of active habits.  If there were any part
of a thought that made no difference in the thought’s practical
consequences, then that part would be no proper element of the
thought’s significance.  To develop a thought’s meaning we need
therefore only determine what conduct it is fitted to produce;
that conduct is for us its sole significance; and the tangible
fact at the root of all our thought-distinctions is that there is
no one of them so fine as to consist in anything but a possible
difference of practice.  To attain perfect clearness in our
thoughts of an object, we need then only consider what
sensations, immediate or remote, we are conceivably to expect
from it, and what conduct we must prepare in case the object
should be true.  Our conception of these practical consequences
is for us the whole of our conception of the object, so far as
that conception has positive significance at all.
This is the principle of Peirce, the principle of pragmatism.
Such a principle will help us on this occasion to decide, among
the various attributes set down in the scholastic inventory of
God’s perfections, whether some be not far less significant than
others.
If, namely, we apply the principle of pragmatism to God’s
metaphysical attributes, strictly so called, as distinguished
from his moral attributes, I think that, even were we forced by a
coercive logic to believe them, we still should have to confess
them to be destitute of all intelligible significance. Take God’s
aseity, for example; or his necessariness; his immateriality; his
“simplicity” or superiority to the kind of inner variety and
succession which we find in finite beings, his indivisibility,
and lack of the inner distinctions of being and activity,
substance and accident, potentiality and actuality, and the rest;
his repudiation of inclusion in a genus; his actualized infinity;
his “personality,” apart from the moral qualities which it may
comport; his relations to evil being permissive and not positive;
his self-sufficiency, self-love, and absolute felicity in
himself:–candidly speaking, how do such qualities as these
make any definite connection with our life?  And if they
severally call for no distinctive adaptations of our conduct,
what vital difference can it possibly make to a man’s religion
whether they be true or false?
For my own part, although I dislike to say aught that may grate
upon tender associations, I must frankly confess that even though
these attributes were faultlessly deduced, I cannot conceive of
its being of the smallest consequence to us religiously that any
one of them should be true.  Pray, what specific act can I
perform in order to adapt myself the better to God’s simplicity? 
Or how does it assist me to plan my behavior, to know that his
happiness is anyhow absolutely complete?  In the middle of the
century just past, Mayne Reid was the great writer of books of
out-of-door adventure. He was forever extolling the hunters and
field-observers of living animals’ habits, and keeping up a fire
of invective against the “closet-naturalists,” as he called them,
the collectors and classifiers, and handlers of skeletons and
skins.  When I was a boy, I used to think that a closet-
naturalist must be the vilest type of wretch under the sun. But
surely the systematic theologians are the closet-naturalists of
the deity, even in Captain Mayne Reid’s sense.  What is their
deduction of metaphysical attributes but a shuffling and matching
of pedantic dictionary-adjectives, aloof from morals, aloof from
human needs, something that might be worked out from the mere
word “God” by one of those logical machines of wood and brass
which recent ingenuity has contrived as well as by a man of flesh
and blood.  They have the trail of the serpent over them.  One
feels that in the theologians’ hands, they are only a set of
titles obtained by a mechanical manipulation of synonyms;
verbality has stepped into the place of vision, professionalism
into that of life.  Instead of bread we have a stone; instead of
a fish, a serpent.  Did such a conglomeration of abstract terms
give really the gist of our knowledge of the deity, schools of
theology might indeed continue to flourish, but religion, vital
religion, would have taken its flight from this world. What keeps
religion going is something else than abstract definitions and
systems of concatenated adjectives, and something different from
faculties of theology and their professors.  All these things are
after-effects, secondary accretions upon those phenomena of vital
conversation with the unseen divine, of which I have shown you so
many instances, renewing themselves in saecula saeculorum in the
lives of humble private men.
So much for the metaphysical attributes of God!  From the point
of view of practical religion, the metaphysical monster which
they offer to our worship is an absolutely worthless invention of
the scholarly mind.
What shall we now say of the attributes called moral?
Pragmatically, they stand on an entirely different footing. They
positively determine fear and hope and expectation, and are
foundations for the saintly life.  It needs but a glance at them
to show how great is their significance.
God’s holiness, for example:  being holy, God can will nothing
but the good.  Being omnipotent, he can secure its triumph. 
Being omniscient, he can see us in the dark.  Being just, he can
punish us for what he sees.  Being loving, he can pardon too. 
Being unalterable, we can count on him securely.  These qualities
enter into connection with our life, it is highly important that
we should be informed concerning them.  That God’s purpose in
creation should be the manifestation of his glory is also an
attribute which has definite relations to our practical life. 
Among other things it has given a definite character to worship
in all Christian countries.  If dogmatic theology really does
prove beyond dispute that a God with characters like these
exists, she may well claim to give a solid basis to religious
sentiment.  But verily, how stands it with her arguments?
It stands with them as ill as with the arguments for his
existence.  Not only do post-Kantian idealists reject them root
and branch, but it is a plain historic fact that they never have
converted any one who has found in the moral complexion of the
world, as he experienced it, reasons for doubting that a good God
can have framed it.  To prove God’s goodness by the scholastic
argument that there is no non-being in his essence would sound
to such a witness simply silly.
No! the book of Job went over this whole matter once for all and
definitively.  Ratiocination is a relatively superficial and
unreal path to the deity:  “I will lay mine hand upon my mouth; I
have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
seeth Thee.”  An intellect perplexed and baffled, yet a
trustful sense of presence–such is the situation of the man who
is sincere with himself and with the facts, but who remains
religious still.[298]
[298] Pragmatically, the most important attribute of God is his
punitive justice.  But who, in the present state of theological
opinion on that point, will dare maintain that hell fire or its
equivalent in some shape is rendered certain by pure logic? 
Theology herself has largely based this doctrine upon revelation,
and, in discussing it, has tended more and more to substitute
conventional ideas of criminal law for a priori principles of
reason.  But the very notion that this glorious universe, with
planets and winds, and laughing sky and ocean, should have been
conceived and had its beams and rafters laid in technicalities of
criminality, is incredible to our modern imagination.  It weakens
a religion to hear it argued upon such a basis.
We must therefore, I think, bid a definitive good-by to dogmatic
theology.  In all sincerity our faith must do without that
warrant.  Modern idealism, I repeat, has said goodby to this
theology forever.  Can modern idealism give faith a better
warrant, or must she still rely on her poor self for witness?
The basis of modern idealism is Kant’s doctrine of the
Transcendental Ego of Apperception.  By this formidable term Kant
merely meant the fact that the consciousness “I think them” must
(potentially or actually) accompany all our objects.  Former
skeptics had said as much, but the “I” in question had remained
for them identified with the personal individual.  Kant
abstracted and depersonalized it, and made it the most universal
of all his categories, although for Kant himself the
Transcendental Ego had no theological implications.
It was reserved for his successors to convert Kant’s notion of
Bewusstsein uberhaupt, or abstract consciousness, into an
infinite concrete self-consciousness which is the soul of the
world, and in which our sundry personal self-consciousnesses
have their being.  It would lead me into technicalities to show
you even briefly how this transformation was in point of fact
effected.  Suffice it to say that in the Hegelian school, which
to-day so deeply influences both British and American thinking,
two principles have borne the brunt of the operation.
The first of these principles is that the old logic of identity
never gives us more than a post-mortem dissection of disjecta
membra, and that the fullness of life can be construed to thought
only by recognizing that every object which our thought may
propose to itself involves the notion of some other object which
seems at first to negate the first one.
The second principle is that to be conscious of a negation is
already virtually to be beyond it.  The mere asking of a question
or expression of a dissatisfaction proves that the answer or the
satisfaction is already imminent; the finite, realized as such,
is already the infinite in posse.
Applying these principles, we seem to get a propulsive force into
our logic which the ordinary logic of a bare, stark self-identity
in each thing never attains to.  The objects of our thought now
ACT within our thought, act as objects act when given in
experience.  They change and develop. They introduce something
other than themselves along with them; and this other, at first
only ideal or potential, presently proves itself also to be
actual.  It supersedes the thing at first supposed, and both
verifies and corrects it, in developing the fullness of its
meaning.
The program is excellent; the universe IS a place where things
are followed by other things that both correct and fulfill them;
and a logic which gave us something like this movement of fact
would express truth far better than the traditional school-logic,
which never gets of its own accord from anything to anything
else, and registers only predictions and subsumptions, or static
resemblances and differences. Nothing could be more unlike the
methods of dogmatic theology than those of this new logic.  Let
me quote in illustration some passages from the Scottish
transcendentalist whom I have already named.
“How are we to conceive,” Principal Caird writes, “of the reality
in which all intelligence rests?”  He replies:  “Two things may
without difficulty be proved, viz., that this reality is an
absolute Spirit, and conversely that it is only in communion with
this absolute Spirit or Intelligence that the finite Spirit can
realize itself.  It is absolute; for the faintest movement of
human intelligence would be arrested, if it did not presuppose
the absolute reality of intelligence, of thought itself.  Doubt
or denial themselves presuppose and indirectly affirm it.  When I
pronounce anything to be true, I pronounce it, indeed, to be
relative to thought, but not to be relative to my thought, or to
the thought of any other individual mind.  From the existence of
all individual minds as such I can abstract; I can think them
away.  But that which I cannot think away is thought or
self-consciousness itself, in its independence and absoluteness,
or, in other words, an Absolute Thought or Self-Consciousness.”
Here, you see, Principal Caird makes the transition which Kant
did not make:  he converts the omnipresence of consciousness in
general as a condition of “truth” being anywhere possible, into
an omnipresent universal consciousness, which he identifies with
God in his concreteness.  He next proceeds to use the principle
that to acknowledge your limits is in essence to be beyond them;
and makes the transition to the religious experience of
individuals in the following words:–
“If [Man] were only a creature of transient sensations and
impulses, of an ever coming and going succession of intuitions,
fancies, feelings, then nothing could ever have for him the
character of objective truth or reality.  But it is the
prerogative of man’s spiritual nature that he can yield himself
up to a thought and will that are infinitely larger than his own. 
As a thinking self-conscious being, indeed, he may be said, by
his very nature, to live in the atmosphere of the Universal Life.
As a thinking being, it is possible for me to suppress and quell
in my consciousness every movement of self-assertion, every
notion and opinion that is merely mine, every desire that belongs
to me as this particular Self, and to become the pure medium of a
thought that is universal–in one word, to live no more my own
life, but let my consciousness be possessed and suffused by the
Infinite and Eternal life of spirit.  And yet it is just in this
renunciation of self that I truly gain myself, or realize the
highest possibilities of my own nature.  For whilst in one sense
we give up self to live the universal and absolute life of
reason, yet that to which we thus surrender ourselves is in
reality our truer self.  The life of absolute reason is not a
life that is foreign to us.”
Nevertheless, Principal Caird goes on to say, so far as we are
able outwardly to realize this doctrine, the balm it offers
remains incomplete.  Whatever we may be in posse, the very best
of us in actu falls very short of being absolutely divine. Social
morality, love, and self-sacrifice even, merge our Self only in
some other finite self or selves.  They do not quite identify it
with the Infinite.  Man’s ideal destiny, infinite in abstract
logic, might thus seem in practice forever unrealizable.
“Is there, then,” our author continues, “no solution of the
contradiction between the ideal and the actual?  We answer, There
is such a solution, but in order to reach it we are carried
beyond the sphere of morality into that of religion.  It may be
said to be the essential characteristic of religion as contrasted
with morality, that it changes aspiration into fruition,
anticipation into realization; that instead of leaving man in the
interminable pursuit of a vanishing ideal, it makes him the
actual partaker of a divine or infinite life.  Whether we view
religion from the human side or the divine–as the surrender of
the soul to God, or as the life of God in the soul–in either
aspect it is of its very essence that the Infinite has ceased to
be a far-off vision, and has become a present reality.  The very
first pulsation of the spiritual life, when we rightly apprehend
its significance, is the indication that the division between the
Spirit and its object has vanished, that the ideal has become
real, that the finite has reached its goal and become suffused
with the presence and life of the Infinite.
“Oneness of mind and will with the divine mind and will is not
the future hope and aim of religion, but its very beginning and
birth in the soul.  To enter on the religious life is to
terminate the struggle.  In that act which constitutes the
beginning of the religious life–call it faith, or trust, or
self-surrender, or by whatever name you will–there is involved
the identification of the finite with a life which is eternally
realized.  It is true indeed that the religious life is
progressive; but understood in the light of the foregoing idea,
religious progress is not progress TOWARDS, but WITHIN the sphere
of the Infinite.  It is not the vain attempt by endless finite
additions or increments to become possessed of infinite wealth,
but it is the endeavor, by the constant exercise of spiritual
activity, to appropriate that infinite inheritance of which we
are already in possession.  The whole future of the religious
life is given in its beginning, but it is given implicitly.  The
position of the man who has entered on the religious life is that
evil, error, imperfection, do not really belong to him:  they are
excrescences which have no organic relation to his true nature: 
they are already virtually, as they will be actually, suppressed
and annulled, and in the very process of being annulled they
become the means of spiritual progress.  Though he is not exempt
from temptation and conflict, [yet] in that inner sphere in which
his true life lies, the struggle is over, the victory already
achieved.  It is not a finite but an infinite life which the
spirit lives.  Every pulse-beat of its [existence] is the
expression and realization of the life of God."[299]
[299] John Caird:  An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion
London and New York, 1880, pp. 243-250, and 291-299, much
abridged.
You will readily admit that no description of the phenomena of
the religious consciousness could be better than these words of
your lamented preacher and philosopher. They reproduce the very
rapture of those crises of conversion of which we have been
hearing; they utter what the mystic felt but was unable to
communicate; and the saint, in hearing them, recognizes his own
experience.  It is indeed gratifying to find the content of
religion reported so unanimously.  But when all is said and done,
has Principal Caird–and I only use him as an example of that
whole mode of thinking–transcended the sphere of feeling and of
the direct experience of the individual, and laid the foundations
of religion in impartial reason?  Has he made religion universal
by coercive reasoning, transformed it from a private faith into a
public certainty?  Has he rescued its affirmations from obscurity
and mystery?
I believe that he has done nothing of the kind, but that he has
simply reaffirmed the individual’s experiences in a more
generalized vocabulary.  And again, I can be excused from proving
technically that the transcendentalist reasonings fail to make
religion universal, for I can point to the plain fact that a
majority of scholars, even religiously disposed ones, stubbornly
refuse to treat them as convincing.  The whole of Germany, one
may say, has positively rejected the Hegelian argumentation.  As
for Scotland, I need only mention Professor Fraser’s and
Professor Pringle-Pattison’s memorable criticisms, with which so
many of you are familiar.[300]  Once more, I ask, if
transcendental idealism were <445> as objectively and absolutely
rational as it pretends to be, could it possibly fail so
egregiously to be persuasive?
[300] A. C. Fraser:  Philosophy of Theism, second edition,
Edinburgh and London, 1899, especially part ii, chaps. vii. and
viii.  A. Seth [Pringle-Pattison]:  Hegelianism and Personality,
Ibid., 1890, passim.
The most persuasive arguments in favor of a concrete individual
Soul of the world, with which I am acquainted, are those of my
colleague, Josiah Royce, in his Religious Aspect of Philosophy,
Boston, 1885; in his Conception of God, New York and London,
1897; and lately in his Aberdeen Gifford Lectures, The World and
the Individual, 2 vols., New York and London, 1901-02.  I
doubtless seem to some of my readers to evade the philosophic
duty which my thesis in this lecture imposes on me, by not even
attempting to meet Professor Royce’s arguments articulately.  I
admit the momentary evasion.  In the present lectures, which are
cast throughout in a popular mould, there seemed no room for
subtle metaphysical discussion, and for tactical purposes it was
sufficient the contention of philosophy being what it is (namely,
that religion can be transformed into a universally convincing
science), to point to the fact that no religious philosophy has
actually convinced the mass of thinkers.  Meanwhile let me say
that I hope that the present volume may be followed by another,
if I am spared to write it, in which not only Professor Royce’s
arguments, but others for monistic absolutism shall be considered
with all the technical fullness which their great importance
calls for.  At present I resign myself to lying passive under the
reproach of superficiality.
What religion reports, you must remember, always purports to be a
fact of experience:  the divine is actually present, religion
says, and between it and ourselves relations of give and take are
actual.  If definite perceptions of fact like this cannot stand
upon their own feet, surely abstract reasoning cannot give them
the support they are in need of.  Conceptual processes can class
facts, define them, interpret them; but they do not produce them,
nor can they reproduce their individuality.  There is always a
PLUS, a THISNESS, which feeling alone can answer for.  Philosophy
in this sphere is thus a secondary function, unable to warrant
faith’s veracity, and so I revert to the thesis which I announced
at the beginning of this lecture.
In all sad sincerity I think we must conclude that the attempt to
demonstrate by purely intellectual processes the truth of the
deliverances of direct religious experience is absolutely
hopeless.
It would be unfair to philosophy, however, to leave her under
this negative sentence.  Let me close, then, by briefly
enumerating what she CAN do for religion.  If she will abandon
metaphysics and deduction for criticism and induction, and
frankly transform herself from theology into science of
religions, she can make herself enormously useful.
The spontaneous intellect of man always defines the divine which
it feels in ways that harmonize with its temporary intellectual
prepossessions.  Philosophy can by comparison eliminate the local
and the accidental from these definitions.  Both from dogma and
from worship she can remove historic incrustations.  By
confronting the spontaneous religious constructions with the
results of natural science, philosophy can also eliminate
doctrines that are now known to be scientifically absurd or
incongruous.
 
Sifting out in this way unworthy formulations, she can leave a
residuum of conceptions that at least are possible. With these
she can deal as HYPOTHESES, testing them in all the manners,
whether negative or positive, by which hypotheses are ever
tested.  She can reduce their number, as some are found more open
to objection.  She can perhaps become the champion of one which
she picks out as being the most closely verified or verifiable. 
She can refine upon the definition of this hypothesis,
distinguishing between what is innocent over-belief and symbolism
in the expression of it, and what is to be literally taken.  As a
result, she can offer mediation between different believers, and
help to bring about consensus of opinion.  She can do this the
more successfully, the better she discriminates the common and
essential from the individual and local elements of the religious
beliefs which she compares.
I do not see why a critical Science of Religions of this sort
might not eventually command as general a public adhesion as is
commanded by a physical science.  Even the personally
non-religious might accept its conclusions on trust, much as
blind persons now accept the facts of optics–it might appear as
foolish to refuse them.  Yet as the science of optics has to be
fed in the first instance, and continually verified later, by
facts experienced by seeing persons; so the science of religions
would depend for its original material on facts of personal
experience, and would have to square itself with personal
experience through all its critical reconstructions.  It could
never get away from concrete life, or work in a conceptual
vacuum.  It would forever have to confess, as every science
confesses, that the subtlety of nature flies beyond it, and that
its formulas are but approximations. Philosophy lives in words,
but truth and fact well up into our lives in ways that exceed
verbal formulation.  There is in the living act of perception
always something that glimmers and twinkles and will not be
caught, and for which reflection comes too late.  No one knows
this as well as the philosopher.  He must fire his volley of new
vocables out of his conceptual shotgun, for his profession
condemns him to this industry, but he secretly knows the
hollowness and irrelevancy. His formulas are like stereoscopic or
kinetoscopic photographs seen outside the instrument; they lack
the depth, the motion, the vitality.  In the religious sphere, in
particular, belief that formulas are true can never wholly take
the place of personal experience.
In my next lecture I will try to complete my rough description of
religious experience; and in the lecture after that, which is the
last one, I will try my hand at formulating conceptually the
truth to which it is a witness.
Continue...

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
