


What we had long anticipated of the sufferings of the Indians began to
manifest itself as the spring drew on. Its extent was first brought to
our knowledge by those who came in little parties begging for food.
As long as it was possible to issue occasional rations their Father
continued to do so, but the supplies in the Commissary Department were
now so much reduced that Colonel Cutler did not feel justified in
authorizing anything beyond a scanty relief, and this only in extreme
cases.
We had ourselves throughout the winter used the greatest economy with
our own stores, that we might not exhaust our slender stock of flour and
meal before it could be replenished from “below.” We had even purchased
some sour flour which had been condemned by the commissary, and had
contrived, by a plentiful use of saleratus and a due proportion of
potatoes, to make of it a very palatable kind of bread. But as we had
continued to give to party after party, when they would come to us to
represent their famishing condition, the time at length arrived when we
had nothing to give.
The half-breed families of the neighborhood, who had, like ourselves,
continued to share with the needy as long as their own stock lasted,
were now obliged, of necessity, to refuse further assistance. These
women often came to lament with us over the sad accounts that were
brought from the wintering grounds. It had been a very open winter. The
snow had scarcely been enough at any time to permit the Indians to track
the deer; in fact, all the game had been driven off by the troops and
war-parties scouring the country through the preceding summer.
We heard of their dying by companies from mere inanition, and lying
stretched in the road to the Portage, whither they were striving to drag
their exhausted frames. Soup made of the bark of the slippery elm, or
stewed acorns, were the only food that many had subsisted on for weeks.
We had for a long time received our own food by daily rations from the
garrison, for things had got to such a pass that there was no
possibility of obtaining a barrel of flour at a time. After our meals
were finished I always went into the pantry, and collecting carefully
every remaining particle of food set it aside, to be given to some of
the wretched applicants by whom we were constantly thronged.
One day as I was thus employed, a face appeared at the window with which
I had once been familiar. It was the pretty daughter of the elder
Day-kau-ray. She had formerly visited us often, watching with great
interest our employments–our sewing, our weeding and cultivating the
garden, or our reading. Of the latter, I had many times endeavored to
give her some idea, showing her the plates in the Family Bible, and
doing my best to explain them to her, but of late I had quite lost sight
of her. Now, how changed, how wan she looked! As I addressed her with my
ordinary phrase, ’Tshah-ko-zhah?” (What is it?) she gave a sigh that
was almost a sob. She did not beg, but her countenance spoke volumes.
I took my dish and handed it to her, expecting to see her devour the
contents eagerly; but no–she took it, and, making signs that she would
soon return, walked away. When she brought it back, I was almost sure
she had not tasted a morsel herself.
Oh! the boats–the boats with the corn! Why did they not come? We both
wrote and sent to hasten them, but, alas! everything and everybody moved
so slowly in those unenterprising times! We could only feel sure that
they would come when they were ready, and not a moment before.
We were soon obliged to keep both doors and windows fast, to shut out
the sight of misery we could not relieve. If a door were opened for the
admission of a member of the family, some wretched mother would rush in,
grasp the hand of my infant, and, placing that of her famishing child
within it, tell us, pleadingly, that he was imploring “his little
brother” for food. The stoutest man could not have beheld with dry eyes
the heart-rending spectacle which often presented itself. It was in vain
that we screened the lower portion of our windows with curtains. They
would climb up on the outside, and tier upon tier of gaunt, wretched
faces would peer in above, to watch us, and see if indeed we were as ill
provided as we represented ourselves.
The noble old Day-kau-ray came one day, from the Barribault, to apprise
us of the state of his village. More than forty of his people, he said,
had now been for many days without food, save bark and roots. My husband
accompanied him to the commanding officer to tell his story and
ascertain if any amount of food could be obtained from that quarter. The
result was, the promise of a small allowance of flour, sufficient to
alleviate the cravings of his own family.
When this was explained to the chief, he turned away. “No,” he said,
“if his people could not be relieved, he and his family would starve
with them!” And he refused, for those nearest and dearest to him, the
proffered succor, until all could share alike.
The announcement, at length, that “the boats were in sight,” was a
thrilling and most joyful sound.
Hundreds of poor creatures were assembled on the bank, watching their
arrival. Oh! how torturing was their slow approach, by the winding
course of the river, through the extended prairie! As the first boat
touched the land, we, who were gazing on the scene with anxiety and
impatience only equalled by that of the sufferers, could scarcely
refrain from laughing, to see old Wild-Cat, who had somewhat fallen off
in his huge amount of flesh, seize “the Washington Woman” in his arms
and hug and dance with her in the ecstasy of his delight.
Their Father made a sign to them all to fall to work with their
hatchets, which they had long held ready, and in an incredibly short
time barrel after barrel of corn was broken open and emptied, while even
the little children possessed themselves of pans and kettles full, and
hastened to the fires that were blazing around to parch and cook that
which they had seized.
From this time forward, there was no more destitution. The present
abundance was immediately followed by the arrival of supplies for the
Commissary’s Department; and, refreshed and invigorated, our poor
children departed once more to their villages, to make ready their crops
for the ensuing season.
In the course of the spring, we received a visit from the Rev. Mr. Kent
and Mrs. Kent, of Galena. This event is memorable, as being the first
occasion on which the gospel, according to the Protestant faith, was
preached at Fort Winnebago. The large parlor of the hospital was fitted
up for the service, and gladly did we each say to the other, “Let us go
to the house of the Lord!”
For nearly three years had we lived here without the blessing of a
public service of praise and thanksgiving. We regarded this commencement
as an omen of better times, and our little “sewing-society” worked with
renewed industry, to raise a fund Which might be available hereafter in
securing the permanent services of a missionary.
Not long after this, on a fine spring morning, as we were seated at
breakfast, a party of Indians entered the parlor, and came to the door
of the room where we were. Two of them passed through, and went out upon
a small portico–the third remained standing in the door-way at which he
had at first appeared. He was nearly opposite me, and as I raised my
eyes, spite of his change of dress, and the paint with which he was
covered, I at once recognized him.
I continued to pour the coffee, and, as I did so, I remarked to my
husband, “The one behind you, with whom you are speaking, is one of the
escaped prisoners.”
Without turning his head, Mr. Kinzie continued to listen to all the
directions they were giving him about the repairing of their guns,
traps, etc., which they wished to leave with the blacksmith. As they
went on, he carelessly turned towards the parlor door, and replied to
the one speaking to him. When he again addressed me, it was to say,–
“You are right, but it is no affair of ours. We are none of us to look
so as to give him notice that we suspect anything. They are undoubtedly
innocent, and have suffered enough already.”
Contrary to his usual custom, their Father did not ask their names, but
wrote their directions, which he tied to their different implements, and
then bade them go and deliver them themselves to M. Morrin.
The rest of our circle were greatly pleased at the young fellow’s
audacity, and we quite longed to tell the officers that we could have
caught one of their fugitives for them, if we had had a mind.
The time had now come when we began to think seriously of leaving our
pleasant home, and taking up our residence at Detroit, while making
arrangements for a permanent settlement at Chicago.
This intelligence, when communicated to our Winnebago children, brought
forth great lamentations and demonstrations of regret. From the
surrounding country they came flocking in, to inquire into the truth of
the tidings they had heard, and to petition earnestly that we would
continue to live and die among them.
Among them all, no one seemed so overwhelmed with affliction as
Elizabeth, our poor Cut-Nose. When we first told her of our intention,
she sat for hours in the same spot, wiping away the tears that would
find their way down her cheeks, with the corner of the chintz shawl she
wore pinned across her bosom.
“No! I never, never, never shall I find such friends again,” she would
exclaim. “You will go away, and I shall be left here all alone.”
Wild-Cat, too, the fat, jolly Wild-Cat, gave way to the most audible
lamentations.
“Oh, my little brother,” he said to the baby, on the morning of our
departure, when he had insisted on taking him and seating him on his
fat, dirty knee, “you will never come back to see your poor brother
again!”
And having taken an extra glass on the occasion, he wept like an infant.
It was with sad hearts that on the morning of the 1st of July, 1888, we
bade adieu to the long cortége which followed us to the boat, now
waiting to convey us to Green Bay, where we were to meet Governor Porter
and Mr. Brush, and proceed, under their escort, to Detroit.
When they had completed their tender farewells, they turned to accompany
their father across the Portage, on his route to Chicago, and long
after, we could see them winding along the road, and hear their loud
lamentations at a parting which they foresaw would be forever.
Continue...

This eBook of “Wau-bun” by Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
