


Early in January the snow fell in great abundance. We had an unusual
quantity at the Portage, but in “the diggings,” as the lead-mining
country was called, it was of an unheard-of depth–five or six feet upon
a level.
An express had been dispatched to Chicago by the officers to take our
letters, and bring back the mail from that place. A tough, hardy
soldier, named Sulky, acted as messenger, and he had hitherto made light
of his burden or the length of the way, notwithstanding that his task
was performed on foot with his pack upon his shoulders. But now Sulky
had been absent some weeks, and we had given him up entirely, persuaded
that he must have perished with cold and starvation.
At length he appeared, nearly blind from travelling in the snow. He had
lain by three weeks in an Indian lodge, the snow being too deep to
permit him to journey. The account he gave put an end to the hopes I had
begun to entertain of being able to visit our friends at Chicago in the
course of this winter.
We had, before the last heavy fall of snow, been forming plans to that
effect. Captain Harney had kindly commenced preparing some trains, or
boxes placed on sledges, which it was thought would, when lined with
buffalo-skins, furnish a very comfortable kind of vehicle for the
journey; and I was still inclined to think a good, deep bed of snow over
the whole country no great obstacle to a sleigh-ride. The whole matter
was, however, cut short by the commanding officer, who from the first
had violently opposed the scheme, declaring that he would order the
sentinels to fire on us if we attempted to leave the fort. So, finding
the majority against us, we were obliged to yield.
The arrival of sweet, lovely little Lizzie Twiggs, before January was
quite past, was an event that shed light and joy in at least two
dwellings. It seemed as if she belonged to all of us, and as she
increased in size and beauty it was hard to say who, among us all, was
most proud of her. If we had ever felt any languid hours before, we
could have none now–she was the pet, the darling, the joint property of
both households.
Whatever regret I might have had, previous to this event, at the idea
of leaving my friend for the three weeks to which we proposed to limit
our visit to Chicago, I felt now that she would scarcely miss me, and
that we might hold ourselves in readiness to take advantage of the first
improvement in the weather, to put this favorite project in execution.
During the latter part of February the cold became less severe. The
snows melted away, and by the beginning of March the weather was so warm
and genial, that we were quite confident of being able to make the
journey on horseback without any serious difficulty.
Our plans once settled upon, the first thing to be provided was warm and
comfortable apparel. A riding-habit of stout broadcloth was pronounced
indispensable to my equipment. But of such an article I was destitute.
Nothing among my wedding travelling gear seemed in any way to offer a
substitute. What was to be done? The requisite material was to be found
in abundance at the sutler’s store (the shantee, as it was technically
termed), but how to get it manufactured into a suitable garment was the
question.
The regimental tailor was summoned. He was cook to one of the companies,
and there were at first some doubts whether he could be permitted to
forsake the spit for the needle, during the time I should require his
services. All his tailoring-work had, heretofore, been done at odd times
on a bench in the company kitchen, and thither he now proposed to carry
the riding-habit. I suggested that, in order to superintend the work, I
should thus be driven to take up my abode for the time being in the
barracks, which would be a decided inconvenience.
To remedy the difficulty, he was finally so happy as to find a soldier
in “Company D,” who consented to officiate in his place as cook until
his term of service to me should expire.
Behold, then, a little, solemn-looking man in his stocking-feet, seated
cross-legged on an Indian mat by my parlor window. He had made all his
arrangements himself, and I deemed it wisest not to interfere with him.
The cutting-out was the most difficult part, and, as he had never made a
lady’s riding-habit, that task fell to my share. I was as great a novice
as himself, and I must admit that this, my first effort, was open to
criticism. But the little tailor was of a different opinion. He was in
an ecstasy with our joint performance.
“Upon my word, madam,” he would exclaim, surveying it with admiring
eyes, “we shall have a very respectable garment!” I do not know how many
times he repeated this during the three days that the work was in
progress.
I believe he had not perfect confidence in the culinary powers of his
comrade of “Company D,” for regularly a half-hour before beat of drum
his work was folded and laid aside, his snips gathered up, and, all
things being restored to order, he would slip out, resume his shoes,
which, Turk-like, he had left outside the door, and speed over to the
barrack-kitchen to see how matters were going on.
In the mean time, great preparations were making below, under the
supervision of our tidy, active little French servant, Mrs. Pillon, the
wife of one of the engagés, by whom the irregular and unmanageable
Louisa had been replaced.
Biscuits were baked, a ham, some tongues, and sundry pieces of salt pork
were boiled, coffee roasted and ground, sugar cracked, isinglass cut in
pieces of the size requisite for a pot of coffee. For the reception of
all these different articles cotton bags of different sizes had been
previously prepared. Large sacks of skin, called by the Canadians
porches, were also provided to hold the more bulky provisions, for our
journey was to be a long one.
The distance from Fort Winnebago to Chicago was not very formidable, it
is true, if the direct route were taken; but that we knew to be
impossible at this season of the year. The route by Kosh-ko-nong was out
of the question; all the Indians being absent from their villages in the
winter, and the ice being now gone, we could have no means of crossing
the Rock River at that place.
There remained therefore no alternative but to proceed south to Dixon,
or, as it was then called, Ogie’s Ferry, the only certain means of
crossing this broad and rapid stream. This route being so much out of
our direct course that we could not hope to accomplish it in less than
six days, it was necessary to prepare accordingly.
While the wardrobe and provisions were thus in preparation, arrangements
were also being made as to our retinue and mode of conveyance.
Mr. Kinzie decided to take with him but two men: Plante and Pierre
Roy,–the former to act as guide, on the assurance that he knew every
mile of the way, from the Portage to Ogie’s Ferry, and from Ogie’s Ferry
to Chicago.
The claims of the different saddle-horses were discussed, and the most
eligible one was selected for my use. We hesitated for a time between
“Le Gris” and “Souris,” two much-vaunted animals, belonging to Paquette,
the interpreter. At length, being determined, like most of my sex, by a
regard for exterior, I chose “Le Gris,” and “Souris” was assigned to
young Roy; my own little stumpy pony, “Brunet,” being pronounced just
the thing for a pack-saddle. My husband rode his own bay horse “Tom,"
while Plante, the gayest and proudest of the party, bestrode a fine,
large animal called “Jerry,” which had lately been purchased for my use;
and thus was our cortége complete.
Continue...

This eBook of “Wau-bun” by Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
