


As the boats might be expected in a few days, it was thought best to
begin at once what preparations were in my power towards housekeeping.
These were simply the fitting and sewing of my carpets, in which I was
kindly assisted by Mrs. Twiggs; and, the wife of one of our Frenchmen
having come over from the Agency and made everything tidy and
comfortable, the carpets were soon tacked down, and the rooms were ready
for the reception of the rest of the furniture.
I had made many fruitless attempts, both in Detroit and Green Bay, to
procure a servant-woman to accompany me to my new home. Sometimes one
would present herself, but, before we could come to a final agreement,
the thoughts of the distance, of the savages, the hardships of the
journey, or, perhaps, the objections of friends, would interfere to
break off the negotiation; so that I had at length been obliged to rest
satisfied with the simple hope held out by my husband, that one of his
French employés, with his wife, would be contented to take up their
abode with us.
In this state of things, all difficulties seemed to be obviated by the
proposal of Major Twiggs, that we should take into our service a young
colored girl whom he had brought from Buffalo, in the spring, to wait on
Mrs. T. until her own servants should arrive from the South.
Louisa was accordingly sent for, an uncommonly handsome young negress,
with an intelligent but very demure countenance, who called herself
fifteen years of age, but who, from the progress in vice and iniquity I
afterwards discovered her to have made, must have been at least several
years older. Be that as it may, she now seemed to have no fault but
carelessness and inexperience, both of which I had great hopes she would
get the better of, under careful training.
My first week’s visit with Mrs. Twiggs had just expired when word was
given that the boats were in sight–the boats that contained our
furniture–and the expected arrival of Louis Philippe to visit Queen
Victoria could scarcely have created a more universal sensation, than
did this announcement in our little community. Although we knew that
some hours must yet elapse before they could reach the spot for
disembarkation, we were constantly on the watch, and at length all the
young officers, followed by as many of the soldiers as were off duty,
accompanied Mr. Kinzie down the bank to the landing, to witness and, if
necessary, to assist in helping everything safe to land.
Sad was the plight in which matters were found. The water poured out of
the corners of the boxes as they were successively hoisted on shore. Too
impatient to wait until they could be carried up to the fort, the
gentlemen soon furnished themselves with, hammers and hatchets, and fell
eagerly to work, opening the boxes to explore the extent of the damage.
Alas for the mahogany! not a piece from which the edges and veneering
were not starting. It had all the appearance of having lain under the
Grande Chûte for days. Poor Hamilton was load in his protestations and
excuses.
It was the fault of the men, of the weather, of the way the things were
packed. “Confound it! he had taken the best care of the things he
possibly could–better than he had ever taken before–it would get
done!”
There was nothing but to be patient and make the best of it. And when
the pretty sideboard and work-table had been thoroughly rubbed and set
up, and all the little knick-knacks arranged on the mantel-piece–when
the white curtains were hung at the windows, and the chairs and
dining-table each in its proper place in relation to the piano, our
parlor was pronounced “magnificent.” At least so seemed to think
Hamilton, who came to give one admiring look, and to hear the music of
the piano, which was a perfect novelty to him. His description of it to
the young officers, after his return to the Bay, was expressive of his
admiration and wonder–"There it stood on its four legs! Anybody might
go up and touch it!”
In due time the dinner- and tea-sets were carefully bestowed in the
“Davis,” together with sundry jars of sweetmeats that I had prepared in
Detroit; the iron and tin utensils were placed in a neat cupboard in the
kitchen, of which my piano-box supplied the frame; the barrel of eggs
and tubs of butter, brought all the way from Ohio, were ranged in the
store-room; a suitable quantity of salt pork and flour was purchased
from the commissary; and, there being no lack of game of every
description, the offering of our red children, we were ready to commence
housekeeping.
The first dinner in her own home is an era in the life of a young
housekeeper. I shall certainly never forget mine. While I was in the
lower regions superintending my very inexpert little cook, my husband
made his appearance, to say that, as the payment (then the all-absorbing
topic of interest) would not commence until afternoon, he had invited M.
Rolette, Mr. Hempstead, and four other gentlemen to dine with us.
“So unexpected–so unprepared for?”
“Never mind; give them anything you have. They have been living for
some days in tents, and anything will taste well to them.”
My dinner had been intended to consist chiefly of a venison pasty, and
fortunately the only dish among my store was of very large proportions,
so that there was already smoking in the oven a pie of a size nearly
equal to the famous Norwich pudding; thus, with some trifling additions
to the bill of fare, we made out very well, and the master of the house
had the satisfaction of hearing the impromptu dinner very much commended
by his six guests.
Continue...

This eBook of “Wau-bun” by Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
