


We soon learned that a great panic prevailed at Green Bay on account of
the Sauks. The people seemed to have possessed themselves with the idea
that the enemy would visit this place on their way to Canada to put
themselves under the protection of the British Government. How they were
to get there from this point–whether they were to stop and fabricate
themselves bark canoes for the purpose, or whether they were to charter
one of Mr. Newbery’s schooners for the trip, the good people did not
seem fully to have made up their minds. One thing is certain, a portion
of the citizens were nearly frightened to death, and were fully
convinced that there was no safety for them but within the walls of the
old dilapidated fort, from which nearly all the troops had been
withdrawn and sent to Fort Winnebago some time previous.
Their fears were greatly aggravated by a report, brought by some
traveller, that he had slept at night on the very spot where the Sauks
breakfasted the next morning. Now, as the Sauks were known to be reduced
to very short commons, there was every reason to suppose that if the man
had waited half an hour longer they would have eaten him; so he was
considered to have made a wonderful escape.
Our immediate friends and acquaintances were far from joining in these
fears. The utter improbability of such a movement was obvious to all who
considered the nature of the country to be traversed, and the efficient
and numerous body of whites by whom they must be opposed on their
entrance into that neighborhood. There were some, however, who could not
be persuaded that there was any security but in flight, and eagerly was
the arrival of the “Mariner” looked for, as the anxiety grew more and
more intense.
The “Mariner” appeared at last. It was early in the morning. In one hour
from the time of her arrival the fearful news she brought had spread the
whole length of the settlement–"the cholera was in this country! It was
in Detroit–it was among the troops who were on their way to the seat of
war! Whole companies had died of it in the river St. Clair, and the
survivors had been put on shore at Port Gratiot, to save their lives as
best they might!” We were shut in between the savage foe on one hand and
the pestilence on the other!
To those who had friends at the East the news was most appalling. It
seemed to unman every one who heard it. An officer who had exhibited the
most distinguished prowess in the battle-field, and also in some private
enterprises demanding unequalled courage and daring, was the first to
bring us the news. When he had communicated it, he laid his head
against the window-sill and wept like a child.
Those who must perforce rejoin friends near and dear, left the Bay in
the “Mariner;” all others considered their present home the safest; and
so it proved, for the dreadful scourge did not visit Green Bay that
season.
The weather was intensely hot, and the mosquitoes so thick that we did
not pretend to walk on the parade after sunset, unless armed with two
fans, or green branches to keep constantly in motion, in order to
disperse them. This, by the way, was the surest method of attracting
them. We had somehow forgotten the apathetic indifference which had
often excited our wonder in Old Smoker, as we had observed him calmly
sitting and allowing his naked arms and person to become literally
gray with the tormenting insects. Then he would quietly wipe off a
handful, the blood following the movement of the hand over his skin, and
stoically wait for an occasion to repeat the movement. It is said that
the mosquito, if undisturbed until he has taken his fill, leaves a much
less inflamed bite than if brushed away in the midst of his feast.
By day, the air was at this season filled with what is called the Green
Bay fly, a species of dragon-fly, with which the outer walls of the
houses are at times so covered that their color is hardly
distinguishable. Their existence is very ephemeral, scarcely lasting
more than a day. Their dead bodies are seen adhering to the walls and
windows within, and they fall without in such numbers that after a high
wind has gathered them into rows along the sides of the quarters, one
may walk through them and toss them up with their feet like the dry
leaves in autumn.
As we walked across the parade, our attention was sometimes called to a
tapping upon the bars of the dungeon in which a criminal was
confined–it was the murderer of Lieutenant Foster.
It may be remembered that this amiable young officer had been our
travelling companion in our journey from Chicago the preceding year.
Some months after his arrival at Port Howard, he had occasion to order a
soldier of his company, named Doyle, into confinement for intoxication.
The man, a few days afterwards, prevailed on the sergeant of the guard
to escort him to Lieutenant Foster’s quarters on the plea that he wished
to speak to him. He ascended the stairs to the young officer’s room,
while the sergeant and another soldier remained at the foot, near the
door.
Doyle entered, and, addressing Lieutenant Foster, said, “Will you please
tell me, lieutenant, what I am confined for?”
“No, sir,” replied the officer; “you know your offence well enough;
return to your place of confinement.”
The man ran down-stairs, wrenched the gun from the sergeant’s hand, and,
rushing back, discharged it at the heart of Lieutenant Foster.
He turned to go to his inner apartment, but exclaiming, “Ah me!” he fell
dead before the entrance.
Doyle, having been tried by a civil court, was now under sentence,
awaiting his execution. He was a hardened villain, never exhibiting the
slightest compunction for his crime.
The commanding officer, Major Clark, sent to him one day to inquire if
he wanted anything for his comfort.
“If the Major pleased,” he replied, “he should like to have a light and
a copy of Byron’s Works.”
Some fears were entertained that he would contrive to make way with
himself before the day of execution, and, to guard against it, he was
deprived of everything that could furnish him a weapon. His food was
served to him in a wooden bowl, lest a bit of broken crockery might he
used as a means of self destruction.
One morning he sent a little package to the commanding officer as a
present. It contained a strong rope, fabricated from strips of his
blanket, that he had carefully separated, and with a large stout spike
at the end of it. The message accompanying it was, “He wished Major
Clark to see that if he chose to put an end to himself, he could find
means to do it in spite of him.”
And this hardened frame of mind continued to the last. When he was led
out for execution, in passing beyond the gate, he observed a quantity of
lumber recently collected for the construction of a new Company’s
warehouse.
“Ah, captain, what are you going to build here?” inquired he of Captain
Scott, who attended him.
“Doyle,” replied his captain, “you have but a few moments to live–- you
had better employ your thoughts about something else.”
“It is for that very reason, captain,” said he, “that I am inquiring–as
my time is short, I wish to gain all the information I can while it
lasts.”
We were not suffered to remain long in suspense in regard to the friends
we had left behind. In less than two weeks Old Smoker again made his
appearance. He was the bearer of letters from my husband, informing me
that General Dodge was then with him at Port Winnebago, that Generals
Henry and Alexander were likewise at the Fort, and that as soon as they
had recruited their men and horses, which were pretty well worn out with
scouring the country after Black Hawk, they would march again in pursuit
of him towards the head-waters of the Rock River, where they had every
reason, from information lately brought in by the Winnebagoes, to
believe he would be found.
As he charged us to lay aside all uneasiness on his account, and
moreover held forth the hope of soon coming or sending for us, our minds
became more tranquil.
Not long after this, I was told one morning that ’a lady” wished to
see me at the front door. I obeyed the summons, and, to my surprise, was
greeted by my friend Madame Four-Legs. After much demonstration of joy
at seeing me, such as putting her two hands together over her forehead
and then parting them in a waving kind of gesture, laughing, and patting
me on my arms, she drew from her bosom a letter from my husband, of
which she was the bearer. It was to this effect–"Generals Dodge and
Henry left here a few days since, accompanied by Paquette; they met the
Sauks near the Wisconsin, on the 21st. A battle ensued, in which upwards
of fifty of the enemy were killed–our loss was one killed, and eight
wounded. The citizens are well pleased that all this has been
accomplished without any aid from Old White Beaver.[56] The war must
be near its close, for the militia and regulars together will soon
finish the remaining handful of fugitives.”
The arrival of Lieutenant Hunter, who had obtained leave of absence in
order to escort us, soon put all things in train for our return to Fort
Winnebago. No Mackinac boat was to be had, but in lieu of it a Durham
boat was procured. This is of a description longer and shallower than
the other, with no convenience for rigging up an awning, or shelter of
any kind, over the centre; but its size was better fitted to accommodate
our party, which consisted, besides our own family, of Lieutenant and
Mrs. Hunter, the wife of another officer now stationed at Port
Winnebago, and our cousin, Miss Forsyth. We made up our minds, as will
be supposed, to pretty close quarters.
Our crew was composed partly of Frenchmen and partly of soldiers, and,
all things being in readiness, we set off one fine bright morning in the
latter part of July.
Our second day’s alternate rowing and poling brought us to the Grande
Chûte early in the afternoon.
Here, it is the custom to disembark at the foot of the rapids, and,
ascending the high bank, walk around the fall, while the men pull the
boat up through the foaming waters.
Most of our party had already stepped on shore, when a sudden thought
seized one of the ladies and myself.
“Let us stay in the boat,” said we, “and be pulled up the Chûte.” The
rest of the company went on, while we sat and watched with great
interest the preparations the men were making. They were soon overboard
in the water, and, attaching a strong rope to the bow of the boat, all
lent their aid in pulling as they marched slowly along with their heavy
load. The cargo, consisting only of our trunks and stores, which were of
no very considerable weight, had not been removed.
We went on, now and then getting a tremendous bump against a hidden
rock, and frequently splashed by a shower of foam as the waves roared
and boiled around us.
The men kept as close as possible to the high, precipitous bank, where
the water was smoothest. At the head of the cordel was a merry
simpleton of a Frenchman, who was constantly turning his head to grin
with delight at our evident enjoyment and excitement.
We were indeed in high glee. “Is not this charming?” cried one. “I only
wish––”
The wish, whatever it was, was cut short by a shout and a crash. “Have
a care, Robineau! Mind where you are taking the boat!” was the cry, but
it came too late. More occupied with the ladies than with his duty, the
leader had guided us into the midst of a sharp, projecting tree that
hung from the bank. The first tug ripped out the side of the boat, which
immediately began to fill with water.
My companion and I jumped upon the nearest rocks that showed their heads
above the foam. Our screams and the shouts of the men brought Lieutenant
Hunter and some Indians, who were above on the bank, dashing down to our
rescue. They carried us in their arms to land, while the men worked
lustily at fishing up the contents of the boat, now thoroughly saturated
with water.
We scrambled up the high bank, in a miserable plight, to join in the
general lamentation over the probable consequences of the accident.
“Oh! my husband’s new uniform!” cried one, and “Oh! the miniatures in
the bottom of my trunk!” sighed another–while, “Oh! the silk dresses,
and the ribbons, and the finery!” formed the general chorus.
No one thought of the provisions, although we had observed, in our
progress to shore, the barrel of bread and the tub of ice, which
Lieutenant Hunter had providently brought for our refreshment, sailing
away on the dancing waves. Among the boxes brought to land, and “toted"
up the steep bank, was one containing some loaves of sugar and packages
of tea, which I had bought for our winter’s supply from the sutler at
the post. The young Indian who was the bearer of it set it upon the
ground, and soon called my attention to a thick, white stream that was
oozing from the corners. I made signs for him to taste it. He dipped his
finger in it, and exclaimed with delight to his companions, when he
perceived what it was. I then pointed to his hatchet, and motioned him
to open the box. He did not require a second invitation–it was soon
backed to pieces.
Then, as I beckoned up all the rest of the youngsters who were looking
on, full of wonder, such a scrambling and shouting with delight
succeeded as put us all, particularly the boys, into fits of laughter.
Bowls, dippers, hands, everything that could contain even the smallest
quantity, were put in requisition. The squaws were most active. Those
who could do no better took the stoutest fragments of the blue paper in
which the sugar had been enveloped, and in a trice nothing remained but
the wet, yellow bundles of tea, and the fragments of the splintered box
which had contained it.
By this time fires had been made, and the articles from the trunks were
soon seen covering every shrub and bush in the vicinity. Fortunately,
the box containing the new uniform had been piled high above the others,
in the centre of the boat, and had received but little damage; but sad
was the condition of the wardrobes in general.
Not a white article was to be seen. All was mottled; blue, green, red,
and black intermingling in streaks, and dripping from ends and corners.
To add to the trouble, the rain began to fall, as rain is apt to do, at
an inconvenient moment, and soon the half-dried garments had to be
gathered out of the smoke and huddled away in a most discouraging
condition.
The tent was pitched, wet as it was, and the blankets, wrung out of the
water, and partially dried, were spread upon the ground for our
accommodation at night.
A Hamburg cheese, which had been a part of my stores, was voted to me
for a pillow, and, after a supper the best part of which was a portion
of one of the wet loaves which had remained in a barrel too tightly
wedged to drift away, we betook ourselves to our repose.
The next morning rose hot and sultry. The mosquitoes, which the rain
had kept at bay through the night, now began to make themselves amends,
and to torment us unmercifully.
After our most uncomfortable and unpalatable breakfast, the first
question for consideration was, what we were to do with ourselves. Our
boat lay submerged at the foot of the hill, half-way up the rapids. The
nearest habitation among the Waubanakees was some miles distant, and
this there was no means of reaching but by an Indian canoe, if some of
our present friends and neighbors would be so obliging as to bring one
for our use. Even then it was doubtful if boats could be found
sufficient to convey all our numerous party back to Green Bay.
In the midst of these perplexing consultations a whoop was heard from
beyond the hill, which here sloped away to the north, at the head of the
rapids.
“There is John! that is certainly his voice!” cried more than one of the
company.
It was, indeed, my husband, and in a moment he was among us. Never was
arrival more opportune, more evidently providential.
Not having learned our plans (for the unsettled state of the country had
prevented our sending him word), he had come provided with a boat, to
take us back to Fort Winnebago.
Our drying operations, which we had recommenced this morning, were soon
cut short. Everything was shuffled away in the most expeditious manner
possible, and in an incredibly short time we were transferred to the
other boat, which lay quietly above the Chûte, and were pulling away
towards Winnebago Lake.
We had resolved to go only so far as the vicinity of the lake, where the
breeze would render the mosquitoes less intolerable, and then to stop
and make one more attempt at drying our clothing. Accordingly, when we
reached a beautiful high bank near the Little Butte, we stopped for that
purpose again, unpacked our trunks, and soon every bush and twig was
fluttering with the spoils of the cruel waves.
Hardly had we thus disposed of the last rag or ribbon when the tramp of
horses was heard, followed by loud shouts and cheers ringing through the
forest.
A company of about twenty-five horsemen, with banners flying, veils
fluttering from their hats, and arms glittering in the sun, rode into
our midst, and, amid greetings and roars of laughter, inquired into the
nature and reasons of our singular state of confusion.
They were Colonel Stambough and Alexander Irwin, of Green Bay, with a
company of young volunteers, and followed by a whooping band of
Menomonees, all bound for the seat of war. We comforted them with the
assurance that the victories were by this time all won and the scalps
taken; but, expressing the hope that there were yet a few laurels to be
earned, they bade us adieu, and rapidly pursued their march.
We crossed Lake Winnebago by the clear, beautiful light of a summer
moon. The soft air was just enough to swell the sail, and thus save the
men their labor at the oar.
The witchery of the hour was not, however, sufficient to induce us to
forego our repose after the heat and annoyances of the day–we therefore
disposed ourselves betimes, to be packed away in the centre of the boat.
How it was accomplished no one of the numerous company could tell. If
any accident had occurred to disturb our arrangement, I am sure it would
have been a Chinese puzzle to put us back again in our places. The men
on the outside had much the best of it, and we rather envied those who
were off watch, their ability to snore and change position as the humor
took them.
We reached Powell’s just in time to have gone ashore and prepare our
breakfast had we had wherewithal to prepare it. We had hoped to be able
to procure some supplies here, for hitherto we had been living on the
remains of my husband’s ample stock. That was now so nearly exhausted
that when we found the mess-basket could not be replenished at this
place we began to talk of putting ourselves on allowance.
The wet bread, of which there had remained an ample store, had, as may
be readily imagined, soon fermented under the influence of a July sun.
The tea, too, notwithstanding our careful efforts at drying it on
newspapers and pieces of board, ere long became musty and unfit for use.
There was, literally, nothing left, except the salted meat and a few
crackers, hardly sufficient for the present day.
The men were therefore urged to make all the speed possible, that we
might reach Gleason’s, at Lake Puckaway, in good season on the following
day.
At evening, when we stopped to take our tea at a beautiful little
opening among the trees, we found our old enemies, the mosquitoes, worse
than ever. It was necessary to put on our cloaks and gloves, and tie our
veils close around our throats, only venturing to introduce a cracker or
a cup of tea under this protection in the most stealthy manner.
The men rowed well, and brought us to Gleason’s about eleven o’clock the
next day. We were greeted with the most enthusiastic demonstrations by
my old friend La Grosse Américaine, who had removed here from
Bellefontaine.
“Oh, Mrs. Armstrong,” cried we, “get us some breakfast–we are
famishing!”
At that instant who should appear but our faithful Mâtâ, driving the old
calèche in which we were in the habit of making our little excursions in
the neighborhood of the Port. He had ridden over, hoping to meet us, in
the idea that some of us would prefer this method of reaching our home.
With provident thoughtfulness, he had brought tea, roasted coffee, fresh
butter, eggs, etc., lest we should be short of such luxuries in that
advanced stage of our journey.
His “Good-morning, Madame Johns! How do you dos?” was a pleasant and
welcome sound.
We could not wait for our breakfast, but gathered round La Grosse
Américaine like a parcel of children while she cut and spread slices of
bread-and-butter for us.
After our regular meal was finished, it was decided that sister Margaret
should take Josette, and return with Mâtâ to open the house and make it
ready for our reception. It had been the head-quarters of militia,
Indians, and stragglers of various descriptions during our absence, and
we could easily imagine that a little “misrule and unreason” might have
had sway for that period.
We had yet seventy-two miles, by the devious winding course of the
river, over first the beautiful waters of Lac de Boeuf, and then through
the low, marshy lands that spread away to the Portage. An attempt was
made on the part of one of the gentlemen to create a little excitement
among the ladies as we approached the spot where it had been supposed
the Sauks might pass on their way to the Chippewa country.
“Who knows,” said he, gravely, “but they may be lurking in this
neighborhood yet? If so, we shall probably have some signal. We must be
on the alert!”
Some of the ladies began to turn pale and look about them. After an
interval of perfect silence, a low, prolonged whistle was heard. There
was so much agitation, and even actual terror, that the mischievous
author of the trick was obliged to confess at once, and receive a hearty
scolding for the pain he had caused.
Just before sunset of the second day from Gleason’s we reached our home.
Every thing was radiant with neatness and good order. With the
efficient aid of our good Manaigre and his wife, the house had been
whitewashed from the roof to the door-sill, a thorough scrubbing and
cleansing effected, the carpets unpacked and spread upon the floors, the
furniture arranged, and, though last not least, a noble supper smoked
upon the board by the time we had made, once more, a civilized toilet.
Many of our friends from the Fort were there to greet us, and a more
happy or thankful party has seldom been assembled.
Continue...

This eBook of “Wau-bun” by Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
