


Major and Mrs. Twiggs, and a few of the younger officers (for nearly all
of the older ones were absent), with our brother Robert, or, as he is
called throughout all the Indian tribes, “Bob,” gave us a cordial
welcome–how cordial those alone can know who have come, like us, to a
remote, isolated home in the wilderness. The Major insisted on our
taking possession at once of vacant quarters in the fort, instead of at
“the Agency,” as had been proposed.
“No–we must be under the same roof with them. Mrs. Twiggs had been
without a companion of her own sex for more than four months, and would
certainly not hear of a separation now. But we must be their guests
until the arrival of the boats containing our furniture,” which, under
the care of our old acquaintance, Hamilton Arndt, was making its way
slowly up from Green Bay.
A dinner had been prepared for us. This is one of the advantages of the
zigzag approach by the Fox River–travellers never take their friends by
surprise; and when the whole circle sat down to the hospitable board, we
were indeed a merry company.
After dinner Mrs. Twiggs showed me the quarters assigned to us, on the
opposite side of the spacious hall. They consisted of two large rooms on
each of the three floors or stories of the building. On the ground-floor
the front room was vacant. The one in the rear was to be the
sleeping-apartment, as was evident from a huge, unwieldy bedstead, of
proportions amply sufficient to have accommodated Og, the King of
Bashan, with Mrs. Og and the children into the bargain. We could not
repress our laughter; but the bedstead was nothing to another structure
which occupied a second corner of the apartment.
This edifice had been built under the immediate superintendence of one
of our young lieutenants, and it was plain to be seen that upon it both
he and the soldiers who fabricated it had exhausted all their
architectural skill. The timbers of which it was composed had been
grooved and carved; the pillars that supported the front swelled in and
out in a most fanciful manner; the doors were not only panelled, but
radiated in a way to excite the admiration of all unsophisticated eyes.
A similar piece of workmanship had been erected in each set of quarters,
to supply the deficiency of closets, an inconvenience which had never
occurred, until too late, to the bachelors who planned them. The three
apartments of which each structure was composed, were unquestionably
designed for clothes-press, store-room, and china-closet; such, at
least, were the uses to which Mrs. Twiggs had appropriated the one
assigned to her. There was this slight difficulty, that in the latter
the shelves were too close to admit of setting in even a gravy-boat, but
they made up in number what was wanting in space. We christened the
whole affair, in honor of its projector, a “Davis,” thus placing the
first laurel on the brow of one who was afterwards to signalize himself
in Cabinet making of quite a different character.
The bold promontory on which Fort Winnebago was built looked down upon
the extended prairie and the Fox River on one side, and on the other
stretched away into the thickly-wooded ridge that led off to Belle
Fontaine and Lake Puckaway.
In front lay an extent of meadow, across which was the Portage road, of
about two miles in length, leading between the Fox and the Wisconsin
Rivers. Teams of oxen and a driver were kept at the Agency by the
Government, to transport the canoes of the Indians across this place,
which at many seasons was wet, miry, and almost impassable.
The woods were now brilliant with the many tints of autumn, and the
scene around was further enlivened by groups of Indians, in all
directions, and their lodges, which were scattered here and there, in
the vicinity of the Agency buildings. On the low grounds might be seen
the white tents of the traders, already prepared to furnish winter
supplies to the Indians, in exchange for the annuity money they were
about to receive.
A great concourse had been for many days assembling in anticipation of
the payment, which was expected to take place as soon as Shaw-nee-aw-kee
should arrive with the silver.
Preparatory to this event, the great chief of the nation, Four-Legs,
whose village we had passed at the entrance to Winnebago Lake, had
thought proper to take a little carouse, as is too apt to be the custom
when the savages come into the neighborhood of a sutler’s establishment.
In the present instance, the facilities for a season of intoxication had
been augmented by the presence on the ground of some traders, too
regardless of the very stringent laws prohibiting the sale of liquor to
the Indians.
Poor Four-Legs could not stand this full tide of prosperity. Unchecked
by the presence of his Father, the agent, he carried his indulgence to
such excess that he fell a victim in the course of a few days. His
funeral had been celebrated with unusual pomp the day before our
arrival, and great was my disappointment at finding myself too late to
witness all the ceremonies.
His body, according to their custom, having been wrapped in a blanket,
and placed in a rude coffin, along with his guns, tomahawk, pipes, and a
quantity of tobacco, had been carried to the most elevated point of the
hill opposite the fort, followed by an immense procession of his people,
whooping, beating their drums, howling, and making altogether what is
emphatically termed a ’pow-wow“
After the interment of the body, a stake was planted at its head, on
which was painted in vermilion a series of hieroglyphics, descriptive of
the great deeds and events of his life The whole was then surrounded
with pickets of the trunks of the tamarack-trees, and hither the friends
would come for many successive days to renew the expression of their
grief, and to throw over the grave tobacco and other offerings to the
Great Spirit.
It was a consolation to find that, although delayed, we were yet in time
to furnish a quantity of white cotton for a flag to wave over the grave,
and also to pay a considerable bill at the sutler’s for the different
articles that had been found necessary for the funeral parade–it being
a duty expected of their Father to bury the dead suitably.
The funeral observances in honor of the chief had not yet ceased.
Throughout the day, and all that night, the sound of instruments,
mingled with doleful lamentations, and with the discordant whoops and
yells of those in a partial state of intoxication, filled the air, and
disturbed our repose. To these were added occasionally the plaintive
sounds of the Indian flute, upon which the young savage plays when he is
in love. Grief and whiskey had made their hearts tender, and the woods
resounded to their melancholy strains.
Early the following morning, before I left my room, I was startled by
the sounds of lamentation and woe proceeding from the adjoining
apartment. On entering it, I found several squaws seated on the floor,
with downcast looks expressive of condolence and sympathy, while in
their midst sat a little ugly woman, in tattered garments, with
blackened face and dishevelled hair, sobbing and wailing bitterly.
Not doubting they were the family of the deceased chief, I was quite
troubled at my inability to express, otherwise than by gestures, my
participation in their sorrows.
Unacquainted as I was with their customs, I took it for granted from
their wretched appearance that poverty and destitution formed one of the
sources of their affliction. One of the party, at least, seemed in the
very depths of misery. “Can it be possible,” said I to myself, “that
this poor creature has only these scanty rags to cover her?”
Stepping back to my own room, I brought out a pretty calico wrapper,
which I presented to the little, dirty, blackened object. She took it,
and commenced a fresh series of sobbing and sighing. I made signs to her
to put it on, opening it and explaining to her how it was to be worn,
and recommending to her, by gestures, to lose no time in making herself
more comfortable.
At this, the other women burst into a laugh.
“Very mal-à-propos,” thought I, “and somewhat unfeeling.” At that moment
my husband, entering, explained to me that the chief mourner was Madame
Four-Legs, the widow; that she had undoubtedly a comfortable wardrobe at
home, but that it was part of the etiquette of mourning to go for a
season with neglected persons and blackened faces. All this was told me
in the intervals of shaking hands, and offering and receiving
condolences in the most uncouth, guttural language I had ever heard.
Their Father at length dismissed them, with a promise of some presents
to help dry up their tears. It must not be inferred that the grief of
the poor little widow was not sincere. On the contrary, she was greatly
attached to her husband, and had had great influence not only with him
but with the nation at large. She was a Fox woman, and spoke the
Chippewa, which is the court language among all the tribes, so that she
was often called upon to act as interpreter, and had, in fact, been in
the habit of accompanying her husband, and assisting him by her counsels
upon all occasions. She was a person of great shrewdness and judgment,
and, as I afterwards experienced, of strong and tenacious affections.
After breakfast I received a visit from the principal chiefs, who had
put on their best of apparel and paint to receive their new mother.
There was Naw-kaw, or Kar-ray-mau-nee, “the Walking Turtle,” now the
principal chief of the nation, a stalwart Indian, with a broad, pleasant
countenance, the great peculiarity of which was an immense under lip,
hanging nearly to his chin. There was the old Day-kau-ray, the most
noble, dignified, and venerable of his own, or indeed of any tribe. His
fine Roman countenance, rendered still more striking by his bald head,
with one solitary tuft of long silvery hair neatly tied and falling back
on his shoulders; his perfectly neat, appropriate dress, almost without
ornament, and his courteous demeanor, never laid aside under any
circumstances, all combined to give him the highest place in the
consideration of all who knew him. It will hereafter be seen that his
traits of character were not less grand and striking than were his
personal appearance and deportment.
There was Black-Wolf, whose lowering, surly face was well described by
his name. The fierce expression of his countenance was greatly
heightened by the masses of heavy black hair hanging round it, quite
contrary to the usual fashion among the Winnebagoes. They, for the most
part, remove a portion of their hair, the remainder of which is drawn to
the back of the head, clubbed and ornamented with beads, ribbons, cock’s
feathers, or, if they are so entitled, an eagle’s feather for every
scalp taken from an enemy.
There was Talk-English, a remarkably handsome, powerful young Indian,
who received his name in the following manner. He was one of a party of
sixteen Winnebagoes who had, by invitation, accompanied their Agent and
Major Forsyth (or the Chippewa, as he was called) on a visit to the
President at Washington, the year previous.
On the journey, the question naturally addressed to them by people not
familiar with Western Indians was,–
“Do you talk English?”
The young fellow, being very observant, came to his Father. “What do
they mean by this? Everybody says to me, talk English!“
The Agent interpreted the words to him. “Ah, very well.”
The next place they arrived at was Lockport, in the State of New York.
Jumping off the canal-boat upon the lock, he ran up to the first man he
met, and, thrusting forward his face, cried out, “Talk Eengeesh?”
“Yes,” said the man; “do you talk English?”
“Ya-as.”
From that time forward he always bore the name of Talk-English, and
was registered on the pay-rolls by a title of which he was not a little
proud.
Hoo-wau-ne-kah, “the Little Elk,” was another of the distinguished men
of the tribe. He had likewise been at Washington. Henry Clay, when he
visited them, after looking carefully at the countenances and bearing
of all the members of the deputation, had indicated him as the one
possessing the greatest talent; and he was greatly pleased when informed
that he was the principal orator of the nation, and decidedly superior
in abilities to any other individual of the tribe.
Wild-Cat, our Indian Falstaff in all save the cowardice and falsehood, I
have already mentioned.
Then there was Kau-ray-kaw-saw-kaw, “the White Crow,” a Rock River
Indian, who afterwards distinguished himself as the friend of the whites
during the Sauk war. He was called by the French “le Borgne,” from
having lost an eye; and the black silk handkerchief which he wore
drooping over the left side of his face to disguise the blemish, taken
with his native costume, gave him a very singular appearance.
There was a nephew of the defunct chief Four-Legs, to whom with justice
was given, by both whites and Indians, the appellation of “the Dandy."
When out of mourning his dress was of the most studied and fanciful
character. A shirt (when he condescended to wear any) of the brightest
colors, ornamented with innumerable rows of silver brooches set thickly
together; never less than two pairs of silver arm-bands; leggings and
moccasins of the most elaborate embroidery in ribbons and
porcupine-quills; everything that he could devise in the shape of
ornament hanging to his club of hair behind; a feather fan in one hand,
and in the other a mirror, in which he contemplated himself every five
minutes; these, with the variety and brilliancy of the colors upon his
face, the suitable choice and application of which occupied no small
portion of the hours allotted to his toilet, made up the equipment of
young Four-Legs.
This devotion to dress and appearance seemed not altogether out of
place in a youthful dandy; but we had likewise an old one of the same
stamp. Pawnee Blanc, or the White Pawnee, surpassed his younger
competitor, if possible, in attention to his personal attractions.
Upon the present occasion he appeared in all his finery, and went
through the customary salutations with an air of solemn dignity, then
walked, as did the others, into the parlor (for I had received them in
the hall), where they all seated themselves upon the floor. Fortunately,
the room was now bare of furniture, but “alas!” thought I, “for my
pretty carpet, if this is to be the way they pay their respects to me!"
I watched the falling of the ashes from their long pipes, and the other
inconveniences of the use of tobacco, or kin-nee-kin-nick, with absolute
dismay.
The visit of the chiefs was succeeded by one from the interpreter and
his wife, with all the Canadian and half-breed women, whose husbands
found employment at the Agency or at the American Fur Company’s
establishment.
By this time my piano had been taken from its case and set up in our
quarters. To our great joy, we found it entirely uninjured. Thanks to
the skill of Nunns and Clark, not a note was out of tune.
The women, to whom it was an entire novelty, were loud in their
exclamations of wonder and delight.
“Eh-h-h! regardez donc! Quelles inventions! Quelles merveilles!“[13]
One, observing the play of my fingers reflected in the nameboard, called
in great exultation to her companions. She had discovered, as she
thought, the hidden machinery by which the sounds were produced, and was
not a little mortified when she was undeceived.
Continue...

This eBook of “Wau-bun” by Juliette Augusta Magill Kinzie belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
