


ASSOCIATED WITH “LORNA DOONE”
=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo via Barnstaple. L. and
  S.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Lynton (about 6 miles distant).
=Distance from London.=–225 miles.
=Average Time.=–7 hours.
                     1st        2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  37s. 10d.  24s. 0d.  18s. 10-1/2d.
          Return  65s.  6d.  42s. 0d.  37s.  9d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–Lynton–"The Tors Hotel,” “Valley
  of Rocks,” “Royal Castle,” “Kensington,” “Crown,” “Globe,"
  etc. Minehead–"Métropole,” “Beach,” “Plume of Feathers,"
  etc. Porlock–"The Ship,” “The Castle,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Paddington to Minehead, Great
  Western Rly. By coach from Minehead via Porlock, 12 miles.
Every one who has read the late Mr. R.D. Blackmore’s Lorna Doone has a
keen interest in what is frequently called the Doone Country. This
comprises the north-west corner of Exmoor, bordering on the boundaries
of Devonshire. But those who visit the little village of Oare and
Badgworthy Water must not expect to see all that the novelist’s
imagination conjured up. Nevertheless, though some have been
disappointed, there is much to be seen which is of interest. The church
at Oare, for instance, is closely associated with John Ridd and Lorna,
and the Snowe family, mentioned by the novelist, are commemorated in the
church. Then, too, the feats of a “Great John Ridd” are obscurely
traditional in the district.
The Doone valley, with Badgworthy (pronounced Badgery_) Water running
through it, is about half-an-hour’s walk from Malmsmead Bridge, which is
close to the village of Oare. Keeping up the course of the stream one
reaches a wood of oaks, and near it one finds a tributary of the brook
falling down a series of miniature cascades. This is the “water slide"
up which Blackmore took his hero on the occasion of his first meeting
with Lorna Doone. If one crosses a bridge near this the path will be
found to continue for about a mile. At this distance one turns to the
right by another stream, and enters a combe containing the ruins of the
Doone Houses as they are called. A lonely cottage looks down upon all
that is to be seen of the famous stronghold of the Doones. The narrow
approach to the place never existed outside the pages of the romance.
The scenery of this portion of Exmoor is exceedingly wild.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
THE DOONE VALLEY, EXMOOR.
Associated with Blackmore’s Lorna Doone.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
