


THE HOMES OF WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
=How to get there.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Ambleside (4 miles from Grasmere).
=Distance from London.=–260 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6 to 8 hours.
                     1st       2nd     3rd
=Fares.=–Single  39s. 0d.  25s. 2d.   23s.
          Return  76s. 4d.  49s. 4d.   45s.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Prince of Wales Hotel,” on lake,
  1/2 mile from village. “Rothay Hotel,” near church. “Red Lion
  Hotel,” “Mossgrove” (Temperance), “Grasmere Hotel” (Temperance),
  all in village. No inn at Rydal village.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras. Midland Railway.
Grasmere is the name of a village and lake in Westmorland, about 3 miles
north-west of Ambleside. The lovely village, beautifully situated at the
head of the lake, has an old church containing the grave of Wordsworth.
Wordsworth’s cottage (a charge of 6d. is made for admission) is only
half a mile from the church. It is restored, as far as possible, to its
condition in Wordsworth’s day, and contains a number of relics of the
poet’s family. The lake, a mile in length, and surrounded by mountains,
forms one of the most beautiful scenes in England. Wordsworth afterwards
removed to Rydal Mount (two or three miles off), which place remains
especially associated with his memory. It is a somewhat remarkable fact
that this quiet and thoughtful interpreter of nature was in the early
years of his life, while going on a pedestrian tour through France,
thrust into the early fervours of its great Revolution. Wordsworth’s
sympathy with the aims of the Gironde party might have cost him his
life, for many of his friends in Paris suffered death, but happily
circumstances caused him to return to England. It was his noble sister
Dorothy, his constant and devoted companion, who met him on his return
from Paris, broken-hearted, and induced him to return to nature.
Wordsworth’s poetry was not appreciated for a considerable time, but he
calmly wrote on, undismayed by the ridicule poured forth on the “Lake
School of Poets,” which included Coleridge and Southey, and gradually
his calm and dignified descriptions of nature asserted their rightful
influence. After publishing his greatest poem, The Excursion, the tide
of generous appreciation set in. In 1843, Wordsworth was made Poet
Laureate. His pure and fervent poetry was a protest against the diseased
sentimentality of the age.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
RYDAL WATER.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
