


THE HOME OF CHARLES KINGSLEY
=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. South-Western Railway.
=Nearest Stations.=–Wokingham, 5 miles; Winchfield, 7 miles.
=Distance from London.=–Wokingham, 36-1/2 miles; Winchfield, 39 miles.
=Average Time.=–Wokingham, 2 hours; Winchfield, 1-1/2 hours.
=Fares.=–
                      Single.                    Return.
              1st      2nd      3rd       1st      2nd      3rd
Wokingham   5s. 6d.  3s. 9d.  3s. 0d.   9s. 0d.  6s. 6d.  6s. 0d.
Winchfield  6s. 6d.  4s. 0d.  3s. 3d.  11s. 6d.  7s. 2d.  6s. 6d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–Small village inn at Eversley. “George
  Hotel” at Odiham, 2 miles from Winchfield Station; very old
  and picturesque.
=Alternative route.=–Train to Wellington College. S.E. and C. Rly.
The drive from Winchfield (7 miles) is chiefly across beautiful heathery
commons; from Wokingham the road is more enclosed with hedges. Eversley
Church and rectory stand almost alone, save for a farmhouse and barns,
being nearly a mile from the other portions of the village. The church
is very picturesquely situated on sloping ground, an avenue of yews
leading from the lych gate to the porch. Inside, the building has
suffered a good deal from restoration, but the pulpit from which
Kingsley preached his stirring sermons remains unaltered. The rectory is
a very old building which has been modernised on the side fronting on
the road. On the lawn stands the group of glorious Scotch firs which
Kingsley was never tired of watching. Their boughs sweep downwards and
almost touch the grass, and their great red trunks are a strong contrast
to the dense green of the surrounding foliage.
In one of the sitting-rooms is a set of drawers in which Kingsley kept a
collection of fossils. His grave is on the side of the church yard
nearest the overshadowing branches of the Scotch firs. The Runic cross
of white marble is a beautiful one. The head is ornamented with a spray
of passion flower and bears upon it the words “God is Love.” On the base
are the words “Amavimus, amamus, amabimus.”
The neighbouring district of Bramshill has still the little thatched
cottage where Kingsley used to conduct a little simple service on Sunday
afternoons. The whole of the country surrounding Bramshill Park is
closely covered with self-sown firs, and the commons interspersed among
the forest lands are covered with heather and gorse. This was the
country Kingsley loved, whether he was riding over it with the local
pack of foxhounds or on a visit to one of his parishioners.
[Illustration: EVERSLEY RECTORY.
The scene of the labours of Charles Kingsley.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
