


=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Helmsley.
=Distance from London.=–219-1/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-3/4 to 5 hours.
                     1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  31s. 3d.   ...   18s. 3-1/2d.
          Return  62s. 6d.   ...   36s. 7d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Black Swan” and “Crown” Hotels
  at Helmsley. There is no inn at Rievaulx.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras via Sheffield. Midland.
The little village of Rievaulx–the name is Norman-French, but is
pronounced Rivers–is situated close to the river Rye, and 2-1/2 miles
from Helmsley, on the Thirsk road. The great point of interest in
connection with the village is the fact that close by are the ruins of
the once magnificent abbey for monks of the Cistercian order, founded by
Sir Walter D’Espec in 1131. The founder eventually became a monk at
Rievaulx, and at his death was buried there. After the Dissolution the
site was granted to the Villiers family, from whom it came to the
Duncombes in 1695.
The most striking view of the abbey is obtained by leaving the main road
and taking the footpath across Duncombe Park, where a sudden turn brings
one in sight of a bend in the Rye, with the great roofless church rising
on the left bank of the river. The principal remains of the fine old
abbey, one of the most beautiful ruins in the kingdom, consist of the
choir and transept of the church, and the refectory. The hospitium or
guest house was formerly on the right of the lane leading to Helmsley.
The great nave of the church is now a shapeless ruin, but from certain
indications it may be seen that it was Norman, and probably the work of
D’Espec. The lower parts of the transept are Norman, and the remainder
Early English.
The magnificent tower arch, 75 feet high, is still standing, and one of
the most striking views of the ancient fabric is the crumbling nave as
it appears framed in this lofty and wonderfully-proportioned opening,
with a background of rich English foliage and landscape.
West of the nave were the cloisters, of which only a few arches now
remain, and opening from their west wall is the fine Early English
refectory, with the reading-desk still existing. Underneath the
refectory there are the remains of the Norman dormitory.
Near the bridge, at the lower end of the village of Rievaulx, a place
still called the “Forge,” was possibly an ironworks under the
superintendence of the monks.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
RIEVAULX ABBEY.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
