


=How to get there.=–From King’s Cross. Great Northern Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Worksop Station.
=Distance from London.=–146-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–3-1/2 hours.
                     1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  20s. 1d.   ...   12s. 2-1/2d.
          Return  40s. 2d.   ...   24s. 5d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Hotel,” etc., at Worksop.
=Alternative Route.=–From Marylebone or to Dukeries Junction from
  King’s Cross.
The district known as the “Dukeries” is undoubtedly the finest portion
of what remains of the famous Sherwood Forest associated with Robin Hood
and his “merrie men.” The name “Dukeries” arises from the fact that
within the boundaries of the forest were once the homes of the Dukes of
Portland, Newcastle, Norfolk, Leeds, and Kingston. The Dukes of Norfolk
and Leeds no longer hold their property, and Earl Manvers, as a
representative of the Kingston family, preserves at Thoresby the
traditions of his race. At Welbeck the Duke of Portland, and at Clumber
the Duke of Newcastle, still keep up their magnificent homes. To the
latter noblemen the majority of the “Dukeries” belongs. The drive round
this lovely part of the forest is nearly 30 miles, through beautiful
scenery.
Worksop, with its fine old priory church, is one of the best
starting-points for a tour round the Dukeries. Clumber House, the seat
of the Duke of Newcastle, is 4 miles from Worksop, and orders to see the
interior can be obtained from the Newcastle agent, in Park Street, by
writing a day or two beforehand. The mansion, built in 1772, is very
magnificent and contains some priceless pictures.
Thoresby House, the seat of Earl Manvers, is not far distant from
Clumber. The present house, which was designed by Salvin in 1868, is the
third home of the Manvers which has occupied this site.
Welbeck Abbey, the home of the Duke of Portland, is another of the
important seats in the district, standing in the centre of one of the
finest parks in the kingdom. The mansion itself is not a showplace, but
when the family is not in residence various parts of it are exhibited
upon payment of 1s., any weekday except Saturday. An extra shilling will
enable the visitor to view the underground apartments.
The whole of the “Dukeries” district teems with interesting places,
ancient and modern. From Mansfield one may visit Hardwick Hall, Bolsover
Castle, and Newstead Abbey, beloved of Byron (see Index), while Belvoir
Castle (see Index) and Woolaton Hall are within easy distance.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
CLUMBER HOUSE
The seat of the Duke of Newcastle. It was built in 1772.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
