


=How to get there.=–Train to Keswick from Euston. L. and N.W.R.
=Nearest Station.=–Keswick (for visiting Derwentwater, Skiddaw,
  Bassenthwaite, Buttermere, Cockermouth, Wytheburn).
=Distance from London.=–300 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6 to 10 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  42s. 0d.  26s. 7d.  24s. 1d.
          Return  81s. 0d.  47s. 6d.  43s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Keswick Hotel,” “Royal Oak,"
  “Queen’s,” etc.
=Alternative Routes.=–Train from King’s Cross to Keswick, Great
Northern Railway. Train from St. Pancras, Midland Railway.
Keswick, usually regarded as the capital of the north-western portion of
the Lake District, is situated in the lovely vale of Derwentwater, on
the river Greta, shut in on all sides by mountain walls, the highest
summit being the lofty Skiddaw, which crowns the range to the north of
the valley. The old portion of the town is picturesque and interesting,
especially the quaint old town hall in the market-place, marking the
centre of the town.
Foremost among the attractions in the vicinity of Keswick is Lake
Derwentwater, within less than a mile of the town, and separated from it
by rising ground. The lake is 3-1/2 miles in length and 1-1/2 wide, and
is remarkable for the transparency of its waters, the shingle and rocks
at the bottom being clearly visible at a depth of 15 or 20 feet. The
scenery of the lake is beyond description beautiful. “Here is
Derwentwater,” says De Quincey, “with its lovely islands in one
direction, Bassenthwaite in another; the mountains of Newlands; the
gorgeous confusion of Borrowdale revealing its sublime chaos through the
narrow vista of its gorge; the sullen rear closed by the vast and
towering masses of Skiddaw and Blencathra.” The valley of Borrowdale is
to the south of the lake, and near the south-eastern extremity are the
famous Falls of Lodore, so wonderfully described in Southey’s celebrated
poem.
Bassenthwaite Water, connected with Derwentwater by the Derwent, is a
smaller lake, but exceedingly beautiful, and Buttermere has a quaint
little village which goes by the same name.
Among the many places within easy reach of Keswick are Cockermouth, the
birthplace of Wordsworth; Wytheburn, the nearest village to Thirlmere;
and Skiddaw, the ascent of which can be accomplished with comparative
ease on pony-back. The summit is over 3000 feet above sea-level.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
CRUMMOCK WATER AND BUTTERMERE.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
