


“All which I saw, and part of which I was."
    –Dryden.
  Geographical sketch of California
  Its political and social institutions
  Colorado River
  Valley and river of San Joaquin
  Former government
  Presidios
  Missions
  Ports and commerce.
For the general information of the reader, it will be proper to give a
brief geographical sketch of California, and some account of its
political and social institutions, as they have heretofore existed.
The district of country known geographically as Upper California is
bounded on the north by Oregon, the forty-second degree of north
latitude being the boundary line between the two territories; on the
east by the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra de los Mimbres, a
continuation of the same range; on the south by Sonora and Old or Lower
California, and on the west by the Pacific Ocean. Its extent from north
to south is about 700 miles, and from east to west from 600 to 800
miles, with an area of about 400,000 square miles. A small portion only
of this extensive territory is fertile or inhabitable by civilized man,
and this portion consists chiefly in the strip of country along the
Pacific Ocean, about 700 miles in length, and from 100 to 150 in
breadth, bounded on the east by the Sierra Nevada, and on the west by
the Pacific. In speaking of Upper California this strip of country is
what is generally referred to.
The largest river of Upper California is the Colorado or Red, which has
a course of about 1000 miles, and empties into the Gulf of California
in latitude about 32 degrees north. But little is known of the region
through which this stream flows. The report of trappers, however, is
that the river is canoned between high mountains and precipices a
large portion of its course, and that its banks and the country
generally through which it flows are arid, sandy, and barren. Green and
Grand Rivers are its principal upper tributaries, both of which rise in
the Rocky Mountains, and within the territories of the United States.
The Gila is its lowest and largest branch, emptying into the Colorado,
just above its mouth. Sevier and Virgin Rivers are also tributaries of
the Colorado. Mary’s River rises near latitude 42 degrees north, and
has a course of about 400 miles, when its waters sink in the sands of
the desert. This river is not laid down on any map which I have seen.
The Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers have each a course of from 300 to
400 miles, the first flowing from the north and the last from the
south, and both emptying into the Bay of St. Francisco at the same
point. They water the large and fertile valley lying between the Sierra
Nevada and the coast range of mountains. I subjoin a description of the
valley and river San Joaquin, from the pen of a gentleman (Dr. Marsh)
who has explored the river from its source to its mouth.
“This noble valley is the first undoubtedly in California, and one of
the most magnificent in the world. It is about 500 miles long, with
an-average width of about fifty miles. It is bounded on the east by the
great Snowy Mountains, and on the west by the low range, which in many
places dwindles into insignificant hills, and has its northern terminus
at the Strait of Carquines, on the Bay of San Francisco, and its
southern near the Colorado River.
“The river of San Joaquin flows through the middle of the valley for
about half of its extent, and thence diverges towards the eastern
mountain, in which it has its source. About sixty miles further south
is the northern end of the Buena Vista Lake, which is about one hundred
miles long, and from ten to twenty wide. Still farther south, and near
the western side of the valley, is another and much smaller lake.
“The great lake receives about a dozen tributaries on its eastern side,
which all rise in the great range of the Snowy Mountains. Some of these
streams flow through broad and fertile valleys within the mountain’s
range, and, from thence emerging, irrigate the plains of the great
valley for the distance of twenty or thirty miles. The largest of these
rivers is called by the Spanish inhabitants the river Reyes, and falls
into the lake near its northern end; it is a well-timbered stream, and
flows through a country of great fertility and beauty. The tributaries
of the San Joaquin are all on the east side.
“On ascending the stream we first meet with the Stanislaus, a clear
rapid mountain stream, some forty or fifty yards wide, with a
considerable depth of water in its lower portion. The Mormons have
commenced a settlement, called New Hope, and built some two or three
houses near the mouth.
“There are considerable bodies of fertile land along the river, and the
higher plains afford good pasturage.
“Ten miles higher up is the river of the Tawalomes; it is about the
size of the Stanislaus, which it greatly resembles, except that the
soil is somewhat better, and that it particularly abounds with salmon.
“Some thirty miles farther comes in the Merced, much the largest of the
tributaries of the San Joaquin. The lands along and between the
tributaries of the San Joaquin and the lake of Buena Vista form a fine
pastoral region, with a good proportion of arable land, and a very
inviting field for emigration. The whole of this region has been but
imperfectly explored; enough, however, is known to make it certain that
it is one of the most desirable regions on the continent.
“In the valleys of the rivers which come down from the great Snowy
Mountains are vast bodies of pine, and red-wood, or cedar timber, and
the streams afford water power to any desirable amount.
“The whole country east of the San Joaquin, and the water communication
which connects it with the lakes, is considered, by the best judges, to
be particularly adapted to the culture of the vine, which must
necessarily become one of the principal agricultural resources of
California.”
The Salinas River empties into the Pacific, about twelve miles above
Monterey. Bear River empties into the Great Salt Lake. The other
streams of California are all small. In addition to the Great Salt Lake
and the Utah Lake there are numerous small lakes in the Sierra Nevada.
The San Joaquin is connected with Tule Lake, or Lake Buena Vista, a
sheet of water about eighty miles in length and fifteen in breadth. A
lake, not laid down in any map, and known as the Laguna among the
Californians, is situated about sixty miles north of the Bay of San
Francisco. It is between forty and sixty miles in length. The valleys
in its vicinity are highly fertile, and romantically beautiful. In the
vicinity of this lake there is a mountain of pure sulphur. There are
also soda springs, and a great variety of other mineral waters, and
minerals.
The principal mountains west of the eastern boundary of California (the
Rocky Mountains) are the Bear River, Wahsatch, Utah, the Sierra Nevada,
and the Coast range. The Wahsatch Mountains form the eastern rim of the
“great interior basin.” There are numerous ranges in this desert basin,
all of which run north and south, and are separated from each other by
spacious and barren valleys and plains. The Sierra Nevada range is of
greater elevation than the Rocky Mountains. The summits of the most
elevated peaks are covered with perpetual snow. This and the coast
range run nearly parallel with the shore of the Pacific. The first is
from 100 to 200 miles from the Pacific, and the last from forty to
sixty miles. The valley between them is the most fertile portion of
California.
Upper California was discovered in 1548, by Cabrillo, a Spanish
navigator. In 1578, the northern portion of it was visited by Sir
Francis Drake, who called it New Albion. It was first colonized by the
Spaniards, in 1768, and formed a province of Mexico until after the
revolution in that country. There have been numerous revolutions and
civil wars in California within the last twenty years; but up to the
conquest of the country by the United States in 1846, Mexican authority
has generally been exercised over it.
The following description of the political and social condition of
Upper California in 1822 is extracted and translated from a Spanish
writer of that date. I have thought that the extract would not be
uninteresting:–
“Government.–Upper California, on account of its small population,
not being able to become a state of the great Mexican republic, takes
the character of territory, the government of which is under the charge
of a commandant-general, who exercises the charge of a superior
political chief, whose attributes depend entirely upon the president of
the republic and the general congress. But, to amplify the legislation
of its centre, it has a deputation made up of seven vocals, the half of
these individuals being removed every two years. The superior political
chief presides at their sessions. The inhabitants of the territory are
divided amongst the presidios, missions, and towns.
“Presidios.–The necessity of protecting the apostolic predication
was the obligatory reason for forming the presidios, which were
established according to circumstances. That of San Diego was the
first; Santa Barbara, Monterey, and San Francisco were built
afterwards. The form of all of them is nearly the same, and this is a
square, containing about two hundred yards in each front, formed of a
weak wall made of mud-bricks. Its height may be four yards in the
interior of the square, and built on to the same wall. In its entire
circumference are a chapel, storehouses, and houses for the commandant,
officers, and troops, having at the entrance of the presidio quarters
for a corps-de-garde.
“These buildings in the presidios, at the first idea, appear to have
been sufficient, the only object having been for a defence against a
surprise from the gentiles, or wild Indians in the immediate vicinity.
But this cause having ceased, I believe they ought to be demolished, as
they are daily threatening a complete ruin, and, from the very limited
spaces of habitation, must be very incommodious to those who inhabit
them. As to the exterior of the presidios, several private individuals
have built some very decent houses, and, having evinced great emulation
in this branch of business, I have no doubt but in a short time we
shall see very considerable towns in California.
“At the distance of one, or at the most two miles from the presidio,
and near to the anchoring-ground, is a fort, which has a few pieces of
artillery of small calibre. The situation of most of them is very
advantageous for the defence of the port, though the form of the walls,
esplanades, and other imperfections which may be seen, make them very
insignificant.
“The battalion of each presidio is made up of eighty or more horse
soldiers, called cuera; besides these, it has a number of auxiliary
troops and a detachment of artillery. The commandant of each presidio
is the captain of its respective company, and besides the intervention,
military and political, he has charge of all things relating to the
marine department.
“Missions.–The missions contained in the territory are twenty-one.
They were built at different epochs: that of San Diego, being the
first, was built in 1769; its distance from the presidio of the same
name is two leagues. The rest were built successively, according to
circumstances and necessity. The last one was founded in the year 1822,
under the name of San Francisco Dolores, and is the most northern of
all.
“The edifices in some of those missions are more extensive than in
others, but in form they are all nearly equal. They are all fabricated
of mud-bricks, and the divisions are according to necessity. In all of
them may be found commodious habitations for the ministers, storehouses
to keep their goods in, proportional granaries, offices for
soap-makers, weavers, blacksmiths, and large parterres, and horse and
cattle pens, independent apartments for Indian youths of each sex, and
all such offices as were necessary at the time of its institution.
Contiguous to and communicating with the former is a church, forming a
part of the edifices of each mission; they are all very proportionable,
and are adorned with profusion.
“The Indians reside about two hundred yards distant from the
above-mentioned edifice. This place is called the rancheria. Most of
the missions are made up of very reduced quarters, built with
mud-bricks, forming streets, while in others the Indians have been
allowed to follow their primitive customs; their dwellings being a sort
of huts, in a conical shape, which at the most do not exceed four yards
in diameter, and the top of the cone may be elevated three yards. They
are built of rough sticks, covered with bulrushes or grass, in such a
manner as to completely protect the inhabitants from all the
inclemencies of the weather. In my opinion, these rancherias are the
most adequate to the natural uncleanliness of the Indians, as the
families often renew them, burning the old ones, and immediately
building others with the greatest facility. Opposite the rancherias,
and near to the mission, is to be found a small garrison, with
proportionate rooms, for a corporal and five soldiers with their
families. This small garrison is quite sufficient to prevent any
attempt of the Indians from taking effect, there having been some
examples made, which causes the Indians to respect this small force.
One of these pickets in a mission has a double object; besides keeping
the Indians in subjection, they run post with a monthly correspondence,
or with any extraordinaries that may be necessary for government.
“All the missions in this California are under the charge of religious
men of the order of San Francisco. At the present time their number is
twenty-seven, most of them of an advanced age. Each mission has one of
these fathers for its administrator, and he holds absolute authority.
The tilling of the ground, the gathering of the harvest, the
slaughtering of cattle, the weaving, and everything that concerns the
mission, is under the direction of the fathers, without any other
person interfering in any way whatever, so that, if any one mission has
the good fortune to be superintended by an industrious and discreet
padre, the Indians disfrute in abundance all the real necessaries of
life; at the same time the nakedness and misery of any one mission are
a palpable proof of the inactivity of its director. The missions extend
their possessions from one extremity of the territory to the other, and
have made the limits of one mission from those of another. Though they
do not require all this land for their agriculture and the maintenance
of their stock, they have appropriated the whole; always strongly
opposing any individual who may wish to settle himself or his family on
any piece of land between them. But it is to be hoped that the new
system of illustration, and the necessity of augmenting private
properly, and the people of reason, will cause the government to take
such adequate measures as will conciliate the interests of all. Amongst
all the missions there are from twenty-one to twenty-two thousand
Catholic Indians; but each mission has not an equal or a proportionate
part in its congregation. Some have three or four thousand, whilst
others have scarcely four hundred; and at this difference may be
computed the riches of the missions in proportion. Besides the number
of Indians already spoken of, each mission has a considerable number of
gentiles, who live chiefly on farms annexed to the missions. The number
of these is undetermined.
“The Indians are naturally filthy and careless, and their understanding
is very limited. In the small arts they are not deficient in ideas of
imitation but they never will be inventors. Their true character is
that of being revengeful and timid, consequently they are very much
addicted to treachery. They have no knowledge of benefits received, and
ingratitude is common amongst them. The education they receive in their
infancy is not the proper one to develope their reason, and, if it
were, I do not believe them capable of any good impression. All these
Indians, whether from the continual use of the sweat-house, or from
their filthiness, or the little ventilation in their habitations, are
weak and unvigorous; spasms and rheumatics, to which they are so much
subject, are the consequences of their customs. But what most injures
them, and prevents propagation, is the venereal disease, which most of
them have very strongly, clearly proving that their humours are
analogous to receiving the impressions of this contagion. From this
reason may be deduced the enormous differences between the births and
deaths, which, without doubt, is one-tenth per year in favour of the
latter; but the missionaries do all in their power to prevent this,
with respect to the catechumens situated near them.
“The general productions of the missions are, the breed of the larger
class of cattle, and sheep, horses, wheat, maize or Indian corn, beans,
peas, and other vegetables; though the productions of the missions
situated more to the southward are more extensive, these producing the
grape and olive in abundance. Of all these articles of production, the
most lucrative is the large cattle, their hides and tallow affording an
active commerce with foreign vessels on this coast. This being the only
means the inhabitants, missionaries, or private individuals have of
supplying their actual necessities, for this reason they give this
branch all the impulse they possibly can, and on it generally place all
their attention.
“It is now six years since they began to gather in hides and tallow for
commerce. Formerly they merely took care of as many or as much as they
required for their own private use, and the rest was thrown away as
useless; but at this time the actual number of hides sold annually on
board of foreign vessels amounts to thirty or forty thousand, and about
the same amount of arrobas (twenty-five pounds) of tallow; and, in
pursuing their present method, there is no doubt but in three or four
years the amount of the exportation of each of these articles will be
doubled. Flax, linen, wine, olive-oil, grain, and other agricultural
productions, would be very extensive if there were stimulants to excite
industry; but, this not being the case, there is just grain enough sown
and reaped for the consumption of the inhabitants in the territory.
“The towns contained in this district are three; the most populous
being that of Angeles, which has about twelve hundred souls; that of
St. Joseph’s of Guadaloupe may contain six hundred, and the village of
Branciforte two hundred; they are all formed imperfectly and without
order, each person having built his own house on the spot he thought
most convenient for himself. The first of these pueblos is governed by
its corresponding body of magistrates, composed of an alcalde or judge,
four regidores or municipal officers, a syndic, and secretary; the
second, of an alcalde, two regidores, a syndic, and secretary; and the
third, on account of the smallness of its population, is subject to the
commandancia of Monterey.
“The inhabitants of the towns are white, and, to distinguish them from
the Indians, are vulgarly called people of reason. The number of
these contained in the territory may be nearly five thousand. These
families are divided amongst the pueblos and presidios. They are nearly
all the descendants of a small number of individuals who came from the
Mexican country, some as settlers, others in the service of the army,
and accompanied by their wives. In the limited space of little more
than fifty years the present generation has been formed.
“The whites are in general robust, healthy, and well made. Some of them
are occupied in breeding and raising cattle, and cultivating small
quantities of wheat and beans; but for want of sufficient land, for
which they cannot obtain a rightful ownership, their labours are very
limited. Others dedicate themselves to the service of arms. All the
presidial companies are composed of the natives of the country, but the
most of them are entirely indolent, it being very rare for any
individual to strive to augment his fortune. Dancing, horse-riding, and
gambling occupy all their time. The arts are entirely unknown, and I am
doubtful if there is one individual who exercises any trade; very few
who understand the first rudiments of letters, and the other sciences
are unknown amongst them.
“The fecundity of the people of reason is extreme. It is very rare to
find a married couple with less than five or six children, while there
are hundreds who have from twelve to fifteen. Very few of them die in
their youth, and in reaching the age of puberty are sure to see their
grand-children. The age of eighty and one hundred has always been
common in this climate; most infirmities are unknown here, and the
freshness and robustness of the people show the beneficial influence of
the climate; the women in particular have always the roses stamped on
their cheeks. This beautiful species is without doubt the most active
and laborious, all their vigilance in duties of the house, the
cleanliness of their children, and attention to their husbands,
dedicating all their leisure moments to some kind of occupation that
may be useful towards their maintenance. Their clothing is always clean
and decent, nakedness being entirely unknown in either sex.
“Ports and Commerce.–There are four ports, principal bays, in this
territory, which take the names of the corresponding presidios. The
best guarded is that of San Diego. That of San Francisco has many
advantages. Santa Barbara is but middling in the best part of the
season; at other times always bad. Besides the above-mentioned places,
vessels sometimes anchor at Santa Cruz, San Luis Obispo, El Refugio,
San Pedro, and San Juan, that they may obtain the productions of the
missions nearest these last-mentioned places; but from an order sent by
the minister of war, and circulated by the commandante-general, we are
given to understand that no foreign vessel is permitted to anchor at
any of these places, Monterey only excepted, notwithstanding the
commandante-general has allowed the first three principal ports to
remain open provisionally. Were it not so, there would undoubtedly be
an end to all commerce with California, as I will quickly show.
“The only motive that induces foreign vessels to visit this coast is
for the hides and tallow which they barter for in the territory. It is
well known, that at any of these parts there is no possibility of
realizing any money, for here it does not circulate. The goods imported
by foreign vessels are intended to facilitate the purchase of the
aforesaid articles, well knowing that the missions have no interest in
money, but rather such goods as are necessary for the Indians, so that
several persons who have brought goods to sell for nothing but money
have not been able to sell them. It will appear very extraordinary that
money should not be appreciated in a country where its value is so well
known; but the reason may be easily perceived by attending to the
circumstances of the territory.
“The quantity of hides gathered yearly is about thirty or forty
thousand; and the arrobas of tallow, with very little difference, will
be about the same. Averaging the price of each article at two dollars,
we shall see that the intrinsic value in annual circulation in
California is 140,000 dollars. This sum, divided between twenty-one
missions, will give each one 6666 dollars. Supposing the only
production of the country converted into money, with what would the
Indians be clothed, and by what means would they be able to cover a
thousand other necessaries? Money is useful in amplifying speculations;
but in California, as yet, there are no speculations, and it
productions are barely sufficient for the absolute necessary
consumption. The same comparison may be made with respect to private
individuals, who are able to gather a few hides and a few arrobas of
tallow, these being in small quantities.”
Continue...

This eBook of “What I Saw in California” (1849; a Description of Its Soil, Climate, Productions, and Gold Mines;
with the Best Routes and Latest Information for Intending Emigrants.) by Edwin Bryant belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What I Saw in CaliforniaBy Edwin BryantAt Amazon
