


=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. South-Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Amesbury (1-1/2 miles from Stonehenge).
=Distance from London.=–80 miles.
=Average Time.=–3 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  13s. 2d.   8s. 3d.   6s. 7-1/2d.
          Return  23s. 2d.  14s. 8d.  13s. 3d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"The George Hotel” at Amesbury.
  “Railway Hotel” (small) at Porton.
=Alternative Route.=–Porton Station, 5-1/2 miles, and Salisbury Station,
  8 miles from Stonehenge.
One of the earliest and most enduring works of man in the British
Islands is to be seen in the circles of giant stones on Salisbury Plain.
They stand in two concentric circles. The outer ring of monoliths
encloses an inner one of blue stones about half their height. These in
turn surround a horseshoe formation consisting of the remains of five
great trilithons. Some of these stones have fallen across the flat one
known as the altar stone, occupying a central position at the head of
the horseshoe. On the 21st of June the sun rises exactly in a line with
the centre of the horseshoe and the long earthen avenue leading towards
the stones, and thus throws a ray between two of the outer monoliths and
touches the altar stone. This orientation on the plan of so many eastern
shrines proves that Stonehenge was the temple of some early
sun-worshipping race of men in Britain.
Sir Norman Lockyer’s recent observations at the summer solstice have
placed the date of erection at about 1680 B.C., and the discovery of
flint implements beneath some Roman remains also points to neolithic
times. The upright stones and those resting upon them were originally
all mortised and tenoned together, and from the fact that no similar
stone is found nearer than Marlborough Downs the primitive men must have
hauled the stones considerable distances by means of long leather ropes.
The small blue stones were possibly brought from Normandy.
Other stone circles and similar remains are to be seen at Avebury,
Rollright, and Kit’s Coty House, a few miles from Rochester. Also in
Shropshire there is a district rich in stone circles and prehistoric
remains. This is in a line north of Bishops Castle and Shelve, and to
those who appreciate wild scenery this part of the county may be
specially recommended.
[Illustration: STONEHENGE.
Looking towards the east from the altar stone. The point on the horizon
where the sun rises on June 21 is indicated by the small stone seen
through the arches.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
