


THE SCENE OF MONMOUTH’S DEFEAT
=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Athelney.
=Distance from London.=–150-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 4-1/2 to 5-3/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  26s. 8d.  16s. 8d.  13s. 4d.
          Return  53s. 4d.  33s. 4d.  26s. 8d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Railway Hotel.”
The Isle of Athelney, the hiding-place of Alfred the Great, at the time
when the fortunes of England lay trembling in the balance, is a slightly
elevated plot of land where the river Parret joins the Tone. In Alfred’s
days it was a small island surrounded by an impenetrable morass, and
thickly grown with alders. Here tradition places the hut in which the
king, deep in thought, allowed the good wife’s cakes to burn. Soon a
little band of faithful followers joined Alfred, and together they built
a causeway over the marshes, eventually constructing a fort from which
successful sallies were made against the Danes in the vicinity. The
rally of the Saxons round their intrepid king resulted in the victory of
Ethandune, and out of gratitude for his success, Alfred built on the
island an abbey, of which a few relics, including the famous Alfred
Jewel, remain to-day. A monument erected by Mr. John Slade marks the
spot.
A mile to the north is Boroughbridge with its solitary hill, on which
many believe that Alfred built his chief fort. The hill is now crowned
by the ruins of St. Michael’s Church, St. Michael being the saint whose
name is associated with most of our hill-top shrines. Ling, the next
village, is thought to be a corruption of Atheling.
Athelney is on the edge of the flat valley of Sedgemoor, the scene of
Monmouth’s defeat in 1685. The royal troops were quartered in the
villages of Weston Zoyland, Middlezoy, and Chedzoy, their headquarters
being Weston Zoyland, round which the battle raged most fiercely.
Knowing the carelessness that prevailed in the royal camp, Monmouth
attempted a night attack. On Sunday night, July 5, therefore, his troops
stole out. But they were foiled and trapped by the broad ditches called
“rhines,” in which they lost their way in a helpless fashion, and a
pistol that went off in the confusion roused the Royalists, with the
result that Monmouth’s followers were hopelessly routed, a thousand
being slain.
[Illustration: THE “ISLAND” OF ATHELNEY.
The Alfred memorial is in the foreground, and in the distance is the
“Mump,” the lonely hill surmounted by the ruined church of
Boroughbridge.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
