


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Wantage Road.
=Distance from London.=–60-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1-1/2 to 2-3/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  10s. 0d.   6s. 4d.   5s. 0-1/2d.
          Return  17s. 8d.  11s. 0d.  10s. 1d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–Good posting and hotels. “Bear
  Hotel” and “Blue Boar.”
The chalk ridge in the north of Berkshire is rich in memories of Alfred.
First in importance is Wantage, a peaceful town at the foot of the
hills, and famous as the birthplace of the great king. There is a statue
by Count Gleichen in the wide market-place representing Alfred with a
battle-axe and a charter in his hands. The church is a fine example of
Early English architecture, and interesting besides as the burying-place
of many famous Fitz-warens, among them Ivo, whose daughter married
Richard Whittington, Lord Mayor of London. Dr. Butler of The Analogywas born in the town, and the house is still to be seen.
Leaving Wantage, one may go along the breezy downs to Uffington Castle,
a large fort, presumably of British origin. It was one of many similar
forts along the Roman way called Ichenilde Street, that stretches
straight as an arrow along the whole ridge. Near the fort is the famous
White Horse cut in the chalk, which, since its recent cleansing, gleams
brilliantly from the hillside. It was cut out to commemorate the
magnificent victory of Ethelred the Unready and Alfred over the Danes at
Ashdown in 871. Readers of Tom Brown’s School Days will recall the
story of the Berkshire revels in 1857, when the scouring of the Horse
took place. Judge Hughes was born here, under the shadow of the downs,
and near by is the round hill where tradition says St. George slew the
dragon.
In Kenilworth Sir Walter Scott has immortalised Wayland Smith’s Cave,
a neolithic burial-place of some ancient chieftain which lies to the
west of Uffington Castle. It is a circle of stone slabs with flat stones
on the top. Wayland was the “Vulcan” of the men of the north, and
Alfred, in one of his translations, altered the “Fabricius” of the Roman
account into the northern “Wayland,” the fairy smith who replaced lost
shoes on horses. It was in this cave that Scott made Flibbertigibbet
play tricks on Tressilian.
[Illustration: THE STATUE OF ALFRED THE GREAT AT WANTAGE.
It was designed by Count Gleichen.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
