


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston via Chester. L. and N.W. Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Hawarden.
=Distance from London.=–186 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 4 to 5 hours.
=Fares.=–To Chester–            1st        2nd       3rd
                   Single      27s. 10d.  18s. 8d.  14s. 11d.
                   Return      51s.  9d.  32s. 8d.  29s. 10d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Glynne Arms,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Paddington via Wrexham. Great
  Western Railway.
Hawarden is a small town, about 6-1/2 miles from Chester. The great
interest of the place centres in Hawarden Castle, the home, until his
death, of the Rt. Hon. W.E. Gladstone. There are really two castles, but
little remains of the old one except the large circular keep and part of
the banqueting-hall. On the spot previously occupied by the old
battlements a modern wall has been built, from which a fine view across
the Dee estuary can be obtained. The castle was probably built before
the time of Edward I. Here Simon de Montfort surrendered the castle to
Llewelyn. After its reversion to the Crown it was again taken by
Llewelyn’s brother, and it was about this time that the present keep was
built. After its dismantling during the Parliamentary War, it was
purchased by Serjeant Glynne, in whose family it still remains.
Within full view of the old castle, and enclosed by the same park,
stands the modern mansion, constructed in the style of a castellated
Gothic building of the thirteenth century. It was originally a square
brick building, but it has had so many additions, besides being turreted
and encased in stone, that it is almost impossible to trace the former
structure. The south-east front looks on a gravel walk surrounding some
formal flower-beds, which was one of Mr. Gladstone’s favourite walks
when he was unable to take other exercise. Visitors are not admitted to
the modern castle.
Euloe Castle, some two or three miles from Hawarden, is said to be
connected with the few remains of the old chapel by means of an
underground passage. It is a picturesque, ivy-mantled ruin, but little
is known of its history.
Hawarden Church has a central tower, surmounted by a short spire; it was
restored by Sir Gilbert Scott in 1857. A window to the memory of Mr.
Gladstone, by the late Sir Edward Burne-Jones, has just been placed in
the west end.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
HAWARDEN CASTLE.
The home, until his death, of the Rt. Hon. W.E. Gladstone.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
