


THE BIRTHPLACE OF SHAKESPEARE
=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Stratford-on-Avon.
=Distance from London.=–121-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3 to 4-3/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  16s. 0d.  10s. 6d.   8s.  5d.
          Return  29s. 3d.  18s. 6d.  16s. 10d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Red Horse Hotel,” “Shakespeare
  Hotel,” “Golden Lion Hotel,” “Red Lion,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
Stratford-on-Avon, a picturesque town situated on the river Avon, in
Warwickshire, is visited yearly by thousands of people desirous of
seeing the birthplace of William Shakespeare. John Shakespeare, the
father of William, bought the two half-timbered houses in Henley Street,
where he practised his trade of wool-stapler, and it was in one of these
houses that William Shakespeare was born in 1564. These houses are now
practically in their original condition, although at one time the
wool-shop was turned into an inn. The desk, said to have been used by
Shakespeare when at school, is to be seen in the former wool-shop, now
converted into a museum. The King Edward VI. Grammar School, to which
Shakespeare went, occupies the first floor of the old Guildhall, built
in the thirteenth century, but much altered in the fifteenth century. It
was in this Guildhall that Shakespeare saw for the first time a
theatrical performance given by travelling players. Close to the
Guildhall is the site of New Place, which was bought by Shakespeare.
Only the foundations of this house remain, as in 1753 the owner, the
Rev. Francis Gastrell, being angry at having to pay some rates, was not
content with cutting down the famous mulberry tree planted by the poet,
but caused the whole house to be razed and the materials sold.
The Church of Holy Trinity, most beautifully situated on the river Avon,
is cruciform in plan. In the chancel is Shakespeare’s grave, with the
stone slab having the well-known lines:–
  GOOD FREND, FOR IESVS SAKE FORBEARE,
  TO DIGG THE DUST ENCLOASED HEARE;
  BLESTE BE YE MAN YT SPARES THES STONES,
  AND CVRST BE HE YT MOVES MY BONES.
At Shottery, one mile from Stratford, is the half-timbered cottage where
Anne Hathaway, the wife of Shakespeare, was born.
[Illustration: Valentine & Sons, Ltd.
TRINITY CHURCH, STRATFORD-ON-AVON.
From the river. In the chancel is Shakespeare’s grave.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
