


THE BIRTHPLACE OF BYRON
=How to get there.=–Train from St. Pancras. Change trains at
  Nottingham. Midland Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Newstead.
=Distance from London.=–134-1/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-1/4 to 4-1/4 hours.
                     1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  17s. 6d.   ...   10s. 9-1/2d.
          Return  35s. 0d.   ...   21s. 7d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Station Hotel,"* Newstead. “Swan
  Hotel,"* Mansfield. “Midland,” “White Hart,” and “Green
  Dragon,” and others.
Near Sherwood Forest, and not far from the town of Mansfield, is
Newstead Abbey, the ancestral seat of the Byrons. Founded in 1170 by
Henry II. as an expiation for the murder of Thomas à Becket, the abbey,
at the dissolution of the monasteries, was given by Henry VIII. to Sir
John Byron. The latter made it his home, altering it very little, but
allowing the church to fall into ruins. The monks, before leaving their
old home, hid the charters in the lectern, which they threw into the
lake. About 100 years ago the lectern, still containing the charters,
was discovered, and is now being used at Southwell. The “Wicked Lord
Byron,” the grand-uncle of the poet, allowed the abbey to fall into
decay, and to spite his sons cut down a large number of splendid oaks.
Byron succeeded to the estate when a mere boy, and loved it so much
that, even when in great need of money, he refused to part with it. At
last he was obliged to sell the home, which he has so vividly portrayed
in verse, to his old school friend Colonel Wildman. After the loss of
the abbey, Byron left England, and died six years afterwards, in 1824,
at Missolonghi, fighting for the independence of the Greeks.
The Abbey Church, though in ruins, is a very good example of Early
English work. The abbey itself is full of interesting and historic
rooms, one being the bedroom where Charles II. slept, retaining still
the state bed, whose coverlet was embroidered by Mary Queen of Scots.
Edward I. is known to have stayed in the abbey, and the room which he
occupied contains some splendid oak carving. Lord Byron’s bedroom is
just as he left it, with his college pictures on the walls and the
writing-table that he used. Newstead is open to the public on Tuesday
and Friday when the family are not in residence. Tickets may be obtained
at the two hotels mentioned above which are marked with an asterisk.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
NEWSTEAD ABBEY.
It contains Lord Byron’s bedroom in exactly the condition he left it in
1818.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
