


THE HOME OF DARWIN
=How to get there.=–Train from Charing Cross, Cannon Street, or
  London Bridge. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Orpington (3-1/2 to 4 miles from Downe).
=Distance from London.=–13-3/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–35 minutes.
                    1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  2s. 4d.  1s. 6d.  1s. 2-1/2d.
          Return  4s. 0d.  3s. 0d.     ...
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Queen’s Head,” at Downe, facing the
  church. Hotels at Farnborough–"White Lion,” “George and
  Dragon.”
The home of the great scientist is still standing in the little village
of Downe in Kent. The road to the hamlet is through Farnborough, and the
walk takes an hour. Downe is a pleasant place, possessing a large
village pond and a small church with a shingled spire. Darwin’s home,
known as Downe House, was built in the eighteenth century. Its front is
of white stucco, relieved by ivy and other creepers. The wing on the
west side of the house was added by Darwin shortly after he came to live
there. This new portion of the house was used partly to accommodate his
library. On the north side is the room used by Darwin as a study, in
which he wrote some of his most important works. The garden of the house
is sheltered and reposeful, and from the old wall-garden to the south
there is a beautiful view over the delightful stretch of country in the
direction of Westerham.
The life led by Darwin when at Downe was exceedingly quiet and regular,
for he always went to bed at an early hour, and rising at six was
enabled to get in a walk and breakfast before commencing work at eight
o’clock. At some other time of the day he would manage to get an
opportunity for another walk, and part of the evening would be given up
to his family and friends who were privileged to enjoy conversation with
the great author of The Origin of Species. Professor Haeckel,
describing a visit to Darwin’s home, says, “There stepped out to meet me
from the shady porch ... the great naturalist himself, a tall and
venerable figure, with the broad shoulders of an Atlas supporting a
world of thought, his Jupiter-like forehead, highly and broadly arched
... and deeply furrowed with the plough of mental labour; his kindly,
mild eyes looking forth under the shadow of prominent brows.”
[Illustration: DOWNE HOUSE AT DOWNE, KENT.
The Home of Charles Darwin.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
