


=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo, L. and S.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Camelford. Thence by omnibus to Tintagel (4-1/2
  miles distant) twice daily.
=Distance from London.=–241 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6-1/2 to 8 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  41s. 0d.  26s. 3d.  21s. 3d.
          Return  72s. 2d.  46s. 4d.  42s. 6d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"King Arthur’s,” “Castle Hotel,"
  “Tintagel,” etc.
Tintagel Castle is situated near Bossiney, a place of some importance in
bygone times, to judge from the number of ruins of houses to be seen
there. Situated as the castle is, high up on a mass of dark, slaty rock
in one of the wildest parts of the coast of Northern Cornwall, it is a
suitable spot to be the legendary birthplace of King Arthur. The
formation of the rocky ground is very interesting. Tintagel itself is
almost an island, but a low isthmus connects it with the mainland. On
both sides of the chasm are the ruins of the castle, and wide as the gap
is, the buildings on the mainland and on the rock are in an exact line,
and present the same characteristic features, thus showing that there
has probably been a considerable subsidence of the land at that point.
The castle must have been almost inaccessible. In the time of Leland a
chapel occupied part of the keep. Some doubt is entertained as to the
date of the building of the castle, opinion being divided between a
Norman, a Saxon, or a Roman origin.
The remains of a British or Saxon church are to be found on the summit
of the island. The church is supposed to have belonged to the abbey and
convent of Fontevrault, in Normandy. It was afterwards given by Edward
IV. to the Collegiate Church of Windsor, the dean and the chapter being
the patrons. Parts of the church of Tintagel have recently been restored
by the vicar of the parish.
About 3 miles from Tintagel is the Slaughter Bridge, which derives its
names from the two great battles which were fought there, one between
King Arthur and his nephew, who died in 542, when Arthur was said to
have been mortally wounded, and the other between the Britons and Saxons
in 823. Other ancient relics in the form of barrows and stone crosses
are to be found in this neighbourhood.
For Stonehenge and other prehistoric remains, see Index.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
KING ARTHUR’S CASTLE, TINTAGEL.
One of the wildest spots on the north coast of Cornwall.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
