


THE HOME OF WILLIAM PITT
=How to get there.=–Train from Charing Cross, Cannon Street, and
  London Bridge. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Hayes (2 miles from Keston village). About 3
  miles from Holwood House.
=Distance from London.=–12 miles.
=Average Time.=–35 minutes.
                    1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  2s. 0d.  1s. 3d.  1s. 0-1/2d.
          Return  3s. 3d.  2s. 4d.  1s. 10d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"The Fox Inn,” “The George."
=Alternative Route.=–To Orpington Station by the South-Eastern and
  Chatham Railway, about 4 miles distant.
Visitors are able to pass through the park on a public footpath.
About 3 miles’ walk from Hayes Station by a pleasant road over Hayes
Common is Holwood House, a stately, classic building, for many years the
home of William Pitt, the famous statesman and son of the Earl of
Chatham. He owned the estate between 1785 and 1802, and it was during
this period that the British camp in the park suffered so severely. The
earth-works were occupied by some early British tribe before Caesar
crossed the Channel, and the place probably owed its strength to its
well-chosen position. Pitt, however, caused these fascinating remains to
be levelled to a considerable extent, in order to carry out some of his
ideas of landscape gardening. A magnificent tree growing near the house
is known as “Pitt’s Oak,” from the tradition that Pitt was specially
fond of spending long periods of quiet reading beneath its overshadowing
boughs. Another tree of more interest still stands quite near the public
footpath through the park. This is known as “Wilberforce’s Oak,” and is
easily distinguished from the surrounding trees by the stone seat
constructed in its shade. The momentous decision which makes this tree
so interesting is given in Wilberforce’s diary for the year 1788. He
writes, “At length, I well remember after a conversation with Mr. Pitt
in the open air at the root of an old tree at Holwood, just above the
steep descent into the vale of Keston, I resolved to give notice on a
fit occasion in the House of Commons of my intention to bring forward
the abolition of the slave-trade.”
With the exception of Knole Park, Holwood boasts some of the finest
beeches in the country. The present house took the place of the one
occupied by Pitt in 1825; the architect was Decimus Burton.
[Illustration: WILBERFORCE’S OR “EMANCIPATION OAK” IN HOLWOOD PARK,
KESTON.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
