


=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Durham. (Raby Castle is close to the town of
  Staindrop.)
=Distance from London.=–256 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 5-3/4 to 7-1/2 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  35s. 10d.   ...   21s. 2d.
          Return  71s.  8d.   ...   42s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Durham–"Rose and Crown
  Hotel,” “Royal County Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras. Midland Railway.
Raby Castle, the ancestral home of the Nevilles and an almost perfect
specimen of a fourteenth-century castle, is situated close to the little
town of Staindrop in the county of Durham. Canute, the Danish king, is
said to have had a house in Staindrop; and it was he who presented Raby
Castle to the shrine of St. Cuthbert. The castle passed from the
possession of the monks in 1131, when they granted it to Dolphin, who
belonged to the royal family of Northumberland, for the yearly rental of
£4. Dominus de Raby, a descendant of Dolphin, married Isabel Neville,
the heiress of the Saxon house of Balmer, and their son, Geoffrey, took
the surname of Neville. The present castle was built by John, Lord
Neville, about the year 1379, when he had permission to fortify.
There is very little history attaching to the fortress, for, with the
exception of two insignificant attacks during the Civil War, it
sustained no sieges. It belonged to the Nevilles until 1570, when
Charles Neville, Earl of Westmorland, lost the castle, together with all
his estates, for the share which he took in the rising in the North for
the restoration of the Roman Catholic religion in England. Not being
situated on high ground, the chief defence of Raby Castle, apart from
the strength of its walls, must have been the abundance of water which
completely surrounded it.
The chapel is the oldest portion; but the castle was almost entirely
built in one man’s lifetime, and bears scarcely any traces of earlier or
later work. The interior, however, has been much altered by modern
architects, who have obliterated a great portion of John Neville’s work.
The Baron’s Hall used to be a fine room, with beautiful windows, an oak
roof, and a stone music-gallery. The kitchen, which occupies the whole
interior of a large tower, is one of the most interesting and perfect
features of the castle, though it has no longer the original fireplaces.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
RABY CASTLE.
Built by John, Lord Neville, about the year 1379.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
