


  California battalion
  Their appearance and costume
  List of the officers
  Commence our march to Los Angeles
  Appearance of the country in the vicinity of San Juan
  Slaughter of beeves
  Astonishing consumption of beef by the men
  Beautiful morning
  Ice
  Salinas river and valley
  Californian prisoners
  Horses giving out from fatigue
  Mission of San Miguel
  Sheep
  Mutton
  March on foot
  More prisoners taken
  Death of Mr. Stanley
  An execution
  Dark night
  Capture of the mission of San Luis Obispo
  Orderly conduct and good deportment of the California battalion.
November 30.–The battalion of mounted riflemen, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Fremont, numbers, rank and file, including Indians,
and servants, 428. With the exception of the exploring party, which
left the United States with Colonel F., they are composed of volunteers
from the American settlers, and the emigrants who have arrived in the
country within a few weeks. The latter have generally furnished their
own ammunition and other equipments for the expedition. Most of these
are practised riflemen, men of undoubted courage, and capable of
bearing any fatigue and privations endurable by veteran troops. The
Indians are composed of a party of Walla-Wallas from Oregon, and a
party of native Californians. Attached to the battalion are two pieces
of artillery, under the command of Lieutenant McLane, of the navy. In
the appearance of our small army there is presented but little of “the
pomp and circumstance of glorious war.” There are no plumes nodding
over brazen helmets, nor coats of broadcloth spangled with lace and
buttons. A broad-brimmed low-crowned hat, a shirt of blue flannel, or
buckskin, with pantaloons and mocassins of the same, all generally much
the worse for wear, and smeared with mud and dust, make up the costume
of the party, officers as well as men. A leathern girdle surrounds the
waist, from which are suspended a bowie and a hunter’s knife, and
sometimes a brace of pistols. These, with the rifle and
holster-pistols, are the arms carried by officers and privates. A
single bugle (and a sorry one it is) composes the band. Many an embryo
Napoleon, in his own conceit, whose martial spirit has been excited to
flaming intensity of heat by the peacock-plumage and gaudy trappings of
our militia companies, when marching through the streets to the sound
of drum, fife, and brass band, if he could have looked upon us, and
then consulted the state of the military thermometer within him, would
probably have discovered that the mercury of his heroism had fallen
several degrees below zero. He might even have desired that we should
not come
    “Between the wind and his nobility.”
War, stripped of its pageantry, possesses but few of the attractions
with which poetry and painting have embellished it. The following is a
list of the officers composing the California Battalion:–Lieut.-colonel
J.G. Fremont, commanding; A.H. Gillespie, major; P.B. Reading,
paymaster; H. King, commissary; J.R. Snyder, quartermaster, since
appointed a land-surveyor by Colonel Mason; Wm. H. Russell, ordnance
officer; T. Talbot, lieutenant and adjutant; J.J. Myers, sergeant-major,
appointed lieutenant in January, 1847.
Company A.–Richard Owens, captain; Wm. N. Loker, 1st lieutenant,
appointed adjutant, Feb. 10th, 1847; B.M. Hudspeth, 2d lieutenant,
appointed captain, Feb. 1847, Wm. Findlay, 2d lieutenant, appointed
captain, Feb. 1847.
Company B.–Henry Ford, captain; Andrew Copeland, 1st lieutenant.
Company C.–Granville P. Swift, captain; Wm. Baldridge, 1st
lieutenant; Wm. Hartgrove, 2d do.
Company D.–John Sears, captain; Wm. Bradshaw, 1st lieutenant.
Company E.–John Grigsby, captain; Archibald Jesse, 1st lieutenant.
Company F.–L.W. Hastings, captain (author of a work on California);
Wornbough, 1st lieutenant; J.M. Hudspeth, 2d do.
Company G.–Thompson, captain; Davis 1st lieutenant; Rock, 2d do.
Company H.–R.T. Jacobs, captain; Edwin Bryant, 1st lieutenant
(afterwards alcalde at San Francisco); Geo. M. Lippincott, 2d do., of
New York.
Artillery Company.–Louis McLane, captain (afterwards major); John.
K. Wilson, 1st lieutenant, appointed captain in January, 1847; Wm.
Blackburn, 2d do. (now alcalde of Santa Cruz).
Officers on detached Service and doing Duty at the South.–S. Hensley,
captain; S. Gibson, do. (lanced through the body at San Pascual);
Miguel Pedrorena, do., Spaniard (appointed by Stockton); Stgo.
Arguello, do., Californian (appointed by do.); Bell, do. (appointed
by do.), old resident of California (Los Angeles); H. Rhenshaw, 1st
lieutenant, (appointed by do.); A. Godey, do. (appointed by do.); Jas.
Barton, do. (appointed by do.); L. Arguello, do., Californian
(appointed by do.).
After a march of six or eight hours, up the valley of the arroyo,
through a heavy rain, and mud so deep that several of our horses gave
out from exhaustion, we encamped in a circular bottom, near a deserted
adobe house. A caballada, of some 500 or 600 loose horses and mules
is driven along with us, but many of them are miserable sore-backed
skeletons, having been exhausted with hard usage and bad fare during
the summer campaign. Besides these, we have a large number of
pack-mules, upon which all our baggage and provisions are transported.
Distance 10 miles.
We did not move on the 1st and 2d of December. There being no cattle in
the vicinity of our camp, a party was sent back to the mission, on the
morning of the 1st, who in the afternoon returned, driving before them
about 100 head, most of them in good condition. After a sufficient
number were slaughtered to supply the camp with meat for the day, the
remainder were confined in a corral prepared for the purpose, to be
driven along with us, and slaughtered from day to day. The rain has
continued, with short intermissions, since we commenced our march on
the 30th of November. The ground has become saturated with water, and
the small branches are swollen into large streams. Notwithstanding
these discomforts, the men are in good spirits, and enjoy themselves in
singing, telling stories, and playing monte.
December 3.–The rain ceased falling about 8 o’clock this morning;
and, the clouds breaking away, the sun cheered us once more with his
pleasant beams. The battalion was formed into a hollow square, and, the
order of the day being read, we resumed our march. Our progress,
through the deep mud, was very slow. The horses were constantly giving
out, and many were left behind. The young and tender grass upon which
they feed affords but little nourishment, and hard labour soon exhausts
them. We encamped on a low bluff, near the arroyo, timbered with
evergreen oak. Distance 8 miles.
December 4.–I was ordered with a small party in advance this
morning. Proceeding up the valley a few miles, we left it, crossing
several steep hills sparsely timbered with oak, from which we descended
into another small valley, down which we continued to the point of its
termination, near some narrow and difficult mountain gorges. In
exploring the gorges, we discovered the trail of a party of
Californians, which had passed south several days before us, and found
a horse which they had left in their march. This, doubtless, was a
portion of the party which captured Mr. Larkin, and had the engagement
between Monterey and St. Juan, on the 17th ult. The main body coming
up, we encamped at three o’clock. The old grass around our camp is
abundant; but having been so much washed by the rains, and consequently
exhausted of its nutritious qualities, the animals refused to eat it.
The country over which we have travelled to-day, and as far as I can
see, is mountainous and broken, little of it being adapted to other
agricultural purposes than grazing.
Thirteen beeves are slaughtered every afternoon for the consumption of
the battalion. These beeves are generally of good size, and in fair
condition. Other provisions being entirely exhausted, beef constitutes
the only subsistence for the men, and most of the officers. Under these
circumstances, the consumption of beef is astonishing. I do not know
that I shall be believed when I state a fact, derived from observation
and calculation, that the average consumption per man of fresh beef is
at least ten pounds per day. Many of them, I believe, consume much
more, and some of them less. Nor does this quantity appear to be
injurious to health, or fully to satisfy the appetite. I have seen some
of the men roast their meat and devour it by the fire from the hour of
encamping until late bed-time. They would then sleep until one or two
o’clock in the morning, when, the cravings of hunger being greater than
the desire for repose, the same occupation would be resumed, and
continued until the order was given to march. The Californian beef is
generally fat, juicy, and tender, and surpasses in flavour any which I
ever tasted elsewhere. Distance 10 miles.
December 5.–I rose before daylight. The moon shone brightly. The
temperature was cold. The vapour in the atmosphere had congealed and
fallen upon the ground in feathery flakes, covering it with a white
semi-transparent veil, or crystal sheen, sparkling in the moonbeams.
The smoke from the numerous camp-fires soon began to curl languidly up
in graceful wreaths, settling upon the mountain summits. The scene was
one for the pencil and brush of the artist; but, when the envious sun
rose, he soon stripped Madam Earth of her gauzy holiday morning-gown,
and exposed her every-day petticoat of mud.
Our march to-day has been one of great difficulty, through a deep
brushy mountain gorge, through which it was almost impossible to force
the field-pieces. In one place they were lowered with ropes down a
steep and nearly perpendicular precipice of great height and depth. We
encamped about three o’clock, P.M., in a small valley. Many of the
horses gave out on the march, and were left behind by the men, who came
straggling into camp until a late hour of the evening, bringing their
saddles and baggage upon their shoulders. I noticed, while crossing an
elevated ridge of hills, flakes of snow flying in the air, but melting
before they reached the ground. The small spring-branch on which we
encamped empties into the Salinas River. The country surrounding us is
elevated and broken, and the soil sandy, with but little timber or
grass upon it. Distance 12 miles.
December 6.–Morning clear and cool. Crossed an undulating country,
destitute of timber and water, and encamped in a circular valley
surrounded by elevated hills, through which flows a small tributary of
the Salinas. The summits of the mountains in sight are covered with
snow, but the temperature in the valleys is pleasant. Distance 15
miles.
December 7.–Ice, the first I have seen since entering California,
formed in the branch, of the thickness of window-glass. We reached the
valley of the Salinas about eleven o’clock A.M., and encamped for the
day. The river Salinas (laid down in some maps as Rio San Buenaventura)
rises in the mountains to the south, and has a course of some sixty or
eighty miles, emptying into the Pacific about twelve miles north of
Monterey. The valley, as it approaches the ocean, is broad and fertile,
and there are many fine ranchos upon it. But, higher up, the stream
becomes dry in the summer, and the soil of the valley is arid and
sandy. The width of the stream at this point is about thirty yards. Its
banks are skirted by narrow belts of small timber. A range of elevated
mountains rises between this valley and the coast. A court-martial was
held to-day, for the trial of sundry offenders. Distance 8 miles.
December 8.–Morning cool, clear, and pleasant. Two Californians were
arrested by the rear-guard near a deserted rancho, and brought into
camp. One of them turned out to be a person known to be friendly to the
Americans. There has been but little variation in the soil or scenery.
But few attempts appear to have been made to settle this portion of
California. The thefts and hostilities of the Tular Indians are said to
be one of the causes preventing its settlement. Distance 15 miles.
December 9.–The mornings are cool, but the middle of the day is too
warm to ride comfortably with our coats on. Our march has been
fatiguing and difficult, through several brushy ravines and over steep
and elevated hills. Many horses gave out as usual, and were left, from
inability to travel. Our caballada is diminishing rapidly. Distance
10 miles.
December 10.–Our march has been on the main beaten trail, dry and
hard, and over a comparatively level country. We passed the mission of
San Miguel about three o’clock, and encamped in a grove of large oak
timber, three or four miles south of it. This mission is situated on
the upper waters of the Salinas, in an extensive plain. Under the
administration of the padres it was a wealthy establishment, and
manufactures of various kinds were carried on. They raised immense
numbers of sheep, the fleeces of which were manufactured by the Indians
into blankets and coarse cloths. Their granaries were filled with an
abundance of maize and frijoles, and their store-rooms with other
necessaries of life, from the ranchos belonging to the mission lands in
the vicinity. Now all the buildings, except the church and the
principal range of houses contiguous, have fallen into ruins, and an
Englishman, his wife, and one small child, with two or three Indian
servants, are the sole inhabitants. The church is the largest I have
seen in the country, and its interior is in good repair, although it
has not probably been used for the purpose of public worship for many
years. The Englishman professes to have purchased the mission and all
the lands belonging to it for 300 dollars.
Our stock of cattle being exhausted, we feasted on Californian mutton,
sheep being more abundant than cattle at this mission. The wool, I
noticed, was coarse, but the mutton was of an excellent quality. The
country over which we have travelled to-day shows the marks of long
drought previous to the recent rains. The soil is sandy and gravelly,
and the dead vegetation upon it is thin and stunted. About eighty of
our horses are reported to have given out and been left behind.
Distance 20 miles.
December 12.–To relieve our horses, which are constantly giving out
from exhaustion, the grass being insufficient for their sustenance
while performing labour, the entire battalion, officers and men, were
ordered to march on foot, turning their horses, with the saddles and
bridles upon them, into the general caballada, to be driven along by
the horse-guard. The day has been drizzly, cold, and disagreeable. The
country has a barren and naked appearance; but this, I believe, is
attributable to the extreme drought that has prevailed in this region
for one or two years past. We encamped near the rancho of a friendly
Californian–the man who was taken prisoner the other day and set at
large. An Indian, said to be the servant of Tortoria Pico, was captured
here by the advance party. A letter was found upon him, but the
contents of which I never learned. This being the first foot-march,
there were, of course, many galled and blistered feet in the battalion.
My servant obtained, with some difficulty, from the Indians at the
rancho, a pint-cup of pinole, or parched corn-meal, and a quart or
two of wheat, which, being boiled, furnished some variety in our viands
at supper, fresh beef having been our only subsistence since the
commencement of the march from San Juan. Distance 12 miles.
December 13.–A rainy disagreeable morning. Mr. Stanley, one of the
volunteers, and one of the gentlemen who so kindly supplied us with
provisions on Mary’s River, died last night. He has been suffering from
an attack of typhoid fever since the commencement of our march, and
unable most of the time to sit upon his horse. He was buried this
morning in a small circular opening in the timber near our camp. The
battalion was formed in a hollow square surrounding the grave which had
been excavated for the final resting-place of our deceased friend and
comrade. There was neither bier, nor coffin, nor pall–
    “Not a drum was heard, nor a funeral note.”
The cold earth was heaped upon his mortal remains in silent solemnity,
and the ashes of a braver or a better man will never repose in the
lonely hills of California.
After the funeral the battalion was marched a short distance to witness
another scene, not more mournful, but more harrowing than the last. The
Indian captured at the rancho yesterday was condemned to die. He was
brought from his place of confinement and tied to a tree. Here he stood
some fifteen or twenty minutes, until the Indians from a neighbouring
rancheria could be brought to witness the execution. A file of
soldiers were then ordered to fire upon him. He fell upon his knees,
and remained in that position several minutes without uttering a groan,
and then sank upon the earth. No human being could have met his fate
with more composure, or with stronger manifestations of courage. It was
a scene such as I desire never to witness again.
A cold rain fell upon us during the entire day’s march. We encamped at
four o’clock, P.M.; but the rain poured down in such torrents that it
was impossible to light our camp-fires and keep them burning. This
continued nearly the whole night, and I have rarely passed a night more
uncomfortably. A scouting party brought in two additional prisoners
this evening. Another returned, and reported the capture of a number of
horses, and the destruction of a rancho by fire. Distance 12 miles.
December 14.–The battalion commenced its march on foot and in a
heavy rain. The mud is very deep, and we have been compelled to wade
several streams of considerable depth, being swollen by the recent
rains. At one o’clock a halt was ordered, and beef slaughtered and
cooked for dinner. The march was resumed late in the afternoon, and the
plain surrounding the mission of San Luis Obispo was reached in the
pitch darkness of the night, a family in the canada having been taken
prisoners by the advance party to prevent them from giving the alarm.
The battalion was so disposed as to surround the mission and take
prisoners all contained within it. The place was entered in great
confusion, on account of the darkness, about nine o’clock. There was no
military force at the mission, and the few inhabitants were greatly
alarmed, as may well be supposed, by this sudden invasion. They made no
resistance, and were all taken prisoners except one or two, who managed
to escape and fled in great terror, no one knew where or how. It being
ascertained that Tortoria Pico, a man who has figured conspicuously in
most of the Californian revolutions, was in the neighbourhood, a party
was despatched immediately to the place, and he was brought in a
prisoner. The night was rainy and boisterous, and the soldiers were
quartered to the best advantage in the miserable mud houses, and no
acts of violence or outrage of any kind were committed.
The men composing the Californian battalion, as I have before stated,
have been drawn from many sources, and are roughly clad, and
weather-beaten in their exterior appearance; but I feel it but justice
here to state my belief, that no military party ever passed through an
enemy’s country and observed the same strict regard for the rights of
its population. I never heard of an outrage, or even a trespass being
committed by one of the American volunteers during our entire march.
Every American appeared to understand perfectly the duty which he owed
to himself and others in this respect, and the deportment of the
battalion might be cited as a model for imitation. Distance 18 miles.
Continue...

This eBook of “What I Saw in California” (1849; a Description of Its Soil, Climate, Productions, and Gold Mines;
with the Best Routes and Latest Information for Intending Emigrants.) by Edwin Bryant belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What I Saw in CaliforniaBy Edwin BryantAt Amazon
