


THE HOME OF GILBERT WHITE
=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Alton (4 miles from Selborne).
=Distance from London.=–46-1/2 miles. East Tisted, 2 miles from Selborne,
  shortly to be available.
=Average Time.=–1-3/4 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single   7s. 9d.  5s. 0d.  3s. 10-1/2d.
          Return  13s. 6d.  8s. 8d.  7s.  9d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Alton–"Swan Hotel,” “Crown
  Hotel,” etc.
Selborne, the birthplace of the famous naturalist, Gilbert White, is
situated in the extreme eastern corner of the county of Hampshire. A
vast chalk hill rises some 300 feet above the south-western side of the
village, part of which is covered with an extensive beech wood, called
“The Hanger,” and a down or sheep-walk. This down is a beautiful
park-like spot, with a delightful woodland, now bounded by the Sussex
Downs. The village lies at the foot of the chalk hill parallel with the
Hanger, and contains only one straggling street, nearly a mile in
length, a small rivulet rising at each end. The stream at the
north-western end often fails, but the other, known as the “Well-Head,"
is a fine spring, seldom influenced by drought. Wolmer Forest, near by,
is famed for its timber. In the centre of the village, on a piece of
ground commonly known as “The Plestor,” there stood, until the fearful
storm of 1703, a colossal oak tree, with a short body and enormous
horizontally spreading arms. The stone steps, with seats above them,
surrounding the tree, formed a favourite resort for both old and young
during summer evenings. This oak, together with an equally large elm
tree, are mentioned by White.
Gilbert White was born in 1720. He began his education at Basingstoke,
from whence he proceeded in 1739 to Oriel College, Oxford, and finally
became one of the senior proctors of the university in 1752. On his
father’s death, White became the occupier of his house in Selborne known
as “The Wakes,” and afterwards became curate of the parish. He never
married, but lived a happy and uneventful life, wrapped up in the
wonderfully exact observations of nature which were the basis of his
numerous letters forming The Natural History of Selborne. His final
resting-place is unobtrusively marked by a simple grey stone bearing the
initials “G.W.,” a monument entirely in keeping with Gilbert White’s
quiet and retiring nature and refreshingly simple style of writing.
[Illustration: THE WAKES.
Gilbert White’s house at Selborne.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
