


=How to get there.=–Train from Victoria, Holborn Viaduct, Charing
  Cross, or Cannon Street. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Canterbury (East).
=Distance from London.=–61-3/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1-3/4 to 2-3/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  10s. 4d.   6s. 6d.   5s. 2d.
          Return  18s. 0d.  13s. 0d.  10s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"County Hotel,” “The Fleece
  Family and Commercial Hotel,” Baker’s “Temperance Hotel,"
  “The Royal Fountain Hotel,” “Falstaff Hotel,” etc.
The city of Canterbury, originally an important station in Watling
Street, the Durovernum of the Romans, was one of the earliest places
occupied by the Saxons, by whom it was named Cantwarabyrig, or “town
of the Kentish men,” and made the capital of the Saxon kingdom of Kent,
and a royal residence. About 597 the abbey was founded by St. Augustine
and his royal convert King Ethelbert. Canterbury was then constituted
the seat of the primacy in England, a dignity it retains to this day.
At the period of the Norman Conquest the city was of considerable size,
and the castle, of which very little now remains, is reputed to be the
work of William the Conqueror. The cathedral was burnt down at least
twice before the present building was erected, but under the influence
of the Norman archbishops, Lanfranc and Anselm, the erection of the new
“Church of Christ” proceeded apace. But it was not until the end of the
twelfth century that the murder of Becket set the whole of Europe
ringing with excitement, and Canterbury rose at once into the front rank
as an ecclesiastical city and pilgrims’ shrine.
At the time when Chaucer wrote his Canterbury Tales the city was
surrounded by a strong wall with twenty-one towers and six gates. Of the
wall there are some remains in Broad Street; of the gates “West Gate,"
through which the pilgrims entered from London, is the only survivor.
Canterbury teems with interesting relics of the past, and weeks may be
spent in its old-world streets, where one is continually coming across
unexpected little bits of half-timber work, weather-beaten gables, and
grotesque oak carving. The cathedral, whose “Bell Harry” or central
tower seems to dominate the whole city, should be approached through
Mercery Lane, at the corner of which are some slight remains of
Chaucer’s hostelry, “The Chequers of Hope.” At the bottom of the lane
the cathedral close is entered by the famous Christ Church Gateway,
erected by Prior Goldstone in 1517. Once inside the close gate the
visitor gets some idea of the amazing beauty of the structure, which is
certainly unsurpassed by any other cathedral in the kingdom. The
building exhibits almost every style of architecture, from the Norman
work of William of Lens to the late Perpendicular of Prior Goldstone,
and yet the work of composition and design has been so exquisitely
carried out that there is no hint of any want of harmony in the
magnificent whole. The interior is no less remarkable, the arches and
vaulting of the nave being some of the most beautiful in existence.
Becket’s shrine was despoiled at the Reformation, but the number of
pilgrims who visited it may be imagined from the fact that the broad
stone steps are worn hollow, and this only by the knees of his
worshippers. The Angel doorway in the cloisters, by which the archbishop
entered the sacred building pursued by his murderers, gives access on to
the north-west or martyrdom transept. Here is shown the spot where the
primate made his last stand and fell under the blows of the Norman
knights. Another object of special interest is the tomb of Edward, the
Black Prince, who died in the city in 1376. There is so much to see in
and about the cathedral and its precincts, however, that a trustworthy
guide-book is a sine qua non. The building is open from 9.30 to the
end of evening service–the nave and two west transepts free; the choir
and crypt, 6d. each person. Sketching orders, 2s. 6d. per day, and
photographing orders, 5s. per day.
In the city itself the most interesting of the old churches is St.
Martin’s, reputed to be the oldest in England (admission, 6d.). Here St.
Augustine first preached Christianity before the cathedral was built.
St. Martin’s Hill, near the church, should be noticed. It was over this
ascent that Augustine with his Roman monks passed into Canterbury in
697.
In Monastery Street is the fine gateway of the once rich and powerful
St. Augustine’s Abbey; and near it, not many years ago, was a fine
example of Saxon work, known as Ethelbert’s Tower, which some of the
intelligent busybodies of the time had removed with a battering-ram.
In Broad Street is the Hospital of St. John, with its quaint entrance
and fine old timbered gateway.
The Grammar School, known as the King’s School, was founded at the close
of the seventh century. The most remarkable portion of what remains of
the old buildings is an almost unique Norman staircase.
[Illustration: THE WEST GATE, CANTERBURY.
The only one left standing of the six in existence in the days of
Chaucer.]
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
THE TRANSEPT OF MARTYRDOM.
In Canterbury Cathedral.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
