


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Thorpe Cloud, at the south end of Dovedale.
=Distance from London.=–152 miles.
=Average Time.=–About 4 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  20s.  6d.   ...   12s. 1-1/2d.
          Return  39s. 10d.   ...      ...
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Izaak Walton Hotel,” at Ham;
  “The Peveril Hotel,” near Thorpe; “Green Man,” “White Hart,"
  etc., at Ashbourne.
=Alternative Routes.=–Train from St. Pancras. Midland Railway
  to Ashbourne, thence by coach; or train from King’s Cross,
  Great Northern Railway.
Dovedale is the apt name given to the valley of the Dove, a river rising
on the borders of Derby and Stafford, near Buxton and Axe Edge Hill,
and, after a course of 45 miles, joining the Trent at Newton Solney. The
portion of its course chiefly associated with the name begins half a
mile from the village of Thorpe, which may be reached from Ashbourne,
the nearest station, by coach. From Thorpe the river is approached by a
stony declivity on the east of Thorpe Cloud.
The footpath is throughout on the Derbyshire side of the stream, and may
be reached from the Staffordshire side either by crossing the narrow
bridge or some stepping-stones at Thorpe Cloud. For some distance after
entering the valley the footpath follows the margin of the river, whose
banks are a mass of magnificent foliage, intermixed with a tangle of
brambles, honeysuckle, and wild roses. On the Staffordshire bank, a
little further up, the foliage suddenly changes to a mass of sheer
cliff, changing again to a mass of rifted rocks, divided into curious
turret-like terminations. This striking formation is known as Dovedale
Church, and is accompanied on the Derbyshire side by a number of rocks
which appear from below to terminate in sharp pinnacles, and have been
named “Tissington Spires,” from the village close by. About 200 yards
beyond the “Church,” on the Derbyshire bank, is the entrance to
Reynard’s Cave, a huge cavern with an entrance 40 feet high by 20 wide,
from which the view over the dale is superb.
Throughout its whole length of nearly 3 miles the Dovedale scenery is
the extraordinary mixture of ruggedness and soft beauty, which makes it
unequalled, in its particular style, in the kingdom.
Dovedale is associated with the name of Izaak Walton and his friend
Charles Cotton, the poet.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
TISSINGTON SPIRES, DOVEDALE.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
