


=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Alton (1 mile from Chawton).
=Distance from London.=–46-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1-3/4 to 2 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single   7s. 9d.  5s. 0d.  3s. 10-1/2d.
          Return  13s. 6d.  8s. 8d.  7s.  9d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Alton–"Swan Hotel,” “Crown
  Hotel,” etc.
Situated about a mile from Alton Station, on the main line of the
South-Western Railway, is the little village of Chawton, the residence
of Jane Austen at the time when she was producing her best literary
work. A walk along the main Winchester road brings one to the charming
old-world place, and, keeping on past the thatched cottages of the
village, one reaches a small brick house on the right-hand side, near a
pond, just before the road divides for Winchester and Gosport. This
building, which is now tenanted by a workman’s club, was Chawton
Cottage, where Jane Austen spent some of the brightest days of her life,
and wrote her most successful novels, books which are more highly
appreciated at the present day than they were during the lifetime of the
authoress.
Her father was rector of Steventon, another Hampshire village, at which
place his daughter was born in 1775, and where her early days were
spent. Jane Austen’s novels are remarkable for the truthfulness and
charm with which they reproduce the everyday life of the upper middle
classes in England in her time, and for delicate and yet distinct
insight into every variety of the human character. Miss Austen’s first
four novels, Sense and Sensibility, Pride and Prejudice, Mansfield
Park, and Emma, were published anonymously.
A short distance along the Gosport road is Chawton Park, a remarkably
fine Elizabethan mansion, occupied in Miss Austen’s time by Edward
Knight, the lord of the manor. This country seat, which is not
accessible to visitors, was most probably the original of Mansfield
Park, and in the little church close by are several monuments to the
Knight family. Miss Austen died at Winchester on July 24, 1817, and is
buried in the cathedral. The brass to her memory is in the north aisle.
Within easy walking distance is Gilbert White’s home at Selborne, which
is treated under a separate heading (p. 70).
[Illustration: JANE AUSTEN’S COTTAGE AT CHAWTON.
Sense and Sensibility, Pride and Prejudice, and Northanger Abbeywere revised and partly rewritten here; and Emma, Mansfield Park,
and Persuasion were entirely produced at the cottage.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
