


THE HOME OF THE “VENERABLE BEDE”
=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Jarrow (2 miles north-east from Monkton).
=Distance from London.=–268 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 5-1/4 to 7-1/2 hours.
                    1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares=–Single  37s. 7d.   ...   22s. 3d.
         Return  75s. 2d.   ...   44s. 6d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Jarrow–"Ben Lomond Hotel,"
  “Burkett’s Hotel."
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras. Midland Railway.
Monkwearmouth, a little town 2 miles distant from Jarrow, the large
shipbuilding town on the southern bank of the river Tyne, is famous for
being the birthplace of the Venerable Bede. Bede, who was born in 673
A.D., was placed, at the age of seven years, in the monastery at
Monkwearmouth, from which he went to Jarrow, to the new monastery just
built by Benedict Biscop. He remained at Jarrow for the rest of his
life, studying the Scriptures and writing books. His greatest work was
the Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation, which has given him
his position as the father of English history. The story of his death is
very beautiful. He was translating St. John’s Gospel into English when
he was attacked by a sudden illness, and felt he was dying. He kept on
with his task, however, and continued dictating to his scribe, bidding
him write quickly. When he was told that the book was finished he said,
“You speak truth, all is finished now,” and after singing “Glory to
God,” he quietly passed away.
The abbey churches of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow are interesting, because
they have remained practically unaltered from their construction in the
seventh century. The monasteries never grew sufficiently to require
great enlargements, and thus they would have been to-day very nearly as
the Anglo-Saxon monks saw them. Monkwearmouth Church was built in the
Romanesque style by Benedict Biscop, who sent to France for workmen to
put in the glass for the church windows. Besides the church, no trace
remains of any monastic building at Monkwearmouth. The chancel and tower
of the abbey church at Jarrow bear a great resemblance to those of
Monkwearmouth, both being the work of Benedict Biscop. The domestic part
of the monastery at Jarrow, where Bede lived and died, has disappeared,
for the present ruins show Norman and not Saxon work. Monkwearmouth
possesses one of the earliest Christian gravestones in England.
[Illustration: Valentine & Sons, Ltd.
MONKWEARMOUTH CHURCH.
Partly built by Bishop Biscop in Bede’s time.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
