


=How to get there.=–Great Western Railway, Paddington Station.
=Nearest Stations.=–Dulverton or Minehead. For both stations
  change at Taunton.
=Distance from London.=–180 miles to Dulverton; 188 miles to
  Minehead.
=Average Time.=–To Dulverton varies between 5 to 6-1/2 hours. To
  Minehead varies between 5-1/2 to 7 hours.
=Fares.=–        Single                            Return
              1st       2nd       3rd           1st        2nd       3rd
Dulverton  30s. 9d.  19s. 3d.  15s. 4-1/2d.  53s. 10d.  33s. 9d.  30s. 9d.
Minehead   31s. 4d.  19s. 6d.  15s. 8d.      54s. 10d.  34s. 4d.  31s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–Dulverton–"Carnarvon Arms,"
  “Lamb,” etc. Minehead–"Métropole,” “Beach,” “Wellington,"
  “Plume of Feathers,” etc. Porlock–"The Ship,” etc.
  Simonsbath–"Exmoor Forest Hotel.”
Exmoor, like Dartmoor, can be approached from many different places, but
to reach some of the finest and most typical stretches of the moor one
cannot do better than choose Dulverton or Minehead. Porlock, six or
seven miles by road (there is no railway) from Minehead, is a third
place admirably suited for getting on to Exmoor; it is the nearest place
of any size to Dunkery Beacon, which is the highest shoulder of the moor
(1707 feet). The drawing given here shows the valley of the Horner, a
small stream rising on the heathery slopes of Dunkery Beacon, which
appears in the distance. This valley is one of the most romantic spots
on Exmoor. After a long ride or ramble on foot over the open heather,
with sweeping views which include Dartmoor, South Wales, the hills
around Bath, as well as Brown Willy in Cornwall, one finds the ground
falling steeply, and before long one is climbing down a water-worn path
among sturdy oaks. The air also becomes full of the music of the rushing
Horner below. The stream is eventually discovered boiling over mossy
stones in the green shade of the close-growing trees filling the deep
valley. The quieter pools are frequently taken advantage of by a
hard-pressed stag, for this particular piece of country is frequently
hunted over by the Devon and Somerset staghounds, some of the most
popular meets of the season being held at Cloutsham farm, on one of the
slopes of the Horner valley. The neighbourhood of Dulverton includes
some fine bits of river scenery–the Barle, the Haddeo, and the Exe
meeting one another in the midst of lovely wooded hills. Many of the
villages on the margin of Exmoor are exceedingly pretty. The churches,
too, are generally of great interest.
[Illustration: ON EXMOOR.
Looking up the Horner valley towards Dunkery Beacon, which is shown
under shadow.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
