


=How to get there.=–Train from Victoria, Holborn Viaduct, Ludgate
  Hill, or St. Paul’s. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–West Malling (1 mile from Offham).
=Distance from London.=–36 miles.
=Average Time.=–1-1/2 hours.
                     1st       2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single   5s. 11d.  3s. 9d.  2s. 11-1/2d.
          Return  10s.  4d.  7s. 6d.  3s. 11d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"George Hotel” at West Malling.
=Alternative Route.=–None.
On the green at Offham, an out-of-the-way Kentish village, stands the
only quintain post in England. It consists of a tall white post, having
a spike at the top, upon which revolves a cross-bar. This portion, which
turns on the spike, has a fairly broad square end covered with small
holes, while at the opposite end hangs a billet of wood.
The pastime consisted in riding on horseback at the broad end and aiming
a lance at one of the holes. The rider had to duck his head at the same
instant, in order to save himself from the billet which swung round
immediately the lance-point caught the opposite end. Only those who were
very agile saved themselves from a nasty blow. Instead of a billet, a
bag containing sand or mould would sometimes be suspended on the
cross-bar. This would swing round with sufficient force to unseat the
rider.
This quintain post is undoubtedly one of the most interesting survivals
of the pastimes of the “good old days.” The owners of the adjoining
house have been required to keep the quintain post in a good state of
repair, and it is doubtless to this stipulation in the title-deeds of
the property that we owe the existence of this unique relic.
The ruins of Malling Abbey, now the property of an Anglican sisterhood,
are extremely interesting. The abbey was founded in 1090, and was given
to the nun Avicia by the famous Gundulf of Rochester. The keep of St.
Leonard, not far from the abbey, was also built by Gundulf, who is
responsible for the White Tower of the Tower of London. This St.
Leonard’s Tower is said to be of earlier character than any keep in
Normandy. Permission to see the ruins must be obtained from the abbess
or chaplain, and visitors are expected to give a small contribution
towards the restoration fund.
[Illustration: OFFHAM.
The Quintain Post on the Green.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
