


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston. London and North-Western
  Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Kineton (5 miles from Compton Wynyates).
=Distance from London.=–91-3/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 2 to 3-3/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  14s. 4d.   9s.  0d.  7s. 8d.
          Return  26s. 6d.  16s. 11d.    ...
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Kineton–"Red Lion Hotel,"
  “Swan Hotel."
=Alternative Route.=–None.
Compton Wynyates, the seat of the Marquess of Northampton, is one of the
most beautiful Tudor houses in England, and although Warwickshire is
exceedingly rich in castles and fine old houses, it can show nothing to
surpass this time-worn pile of red brick and stone. Though the moat,
which was the outer guard of the place, has been partly filled in and
converted into smooth lawns, one of the most romantic aspects of the
house is to be seen across an angle of the watery enclosure. The
buildings surround a quadrangle, the entrance being made through a
beautiful Tudor gateway. In the spandrils of its archway are carved the
arms of Henry VIII., with the griffin and greyhound for supporters and
the royal crown above.
The house was built by Sir William Compton during the reign of Henry
VIII., with the exception of some additions, including the great parlour
panelled with oak, which dates from the days of Queen Elizabeth.
To touch on half the glories of this perfect Tudor house would occupy
many pages of this book–its beautiful chapel with its curious carvings
with the seven deadly sins represented as knights in armour, the great
hall in which Henry VIII. was welcomed by Sir William Compton, the
drawing-room with its fine plaster ceiling–all are so full of beauty
and interest that they can merely be referred to here.
The situation of the house in a richly timbered hollow adds infinitely
to its charm. The gardens, too, are of the beautiful type that one
learns to expect in conjunction with so lovely a dwelling, while
flowering creepers on the towers and on the gabled walls complete an
ideal picture of all that is loveliest in an old English mansion.
Permission to see Compton Wynyates can only be obtained by a written
application.
[Illustration: Valentine & Sons, Ltd.
COMPTON WYNYATES.
The seat of the Marquess of Northampton, is one of the most beautiful
mediaeval homes in England.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
