


=How to get there.=–Through train from St. Pancras or change at
  Derby. Midland Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Rowsley (1-1/2 miles distant).
=Distance from London.=–149-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–4 to 4-1/3 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  19s. 11d.   ...   12s. 4-1/2d.
          Return  39s. 10d.   ...   24s. 9d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Bakewell–"Rutland Arms Hotel,"
  “Red Lion,” “Castle,” etc.
Haddon Hall, the most perfect of baronial mansions existing in England,
is situated in a wonderfully picturesque position on a limestone rock
overlooking the river Wye in Derbyshire. The manor was originally given
by William the Conqueror to William Peveril, the famous “Peveril of the
Peak” of Scott’s novel. In the reign of Henry II. the lands reverted to
the Crown, and the property was granted to the Avenalls, from whom it
passed by marriage to the Vernons, of whom the last, Sir George, known
as the “King of the Peak,” died in 1567. His daughter, the celebrated
Dorothy Vernon, married John Manners, son of the Earl of Rutland, and
thus the property passed to the Rutland family, who are still the
owners.
The mansion is approached by a small bridge crossing the river Wye,
whence one enters, under a lofty archway, the first courtyard. In this
beautiful quadrangle one of the most interesting features is the chapel
at the south-west corner. This chapel, which is one of the oldest
portions of the structure, is Norman, with some later work. Almost
opposite, on the left, is the magnificent porch and bay-window leading
into the great hall. It is exactly as it was in the days of the Vernons,
with its dais and table at which the “lord of the feast” sat, its huge
fireplace, timber roof, and minstrels’ gallery. Adjoining it is the
dining-room, a magnificent apartment erected by the “King of the Peak."
Here there is a remarkably fine oriel window, richly ornamented with
carving.
Among other interesting features in the second courtyard are the
drawing-room, hung with the original arras, the long gallery, and the
ancient state-room, adjoining which is the Peveril Tower, the highest
point and oldest portion of the hall. The long gallery, with its stately
bay-windows, looks on to the well-known terrace and the magnificent
garden, made so familiar by photographs.
Haddon Hall may be seen by visitors from nine till dusk, a gratuity
being generally given to the attendant.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
THE BALL-ROOM AT HADDON HALL]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
