


=How to get there.=–Train from Charing Cross, Cannon Street, or
  London Bridge. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Robertsbridge (4 miles from Bodiam). From
  Robertsbridge take train to Bodiam Station (which is close to
  the castle) on Rother Valley Light Railway.
=Distance from London.=–51 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1-1/2 to 3 hours.
                     1st       2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single   8s. 4d.   5s. 3d.  4s. 2-1/2d.
          Return  14s. 8d.  10s. 6d.  8s. 5d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Castle Hotel."
=Alternative Route.=–None.
Bodiam Castle is open to the public every day of the week except Sundays
(tickets, obtainable at the keeper’s cottage, 6d. each; Thursdays, 1s.
each).
There is practically no other moated castle in England which compares
with Bodiam in its completeness. It was built about the year 1386, but
its usefulness for defensive purposes, in view of the increasing
destructiveness of weapons at that time, has been doubted. However, the
knight who was responsible for its construction was Sir Edward
Dalyngrudge, who fought at both Crecy and Poictiers, and must therefore
have seen the primitive forerunner of the modern field-gun in use. The
walls of the castle now enclose a grassy quadrangle, to which access is
gained through a fine gateway, which still retains its outer iron
portcullis. The three others, through which an attacking force was
obliged to penetrate, have all disappeared. Although it has been stated
that the parliamentary forces under Waller captured Bodiam Castle during
the Civil War, it seems to be unlikely that such an attack was ever
made; for in March 1645 the property was conveyed by the Earl of Thanet
to one Nathaniel Powell of London, who was strongly in favour of the
Commonwealth.
Lord Ashcombe, the present owner, has restored the walls very carefully,
and the chapel and various private apartments with their fireplaces
remain intact.
The castle buildings as a whole are a rectangular block entirely
surrounded by the wide moat shown in the illustration. One crosses to
the main gateway by a narrow raised pathway. The surface of the water
during the summer is generally bright with water-lilies.
Bodiam Church is an Early English structure, now very much restored. It
is on the hill, a few minutes’ walk from the castle.
[Illustration: BODIAM CASTLE.
One of the most perfect moated castles in England.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
