


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Wells.
=Distance from London.=–120-3/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-3/4 to 5-3/4 hours.
=Fares.=–Via Chippenham and Westbury.
           1st       2nd       3rd
Single  20s. 0d.  12s. 6d.  10s. 0-1/2d.
Return  35s. 2d.  22s. 0d.  20s. 0d.
Via Yatton–
Single  24s. 8d.  15s. 6d.  12s. 4d.
Return  41s. 0d.  27s. 0d.  24s. 8d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Swan Hotel,” “Mitre Hotel,"
  “Star Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Railway.
Wells is essentially an ecclesiastical town. It has no history of its
own, no great family has ever lived there, and it has no
manufactures,–it has simply grown up round the cathedral. For these
reasons the quiet little Somersetshire town has preserved much of its
antiquity and fascination. The presence of the natural wells, which
still are to be found in the gardens of the Bishop’s Palace, probably
induced King Ina in 704 to found a college of secular canons. Here a
monastery grew, and subsequently became a bishop’s see. John de Villula
transferred his seat to Bath in (_circa_) 1092, and in 1139 the title
was altered to Bishop of Bath and Wells. Wells is one of the smallest of
the English cathedrals, and is in many ways the most beautiful. The
clear space in front emphasises the glorious way in which the three
massive towers harmonise with the ruins of the Bishop’s Palace, the
remains of the Vicar’s Close, and the chapter-house. The present
building was commenced in 1121, but Bishop Joceline of Wells (1206-1242)
rebuilt it from the middle of the choir to the west end. The Early
English work shows considerable differences to that in Salisbury and Ely
Cathedrals, being carried out by a local school of masons, who show
considerable originality in design. The glory of Wells is centred in its
west front. The deep buttresses on the towers cast shadows which only
serve to show up the marvellous sculptured figures of saints and kings,
which may represent a Te Deum in stone. The inside of the cathedral is
remarkable for the inverted arches which were put in the chancel to
support the towers. Bishop Beckington built the three arches to the
close.
A charge of 6d. is made for admission to the choir of the cathedral.
[Illustration: F. Frith & Co.
WELLS CATHEDRAL.
Commenced in 1121, but chiefly rebuilt between 1206 and 1242. It is one
of the smallest cathedrals in England.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
