


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Llanberis (5 miles distant). This is the easiest
  of the ascents by a well-marked path.
=Distance from London.=–257 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6-1/2 to 8 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  41s. 6d.  23s. 7d.  21s. 4-1/2d.
          Return  74s. 9d.  40s. 9d.  37s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Victoria Hotel,” Llanberis.
  “Castle Hotel,” “Snowdon Valley,” “Dolbadarn,” “Padarn
  Villa.” Snowdon Summit Hotel is 3560 feet above the sea.
Snowdon is the name not only of the highest mountain in Wales, but it is
itself a mountain range, broken up by valleys and river courses into
four mountain groups of which Moel-y-Wyddfa is the central and highest
one. The best spot from which a good view of the whole group can be seen
is Capel Curig. The Llanberis ascent to Snowdon is the easiest, but not
so interesting as the other routes. From Capel Curig the ascent is the
steepest and finest, and is unsurpassed for grandeur of scenery. In
respect of foreground Snowdon is not so fine as Cader Idris, and the
mountains of Scotland and the English lake district. There is an absence
of rich valley scenery in the mid-distance, which the Scottish mountains
possess and which so adds to the beauty of the Cumberland and
Westmorland mountains. But the glory of Snowdon is that it commands such
an extended view of other mountain peaks and ridges. It well repays the
holiday-maker to spend a night on the summit of Snowdon to see the grand
panorama which gradually unfolds itself as the sunrise dispels the
mist–sea, lakes, and mountain ridges standing out by degrees in the
clear morning light. Naturally the view is dependent on atmospheric
conditions for its extent. On a clear day one sees the coast-line from
Rhyl to the furthest extremity of Cardigan Bay, also the southern part
of the Menai Straits, nearly all the Isle of Anglesey, and part of the
Tubular Bridge.
One of the mountain lakes is Llyn Llydaw, a fine sheet of water 1500
feet above the sea, and surrounded except on one side by the precipitous
arms of Snowdon, and there are also the Capel Curig lakes. Snowdon is
3571 feet in height. All the ascents are free from danger. From
Llanberis there is a pony-track all the way to the top, but it is not
the most interesting of the various routes. The new mountain railway
follows fairly closely the pathway leading from Llanberis.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
SNOWDON.
It is 3571 feet to the summit.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
