


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston, King’s Cross, St. Pancras, or
  Paddington via Liverpool, and thence by steamer.
=Nearest Station.=–Douglas, on Isle of Man.
=Distance from London.=–205 miles to Liverpool (75 miles by sea from
  Liverpool to Douglas, 90 to Ramsey).
=Average Time.=–12 hours.
                  1st and   2nd and   3rd and    3rd and
                  saloon    saloon    saloon     fore cabin
=Fares.=–Single  35s. 0d.  26s. 8d.  22s. 6d.      ...
          Return  68s. 0d.  46s. 3d.  39s. 6d.   35s. 6d.
=Accommodation Obtainable=.–At Douglas–"Grand,” “Métropole,"
  “Regent,” “Central,” “Granville,” and many others. At
  Ramsey–"Mitre,” “Queen’s,” “Prince of Wales,” “Albert,"
  “Albion,” etc. At Castletown–"George,” “Union,” etc. At
  Peel–"Creg Melin,” “Marine,” “Peel Castle,” etc.
The Isle of Man is much visited because of its mild and equable climate,
its scenery, and its quaint laws and customs. The island is 30 miles
long, and is mountainous in the centre. From the highest point,
Snaefell, one can see four countries. Picturesque wooded glens are to be
found in many parts of the island, and these having become well known as
attractive resorts, a small charge is made to enter each glen. At Glen
Darragh there is a circle of stones, and at Laxey, famous for its
gigantic wheel for pumping water from the mines, there is another small
circle called the “Cloven Stones.” In many cases the churchyards possess
old Runic crosses.
Douglas, on the east of the island, is the chief town. It is a modern
seaside resort, much frequented by Lancashire folk in August. Ramsey,
further north, is quieter, and pleasantly situated on the only river of
importance in Man. It is an old town, with yellow sands and a harbour
crowded with herring-boats. Castletown lies to the south, a quiet old
place, with narrow, crooked streets. Castle Rushen, built in the
thirteenth century, shows no signs of decay. It consists of a keep and
massive outer wall. Here the kings and lords of Manxland lived, though
until lately it was the prison of the island. Peel, on the west, is
chiefly remarkable for its rocky island near the shore, on which there
are the ruins of a castle and churches surrounded by a battlemented
wall. St. Patrick probably landed here, and the ruined cathedral is the
oldest see in Britain.
The most famous king of “Mona” was Orry, son of a Danish king of the
tenth century. The island became subject to England in 1290. The
National Assembly, or House of Keys, was founded by Orry.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
CASTLE RUSHEN, ISLE OF MAN.
Built in the thirteenth century, it was for a long period the residence
of the kings and lords of Manxland.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
