


=How to get there.=–From Waterloo, South-Western Railway. From
  London Bridge or Victoria, London, Brighton, and South Coast Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Epsom.
=Distance from London.=–14 miles.
=Average Time.=–3/4 hour.
                    1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  2s. 3d.  1s. 6d.  1s. 2d.
          Return  3s. 0d.  2s. 6d.  2s. 2d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"King’s Head,” “Spread Eagle,” etc.
One must choose any other than a race-day if one wishes to see the
charming old town of Epsom at its best. But if, on the other hand, one
wishes, to see something of the scene on the race-course depicted in Mr.
Frith’s famous picture, one gets no suggestion of the great spectacle
except on race-days. On these occasions, at the Spring meeting and
during Derby week, one has merely to follow the great streams of
humanity which converge on the downs from the roads from London and from
the railway stations. On ordinary days the wide rolling downs are
generally left alone to the health-giving breezes which blow over them.
In the town itself there is much to be seen of the seventeenth-century
architecture associated with the days of Epsom’s fame as a
watering-place. The wide portion of the High Street at once attracts
one’s notice, for with one or two exceptions its whole length is full of
the quaintest of buildings with cream walls and mossy tiled roofs. The
clock-tower was built in 1848, when it replaced a very simple old
watch-house with a curious little tower rising from it. The “Spread
Eagle” is one of the oldest of the Epsom inns; its irregular front and
its position looking up the High Street make it more conspicuous than
the “King’s Head,” an equally old and very interesting hostelry facing
the clock-tower. Pepys stayed there in 1667, for in his diary of July 14
of that year he writes, “To Epsom, by eight o’clock, to the well; where
much company. And to the towne to the King’s Head; and hear that my Lord
Buckhurst and Nelly (Gwynne) are lodged at the next house, and Sir
Charles Sedley with them: and keep a merry house.” This house, next to
the “King’s Head,” is still standing. A little further along the street
is the large red-brick building known to-day as Waterloo House. It was
built about the year 1680, and was then known as the New Inn. The old
banqueting-hall it contains is divided up now, for the building is
converted into shops.
Durdans, the residence of Lord Rosebery, is about ten minutes’ walk from
the High Street. One can see the house and grounds from the narrow lane
leading to the downs.
[Illustration: HIGH STREET, EPSOM.
Showing one of the famous inns which flourished in the seventeenth
century.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
