


=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Belford (4-1/2 miles from Bamborough).
=Distance from London.=–393 miles.
=Average Time.=–About 9 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  43s. 11d.   ...   26s. 11d.
          Return  87s. 10d.   ...   33s. 10d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras to Belford (Midland
  Railway) via Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Standing on an almost perpendicular mass of basaltic rock, overlooking
the sea at a height of 150 feet, is Bamborough Castle. The stately keep
belongs to the original stronghold, which was built on the site of what
was probably one of a chain of fortresses raised by the Romans for the
protection of the coast. For many centuries the castle was possessed of
great strength, and was frequently used as a place of refuge by the
Kings and Earls of Northumberland. It was founded by Ida, king of the
Angles, about A.D. 547, and suffered considerably at the hands of the
Danes in 933. Earlier than this, however, in the seventh century,
Bamborough was besieged by Penda, the pagan king of Mercia, who,
although having recently gained several victories, made great efforts to
burn down the castle. Having set his men to work to accumulate a great
mass of brushwood, Penda had huge piles heaped up beneath the walls. As
soon as the wind was in the right quarter he set alight the brushwood.
Shortly afterwards, however, the wind veered round until it blew in the
opposite direction, to the discomfiture of his own people, who were thus
obliged to abandon their camp.
Afterwards the castle was repaired again, and was besieged by William
II. when Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, took refuge there.
During the Wars of the Roses Bamborough was frequently captured and
recaptured, and in the various sieges suffered very severely.
In 1720 Nathaniel, Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham, having purchased the
castle, bequeathed it in his will for charitable purposes. The Bishop’s
trustees carried out a considerable amount of repairs, and at the
present time the residential portion is frequently let by the trustees
to tenants for varying periods.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
BAMBOROUGH CASTLE.]
 

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
