


=How to get there.=–Train from Victoria, Holborn Viaduct, or St.
  Paul’s. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Rochester.
=Distance from London.=–33 miles.
=Average Time.=–1-1/2 hours.
                    1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  5s. 4d.  3s. 4d.  2s. 8d.
          Return  9s. 4d.  6s. 3d.  5s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"King’s Head Hotel,” “Royal Victoria,"
  “Bull Hotel,” “Royal Crown Hotel,” etc.
Rochester, a most picturesque old town on the river Medway, has been a
place of importance from the earliest times. The cathedral, which is not
very impressive externally, and is much surrounded by houses, is best
seen from the castle. It was the first church built after Augustine
settled in Canterbury, but of this building no trace now remains except
some foundations. The Norman Bishop Gundulf in 1080 built a large
portion of the Norman work of the present cathedral. In 1201 it was
largely rebuilt by money obtained from thank-offerings for miracles
wrought by St. William, a baker of Perth, who was murdered near
Rochester on his way to Canterbury, and buried in the cathedral. The
Norman castle, standing on the banks of the river, was built by Bishop
Gundulf, and though it is now in ruins, the interior having been
destroyed for its timber, the walls remain firm. The castle was besieged
by William Rufus and Simon de Montfort, and on both occasions suffered
considerable damage. One of the many interesting buildings in the High
Street is the three-gabled house of Watts’s Charity, which has become
famous from Dickens’s Christmas story of The Seven Poor Travellers.
According to the inscription above the doorway, Richard Watts in 1579
founded this “Charity for Six Poor Travellers, who not being Rogues or
Proctors, may receive gratis for one night, Lodging, Entertainment, and
Fourpence each.” Restoration House, an old red-brick mansion on the
Maidstone Road, is so named from the visit of Charles II. on his way to
London in 1660. To all admirers of Charles Dickens, Rochester is full of
memories (see Index, Gad’s Hill). Not only did Dickens make Rochester
the scene of his last unfinished work, Edwin Drood, but he made many
allusions to it elsewhere. Mr. Jingle, for instance, in the Pickwick
Papers says, “Ah! fine place, glorious pile–frowning walls–tottering
arches–dark nooks–crumbling staircases–old cathedral too–earthy
smell–pilgrims’ feet worn away the old steps.”
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
ROCHESTER CATHEDRAL.
A considerable portion was built in 1080 by Bishop Gundulf.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
