


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston via Carlisle. L. and N.W.
  Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Brampton (Lanercost Abbey is situated 2 miles
  north of Brampton).
=Distance from London.=–317 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6 to 9 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  40s. 10d.   ...   24s. 4d.
          Return  81s.  8d.   ...   48s. 8d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Brampton–"Howard Arms,"
  “White Lion Hotel."
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras. Midland Railway.
Lanercost Priory is situated in a singularly beautiful sylvan valley
watered by the river Irthing. Only the shell of the chancel remains, but
the nave has been restored, and is now used as the church of the parish.
The walls of the roofless transepts as well as the central tower are
still standing. The pillars on the south side support a much decayed
clerestory, but on the opposite side both the triforium and clerestory
are in a fairly good state of preservation.
A side chapel in the choir contains some very finely carved but battered
altar-tombs belonging to the Dacre family–one of them is believed to be
that of Lord William Howard. Under what was the refectory of the
conventual buildings, one may find the crypt in a very good state of
preservation. In it are preserved some Roman altars and carvings
discovered at various times in the locality. A number of Roman
inscriptions having been discovered on the walls of the Priory Church;
it is generally supposed that much of the building material was obtained
from the Roman wall. The Rev. J. Maughan has argued for the existence of
a Roman station at this point, and its name is believed to have been
Petriana.
The monastery adjoining the Priory Church belonged to the order of St.
Augustine, and its endowments consisted of all the land lying between
the Picts’ wall and the river Irthing, upon which the buildings stood,
and between Burgh and Poltross.
After the dissolution the monastic buildings were put into a proper
state of repair, and were converted into a private residence by Lord
Thomas Dacre, who built the castellated portion towards the south, which
of course did not belong to the original structure. Half a mile distant
from the priory is Naworth Castle, the historic seat of the Earl of
Carlisle, and Brampton is famous for its mote, which was possibly a
Danish fort.
[Illustration: Valentine & Sons, Ltd.
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
