


=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. South-Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Glastonbury and Street.
=Distance from London.=–132-1/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies from 3-1/2 to 5 hours.
                     1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  21s. 0d.   ...   10s. 6d.
          Return  36s. 9d.   ...   21s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"George Hotel,” “Red Lion Hotel,"
  “Crown Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
In the early days of Christianity in Britain this celebrated abbey,
according to tradition, was established in A.D. 63. Joseph of Arimathea
was supposed to be the founder, and the “miraculous thorn,” which
flowered on Christmas Day, was believed to be holy by the common people
even up to the time of the Puritans. During the wars between Charles I.
and his Parliament the thorn was destroyed, but sturdy trees grown from
cuttings of the original still flourish in some of the neighbouring
gardens. This thorn was believed by the people to be the staff used by
Joseph in his journey to Britain from the Holy Land. At one time
Glastonbury Abbey covered 60 acres, and was the lengthiest
ecclesiastical building in England, but as many of the houses in
Glastonbury, and also a causeway across Sedgemoor (where the unhappy
Duke of Monmouth was defeated) were constructed of the materials, the
ruins are of necessity much diminished. The most interesting remains are
the Abbey Church, with St. Joseph’s Chapel, St. Mary’s Chapel, and the
Abbot’s Kitchen. St. Joseph’s Chapel is supposed to have been erected in
the time of Henry II. and Richard I. It is one of the finest specimens
in existence of transitional Norman work. It is now roofless, and even
the vaulting of the crypt is nearly destroyed. The windows and archways
of St. Mary’s Chapel are beautiful, although roofless. The Abbot’s
Kitchen, a square massive structure with strong buttresses, was built
about 1450. The roof is of stone and is surmounted by a louvre, through
which the smoke escaped during the great culinary preparations in the
days of the abbey’s prosperity. The gargoyles around the building,
representing the heads of sheep and oxen, are suggestive of the purpose
of the building. Henry VIII., who coveted the treasures of the abbey, in
1539 summoned Abbot Whiting to surrender, and on his refusal ordered him
to be drawn and quartered. This was carried out on Glastonbury Tor.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
GLASTONBURY ABBEY.
The doorway of St. Joseph’s Chapel.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
