


=How to get there.=–L. and N.W. Railway from Euston.
=Nearest Station.=–Harlech.
=Distance from London.=–259 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 8-1/4 and 12-1/4 hours.
                     1st        2nd        3rd
=Fares.=–Single  37s. 10d.  24s.  0d.  20s. 4d.
          Return  70s.  3d.  43s. 10d.     ...
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Castle Hotel,” “Lion,” “Belle
  Vue,” “Cambrian” (Temperance), etc.
Harlech Castle is about 10 miles from the pleasant town of Barmouth in
North Wales. The name implies “on the rock,” and every year it is a
great attraction to the many visitors to Wales, because of the fine
mountain and sea view obtained from this commanding height. Like many
other Welsh castles it owes its origin to Edward I. after his conquest
of Wales. Owen Glyndwr or Glendower, a Welsh prince and a descendant of
Llewelyn, had rebelled against Henry IV. in consequence of repeated
injustice done to him by Lord Grey de Ruthin, who had appropriated his
estates. As Owen could obtain no redress from the king he took his cause
into his own hands, and in 1404 seized the important stronghold of
Harlech Castle. Four years later it was retaken by the royal forces. At
first Owen Glendower was successful, but eventually he had to flee to
the mountains. During the Wars of the Roses, when the Duke of York
defeated Henry VI., Queen Margaret fled to Harlech Castle, but after a
lengthened siege in 1468, the defenders had to yield to the victorious
forces of the “White Rose.” It is said that this siege gave rise to the
favourite Welsh air known as the “March of the Men of Harlech.” The
castle stands high, is square, with a round tower at each corner, and
gives one the impression of massive proportions and enormous strength.
The main entrance to the inner ward is between two huge round towers,
and the passage was defended at one end by two, and at the inner
extremity by a third, portcullis. The ascent to the top of the walls is
made by a stair from the courtyard. There is a well-protected walk on
the battlements. The view from the castle is magnificent and extensive,
and should the day be fine it is one vast panorama of mountain, sea, and
coast-line–a sight not easily forgotten. Across the bay, 7 miles off,
can be seen the equally ancient castle of Criccieth, although its ruins
cannot compare to Harlech. On the other side is a glorious range of
heights culminating in Snowdon, while to the left are the graceful
Rivals, mountain heights which should not be missed.
[Illustration: HARLECH CASTLE.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
