


=How to get there.=–Train from Liverpool Street. Gt. Eastern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Norwich.
=Distance from London.=–114 miles.
=Average Time.–Varies between 2-1/2 to 4-1/4 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  20s.  6d.   ...    9s. 5-1/2d.
          Return  31s. 10d.   ...   18s. 11d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–Norwich–"Royal Family Hotel,"
  “Maid’s Head.” Yarmouth–"Royal,” “Queen’s,” etc. Cantley–"Red
  House Hotel.” Brundall–"Yare Hotel."
=Alternative Route.=–To Norwich from King’s Cross, Great Northern
  Railway. Train to Great Yarmouth, Lowestoft, Beccles, Cantley,
  Reedham, etc., from Liverpool Street, Great Eastern Railway.
The charm of the Norfolk Broads consists to a great extent in the fact
that they present different scenery to almost any other county in
England, although the salt marshes of Essex and Suffolk possess the
family likeness obtaining throughout East Anglia. The Norfolk Broads
occupy the stretch of country north of a line drawn between Norwich and
Yarmouth, and both towns offer great advantages for getting into the
Broad country. A “broad,” it should be mentioned, is a local name for a
shallow lake connected with others, and finally with the sea by such
rivers as the Yare, the Bure, or Ant. These rivers and their various
tributaries form excellent sailing grounds, for after tacking for some
time in a rush-fringed river, one suddenly enjoys the contrast of a
broad lagoon where there is plenty of space to sail more freely.
The separate characteristics of the different broads give a choice of
surroundings capable of satisfying every one. Oulton Broad, for
instance, is generally to be found full of smart yachts, while Heigham
forms a contrast in its solemn loneliness. Wroxham Broad is always
bright with white sails going to or from Surlingham, Rockland, or
Salhouse Broads. The last mentioned a beautiful piece of water, the
quieter portions of its surface being generally thick with yellow iris
and purple loosestrife and many other species of water herb. It is
shaded by trees, and makes charming pictures from many points of view.
Crome, it is said, commenced a picture of this broad on the day of his
death, and anticipated that it would be his best work.
Irstead is another beautiful broad surrounded by feathery reeds and
thick with rushes where kingfishers and wild duck are to be found. The
ruins of St. Benet’s Abbey are an interesting feature along the river
Bure. Within the monastic walls a windmill has been built, and this too
is now an old ruin, having lost its sails many years ago.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
AMONG THE NORFOLK BROADS.
A typical scene on one of the rivers connecting the broads.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
