


=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Lyndhurst Road Station (3 miles).
=Distance from London.=–85-1/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 2-1/4 to 3-3/4 hours.
                     1st        2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  14s.  2d.   9s. 0d.   7s. 1d.
          Return  24s. 10d.  15s. 8d.  14s. 2d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Grand Hotel,” Lyndhurst; “Crown
  Hotel,” Lyndhurst; “Rose and Crown,” Brockenhurst, etc.
The popular story as to the creation of what was then the “New” Forest
by William the Conqueror has been probably much exaggerated, although we
all believed in our school days the old chroniclers, who averred that
the king destroyed fifty or so churches and numerous villages, and
exterminated their inhabitants. The fact is that the harsh feudal forest
laws were rigidly enforced by the Conqueror, who no doubt in some places
swept away the villages and churches of rebellious foresters, but the
very qualities of the forest soil disprove the fact that the land was
once all “smiling pastures and golden cornfields,” as some of the old
historians would have us believe.
The New Forest of the present day forms a triangle about 20 miles long
and 12 broad, of which the base is a line drawn westward from the mouth
of the Beaulieu river to within a mile or two of the Avon, the apex
reaching to the confines of Wiltshire. The forest scenery is extremely
diversified, but always very beautiful; glades and reaches of gentle
park and meadow, and open heath-like stretches, contrast wonderfully
with the actual masses of huge beeches, under some of which daylight
never penetrates.
Lyndhurst, the little capital of the New Forest, is situated in its
centre, and is one of the best points from which to explore the beauties
of the district. The church at Lyndhurst is modern, rebuilt in 1863; but
it should be visited in order to see the large altar-fresco of the Ten
Virgins executed by the late Lord Leighton. A little way beyond the
church is the Queen’s House, built in Charles II.’s reign. Here resides
the Deputy-Surveyor, who administers under the Crown, while six elected
Verderers, in their courts of Swain-mote, represent the Commoners. In
the hall is kept what is known as William Rufus’s stirrup-iron.
Close to the village of Minsted is Malwood Lodge, Sir William Harcourt’s
New Forest seat. From a ridge near this there are grand views of the
forest, till one comes to the Compton Arms Hotel, a completely isolated
inn, near the Rufus Stone, which marks the spot where William II. fell
by the arrow of Walter Tyrell.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
THE RUFUS STONE IN THE NEW FOREST.
Marking the spot where William II. fell by Walter Tyrell’s arrow.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
