


=How to get there.=–Train from Charing Cross, Cannon Street, and
  London Bridge. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Sandwich.
=Distance from London.=–84-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 2-1/2 to 3 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  13s. 0d.   8s. 4d.   6s. 6d.
          Return  22s. 8d.  16s. 8d.  13s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Bell,” “Bell and Anchor,” “Fleur
  de Lys,” etc.
It is difficult to realise that Sandwich, now 1-1/2 miles from the
coast, was yet once situated on the sea, and was the second in
importance of the Cinque Ports. In Roman and early Saxon times a wide
arm of the Thames, called the Wantsume, flowed from Reculver (then known
as Regulbium), where it was a mile wide, southwards to what is now the
mouth of the Stour. Between Ebbsfleet and Worth it was over 4 miles
wide. The Roman fortress of Ritupiae (Richborough) guarded it on the
south, and the river Stour flowed into it at Stourmouth. This stream
caused so much alluvial deposit that the sea receded from Richborough in
early Saxon times, and part of the population removed to Sandwich. The
repeated attacks by the Danes and the French did not check the growth of
the town, which attained its maximum prosperity in Edward IV.’s reign,
when it was walled. But the sea left its shores, and the town declined
to again rise in importance, when the 400 Flemish emigrants settled
there in Elizabeth’s reign and introduced silk-weaving, flannel
manufactures, and market-gardening.
Sandwich contains some of the richest bits of mediaeval architecture in
England. There are some traces of the walls to be seen, and one ancient
gateway is perfect, Fisher’s Gate, near the quay. On the north is the
Tudor barbican gate. St. Clement’s Church possesses a central Norman
tower. The nave is in the Perpendicular style, and the chancel is
Decorated. Both have fine roofs. St. Peter’s Church (thirteenth century)
has a tower, but its south aisle was destroyed in 1661. The session-room
at the town hall has some curious seats for the mayor and aldermen, and
the hospital of St. Bartholomew’s has an Early English chapel. The best
of the ancient houses in the town are in Strand Street and Lucksboat
Street. Manswood Grammar School dates from 1564, and has a Flemish
front.
At Richborough can be seen some Roman rectangular walls about 10 feet
high, with a subterranean concrete building in the centre.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
FISHER’S GATE, SANDWICH.
A picturesque survival of the days of the town’s importance as a Cinque
Port.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
