


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Haverfordwest (16 miles from St. Davids), thence
  by coach to St. Davids, past Roch Castle.
=Distance from London.=–To Haverfordwest, 261 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6-1/2 to 9 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  42s. 0d.  26s. 3d.  21s. 0d.
          Return  72s. 3d.  46s. 0d.  42s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Grove Hotel,” “City Hotel,” etc.
St. Davids, the most western town in Wales, is situated on the little
river Alan, a mile from its mouth, near St. Davids Head, on the north
side of St. Brides Bay. The place is now little more than a village,
though in the Middle Ages it was a large city, the great resort of
pilgrims to St. David’s shrine. The city, which was the =Menevia= of
the Romans, is almost as isolated now as it was in their days, the only
available communication being by the daily mail-cart from Haverfordwest,
and an omnibus twice a week during the season.
The modern “city” of St. Davids is a mere village, consisting of one
principal street and two at right angles, with a fine old cross at their
junction, but the chief attractions are its grand old cathedral and the
ruins of its once famous Episcopal palace. The cathedral, originally
built in 1176, is curiously situated in a deep dell, so that only the
upper part of the lofty tower is visible from the village, and the close
is entered by descending thirty-nine steps, locally known as the
thirty-nine articles. The entrance to the close is through a fine old
tower-gateway, 60 feet high, where the records were formerly kept and a
consistory court held.
The west front of the cathedral, which has been well restored, is one of
the finest features of the building. Among the more interesting objects
in the cathedral are Bishop Morgan’s throne, of remarkable workmanship;
the fine rood screen, the work of Bishop Gower; Bishop Vaughan’s
beautiful Tudor chapel and monument; and the shrine of St. David.
The Bishop’s Palace, on the opposite bank of the river, was one of the
finest in the kingdom. It was founded by Bishop Gower in the fourteenth
century, and, together with the cathedral, St. Mary’s College, and other
ecclesiastical buildings, was enclosed by a lofty wall having four
gateways, of which only one remains.
In mediaeval days the shrine of St. David was regarded with great
veneration, and was visited by William the Conqueror, Henry II., and by
Edward I. and his queen.
[Illustration: G.W. Wilson & Co.
ST. DAVIDS CATHEDRAL FROM THE NORTH-EAST.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
