


CHILLINGHAM CASTLE, NORTHUMBERLAND
=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Belford (6 miles from Chillingham).
=Distance from London.=–323 miles.
=Average Time.=–About 9 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  44s. 11d.   ...   26s. 11d.
          Return  89s. 10d.   ...   53s. 10d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras via Newcastle-on-Tyne.
  Midland Railway.
The castle at Chillingham, the seat of the Earl of Tankerville, is a
remarkably picturesque building, erected in the reign of Elizabeth, on
the site of an older fortress. The castle, which is now in the
occupation of Sir Andrew Noble, to whom it has been let by Lord
Tankerville, contains many valuable portraits.
An ancestor of the Earl of Tankerville, Charles Lord Ossulston, came
into the property in 1695 by marriage with the daughter and heiress of
Lord Grey, Earl of Tankerville, a descendant of the Greys of Chillingham
and Wark, who had much property in Glendale.
The herds of cattle at Chillingham are believed to be survivors of Bos
primigenius, the wild ox of Europe, which is the supposed progenitor of
our domestic cattle. This fact is of great scientific interest and is
analogous to the preservation of the few remaining buffaloes in America,
only in this case these wild cattle have been preserved through much
changed conditions for a vastly longer period.
The King, when Prince of Wales, shot one of these animals, but in doing
so had a rather narrow escape. The chief external appearances
distinguishing the cattle from all others are as follows–"their colour
is invariably white; muzzles black, the whole of the inside of the ear
and about one-third of the outside, from the lips downwards, red; horns
white with black tips, very fine and bent upwards; some of the bulls
have a thin upright mane about an inch and a half or two inches long.”
It should be pointed out that there is some danger in encountering any
of the herd in the absence of the park-keepers. The calves have been
noticed to have the wild characteristic of dropping when suddenly
surprised.
A reproduction is given opposite of Landseer’s picture of the wild
cattle.
[Illustration: Collection A. Rischgitz.
THE WILD CATTLE AT CHILLINGHAM.
From the painting by Landseer. The herd are survivors of the wild ox or
Bos primigenius.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
