


=How to get there.=–Train from Victoria, Holborn Viaduct, and Ludgate
  Hill. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Wrotham (2 miles from Ightham Mote).
=Distance from London.=–31 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1 to 1-1/2 hours.
                    1st       2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  5s.  1d.  3s. 2d.  2s. 6d.
          Return  8s. 11d.  6s. 4d.  5s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"The George and the Dragon,"
  Ightham.
=Alternative Route.=–None.
In a lovely green hollow, surrounded by splendid old trees and velvet
turf, stands Ightham Mote, a gem among old English moated manor-houses.
It is the home of Mr. J.C. Colyer-Fergusson, who allows the public to
see the house and grounds on Fridays, between 11 and 1, and 2 and 6. A
charge of 6d. is made.
Crossing a bridge over the moat, one enters the courtyard of the house
through the great Tudor gate illustrated here. Standing in this
courtyard one can scarcely imagine anything more beautiful and
picturesque. The great square battlemented tower, through which one has
just passed, is pierced with leaded windows, and its weather-beaten old
walls are relieved by all sorts of creepers, which have been allowed to
adorn without destroying the rich detail of stone and half-timber work.
Those who find pleasure in gazing on architectural picturesqueness can
satisfy themselves in the richness of colour and detail revealed in this
beautiful courtyard. The crypt with its fine groined roof, the chapel
which dates from 1520, the drawing-room with its two hundred years old
Chinese wall-paper–believed to be one of the earliest occasions when
wall-papers were used in this country–and many other interesting
features are shown to visitors.
The original Ightham Mote seems to have been built in 1180 by Sir Ivo de
Haut. The Hall, it is known, was built by Sir Thomas Cawne in 1340.
Richard de Haut, who owned the place later on, was beheaded in 1484 at
Pontefract. His estate was confiscated and came into the hands of Sir
Robert Brackenbury, governor of the Tower, who lost his life at the
battle of Bosworth. However, during the reign of Henry VII., Ightham
once more came into the possession of the de Hauts; and it should be
mentioned that throughout the seven centuries of its existence the house
has always been inhabited.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
IGHTHAM–THE MOAT AND BRIDGE.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
