


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Bovey Tracey.
=Distance from London.=–215-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 6 to 7 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  33s. 0d.  20s. 6d.  16s.  5-1/2d.
          Return  57s. 9d.  36s. 0d.  32s. 11d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Bovey Tracey–"The Dolphin,"
  “The Railway,” “The Moorland” Hotels.
=Alternative Route.=–Train to Okehampton from Waterloo. L. and
  S.W. Railway. Okehampton is 5 miles from Sourton and 10
  from Lydford.
While only two places are mentioned above as starting-places from which
to get at Dartmoor, a dozen others, such as Tavistock and Ashburton,
might be mentioned. Bovey Tracey, however, has many advantages, for the
moment one alights from the train one sees only four miles distant two
of the most rugged tors of the moor–Hey Tor and Rippon Tor–the last
with its great logan stone balanced near the summit. A coach from the
“Dolphin,” which runs three days a week in the season, takes one through
scenery which grows more and more desolate and grand as the summit of
Hey Tor is approached. From Hey Tor the coach goes on to Buckland
Beacon, whence a wide view is obtained, including the shining roofs of
Princetown right away in the distance. Princetown, with its convict
prison, is considered by the people of the moor to be its most important
town. Holne, which is included in some of the coach drives from Bovey
Tracey, contains the birthplace of Charles Kingsley. Dartmoor is so huge
that one must be born and spend a lifetime in or near it to really know
it, and the visitor can merely endeavour to see typical examples of its
granite tors, its peaty streams, its great stretches of boulder-strewn
heather, and its strangely isolated villages.
Eight miles from Bovey Tracey is Widdecombe, the lonely little village
possessing a church which is known as “the Cathedral of the Moor.” The
great tower of the church was struck by lightning one Sunday in October
1638, and a contemporary account can be seen on some panels in the
tower.
Brent Tor, illustrated opposite, is quite close to the station on the L.
and S.W. Railway of that name. The little battlemented church on the
summit, which has nave, aisles, and chancel, has a legendary origin and
is dedicated to St. Michael. The rock composing the tor is volcanic
trap.
[Illustration: BRENT TOR, DARTMOOR.
The little church standing on Brent Tor is very prominently situated and
can be seen for many miles across the moor.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
