


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Raglan.
=Distance from London.=–151-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 hours.
                     1st        2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  26s.  9d.  16s. 9d.  18s. 4-1/2d.
          Return  46s. 10d.  29s. 4d.  26s. 9d.
Fares via Monmouth are slightly cheaper.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Beaufort Arms.”
Raglan Castle stands on a hill near a tributary of the Usk. It is the
most celebrated ruin on the borders of Wales, and is well preserved.
There is a six-sided keep with walls 10 feet thick, and a gateway with
two ivy-clad towers. It dates probably from Edward IV.’s reign, although
some writers give an earlier time. Before its destruction by the
Parliamentarians the castle was a magnificent structure. A massive
gateway leads to the arched bridge over the moat by which entrance was
gained to the castle. The moat, 30 feet broad, surrounded the keep. The
great hall had a fine roof of Irish bog oak, and the gallery was of
great length.
This fortress was garrisoned for Charles I. by the sturdy old Earl of
Worcester, who was created a marquess in 1642. He collected an army of
1500 foot-soldiers and 500 horse, which was commanded by his son, the
second marquess. After his defeat at Naseby, in July 1645, Charles fled
to Raglan and stayed till September. Sir Thomas Fairfax besieged the
castle in June 1646, and after a three months’ siege the marquess
honourably surrendered to the Parliamentary forces.
This was the last stronghold in the west to hold out for Charles. The
walls of the keep were destroyed, and, in defiance of the terms of
surrender, the aged marquess was imprisoned. He died the following year,
and was buried in Windsor Castle.
The second marquess was a mechanical genius, who invented what was known
as a “Water-commanding Engine.” He erected an apparatus in the moat
which spouted water as high as the top of the castle. This was the first
practical attempt to use steam as a mechanical agent. The marquess also
used his various mechanical contrivances to terrify a body of villagers
who came to search the castle for arms in the cause of the Parliament.
When the machines were set agoing the rustics fled, believing lions or
some other forms of wild animals were after them. This marquess died in
London in 1667, and was buried in Raglan Church.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
RAGLAN CASTLE.
It probably dates from the reign of Edward IV.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
