


THE HOME OF CHARLOTTE BRONTË
=How to get there.=–Train from St. Pancras. Change at Keighley.
  Midland Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Haworth.
=Distance from London.=–216 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 hours.
                     1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  28s. 7d.   ...   16s. 6-1/2d.
          Return  57s. 2d.   ...   33s. 1d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Keighley–"Devonshire Hotel.”
Haworth is a long straggling village 4 miles from Keighley, a large
manufacturing town in the West Riding of Yorkshire. The road is very
steep to the village–"four tough, scrambling miles.” It consists of one
street, so steep that the flagstones with which it is paved are placed
end-ways that the horses may not stumble. Past the church and the lonely
parsonage are the wide moors, high, wild, and desolate, up above the
world, solitary and silent. This gray, sad-looking parsonage, so close
to the still sadder churchyard, is a spot of more than ordinary
interest, for it was the home of the Brontës–that wonderfully gifted
and extraordinary family! Charlotte Brontë shared with her sisters their
intense love for the wild, black, purple moors, rising and sweeping away
yet higher than the church which is built at the summit of the one long
narrow street. All round the horizon are wave-like hills. Jane Eyre,
published in 1847, written with extraordinary power and wonderful
genius, astonished the entire reading world. Little did any one imagine
that the authoress lived far away from the busy haunts of men in a quiet
northern parsonage, leading a gentle, sad life; for her two sisters,
whom Charlotte loved as her own life, were very delicate, and their one
brother, in whom they had placed great hopes, had given way to drink.
Charlotte was known to the literary world as Currer Bell, her sisters as
Acton and Ellis Bell. After Jane Eyre came Shirley, written in a
period of great sorrow, for her two loved sisters died within a short
space of each other, not long after the death of their unhappy brother,
and Charlotte was left alone in the quiet, sad parsonage with only her
aged father. Villette was well received. It was her last work.
Charlotte Brontë married, in 1854, the Rev. Arthur Nichols, and after a
few brief months of happiness passed away on March 31, 1855, at the
early age of thirty-nine.
Haworth has been much influenced by the growth of Keighley.
[Illustration: W.T. Stead, Heckmondwike.
THE PARSONAGE AT HAWORTH, FROM THE CHURCHYARD.
Where Charlotte Brontë and her family lived.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
