


THE BIRTHPLACE OF NELSON
=How to get there.=–Train from Liverpool Street or St. Pancras. Great
  Eastern Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Burnham Market (1 mile from Burnham Thorpe).
=Distance from London.=–122 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-3/4 and 4-1/2 hours.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  19s. 10d.   ...   10s. 3d.
          Return  34s.  0d.   ...   20s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Hoste Arms” at Burnham Market.
Burnham Thorpe, the native village of the great Admiral Nelson, is
within walking distance of either Holkham, Burnham Market, or
Wells-next-the-Sea. Horatio Nelson, the fourth son of Edmund and
Catherine Nelson, was born on September 29, 1758, at the Parsonage
House, which has unfortunately been pulled down. There are, however,
many interesting relics of Nelson in the village church, and it is
interesting to see the surroundings among which Nelson’s childhood was
passed. In the parish register may be seen the signature of Nelson as a
witness to a marriage in the year 1769, when he was eleven years old.
There is a lectern constructed from the wood of the old Victory, which
was presented by the Lords of the Admiralty in 1881. The old Purbeck
marble font in which Horatio was baptized is still to be seen in the
church. How much Nelson loved his native village can be understood from
his remark as the Victory was going into action, “This is the happiest
day of my life; what a happy day, too, for Burnham Thorpe, for it is the
day of their fair.”
Nelson’s father was not by any means well off, and the question of
providing for his sons was a very serious one. Horatio, however, solved
the question as to his own career. At the Grammar School at Norwich,
Nelson said to his brother, “Do, William, write to my father and tell
him that I should like to go to sea with Uncle Maurice.” Captain Maurice
Suckling is said to have heard of Horatio’s decision with some surprise,
for he said, “What has poor Horatio done, who is so weak, that he, above
all the rest, should be sent to rough it out at sea? But let him come,
and the first time we go into action a cannon-ball may knock off his
head and provide for him at once.”
In January 1771, when at school at North Walsham, Nelson heard that he
was to join the Raisonnable, of 64 guns, at Chatham. He was then only
twelve years old.
[Illustration: G.W. Wilson & Co.
BURNHAM THORPE CHURCH.
It still contains the old marble font in which Nelson was baptized.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
