


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Warwick.
=Distance from London.=–108 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 hours.
                     1st       2nd        3rd
=Fares.=–Single  15s. 3d.  10s. 2d.    8s. 1-1/2d.
          Return  28s. 3d.  17s. 10d.  16s. 3d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Warwick Arms Hotel,” “Woolpack
  Hotel,” “Globe Hotel,” etc.
A charge of one shilling is made for admission to Warwick Castle, the
gardens and state apartments being shown to visitors.
Warwick is a small but historic town, charmingly situated on the River
Avon, and dominated by its castle, one of the very few baronial castles
still remaining entire. The town was destroyed by the Danes, but it was
rebuilt by King Alfred’s Ethelfleda, who also built a fortress on an
artificial mound, overlooking the river. By the orders of William I. the
castle was enlarged, and afterwards given by the Conqueror to Henry de
Newburgh, whom he made the first Earl of Warwick of the Norman line. The
castle was of such strength that when, in the reign of Henry III., it
became the property of Margery, sister of Thomas de Newburgh, she was
informed that she would not be allowed to marry any one in whom the king
had not great confidence. The castle afterwards passed into the hands of
the Beauchamps, in whose family it remained until 1445, when the
heiress, Anne, married Richard Neville, the “King-maker,” who took the
title of Earl of Warwick. The title without the estates was given by
James I. to Robert, Lord Rich. The castle was given to Sir Fulke
Greville, afterwards Lord Brooke. In 1759, when Edward Rich died without
issue, Francis Greville was made Earl of Warwick, with whose descendants
the estates have since remained. The entrance to the castle is along a
winding road cut for more than 100 yards out of the solid rock. The
castle as it now stands is a splendid specimen of the fourteenth-century
stronghold built in the transition period, when the mere fortress was
being superseded by a building of more grace and comfort. St. Mary’s
Church in Warwick was rebuilt in the reign of Queen Anne, the former
church, built by Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, having been
destroyed by fire in 1694. Guy’s Cliff, situated 1-1/4 miles from
Warwick, is a most picturesque spot, and is celebrated, according to
tradition, as the retreat of Guy of Warwick.
A charge of threepence each person (no fee less than sixpence) is made,
for admission to St. Mary’s Church.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
WARWICK CASTLE ON THE AVON.
One of the very few baronial castles still remaining entire.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
