


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Chester.
=Distance from London.=–179 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 hours.
                     1st        2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  27s. 10d.  18s. 8d.  14s. 11d.
          Return  51s.  9d.  32s. 8d.  29s. 10d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Queen’s Hotel,” “Grosvenor Hotel,"
  “Talbot Hotel,” “Blossoms Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
The city of Chester, one of the most picturesque in the kingdom, was
known in the Roman era as the “Camp of the Great Legion,” and was called
by the Romans Deunana or Deva, being half surrounded by the Dee.
After the Conquest, the city fell to the share of Hugh Lupus, a nephew
of William the Conqueror, who was created Earl of Chester, and was the
builder of the first castle. His descendants were Earls of Chester until
the reign of Henry III., when the earldom was conferred upon Prince
Edward, whose son, Edward of Carnarvon, was the first Prince of Wales.
The title is still used by the eldest son of the sovereign.
The streets of Chester are exceedingly picturesque, Old Bridge Street
and Watergate Street being perhaps two of the best examples, abounding
as they do in mediaeval timber work and oak carving. But the most
remarkable architectural features of the city are the “Rows,” which are
certainly unique in this country. These Rows, which contain the chief
shops, are level with the first floors of the houses; the second floor
projects over them, forming a covered way. The streets were cut into the
red sandstone by the Romans to a depth of 10 feet, the Rows marking the
natural level.
The old walls of the city are among the most perfect in the kingdom, and
measure nearly 2 miles in circumference, with four gates, one marking
each point of the compass. The east gate, showing the termination of the
great Roman Watling Street, was rebuilt in 1769.
Chester Cathedral, though not of great exterior beauty, should be
visited for the sake of its antiquity and its associations. It is said
to have been founded by Ethelfleda, the daughter of Alfred the Great, on
the site of a nunnery built in 875. The west front, with the Bishop’s
Palace on its left, is perhaps the best feature of the exterior; while
the Bishop’s Throne, in the cathedral, is a wonderfully early piece of
carving, ornamented with figures of the kings of Mercia.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
ONE OF THE MOST PICTURESQUE OF THE ROWS AT CHESTER.
The upper floors project over these covered footways.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
