


=How to get there.=–South-Western Railway, Waterloo Station.
=Nearest Station.=–Queen Street, Exeter.
=Distance from London.=–171-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  28s. 6d.  18s. 0d.  14s. 3-1/2d.
          Return  50s. 0d.  31s. 6d.  28s. 7d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Clarence Hotel,” “Rougemont
  Hotel,” “Half Moon Hotel,” Pople’s “New London Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Great Western Railway, from Paddington
  Station, London, to St. Davids, Exeter.
Exeter, the metropolis of the west, was known as a city even when the
Romans came to Britain. There are no important Roman buildings left now,
but coins and pottery testify to the Roman occupation. The first actual
historic records date from the reign of King Alfred, whose grandson,
Athelstane, made Exeter into a strong city, fortifying it with walls.
Exeter made a stubborn resistance to William the Conqueror, but when
besieged by him was forced to yield. The city suffered siege on two
other notable occasions. In the reign of Henry VII., Perkin Warbeck, the
pretender, made an attack on the castle, but was defeated. In 1646 the
city was blockaded by the Parliamentary forces under Fairfax and
compelled to surrender.
In the centre of the city is the cathedral, which was commenced in A.D.
1107 by Bishop Warelwast, who built the massive Norman towers. Bishop
Quivil, who died in 1292, completely remodelled the cathedral, changing
the somewhat heavy Norman structure into the present graceful Gothic
one. The successor of Bishop Quivil carried out the plans he left behind
him, and the cathedral was finished in 1350, although some minor work
remained to be done. Unlike so many of the early cathedrals, Exeter has
no central tower, therefore its interior is famous for having the most
uninterrupted vista of any cathedral in England, having no tower-piers
to hinder the view. One of the most beautiful features is the carved
west front.
Standing on the highest ground in Exeter, though not now conspicuous,
are the ruined walls of the Norman castle, called Rougemont (Red Mount),
which obtained its name from the red clay found there. The High Street
contains many old and picturesque buildings, the most important of which
is the Guildhall, built in the fifteenth century, but altered during the
late Renaissance period. Many of the parish churches of Exeter are
worthy of note.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
THE WEST FRONT OF EXETER CATHEDRAL.
Exeter has no central tower, but is unique in having one over each
transept.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
