


THE HOME OF CHARLES DICKENS
=How to get there.=–Train from Victoria or Holborn Viaduct. South-Eastern
  and Chatham Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Rochester. (Gad’s Hill lies 1-1/2 miles from
  Rochester).
=Distance from London.=–31 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1 and 1-1/2 hours.
                    1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  5s. 4d.  3s. 4d.  2s. 8d.
          Return  9s. 4d.  6s. 8d.  5s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–At Rochester–"King’s Head Hotel,"
  “Royal Victoria Hotel,” “Bull Hotel,” “Royal Crown Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Charing Cross, Cannon Street, or
  London Bridge. South-Eastern and Chatham Railway.
Mr. Latham, the present occupier, kindly admits visitors on Wednesday
afternoons.
Lovers of Charles Dickens naturally have a pleasure in seeing the places
near Rochester so familiar to them through his works. A mile and a half
from this ancient city with its cathedral and castle is Gad’s Hill
Place, where the great author resided from 1856 till the day of his
death in 1870. When Dickens was a small boy the house had always a
curious interest for him, for he thought it the most beautiful house he
had ever seen. His father, then living in Rochester, used to bring him
to look at it, and used to tell the little fellow that if he grew up to
be a clever man he might own that or another such house. Gad’s Hill
Place is a comfortable old-fashioned house, built, it is said, about
1775. Facing it is a shrubbery containing huge cedars. This was
connected with the grounds opposite by an underground passage still
existing, and here Dickens erected a châlet given to him by his friend
Mr. Fechter, in which he worked till the time of his sudden death. Gad’s
Hill had a peculiar fascination for Dickens, for it was on the highway
there that he obtained his wonderful insight into the character and
manners of the various tramps and showmen he portrays in his books.
Dickens liked nothing better than taking his friends over this district.
He thought the seven miles between Rochester and Maidstone one of the
most beautiful walks in England. Dickens would compress into infinitely
few days an enormous amount of sight-seeing and country enjoyment:
castles, cathedrals, lunches and picnics among cherry orchards and
hop-gardens.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
GAD’S HILL PLACE, NEAR ROCHESTER.
The home of Charles Dickens.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
