


LANDING-PLACE OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR
=How to get there.=–Train from London Bridge or Victoria. London,
  Brighton, and South Coast Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Pevensey and West Ham.
=Distance from London.=–65 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 2 and 3 hours.
                     1st       2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  10s. 0d.   6s. 2d.  4s. 8d.
          Return  17s. 6d.  11s. 8d.  9s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Oak Inn” at Pevensey village.
Pevensey, the scene of so many notable events in English history, was
probably a fishing-port in prehistoric times. It is situated on flat and
low-lying marsh-land, about 15 miles westward along the coast from
Hastings. Here the Romans built a town and fortress. Entering Pevensey
Castle by the main gateway, you stand on the site of the Roman city of
Anderida, of which many evidences remain in the shape of Roman cement
and tiles in a wall which surrounds the enclosure. The Romans retired
from Anderida in the fifth century, when it was destroyed by the Saxons
under Ella, and the inhabitants slain for their obstinate resistance.
A fortnight before the great battle on Senlac Hill, William of Normandy
landed at the old Roman city. After the Conquest, Roger, Earl of
Mortmain and Cornwall, half-brother of the Conqueror, built the Norman
building whose shattered walls are to be seen to-day. William Rufus,
Simon de Montfort, and Stephen each attacked the castle, and it remained
a fortress until the reign of Queen Elizabeth. In the south-eastern
corner of the Brito-Roman city, there still stands an interesting old
culverin, bearing the crown, Tudor rose, and the initials of Queen
Elizabeth. It is one of two cannon placed there in 1587 in readiness for
the Spaniards. The present castle shows the different work of several
centuries. The remains of a much-weathered stone font, surrounded by an
iron cage, stand in the centre of the enclosure. Near by, within a
palisade, is the old castle well, with hart’s-tongue ferns growing on
the damp brick lining.
At one time Pevensey formed, with Hastings, one of the Cinque Ports. It
began to decline as a seafaring place with the loss of its harbour,
owing to the receding of the sea along the Sussex shore–the walls,
which were formerly almost washed by the waves, being now quite a mile
inland. Visitors may enter the castle on week days without charge.
[Illustration: PEVENSEY CASTLE.
Before the sea receded the waves almost reached the Castle walls.]
WINCHESTER & ITS CATHEDRAL
=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Winchester.
=Distance from London.=–66-1/2 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1-1/2 to 2-3/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  11s. 0d.   7s. 0d.   5s. 6d.
          Return  19s. 3d.  12s. 2d.  10s. 6d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"George Hotel,” “Royal Hotel,"
  “Black Swan Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
Winchester, the ancient Saxon capital of England, is situated near the
foot of the chalk uplands surrounding the river Itchin. It is a city
full of historical interest, and its two most striking features are the
cathedral and college. Long before the Norman Conquest there was a
grammar school at Winchester under the care of the monks. Bishop William
of Wykeham was educated at this earlier school, and it was he who
re-established it on a larger scale. The new college was founded at the
end of the fourteenth century, under the direction of a corporation, and
was allied to one of the colleges at Oxford. For five centuries this
college, the most ancient of the public schools in England, has kept a
foremost place among the many educational centres that now exist. Many
of the college buildings remain almost the same as they were originally
founded.
The cathedral, which is the largest in England, shows every style of
architecture from pure Norman to Early Renaissance. It was founded by
Walkelin, the first Norman bishop, whose carved font is one of the
finest treasures of the building. Bishop Wykeham, at the end of the
fourteenth century, continued the building, which had been steadily
progressing for a considerable time, and commenced the partial casing of
the Norman columns with Perpendicular mouldings. The vaulting shafts of
the nave rise from the ground, and owing to the thickness of the Norman
masonry, there is no proper triforium. The reredos was built by Cardinal
Beaufort in the fifteenth century, and the Lady Chapel was added about
the same time. Though it suffered much damage during the Parliamentary
wars, the cathedral is wonderfully rich in monuments, all its various
architects being buried there, and among the many shrines is that of
William Rufus.
Winchester’s associations with King Alfred, and its numerous examples of
architecture of all the centuries, make the city one of the most
interesting in England.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
WINCHESTER CATHEDRAL.
Showing the Norman north transept and the west end.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
