


THE HOME OF MRS. GASKELL
=How to get there.=–Train from Euston via Crewe. L. and N.W. Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Knutsford.
=Distance from London.=–180 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 4 to 5-1/2 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  24s. 6d.  16s. 6d.  14s. 3-1/2d.
          Return  49s. 0d.  31s. 6d.  28s. 7d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal George Hotel,” etc.
Knutsford still retains the air of old-world quaintness which Mrs.
Gaskell has made so familiar in her delightful Cranford. The whole of
Knutsford breathes the fresh and bright tidiness one always
involuntarily associates with such ladies as “Miss Jenkyns,” and every
house rejoices in a beautifully neat garden. The Royal George Hotel, in
the High Street, is a perfect feast to the eye of panelled wainscotting,
oak settles, and Chippendale cabinets. The richness, all over the town,
of ancient carvings, staircases, and chimney-pieces, is due to the
prosperity which the coach traffic between Liverpool and Manchester
brought to the place for many years.
Mrs. Gaskell was born in Chelsea in 1810, but her mother dying soon
after, she went to live under the care of her mother’s sister, who lived
at Knutsford in Cheshire. Mrs. Gaskell, as a child, was brought up in a
tall red house, standing alone in the midst of peaceful fields and
trees, on the Heath, with a wide view reaching to the distant hills. In
a green hollow near this house there stand an old forge and mill, the
former having existed for more than two hundred years. Mrs. Gaskell had
a lonely childhood, occasionally relieved by a visit to her cousins at
the old family house of Sandlebridge. This old house is now dismantled,
but contains many interesting features. A shuffle-board, or extremely
long table, with drawers and cupboards underneath, of which there now
exist scarcely any specimens, a cradle of great antiquity, and the fine
old wooden chimney-pieces in the front parlour, still remain.
A few places in Knutsford claim association with Cranford. One house
is pointed out as being Miss Matty’s tea-shop. The Knutsford ladies
still gossip over toasted cheese and bezique. Mrs. Gaskell spent her
married life in Manchester, where most of her books were written, but
she used often to return and stay with her cousins, from whom she learnt
many of the quaint stories still told in Knutsford.
[Illustration: F. Frith & Co.
KNUTSFORD.
The village described by Mrs. Gaskell in Cranford.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
