


=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Alnwick.
=Distance from London.=–309 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 7 and 8 hours.
                     1st     2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  43s. 1d.   ...   25s. 9d.
          Return  86s. 2d.   ...   51s. 6d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Northumberland Arms,” “Star
  Hotel."
=Alternative Route.=–Train from St. Pancras via Sheffield and York.
  Midland Railway.
Standing in a magnificent position overlooking the town from which it
takes its name, Alnwick Castle occupies the site of one of the oldest of
the border points of defence. It is believed that a fort existed here
during the Roman occupation, and that a castle was erected on its site
by the Saxons, who named the place Ealnwic. Just before the Conquest
the castle and barony were the property of one Gilbert Tyson, who was
slain at the battle of Hastings. His possessions passed into the hands
of the Norman lords De Vesci, who held them till about 1297, when the
castle and barony were bequeathed by the licence of Edward I. to the
Bishop of Durham. Shortly afterwards they were purchased by Lord Henry
de Percy, from whom they have descended regularly to the present owner,
the Duke of Northumberland. The castle is one of the finest examples of
a feudal fortress in England, the walls enclosing an area of five acres,
and the grounds, watered by the Alne, presenting scenes of the most
varied and romantic beauty.
The two north-western round towers of the keep, together with the
Armourer’s and Falconer’s towers, have recently been swept away in order
to accommodate the new Prudhoe Tower. During the last six years 200
workmen have been employed in transforming the feudal interior of the
castle into a Roman palazzo.
Alnwick, situated so near the border, was the scene of countless raids
and conflicts during the Middle Ages, and with these fights the castle
was always closely associated. It was besieged in 1093 by Malcolm III.,
King of Scotland, and defended by Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland. The
Scottish king and his son Prince Edward both fell during the siege. King
David gained possession of the town in 1135. William the Lion, who took
part with young Richard, afterwards Coeur de Lion, against his father
Henry II., entered Northumberland in 1174, with 80,000 men, and laid
siege to Alnwick; but the attempt was a failure, and William was taken
prisoner.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
ALNWICK CASTLE.
One of the finest examples of a feudal fortress in England.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
