


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Ludlow.
=Distance from London.=–162 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 4-1/2 to 7 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  24s. 4d.  15s. 6d.  12s. 4-1/2d.
          Return  43s. 4d.  27s. 2d.  24s. 9d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"The Feathers Hotel,” “Angel
  Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
Beautifully situated in a lovely valley surrounded by wooded hills,
Ludlow presents a picture of an ancient but prosperous city. The town is
placed at the meeting of two small rivers, the Teme and Corve, which
flow into the Severn. On the top of a hill in the western part of the
town is the old castle, which was a royal residence from early times. It
was built at the time of the Conquest, and was the most important of all
the castles that guarded the Welsh border. The eldest son of Edward IV.
lived in the castle under the guardianship of his uncle, Lord Rivers,
and he was proclaimed king there when only twelve years old. Prince
Arthur, the first husband of Katharine of Aragon, and the eldest son of
Henry VII., was also brought up and educated in the castle. In the Civil
War the Parliamentary troops partially destroyed the castle, but it was
not until the reign of George I. that the buildings were unroofed for
the sake of their lead.
Sir Henry Sidney, the father of the famous Sir Philip Sidney, resided at
Ludlow, being President of the Council of Wales. In the Great Hall, now
roofless, Milton’s masque Comus was performed for the first time, and
Samuel Butler is said to have written part of Hudibras in a little
room over the entrance gateway.
The Parish Church, also situated at the top of the hill, is mainly a
fifteenth-century building, although it contains some earlier work. The
fine east window, occupying the whole breadth of the chancel, is filled
with very old stained glass, depicting the life of St. Lawrence. There
is a round church in the castle, said to be one of the earliest circular
churches in England. The streets are full of picturesque old houses, the
most celebrated being the “Feathers Inn,” a beautiful Jacobean house
containing a coffee-room which has a most elaborately decorated plaster
ceiling and fine oak-panelled walls. The appearance of the room is
exceedingly rich. The Grammar School, founded by the Guild of Palmers,
claims to be the oldest in England.
[Illustration: Valentine & Sons, Ltd.
LUDLOW, SHOWING THE PARISH CHURCH.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
