


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Fowey.
=Distance from London.=–282 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies from 7 to 8 hours.
                     1st        2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  43s.  4d.  27s. 0d.  21s. 8d.
          Return  75s. 10d.  47s. 6d.     ...
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"The Fowey Hotel,” “St. Catherine’s
  Private Hotel,” “Cotswold House,” etc.
Fowey, now little more than a fishing village and holiday resort, was
once the chief port in Cornwall, and the equal of Plymouth and
Dartmouth, a position it owed to its fine harbour, formed by the mouth
of the river Fowey, on which it stands. On the west side of the harbour
stands St. Catherine’s Castle, dating from the reign of Henry VIII., and
on the east the ruins of St. Saviour’s Chapel, an old church. There are
also remains of two square stone towers, erected for the protection of
the entrance to the harbour in the reign of Edward IV. Between these
forts, in mediaeval days, the men of Fowey used to draw a chain as an
additional security. The houses are built chiefly of stone, but the
streets are so narrow and full of angles that it is difficult for a
vehicle of any size to pass through them. In the reign of Edward III. it
sent forty-seven vessels to assist in the siege of Calais.
A heavy blow was dealt to the town by Edward IV. After he had concluded
peace with France, the men of Fowey continued to make prizes of whatever
French ships they could capture, and refused to give up their piratical
ways. This so incensed the king, that the ringleaders in the matter were
summarily executed, a heavy fine was levied upon the town, and its
vessels handed over to the port of Dartmouth, as a lesson against
piracy. This treatment of Fowey seems a little hard in view of the fact
that Dartmouth men were constantly raiding the coasts of Brittany.
The church, built in the reign of Edward IV. and restored in 1876, has
one of the highest towers in Cornwall. The interior has a good timber
roof, a carved oak pulpit, an old font, and several interesting
monuments to the Treffry and Rashleigh families.
The finest and most interesting house in the town is Place House, the
seat of the Treffrys, who have been connected with Fowey for many
generations. Many of the apartments are exceedingly interesting,
especially the hall, with its fine oak roof. The present owner allows
the hall and other portions to be shown to visitors.
[Illustration: Valentine & Sons, Ltd.
FOWEY.
Showing the two little forts at the mouth of the harbour, across which
in mediaeval time a chain was drawn.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
