


=How to get there.=–Train from Victoria or London Bridge via  Portsmouth and Ryde. London, Brighton, and South Coast
  Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Carisbrooke.
=Distance from London.=–88 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  16s. 4d.  10s. 8d.   9s. 1d.
          Return  28s. 4d.  18s. 6d.  16s. 8d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Red Lion Hotel,” “Waverley Hotel,"
  “Eight Bells Hotel,” “Castle Hotel,” “Temperance Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Waterloo via Cowes and Ryde.
  L. and S.W. Railway.
Carisbrooke village is a charming place delightfully situated in the
centre of the island. The castle (the charge for entering is 4d.) stands
on a wooded hill at an elevation of 150 feet. The summit of the hill
forms a level plateau about 20 acres in extent, all enclosed by the
castle walls. Sir Walter Scott is said to have had this castle in his
mind when writing Marmion. Beyond the great interest attached to the
fact that it was here that Charles I. was confined, the castle does not
figure very prominently in history. The fact, however, that this
unfortunate monarch was imprisoned here in 1647 by the Parliament will
be always sufficient to give its ancient walls and battlements a
never-dying interest. When Charles was brought to the castle he was
treated more as a guest than a prisoner, but after his attempted escape
the king was much more closely watched and his pleasures curtailed. The
story of the king attempting in vain to get through his bedroom window
is known to all. Everything was in readiness, the details of rescue were
all carefully prepared. Captain Titus and others of the guard had been
won over to assist the king, and had King Charles negotiated the narrow
window, in all probability the escape would have been a success. In
1650, the year after Charles I. was beheaded, Henry Duke of Gloucester
and the Princess Elizabeth were brought to the castle. Shortly after her
arrival the princess, who was of a sickly constitution, took a severe
chill and was found one morning by her attendants lying dead on a couch.
Queen Victoria had a beautiful monument erected to her memory in Newport
Church. The Well House, where the water is drawn from the depth of 150
feet by a clever donkey and draw-wheel, is an interesting feature of the
castle. Princess Beatrice is the present Governor of the Island.
[Illustration: CARISBROOKE CASTLE.
Where Charles I. was imprisoned in 1647.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
