


=How to get there.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–York.
=Distance from London.=–188-1/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 3-3/4 to 5 hours.
                   1st    2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single   27s.   ...   15s. 8d.
          Return   54s.   ...   31s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Harker’s York Hotel,” “Black Swan
  Hotel,” “Station Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Routes.=–Train from St. Pancras via Sheffield, Midland
  Railway. Train from Liverpool Street, Great Eastern Railway.
The city of York is one of the most famous and interesting in the
kingdom. It was originally the Eborac of the British and the
Eboracum of the Romans, who made it an imperial colony, and the
capital of Maxima Caesariensis. Later the place changed hands many
times between Danes and Saxons until the time of William the Conqueror,
who built the castle. The whole city was burnt in 1137, with the
cathedral and forty churches, and in the Wars of the Roses it was
continually the scene of sanguinary conflicts between the rival parties.
It has been visited at various times by nearly all our kings, and
numerous insurrections have been quelled within its walls. The
cathedral–the chief glory of York–dates from Saxon times. The first
church was founded by Edwin, the fifth king of Northumbria, but before
it was finished he was slain, and the work thenceforward was carried out
by his successor Oswald. The present cathedral was mainly built in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Its chief features are a nave with
the most magnificent side-aisles in the kingdom, two transepts, a choir,
a lady chapel, a large central tower, two bell towers, and a wonderfully
fine chapter-house. During the last century it was twice nearly
destroyed by fire, first by the act of a lunatic, and then by the
carelessness of a workman.
The present structure takes rank with the finest specimens of Gothic
architecture in the world.
Apart from the minster, the whole city teems with archaeological
interest. There are many fine old churches, and much mediaeval
architecture, including the gates of the city, which are wonderfully
well preserved, one of the best being Micklegate Bar, where Richard Duke
of York’s head was exhibited. The city walls built by Edward I. still
remain in a remarkably good state of preservation. Many of the towers,
of which Leland stated there were forty, still exist.
[Illustration: BOOTHAM BAR AND YORK MINSTER.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
