


=How to get there.=–Train from Liverpool Station via Colchester.
  Great Eastern Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Norwich.
=Distance from London.=–114 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 2-1/2 to 4-1/4 hours. Quickest train 2
  hours 32 minutes.
                     1st      2nd      3rd
=Fares.=–Single  20s.  6d.   ...    9s. 5-1/2d.
          Return  31s. 10d.   ...   18s. 11d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Family Hotel,” “Maid’s
  Head Hotel,” “Bell Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from King’s Cross. Great Northern Rly.
The city of Norwich has a unique charm from its combination of the
mediaeval with the modern, and “improvements” so called have not spoilt
it. The chief object of interest is the cathedral, which was founded in
1094 by Bishop Herbert Losinga, who was at one time prior at Fécamp in
Normandy, and chaplain to William II. It is regarded as one of the
greatest existing examples of Norman work, and has the finest cloisters
in England. It is 411 feet long and 191 feet broad at the transepts, and
is crowned with a spire second only to that of Salisbury. Near the
cathedral are a number of ancient and interesting structures more or
less in ruins. Chief of these may be mentioned St. Ethelbert’s and the
Erpingham Gate, by the west front of the cathedral, the former in
Decorated English, the latter in Late Perpendicular, and both are
valuable and rich specimens of these styles. It was Sir Thomas Erpingham
whom Henry V. in Shakespeare’s play addresses as “Good old Knight,” and
it was he who gave the signal to the English at the Battle of Agincourt,
saying, as he threw up his truncheon, “Now, strike!”
Norwich occupies a place in history from the time of the earlier Danish
invasions. First its castle was erected as a stronghold by the East
Anglican kings, and resorted to as a place of safety by the inhabitants,
who gave it the name of North-wic, or northern station or town. The
bishopric of the East Angles was removed hither in 1094, when the
magnificent cathedral was founded. Evelyn in his Diary gives an
account of a visit he paid to that famous scholar and physician, Dr.
Thomas Browne, author of the Religio Medici and Vulgar Errors, then
living in Norwich. It is a pleasant picture of the fine old cathedral
town which he gives. After seeing all the rare curiosities in Sir Thomas
Browne’s house, he was shown all the remarkable places of the city, and
speaks of the “venerable cathedrall, the stately churches, and the
cleannesse of the streetes.”
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
NORWICH CATHEDRAL.
It was founded in 1094, and is considered one of the finest examples of
Norman architecture.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
