


=How to get there.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Plymouth (North Road Station).
=Distance from London.=–246 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 5-1/4 to 6-1/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd        3rd
=Fares.=–Single  37s. 4d.  23s.  4d.  18s. 8d.
          Return  65s. 4d.  40s. 10d.  37s. 4d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Hotel,” “Central Hotel,"
  “Chubb’s Hotel,” “Grand Hotel,” “The Lockyer Hotel,” “Duke
  of Cornwall Hotel,” “Mount Pleasant Hotel,” “Great Western
  Hotel,” “Westminster Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Railway.
Down by Sutton Pool is the portion of the quay known as the Barbican,
famous as the spot from which the Mayflower cast off her moorings and
commenced her momentous voyage across the Atlantic. The place is marked
by a stone inserted among the granite sets, bearing the inscription
“_Mayflower 1620.”
The Pilgrim Fathers had started from Delfshaven, in Holland, in July,
and after coming to Southampton, started their voyage in the Mayflowerand Speedwell. The Speedwell, however, proved unseaworthy, and both
ships were obliged to put into Dartmouth, where the Speedwellunderwent repairs. When they started again, however, it became evident
that the Speedwell would not be able to stand the long Atlantic
voyage, so once more the Puritans put back to the shelter of a
port–this time Plymouth–and there abandoned the Speedwell. On 6th
September 1620 (old style) they finally started, having reduced their
numbers to 101 persons–48 men, the rest women and children.
After sailing for sixty days they reached the coast of America, but it
was a portion of the coast not covered by the charter of the Company,
whose assistance they had sought; they thereupon declared their
intention to “plant this colony for the glory of God and the advancement
of the Christian Faith.” The spot where they landed they named Plymouth
Rock.
Plymouth Hoe, with a magnificent view down Plymouth Sound and its
associations with Drake’s game of bowls during the approach of the
Spanish Armada, is one of the chief glories of Plymouth. The view
includes Mount Edgcumbe Castle, the breakwater built across the mouth of
the harbour and Drake’s Island. The Hamoaze–the estuary of the
Tamar–is always full of the activity of England’s great naval port.
[Illustration: THE BARBICAN AT PLYMOUTH.
From this quay the Mayflower finally left England for her long voyage
across the Atlantic.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
