


=How to get there.=–Train from Waterloo. L. and S.W. Rly.
=Nearest Station.=–Salisbury.
=Distance from London.=–83-1/4 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 1-3/4 and 3-1/4 hours.
                     1st       2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  14s. 0d.   8s. 9d.   6s. 11-1/2d.
          Return  24s. 6d.  15s. 4d.  12s.  0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Angel Hotel,” “Crown Hotel,"
  “White Hart Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–Train from Paddington. Great Western Rly.
Salisbury Cathedral is, in the opinion of many, the finest of all the
English cathedrals, and it certainly has many claims to be considered
so. The vast building was completed within fifty years, and is therefore
practically in one style throughout, an advantage not shared by any
other cathedral in the kingdom. Its situation, too, is unique, standing
as it does in the fine old close, entirely separated from any other
buildings, and with its grey walls and buttresses rising sheer up from
such velvety turf as is seen in England alone. The tower and spire are
perhaps the most beautiful in this country.
Passing into the close by the gate at the end of the High Street, one
reaches the west front, which is very rich in effect, with its tiers of
canopied statues and wonderfully proportioned windows. Through the
beautiful north porch one passes into the nave, which, though
exceedingly beautiful, has a certain air of coldness owing to the
absence of stained glass. It seems hardly credible that this beautiful
glass, the making of which is now a lost art, was deliberately destroyed
at the end of the eighteenth century by the so-called “architect” James
Wyatt. In addition to this, “Wyatt swept away screens, chapels, and
porches, desecrated and destroyed the tombs of warriors and prelates;
obliterated ancient paintings, flung stained glass by cartloads into the
city ditch, and razed to the ground the beautiful old campanile which
stood opposite the north porch.”
The Lady Chapel of the cathedral is one of the most beautiful in the
kingdom.
Although the cathedral is the great glory of Salisbury, there are plenty
of interesting mediaeval buildings in the city. In the close itself are
the King’s House and the King’s Wardrobe, both old gabled houses of
great beauty. St. Thomas’s and St. Edmund’s are the two most interesting
churches in the city.
About 2 miles north of Salisbury is a group of pretty cottages on the
Avon, forming the village of Milston. Here, on May 1, 1672, Joseph
Addison was born in the old rectory, now unfortunately pulled down. His
father, Lancelot Addison, was rector of the parish.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
SALISBURY CATHEDRAL.
The spire is one of the most graceful in the world, and the whole
building, commenced in 1220, was completed within fifty years.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
