


=How to get there.=–Train from Euston. L. and N.W. Railway.
=Nearest Station.=–Carnarvon.
=Distance from London.=–246 miles.
=Average Time.=–Varies between 7 and 9-1/2 hours.
                     1st        2nd       3rd
=Fares.=–Single  39s. 11d.  22s. 9d.  20s. 7-1/2d.
          Return  72s.  0d.  38s. 6d.  35s. 0d.
=Accommodation Obtainable.=–"Royal Hotel,” “Royal Sportsman
  Hotel,” “Castle Hotel,” “Queen’s Hotel,” “Prince of Wales
  Hotel,” “Arvonia Hotel,” etc.
=Alternative Route.=–From Paddington via Chester, 282 miles. Fares
  as from Euston.
The town of Carnarvon is situated on the east side of the Menai Straits,
close by the side of the Roman station of Segontium, which was
connected with Chester by Watling Street. There is said to have been a
fortress here shortly after the Conquest, but the real beginning of the
importance of Carnarvon was the erection of the magnificent castle there
by Edward I., immediately after his conquest of the principality. The
work was commenced in 1283, and occupied more than ten years. In 1284,
the birth of Edward II., the first Prince of Wales, took place at
Carnarvon. During the Civil War the castle changed hands several times;
at length, in 1646, it was taken and held by the Parliamentary forces
under General Mytton.
Portions of the old Roman wall of the city still exist, and numerous
interesting relics have been found. Traces of the old Roman forts or
outposts are also to be seen.
The remains of the castle are very extensive, covering nearly three
acres. The outer walls, from 8 to 10 feet thick, are nearly perfect, and
have thirteen towers, with turrets of five, six, or eight sides. The
five-sided Eagle Tower is one of the loftiest, and takes its name from
the finely sculptured figure of an eagle which surmounts it. This tower
is entered by the Water Gate. The other entrances to the castle are by a
gateway on the north side, under a tower bearing a statue of Edward I.,
and by Queen Eleanor’s Gate, which looks northward and is defended by
four portcullises.
The enclosure originally formed two courts, and though the interior
buildings are in a very decayed state, the outer walls have been
preserved to a great extent by judicious restoration. Thus Carnarvon
Castle is a prominent feature in the general aspect of the town, and
shares with the magnificent remains at Conway the honour of being one of
the two finest castles in the kingdom.
[Illustration: Photochrom Co., Ltd.
CARNARVON CASTLE.
The birth of Edward II., the first Prince of Wales, took place here.]
Continue...

This eBook of “What to See in England” by Gordon Home belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
What to see in England;: A guide to places of historic interest, natural beauty or literary association,By Gordon HomeAt Amazon
