


“What can have happened to Dionysia, that she does not come back?"
murmured Grandpapa Chandore, as he walked up and down the Square, and
looked, for the twentieth time, at his watch. For some time the fear
of displeasing his grandchild, and of receiving a scolding, kept him
at the place where she had told him to wait for her; but at last it
was too much for him, and he said,–
“Upon my word, this is too much! I’ll risk it.”
And, crossing the road which separates the Square from the houses, he
entered the long, narrow passage in the house of the sisters Mechinet.
He was just putting his foot on the first step of the stairs, when he
saw a light above. He distinguished the voice of his granddaughter,
and then her light step.
“At last!” he thought.
And swiftly, like a schoolboy who hears his teacher coming, and fears
to be caught in the act, he slipped back into the Square. Dionysia was
there almost at the same moment, and fell on his neck, saying,–
“Dear grandpapa, I bring you back your bonds,” and then she rained a
shower of kisses upon the old gentleman’s furrowed cheeks.
If any thing could astonish M. de Chandore, it was the idea that there
should exist in this world a man with a heart hard, cruel, and
barbarous enough, to resist his Dionysia’s prayers and tears,
especially if they were backed by twenty thousand francs.
Nevertheless, he said mournfully,–
“Ah! I told you, my dear child, you would not succeed.”
“And you were mistaken, dear grandpapa, and you are still mistaken;
for I have succeeded!”
“But–you bring back the money?”
“Because I have found an honest man, dearest grandpapa,–a most
honorable man. Poor fellow, how I must have tempted his honesty! For
he is very much embarrassed, I know it from good authority, ever since
he and his sisters bought that house. It was more than comfort, it was
a real fortune, I offered him. Ah! you ought to have seen how his eyes
brightened up, and how his hands trembled, when he took up the bonds!
Well, he refused to take them, after all; and the only reward he asks
for the very good service which he is going to render us"–
M. de Chandore expressed his assent by a gesture, and then said,–
“You are right, darling: that clerk is a good man, and he has won our
eternal gratitude.”
“I ought to add,” continued Dionysia, “that I was ever so brave. I
should never have thought that I could be so bold. I wish you had been
hid in some corner, grandpapa, to see me and hear me. You would not
have recognized your grandchild. I cried a little, it is true, when I
had carried my point.”
“Oh, dear, dear child!” murmured the old gentleman, deeply moved.
“You see, grandpapa, I thought of nothing but of Jacques’s danger, and
of the glory of proving myself worthy of him, who is so brave himself.
I hope he will be satisfied with me.”
“He would be hard to please, indeed, if he were not!” exclaimed M. de
Chandore.
The grandfather and his child were standing all the while under the
trees in the great Square while they were thus talking to each other;
and already a number of people had taken the opportunity of passing
close by them, with ears wide open, and all eagerness, to find out
what was going on: it is a way people have in small towns. Dionysia
remembered the clerk’s kindly warnings; and, as soon as she became
aware of it, she said to her grandfather,–
“Come, grandpapa. People are listening. I will tell you the rest as we
are going home.”
And so, on their way, she told him all the little details of her
interview; and the old gentleman declared, in all earnest, that he did
not know which to admire most,–her presence of mind, or Mechinet’s
disinterestedness.
“All the more reason,” said the young girl, “why we should not add to
the dangers which the good man is going to run for us. I promised him
to tell nobody, and I mean to keep my promise. If you believe me, dear
grandpapa, we had better not speak of it to anybody, not even to my
aunts.”
“You might just as well declare at once, little scamp, that you want
to save Jacques quite alone, without anybody’s help.”
“Ah, if I could do that! Unfortunately, we must take M. Folgat into
our confidence; for we cannot do without his advice.”
Thus it was done. The poor aunts, and even the marchioness, had to be
content with Dionysia’s not very plausible explanation of her visit.
And a few hours afterwards M. de Chandore, the young girl, and M.
Folgat held a council in the baron’s study. The young lawyer was even
more surprised by Dionysia’s idea, and her bold proceedings, then her
grandfather; he would never have imagined that she was capable of such
a step, she looked so timid and innocent, like a mere child. He was
about to compliment her; but she interrupted him eagerly, saying,–
“There is nothing to boast of. I ran no risk.”
“A very substantial risk, madam, I assure you.”
“Pshaw!” exclaimed M. de Chandore.
“To bribe an official,” continued M. Folgat, “is a very grave offence.
The Criminal Code has a certain paragraph, No. 179, which does not
trifle, and punishes the man who bribes, as well as the man who is
bribed.”
“Well, so much the better!” cried Dionysia. “If poor M. Mechinet has
to go to prison, I’ll go with him!”
And, without noticing the dissatisfaction expressed in her
grandfather’s features, she added, turning to M. Folgat,–
“After all, sir, you see that your wishes have been fulfilled. We
shall be able to communicate with M. de Boiscoran: he will give us his
instructions.”
“Perhaps so, madam.”
“How? Perhaps? You said yourself"–
“I told you, madam, it would be useless, perhaps even imprudent, to
take any steps before we know the truth. But will we know it? Do you
think that M. de Boiscoran, who has good reasons for being suspicious
of every thing, will at once tell us all in a letter which must needs
pass through several hands before it can reach us?”
“He will tell us all, sir, without reserve, without fear, and without
danger.”
“Oh!”
“I have taken my precautions. You will see.”
“Then we have only to wait.”
Alas, yes! They had to wait, and that was what distressed Dionysia.
She hardly slept that night. The next day was one unbroken torment. At
each ringing of the bell, she trembled, and ran to see.
At last, towards five o’clock, when nothing had come, she said,–
“It is not to be to-day, provided, O God! that poor Mechinet has not
been caught.”
And, perhaps in order to escape for a time the anguish of her fears,
she agreed to accompany Jacques’s mother, who wanted to pay some
visits.
Ah, if she had but known! She had not left the house ten minutes, when
one of those street-boys, who abound at all hours of the day on the
great Square, appeared, bringing a letter to her address. They took it
to M. de Chandore, who, while waiting for dinner, was walking in the
garden with M. Folgat.
“A letter for Dionysia!” exclaimed the old gentleman, as soon as the
servant had disappeared. “Here is the answer we have been waiting
for!”
He boldly tore it open. Alas! It was useless. The note within the
envelope ran thus,–
 “31:9, 17, 19, 23, 25, 28, 32, 101, 102, 129, 137, 504, 515–37:2,
  3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 24, 27, 52, 54, 118, 119, 120, 200,
  201–41:7, 9, 17, 21, 22, 44, 45, 46"–
And so on, for two pages.
“Look at this, and try to make it out,” said M. de Chandore, handing
the letter to M. Folgat.
The young man actually tried it; but, after five minutes’ useless
efforts, he said,–
“I understand now why Miss Chandore promised us that we should know
the truth. M. de Boiscoran and she have formerly corresponded with
each other in cipher.”
Grandpapa Chandore raised his hands to heaven.
“Just think of these little girls! Here we are utterly helpless
without her, as she alone can translate those hieroglyphics for you.”
If Dionysia had hoped, by accompanying the marchioness on her visits,
to escape from the sad presentiments that oppressed her, she was
cruelly disappointed. They went to M. Seneschal’s house first; but the
mayor’s wife was by no means calculated to give courage to others in
an hour of peril. She could do nothing but embrace alternately
Jacques’s mother and Dionysia, and, amid a thousand sobs, tell them
over and over again, that she looked upon one as the most unfortunate
of mothers, and upon the other as the most unfortunate of betrothed
maidens.
“Does the woman think Jacques is guilty?” thought Dionysia, and felt
almost angry.
And that was not all. As they returned home, and passed the house
which had been provisionally taken for Count Claudieuse and his
family, they heard a little boy calling out,–
“O mamma, come quick! Here are the murderer’s mother and his
sweetheart.”
Thus the poor girl came home more downcast than before. Immediately,
however, her maid, who had evidently been on the lookout for her
return, told her that her grandfather and the lawyer from Paris were
waiting for her in the baron’s study. She hastened there without
stopping to take off her bonnet; and, as soon as she came in, M. de
Chandore handed her Jacques’s letter, saying,–
“Here is your answer.”
She could not repress a little cry of delight, and rapidly touched the
letter with her lips, repeating,–
“Now we are safe, we are safe!”
M. de Chandore smiled at the happiness of his granddaughter.
“But, Miss Hypocrite,” he said, “it seems you had great secrets to
communicate to M. de Boiscoran, since you resorted to cipher, like
arch conspirators. M. Folgat and I tried to read it; but it was all
Greek to us.”
Now only the young lady remembered M. Folgat’s presence, and, blushing
deeply, she said,–
“Latterly Jacques and I had been discussing the various methods to
which people resort who wish to carry on a secret correspondence: this
led him to teach me one of the ways. Two correspondents choose any
book they like, and each takes a copy of the same edition. The writer
looks in his volume for the words he wants, and numbers them; his
correspondent finds them by the aid of these numbers. Thus, in
Jacques’s letters, the numbers followed by a colon refer to the pages,
and the others to the order in which the words come.”
“Ah, ah!” said Grandpapa Chandore, “I might have looked a long time.”
“It is a very simple method,” replied Dionysia, “very well known, and
still quite safe. How could an outsider guess what book the
correspondents have chosen? Then there are other means to mislead
indiscreet people. It may be agreed upon, for instance, that the
numbers shall never have their apparent value, or that they shall vary
according to the day of the month or the week. Thus, to-day is Monday,
the second day of the week. Well, I have to deduct one from each
number of a page, and add one to each number of a word.”
“And you will be able to make it all out?” asked M. de Chandore.
“Certainly, dear grandpapa. Ever since Jacques explained it to me, I
have tried to learn it as a matter of course. We have chose a book
which I am very fond of, Cooper’s ’Spy;’ and we amused ourselves by
writing endless letters. Oh! it is very amusing, and it takes time,
because one does not always find the words that are needed, and then
they have to be spelled letter by letter.”
“And M. de Boiscoran has a copy of Cooper’s novels in his prison?"
asked M. Folgat.
“Yes, sir. M. Mechinet told me so. As soon as Jacques found he was to
be kept in close confinement, he asked for some of Cooper’s novels,
and M. Galpin, who is so cunning, so smart, and so suspicious, went
himself and got them for him. Jacques was counting upon me.”
“Then, dear child, go and read your letter, and solve the riddle,"
said M. de Chandore.
When she had left, he said to his companion,–
“How she loves him! How she loves this man Jacques! Sir, if any thing
should happen to him, she would die.”
M. Folgat made no reply; and nearly an hour passed, before Dionysia,
shut up in her room, had succeeded in finding all the words of which
Jacques’s letter was composed. But when she had finished, and came
back to her grandfather’s study, her youthful face expressed the most
profound despair.
“This is horrible!” she said.
The same idea crossed, like a sharp arrow, the minds of M. de Chandore
and M. Folgat. Had Jacques confessed?
“Look, read yourself!” said Dionysia, handing them the translation.
Jacques wrote,–
 “Thanks for your letter, my darling. A presentiment had warned me,
  and I had asked for a copy of Cooper.
 “I understand but too well how grieved you must be at seeing me
  kept in prison without my making an effort to establish my
  innocence. I kept silence, because I hoped the proof of my
  innocence would come from outside. I see that it would be madness
  to hope so any longer, and that I must speak. I shall speak. But
  what I have to say is so very serious, that I shall keep silence
  until I shall have had an opportunity of consulting with some one
  in whom I can feel perfect confidence. Prudence alone is not
  enough now: skill also is required. Until now I felt secure,
  relying on my innocence. But the last examination has opened my
  eyes, and I now see the danger to which I am exposed.
 “I shall suffer terribly until the day when I can see a lawyer.
  Thank my mother for having brought one. I hope he will pardon me,
  if I address myself first to another man. I want a man who knows
  the country and its customs.
 “That is why I have chosen M. Magloire; and I beg you will tell him
  to hold himself ready for the day on which, the examination being
  completed, I shall be relieved from close confinement.
 “Until then, nothing can be done, nothing, unless you can obtain
  that the case be taken out of M. G––-’s hands, and be given to
  some one else. That man acts infamously. He wants me to be guilty.
  He would himself commit a crime in order to charge me with it, and
  there is no kind of trap he does not lay for me. I have the
  greatest difficulty in controlling myself every time I see this
  man enter my cell, who was my friend, and now is my accuser.
 “Ah, my dear ones! I pay a heavy price for a fault of which I have
  been, until now, almost unconscious.
 “And you, my only friend, will you ever be able to forgive me the
  terrible anxiety I cause you?
 “I should like to say much more; but the prisoner who has handed me
  your note says I must be quick, and it takes so much time to pick
  out the words!
“J.”
When the letter had been read, M. Folgat and M. de Chandore sadly
turned their heads aside, fearing lest Dionysia should read in their
eyes the secret of their thoughts. But she felt only too well what it
meant.
“You cannot doubt Jacques, grandpapa!” she cried.
“No,” murmured the old gentleman feebly, “no.”
“And you, M. Folgat–are you so much hurt by Jacques’s desire to
consult another lawyer?”
“I should have been the first, madam, to advise him to consult a
native.”
Dionysia had to summon all her energy to check her tears.
“Yes,” she said, “this letter is terrible; but how can it be
otherwise? Don’t you see that Jacques is in despair, that his mind
wanders after all these fearful shocks?”
Somebody knocked gently at the door.
“It is I,” said the marchioness.
Grandpapa Chandore, M. Folgat, and Dionysia looked at each other for a
moment; and then the advocate said,–
“The situation is too serious: we must consult the marchioness.” He
rose to open the door. Since the three friends had been holding the
council in the baron’s study, a servant had come five times in
succession to knock at the door, and tell them that the soup was on
the table.
“Very well,” they had replied each time.
At last, as they did not come down yet, Jacques’s mother had come to
the conclusion that something extraordinary had occurred.
“Now, what could this be, that they should keep it from her?” she
thought. If it were something good, they would not have concealed it
from her. She had come up stairs, therefore, with the firm resolution
to force them to let her come in. When M. Folgat opened the door, she
said instantly,–
“I mean to know all!”
Dionysia replied to her,–
“Whatever you may hear, my dear mother, pray remember, that if you
allow a single word to be torn from you, by joy or by sorrow, you
cause the ruin of an honest man, who has put us all under such
obligations as can never be fully discharged. I have been fortunate
enough to establish a correspondence between Jacques and us.”
“O Dionysia!”
“I have written to him, and I have received his answer. Here it is.”
The marchioness was almost beside herself, and eagerly snatched at the
letter. But, as she read on, it was fearful to see how the blood
receded from her face, how her eyes grew dim, her lips turned pale,
and at last her breath failed to come. The letter slipped from her
trembling hands; she sank into a chair, and said, stammering,–
“It is no use to struggle any longer: we are lost!”
There was something grand in Dionysia’s gesture and the admirable
accent of her voice, as she said,–
“Why don’t you say at once, my mother, that Jacques is an incendiary
and an assassin?”
Raising her head with an air of dauntless energy, with trembling lips,
and fierce glances full of wrath and disdain, she added,–
“And do I really remain the only one to defend him,–him, who, in his
days of prosperity, had so many friends? Well, so be it!”
Naturally, M. Folgat had been less deeply moved than either the
marchioness or M. de Chandore; and hence he was also the first to
recover his calmness.
“We shall be two, madam, at all events,” he said; “for I should never
forgive myself, if I allowed myself to be influenced by that letter.
It would be inexcusable, since I know by experience what your heart
has told you instinctively. Imprisonment has horrors which affect the
strongest and stoutest of minds. The days in prison are interminable,
and the nights have nameless terrors. The innocent man in his lonely
cell feels as if he were becoming guilty, as the man of soundest
intellect would begin to doubt himself in a madhouse"–
Dionysia did not let him conclude. She cried,–
“That is exactly what I felt, sir; but I could not express it as
clearly as you do.”
Ashamed at their lack of courage, M. de Chandore and the marchioness
made an effort to recover from the doubts which, for a moment, had
well-nigh overcome them.
“But what is to be done?” asked the old lady.
“Your son tells us, madam, we have only to wait for the end of the
preliminary examination.”
“I beg your pardon,” said M. de Chandore, “we have to try to get the
case handed over to another magistrate.”
M. Folgat shook his head.
“Unfortunately, that is not to be dreamt of. A magistrate acting in
his official capacity cannot be rejected like a simple juryman.”
“However"–
“Article 542 of the Criminal Code is positive on the subject.”
“Ah! What does it say?” asked Dionysia.
“It says, in substance, madam, that a demand for a change of
magistrate, on the score of well-founded suspicion, can only be
entertained by a court of appeals, because the magistrate, within his
legitimate sphere, is a court in himself. I do not know if I express
myself clearly?”
“Oh, very clearly!” said M. de Chandore. “Only, since Jacques wishes
it"–
“To be sure; but M. de Boiscoran does not know"–
“I beg your pardon. He knows that the magistrate is his mortal enemy.”
“Be it so. But how would that help us? Do you think that a demand for
a change of venue would prevent M. Galpin from carrying on the
proceedings? Not at all. He would go on until the decision comes from
the Court of Appeals. He could, it is true, issue no final order; but
that is the very thing M. de Boiscoran ought to desire, since such an
order would make an end to his close confinement, and enable him to
see an advocate.”
“That is atrocious!” murmured M. de Chandore.
“It is atrocious, indeed; but such are the laws of France.”
In the meantime Dionysia had been meditating; and now she said to the
young advocate,–
“I have understood you perfectly, and to-morrow your objections shall
be known to M. de Boiscoran.”
“Above all,” said the lawyer, “explain to him clearly that any such
steps as he proposes to take will turn to his disadvantage. M. Galpin
is our enemy; but we can make no specific charge against him. They
would always reply, “If M. de Boiscoran is innocent, why does he not
speak?”
This is what Grandpapa Chandore would not admit.
“Still,” he said, “if we could bring influential men to help us?”
“Can you?”
“Certainly. Boiscoran has old friends, who, no doubt, are all-powerful
still under the present government. He was, in former years, very
intimate with M. de Margeril.”
M. Folgat’s expression was very encouraging.
“Ah!” he said, “if M. de Margeril could give us a lift! But he is not
easily approached.”
“We might send Boiscoran to see him, at least. Since he remained in
Paris for the purpose of assisting us there, now he will have an
opportunity. I will write to him to-night.”
Since the name of Margeril had been mentioned, the marchioness had
become, if possible, paler than ever. At the old gentleman’s last
words she rose, and said anxiously,–
“Do not write, sir: it would be useless. I do not wish it.”
Her embarrassment was so evident, that the others were quite
surprised.
“Have Boiscoran and M. de Margeril had any difficulty?” asked M. de
Chandore.
“Yes.”
“But,” cried Dionysia, “it is a matter of life and death for Jacques.”
Alas! The poor woman could not speak of the suspicions which had
darkened the whole life of the Marquis de Boiscoran, nor of the cruel
penalty which the wife was now called upon to pay for a slight
imprudence.
“If it is absolutely necessary,” she said with a half-stifled voice,
“if that is our very last hope, then I will go and see M. de Margeril
myself.”
M. Folgat was the only one who suspected what painful antecedents
there might be in the life of the marchioness, and how she was
harassed by their memory now. He interposed, therefore, saying,–
“At all events, my advice is to await the end of the preliminary
investigation. I may be mistaken, however, and, before any answer is
sent to M. Jacques, I desire that the lawyer to whom he alludes should
be consulted.”
“That is certainly the wisest plan,” said M. de Chandore. And, ringing
for a servant, he sent him at once to M. Magloire, to ask him to call
after dinner. Jacques de Boiscoran had chosen wisely. M. Magloire was
looked upon in Sauveterre as the most eloquent and most skilful
lawyer, not only of the district, but of the whole province. And what
is rarer still, and far more glorious, he had, besides, the reputation
of being unsurpassed in integrity and a high sense of honor. It was
well known that he would never had consented to plead a doubtful
cause; and they told of him a number of heroic stories, in which he
had thrown clients out of the window, who had been so ill-advised to
come to him, money in hand, to ask him to undertake an unclean case.
He was naturally not a rich man, and preserved, at fifty-four or five,
all the habits of a frugal and thrifty young man.
After having married quite young, M. Magloire had lost his wife after
a few months, and had never recovered from the loss. Although thirty
years old, the wound had never healed; and regularly, on certain days,
he was seen wending his way to the cemetery, to place flowers on a
modest grave there. Any other man would have been laughed at for such
a thing at Sauveterre; but with him they dared not do so, for they all
respected him highly. Young and old knew and reverenced the tall man
with the calm, serene face, the clear, bright eyes, and the eloquent
lips, which, in their well-cut, delicate lines, by turns glowed with
scorn, with tenderness, or with disdain.
Like Dr. Seignebos, M. Magloire also was a Republican; and, at the
last Imperial elections, the Bonapartists had had the greatest
trouble, aided though they were by the whole influence of the
government, and shrinking from no unfair means, to keep him out of the
Chamber. Nor would they have been successful after all, but for the
influence of Count Claudieuse, who had prevailed upon a number of
electors to abstain from voting.
This was the man, who, towards nine o’clock, presented himself, upon
the invitation of M. de Chandore, at his house, where he was anxiously
expected by all the inmates. His greeting was affectionate, but at the
same time so sad, that it touched Dionysia’s heart most painfully. She
thought she saw that M. Magloire was not far from believing Jacques
guilty.
And she was not mistaken; for M. Magloire let them see it clearly, in
the most delicate manner, to be sure, but still so as to leave no
doubt. He had spent the day in court, and there had heard the opinions
of the members of the court, which was by no means favorable to the
accused. Under such circumstances, it would have evidently been a
grave blunder to yield to Jacques’s wishes, and to apply for a change
of venue from M. Galpin to some other magistrate.
“The investigation will last a year,” cried Dionysia, “since M. Galpin
is determined to obtain from Jacques the confession of a crime which
he has not committed.”
M. Magloire shook his head, and replied,–
“I believe, on the contrary, madam, that the investigation will be
very soon concluded.”
“But if Jacques keeps silent?”
“Neither the silence of an accused, nor any other caprice or obstinacy
of his, can interfere with the regular process. Called upon to produce
his justification, if he refuses to do so, the law proceeds without
him.”
“Still, sir, if an accused person has reasons"–
“There are no reasons which can force a man to let himself be accused
unjustly. But even that case has been foreseen. The accused is at
liberty not to answer a question which may inculpate him. /Nemo
tenetur prodere se ipsum/. But you must admit that such a refusal to
answer justifies a judge in believing that the charges are true which
the accused does not refute.”
The great calmness of the distinguished lawyer of Sauveterre terrified
his listeners more and more, except M. Folgat. When they heard him use
all those technical terms, they felt chilled through and through like
the friends of a wounded man who hear the grating noise of the
surgeon’s knife.
“My son’s situation appears to you very serious, sir?” asked the
marchioness in a feeble voice.
“I said it was dangerous, madam.”
“You think, as M. Folgat does, that every day adds to the danger to
which he is exposed?”
“I am but too sure of that. And if M. de Boiscoran is really
innocent"–
“Ah, M. Magloire!” broke in Dionysia, “how can you, who are a friend
of Jacques’s, say so?”
M. Magloire looked at the young girl with an air of deep and sincere
pity, and then said,–
“It is precisely because I am his friend, madam, that I am bound to
tell you the truth. Yes, I know and I appreciate all the noble
qualities which distinguish M. de Boiscoran. I have loved him, and I
love him still. But this is a matter which we have to look at with the
mind, and not with the heart. Jacques is a man; and he will be judged
by men. There is clear, public, and absolute evidence of his guilt on
hand. What evidence has he to offer of his innocence? Moral evidence
only.”
“O God!” murmured Dionysia.
“I think, therefore, with my honorable brother"–
And M. Magloire bowed to M. Folgat.
“I think, that, if M. de Boiscoran is innocent, he has adopted an
unfortunate system. Ah! if luckily there should be an /alibi/. He
ought to make haste, great haste, to establish it. He ought not to
allow matters to go on till he is sent up into court. Once there, an
accused is three-fourths condemned already.”
For once it looked as if the crimson in M. de Chandore’s cheeks was
growing pale.
“And yet,” he exclaimed, “Jacques will not change his system: any one
who knows his mulish obstinacy might be quite sure of that.”
“And unfortunately he has made up his mind,” said Dionysia, “as M.
Magloire, who knows him so well, will see from this letter of his.”
Until now nothing had been said to let the Sauveterre lawyer suspect
that communications had been opened with the prisoner. Now that the
letter had been alluded to, it became necessary to take him into
confidence. At first he was astonished, then he looked displeased;
and, when he had been told every thing, he said,–
“This is great imprudence! This is too daring!”
Then looking at M. Folgat, he added,–
“Our profession has certain rules which cannot be broken without
causing trouble. To bribe a clerk, to profit by his weakness and his
sympathy"–
The Paris lawyer had blushed imperceptibly. He said,–
“I should never have advised such imprudence; but, when it was once
committed, I did not feel bound to insist upon its being abandoned:
and even if I should be blamed for it, or more, I mean to profit by
it.”
M. Magloire did not rely; but, after having read Jacques’s letter, he
said,–
“I am at M. de Boiscoran’s disposal; and I shall go to him as soon as
he is no longer in close confinement. I think, as Miss Dionysia does,
that he will insist upon saying nothing. However, as we have the means
of reaching him by letter,–well, here I am myself ready to profit by
the imprudence that has been committed!–beseech him, in the name of
his own interest, in the name of all that is dear to him, to speak, to
explain, to prove his innocence.”
Thereupon M. Magloire bowed, and withdrew suddenly, leaving his
audience in consternation, so very evident was it, that he left so
suddenly in order to conceal the painful impression which Jacques’s
letter had produced upon him.
“Certainly,” said M. de Chandore, “we will write to him; but we might
just as well whistle. He will wait for the end of the investigation.”
“Who knows?” murmured Dionysia.
And, after a moment’s reflection, she added,–
“We can try, however.”
And, without vouchsafing any further explanation, she left the room,
and hastened to her chamber to write the following letter:–
 “I must speak to you. There is a little gate in our garden which
  opens upon Charity Lane, I will wait for you there. However late
  it may be when you get these lines, come!
“Dionysia.”
Then having put the note into an envelope, she called the old nurse,
who had brought her up, and, with all the recommendations which
extreme prudence could suggest, she said to her,–
“You must see to it that M. Mechinet the clerk gets this note
to-night. Go! make haste!”
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
