


Although M. de Chandore was literally worshipping his grandchild on
his knees, and had transferred all his hopes and his affections to her
who alone survived of his large family, he had still had his thoughts
when he went up stairs to take from his money-box so large a sum of
money. As soon, therefore, as they were outside of the house, he
said,–
“Now that we are alone, my dear child, will you tell me what you mean
to do with all this money?”
“That is my secret,” she replied.
“And you have not confidence enough in your old grandfather to tell
him what it is, darling?”
He stopped a moment; but she drew him on, saying,–
“You shall know it all, and in less than an hour. But, oh! You must
not be angry, grandpapa. I have a plan, which is no doubt very
foolish. If I told you, I am afraid you would stop me; and if you
succeeded, and then something happened to Jacques, I should not
survive the misery. And think of it, what you would feel, if you were
to think afterwards, ’If I had only let her have her way!’ “
“Dionysia, you are cruel!”
“On the other hand, if you did not induce me to give up my project,
you would certainly take away all my courage; and I need it all, I
tell you, grandpapa, for what I am going to risk.”
“You see, my dear child, and you must pardon me for repeating it once
more, twenty thousand francs are a big sum of money; and there are
many excellent and clever people who work hard, and deny themselves
every thing, a whole life long, without laying up that much.”
“Ah, so much the better!” cried the young girl. “So much the better. I
do hope there will be enough so as to meet with no refusal!”
Grandpapa Chandore began to comprehend.
“After all,” he said, “you have not told me where we are going.”
“To my dressmakers.”
“To the Misses Mechinet?”
“Yes.”
M. de Chandore was sure now.
“We shall not find them at home,” he said. “This is Sunday; and they
are no doubt at church.”
“We shall find them, grandpapa; for they always take tea at half-past
seven, for their brother’s, the clerk’s sake. But we must make haste.”
The old gentleman did make haste; but it is a long way from the New-
Market Place to Hill Street; for the sisters Mechinet lived on the
Square, and, if you please, in a house of their own,–a house which
was to be the delight of their days, and which had become the trouble
of their nights.
They bought the house the year before the war, upon their brother’s
advice, and going halves with him, paying a sum of forty-seven
thousand francs, every thing included. It was a capital bargain; for
they rented out the basement and the first story to the first grocer
in Sauveterre. The sisters did not think they were imprudent in paying
down ten thousand francs in cash, and in binding themselves to pay the
rest in three yearly instalments. The first year all went well; but
then came the war and numerous disasters. The income of the sisters
and of the brother was much reduced, and they had nothing to live upon
but his pay as clerk; so that they had to use the utmost economy, and
even contract some debts, in order to pay the second instalment. When
peace came, their income increased again, and no one doubted in
Sauveterre but that they would manage to get out of their
difficulties, as the brother was one of the hardest working men, and
the sisters were patronized by “the most distinguished” ladies of the
whole country.
“Grandpapa, they are at home,” said Dionysia, when they reached the
Square.
“Do you think so?”
“I am sure. I see light in their windows.”
M. de Chandore stopped.
“What am I to do next?” he asked.
“You are going to give me the bonds, grandpapa, and to wait for me
here, walking up and down, whilst I am going to the Misses Mechinet. I
would ask you to come up too; but they would be frightened at seeing
you. Moreover, if my enterprise does not succeed, it would not matter
much as long as it concerned only a little girl.”
The old gentleman’s last doubts began to vanish.
“You won’t succeed, my poor girl,” he said.
“O God!” she replied, checking her tears with difficulty, “why will
you discourage me?”
He said nothing. Suppressing a sigh, he pulled the papers out of his
pockets, and helped Dionysia to stuff them, as well as she could, into
her pocket and a little bag she had in her hand. When she had done,
she said,–
“Well, good-bye, grandpapa. I won’t be long.”
And lightly, like a bird, she crossed the street, and ran up to her
dressmakers. The old ladies and their brother were just finishing
their supper, which consisted of a small piece of port and a light
salad, with an abundance of vinegar. At the unexpected entrance of
Miss Chandore they all started up.
“You, miss,” cried the elder of the two,–"you!”
Dionysia understood perfectly well what that simple “you” meant. It
meant, with the help of the tone of voice, “What? your betrothed is
charged with an abominable crime; there is overwhelming evidence
against him; he is in jail, in close confinement; everybody knows he
will be tried at the assizes, and he will be condemned–and you are
here?”
But Dionysia kept on smiling, as she had entered.
“Yes,” she replied, “it is I. I must have two dresses for next week;
and I come to ask you to show me some samples.”
The Misses Mechinet, always acting upon their brother’s advice, had
made an arrangement with a large house in Bordeaux, by which they
received samples of all their goods, and were allowed a discount on
whatever they sold.
“I will do so with pleasure,” said the older sister. “Just allow me to
light a lamp. It is almost dark.”
While she was wiping the chimney, and trimming the wick, she asked her
brother,–
“Are you not going to the Orpheon?”
“Not to-night,” he replied.
“Are you not expected to be there?”
“No: I sent them word I would not come. I have to lithograph two
plates for the printer, and some very urgent copying to do for the
court.”
While he was thus replying, he had folded up his napkin, and lighted a
candle.
“Good-night!” he said to his sisters. “I won’t see you again
to-night,” and, bowing deeply to Miss Chandore, he went out, his
candle in his hand.
“Where is your brother going?” Dionysia asked eagerly.
“To his room, madam. His room is just opposite on the other side of
the staircase.”
Dionysia was as red as fire. Was she thus to let her opportunity slip,
–an opportunity such as she had never dared hope for? Gathering up
all her courage, she said,–
“But, now I think of it, I want to say a few words to your brother, my
dear ladies. Wait for me a moment. I shall be back in a moment.” And
she rushed out, leaving the dressmakers stupefied, gazing after her
with open mouths, and asking themselves if the grand calamity had
bereft the poor lady of reason.
The clerk was still on the landing, fumbling in his pocket for the key
of his room.
“I want to speak to you instantly,” said Dionysia.
Mechinet was so utterly amazed, that he could not utter a word. He
made a movement as if he wanted to go back to his sisters; but the
young girl said,–
“No, in your room. We must not be overheard. Open sir, please. Open,
somebody might come.”
The fact is, he was so completely overcome, that it took him half a
minute to find the keyhole, and put the key in. At last, when the door
was opened, he moved aside to let Dionysia pass: but she said, “No, go
in!”
He obeyed. She followed him, and, as soon as she was in the room, she
shut the door again, pushing even a bolt which she had noticed.
Mechinet the clerk was famous in Sauveterre for his coolness. Dionysia
was timidity personified, and blushed for the smallest trifle,
remaining speechless for some time. At this moment, however, it was
certainly not the young girl who was embarrassed.
“Sit down, M. Mechinet,” she said, “and listen to me.”
He put his candlestick on a table, and sat down.
“You know me, don’t you?” asked Dionysia.
“Certainly I do, madam.”
“You have surely heard that I am to be married to M. de Boiscoran?”
The clerk started up, as if he had been moved by a spring, beat his
forehead furiously with his hand, and said,–
“Ah, what a fool I was! Now I see.”
“Yes, you are right,” replied the girl. “I come to talk to you abut M.
de Boiscoran, my betrothed, my husband.”
She paused; and for a minute Mechinet and the young girl remained
there face to face, silent and immovable, looking at each other, he
asking himself what she could want of him, and she trying to guess how
far she might venture.
“You can no doubt imagine, M. Mechinet, what I have suffered, since M.
de Boiscoran has been sent to prison, charged with the meanest of all
crimes!”
“Oh, surely, I do!” replied Mechinet.
And, carried away by his emotion, he added,–
“But I can assure you, madam, that I, who have been present at all the
examinations, and who have no small experience in criminal matters,–
that I believe M. de Boiscoran innocent. I know M. Galpin does not
think so, nor M. Daubigeon, nor any of the gentlemen of the bar, nor
the town; but, nevertheless, that is my conviction. You see, I was
there when they fell upon M. de Boiscoran, asleep in his bed. Well,
the very tone of his voice, as he cried out, ’Oh, my dear Galpin!’
told me that the man is not guilty.”
“Oh, sir,” stammered Dionysia, “thanks, thanks!”
“There is nothing to thank me for, madam; for time has only confirmed
my conviction. As if a guilty man ever bore himself as M. de Boiscoran
does! You ought to have seen him just now, when we had gone to remove
the seals, calm, dignified, answering coldly all the questions that
were asked. I could not help telling M. Galpin what I thought. He said
I was a fool. Well, I maintain, on the contrary, that he is. Ah! I beg
your pardon, I mean that he is mistaken. The more I see of M. de
Boiscoran, the more he gives me the impression that he has only a word
to say to clear up the whole matter.”
Dionysia listened to him with such absorbing interest, that she well-
nigh forgot why she had come.
“Then,” she asked, “you think M. de Boiscoran is not much overcome?”
“I should lie if I said he did not look sad, madam,” was the reply.
“But he is not overcome. After the first astonishment, his presence of
mind returned; and M. Galpin has in vain tried these three days by all
his ingenuity and his cleverness"–
Here he stopped suddenly, like a drunken man who recovers his
consciousness for a moment, and becomes aware that he has said too
much in his cups. He exclaimed,–
“Great God! what am I talking about? For Heaven’s sake, madam, do not
let anybody hear what I was led by my respectful sympathy to tell you
just now.”
Dionysia felt that the decisive moment had come. She said,–
“If you knew me better, sir, you would know that you can rely upon my
discretion. You need not regret having given me by your confidence
some little comfort in my great sorrow. You need not; for"–
Her voice nearly failed her, and it was only with a great effort she
could add,–
“For I come to ask you to do even more than that for me, oh! yes, much
more.”
Mechinet had turned painfully pale. He broke in vehemently,–
“Not another word, madam: your hope already is an insult to me. You
ought surely to know that by my profession, as well as by my oath, I
am bound to be as silent as the very cell in which the prisoners are
kept. If I, the clerk, were to betray the secret of a criminal
prosecution"–
Dionysia trembled like an aspen-leaf; but her mind remained clear and
decided. She said,–
“You would rather let an innocent man perish.”
“Madam!”
“You would let an innocent man be condemned, when by a single word you
could remove the mistake of which he is the victim? You would say to
yourself, ’It is unlucky; but I have sworn not to speak’? And you
would see him with quiet conscience mount the scaffold? No, I cannot
believe that! No, that cannot be true!”
“I told you, madam, I believe in M. de Boiscoran’s innocence.”
“And you refuse to aid me in establishing his innocence? O God! what
ideas men form of their duty! How can I move you? How can I convince
you? Must I remind you of the torture this man suffers, whom they
charge with being an assassin? Must I tell you what horrible anguish
we suffer, we, his friends, his relatives?–how his mother weeps, how
I weep, I, his betrothed! We know he is innocent; and yet we cannot
establish his innocence for want of a friend who would aid us, who
would pity us!”
In all his life the clerk had not heard such burning words. He was
moved to the bottom of his heart. At last he asked, trembling,–
“What do you want me to do, madam?”
“Oh! very little, sir, very little,–just to send M. de Boiscoran ten
lines, and to bring us his reply.”
The boldness of the request seemed to stun the clerk. He said,–
“Never!”
“You will not have pity?”
“I should forfeit my honor.”
“And, if you let an innocent one be condemned, what would that be?”
Mechinet was evidently suffering anguish. Amazed, overcome, he did not
know what to say, what to do. At last he thought of one reason for
refusing, and stammered out,–
“And if I were found out? I should lose my place, ruin my sisters,
destroy my career for life.”
With trembling hands, Dionysia drew from her pocket the bonds which
her grandfather had given her, and threw them in a heap on the table.
She began,–
“There are twenty thousand francs.”
The clerk drew back frightened. He cried,–
“Money! You offer me money!”
“Oh, don’t be offended!” began the young girl again, with a voice that
would have moved a stone. “How could I want to offend you, when I ask
of you more than my life? There are services which can never be paid.
But, if the enemies of M. de Boiscoran should find out that you have
aided us, their rage might turn against you.”
Instinctively the clerk unloosed his cravat. The struggle within him,
no doubt, was terrible. He was stifled.
“Twenty thousand francs!” he said in a hoarse voice.
“Is it not enough?” asked the young girl. “Yes, you are right: it is
very little. But I have as much again for you, twice as much.”
With haggard eyes, Mechinet had approached the table, and was
convulsively handling the pile of papers, while he repeated,–
“Twenty thousand francs! A thousand a year!”
“No, double that much, and moreover, our gratitude, our devoted
friendship, all the influence of the two families of Boiscoran and
Chandore; in a word, fortune, position, respect.”
But by this time, thanks to a supreme effort of will, the clerk had
recovered his self-control.
“No more, madam, say no more!”
And with a determined, though still trembling voice, he went on,–
“Take your money back again, madam. If I were to do what you want me
to do, if I were to betray my duty for money, I should be the meanest
of men. If, on the other hand, I am actuated only by a sincere
conviction and an interest in the truth, I may be looked upon as a
fool; but I shall always be worthy of the esteem of honorable men.
Take back that fortune, madam, which has made an honest man waver for
a moment in his conscience. I will do what you ask, but for nothing.”
If grandpapa was getting tired of walking up and down in the Square,
the sisters of Mechinet found time pass still more slowly in their
workroom. They asked each other,–
“What can Miss Dionysia have to say to brother?”
At the end of ten minutes, their curiosity, stimulated by the most
absurd suppositions, had become such martyrdom to them, that they made
up their minds to knock at the clerk’s door.
“Ah, leave me alone!” he cried out, angry at being thus interrupted.
But then he considered a moment, opened hastily, and said quite
gently,–
“Go back to your room, my dear sisters, and, if you wish to spare me a
very serious embarrassment, never tell anybody in this world that Miss
Chandore has had a conversation with me.”
Trained to obey, the two sisters went back, but not so promptly that
they should have not seen the bonds which Dionysia had thrown upon the
table, and which were quite familiar in their appearance to them, as
they had once owned some of them themselves. Their burning desire to
know was thus combined with vague terror; and, when they got back to
their room, the younger asked,–
“Did you see?”
“Yes, those bonds,” replied the other.
“There must have been five or six hundred.”
“Even more, perhaps.”
“That is to say, a very big sum of money.”
“An enormous one.”
“What can that mean, Holy Virgin! And what have we to expect?”
“And brother asking us to keep his secret!”
“He looked as pale as his shirt, and terribly distressed.”
“Miss Dionysia was crying like a Magdalen.”
It was so. Dionysia, as long as she had been uncertain of the result,
had felt in her heart that Jacques’s safety depended on her courage
and her presence of mind. But now, assured of success, she could no
longer control her excitement; and, overcome by the effort, she had
sunk down on a chair and burst out into tears.
The clerk shut the door, and looked at her for some time; then, having
overcome his own emotions, he said to her,–
“Madame.”
But, as she heard his voice, she jumped up, and taking his hands into
hers, she broke out,–
“O sir! How can I thank you! How can I ever make you aware of the
depth of my gratitude!”
“Don’t speak of that,” he said almost rudely, trying to conceal his
deep feeling.
“I will say nothing more,” she replied very gently; “but I must tell
you that none of us will ever forget the debt of gratitude which we
owe you from this day. You say the great service which you are about
to render us is not free from danger. Whatever may happen, you must
remember, that, from this moment, you have in us devoted friends.”
The interruption caused by his sisters had had the good effect of
restoring to Mechinet a good portion of his habitual self-possession.
He said,–
“I hope no harm will come of it; and yet I cannot conceal from you,
madam, that the service which I am going to try to render you presents
more difficulties than I thought.”
“Great God!” murmured Dionysia.
“M. Galpin,” the clerk went on saying, “is, perhaps, not exactly a
superior man; but he understands his profession; he is cunning, and
exceedingly suspicious. Only yesterday he told me that he knew the
Boiscoran family would try every thing in the world to save M. de
Boiscoran from justice. Hence he is all the time on the watch, and
takes all kinds of precautions. If he dared to it, he would have his
bed put across his cell in the prison.”
“That man hates me, M. Mechinet!”
“Oh, no, madam! But he is ambitious: he thinks his success in his
profession depends upon his success in this case; and he is afraid the
accused might escape or be carried off.”
Mechinet was evidently in great perplexity, and scratched his ear.
Then he added,–
“How am I to go about to let M. de Boiscoran have your note? If he
knew beforehand, it would be easy. But he is unprepared. And then he
is just as suspicious as M. Galpin. He is always afraid lest they
prepare him a trap; and he is on the lookout. If I make him a sign, I
fear he will not understand me; and, if I make him a sign, will not M.
Galpin see it? That man is lynx-eyed.”
“Are you never alone with M. de Boiscoran?”
“Never for an instant, madam. I only go in with the magistrate, and I
come out with him. You will say, perhaps, that in leaving, as I am
behind, I might drop the note cleverly. But, when we leave, the jailer
is there, and he has good eyes. I should have to dread, besides, M. de
Boiscoran’s own suspicions. If he saw a letter coming to him in that
way, from me, he is quite capable of handing it at once to M. Galpin.”
He paused, and after a moment’s meditation he went on,–
“The safest way would probably be to win the confidence of M. Blangin,
the keeper of the jail, or of some prisoner, whose duty it is to wait
on M. de Boiscoran, and to watch him.”
“Trumence!” exclaimed Dionysia.
The clerk’s face expressed the most startled surprise. He said,–
“What! You know his name?”
“Yes, I do; for Blangin mentioned him to me; and the name struck me
the day when M. de Boiscoran’s mother and I went to the jail, not
knowing what was meant by ’close confinement.’ “
The clerk was disappointed.
“Ah!” he said, “now I understand M. Galpin’s great trouble. He has, no
doubt, heard of your visit, and imagined that you wanted to rob him of
his prisoner.”
He murmured some words, which Dionysia could not hear; and then,
coming to some decision, apparently, he said,–
“Well, never mind! I’ll see what can be done. Write your letter,
madam: here are pens and ink.”
The young girl made no reply, but sat down at Mechinet’s table; but,
at the moment when she was putting pen to paper she asked,–
“Has M. de Boiscoran any books in his prison?”
“Yes, madam. At his request M. Galpin himself went and selected, in M.
Daubigeon’s library, some books of travels and some of Cooper’s novels
for him.”
Dionysia uttered a cry of delight.
“O Jacques!” she said, “how glad I am you counted upon me!” and,
without noticing how utterly Mechinet seemed to be surprised, she
wrote,–
 “We are sure of your innocence, Jacques, and still we are in
  despair. Your mother is here, with a Paris lawyer, a M. Folgat,
  who is devoted to your interests. What must we do? Give us your
  instructions. You can reply without fear, as you have /our/ book.
“Dionysia.”
“Read this,” she said to the clerk, when she had finished. But he did
not avail himself of the permission. He folded the paper, and slipped
it into an envelope, which he sealed.
“Oh, you are very kind!” said the young girl, touched by his delicacy.
“Not at all, madam. I only try to do a dishonest thing in the most
honest way. To-morrow, madam, you shall have your answer.”
“I will call for it.”
Mechinet trembled.
“Take care not to do so,” he said. “The good people of Sauveterre are
too cunning not to know that just now you are not thinking much of
dress; and your calls here would look suspicious. Leave it to me to
see to it that you get M. de Boiscoran’s answer.”
While Dionysia was writing, the clerk had made a parcel of the bonds
which she had brought. He handed it to her, and said,–
“Take it, madam. If I want money for Blangin, or for Trumence, I will
ask you for it. And now you must go: you need not go in to my sisters.
I will explain your visit to them.”
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
