


Count Claudieuse and his wife had installed themselves, the day after
the fire, in Mautrec Street. The house which the mayor had taken for
them had been for more than a century in the possession of the great
Julias family, and is still considered one of the finest and most
magnificent mansions in Sauveterre.
In less than ten minutes Dr. Seignebos and M. Folgat had reached the
house. From the street, nothing was visible but a tall wall, as old as
the castle, according to the claims of archaeologists, and covered all
over with a mass of wild flowers. In this wall there is a huge
entrance-gate with folding-doors. During the day one-half is opened,
and a light, low open-work railing put in, which rings a bell as soon
as it is pushed open.
You then cross a large garden, in which a dozen statues, covered with
green moss, are falling to pieces on their pedestals, overshadowed by
magnificent old linden-trees. The house has only two stories. A large
hall extends from end to end of the lower story; and at the end a wide
staircase with stone steps and a superb iron railing leads up stairs.
When they entered the hall, Dr. Seignebos opened a door on the right
hand.
“Step in here and wait,” he said to M. Folgat. “I will go up stairs
and see the count, whose room is in the second story, and I will send
you the countess.”
The young advocate did as he was bid, and found himself in a large
room, brilliantly lighted up by three tall windows that went down to
the ground, and looked out upon the garden. This room must have been
superb formerly. The walls were wainscoted with arabesques and lines
in gold. The ceiling was painted, and represented a number of fat
little angels sporting in a sky full of golden stars.
But time had passed its destroying hand over all this splendor of the
past age, had half effaced the paintings, tarnished the gold of the
arabesques, and faded the blue of the ceiling and the rosy little
loves. Nor was the furniture calculated to make compensation for this
decay. The windows had no curtains. On the mantelpiece stood a worn-
out clock and half-broken candelabra; then, here and there, pieces of
furniture that would not match, such as had been rescued from the fire
at Valpinson,–chairs, sofas, arm-chairs, and a round table, all
battered and blackened by the flames.
But M. Folgat paid little attention to these details. He only thought
of the grave step on which he was venturing, and which he now only
looked at in its full strangeness and extreme boldness. Perhaps he
would have fled at the last moment if he could have done so; and he
was only able by a supreme effort to control his excitement.
At last he heard a rapid, light step in the hall; and almost
immediately the Countess Claudieuse appeared. He recognized her at
once, such as Jacques had described her to him, calm, serious, and
serene, as if her soul were soaring high above all human passions. Far
from diminishing her exquisite beauty, the terrible events of the last
months had only surrounded her, as it were, with a divine halo. She
had fallen off a little, however. And the dark semicircle under her
eyes, and the disorder of her hair, betrayed the fatigue and the
anxiety of the long nights which she had spent by her husband’s
bedside.
As M. Folgat was bowing, she asked,–
“You are M. de Boiscoran’s counsel?”
“Yes, madam,” replied the young advocate.
“The doctor tells me you wish to speak to me.”
“Yes, madam.”
With a queenly air, she pointed to a chair, and, sitting down herself,
she said,–
“I hear, sir.”
M. Folgat began with beating heart, but a firm voice,–
“I ought, first of all, madam, to state to you my client’s true
position.”
“That is useless, sir. I know.”
“You know, madam, that he has been summoned to trial, and that he may
be condemned?”
She shook her head with a painful movement, and said very softly,–
“I know, sir, that Count Claudieuse has been the victim of a most
infamous attempt at murder; that he is still in danger, and that,
unless God works a miracle, I shall soon be without a husband, and my
children without a father.”
“But M. de Boiscoran is innocent, madam.”
The features of the countess assumed an expression of profound
surprise; and, looking fixedly at M. Folgat, she said,–
“And who, then, is the murderer?”
Ah! It cost the young advocate no small effort to prevent his lips
from uttering the fatal word, “You,” prompted by his indignant
conscience. But he thought of the success of his mission; and, instead
of replying, he said,–
“To a prisoner, madam, to an unfortunate man on the eve of judgment,
an advocate is a confessor, to whom he tells every thing. I must add
that the counsel of the accused is like a priest: he must forget the
secrets which have been confided to him.”
“I do not understand, sir.”
“My client, madam, had a very simple means to prove his innocence. He
had only to tell the truth. He has preferred risking his own honor
rather than to betray the honor of another person.”
The countess looked impatient, and broke in, saying,–
“My moments are counted, sir. May I beg you will be more explicit?”
But M. Folgat had gone as far as he well could go.
“I am desired by M. de Boiscoran, madam, to hand you a letter.”
The Countess Claudieuse seemed to be overwhelmed with surprise.
“To me?” she said. “On what ground?”
Without saying a word, M. Folgat drew Jacques’s letter from his
portfolio, and handed it to her.
“Here it is!” he said.
She took it with a perfectly steady hand, and opened it slowly. But,
as soon as she had run her eye over it, she rose, turned crimson in
her face, and said with flaming eyes,–
“Do you know, sir, what this letter contains?”
“Yes.”
“Do you know that M. de Boiscoran dares call me by my first name,
Genevieve, as my husband does, and my father?”
The decisive moment had come, and M. Folgat had all his self-
possession.
“M. de Boiscoran, madame, claims that he used to call you so in former
days,–in Vine Street,–in days when you called him Jacques.”
The countess seemed to be utterly bewildered.
“But that is sheer infamy, sir,” she stammered. “What! M. de Boiscoran
should have dared tell you that I, the countess Claudieuse, have been
his–mistress?”
“He certainly said so, madam; and he affirms, that a few moments
before the fire broke out, he was near you, and that, if his hands
were blackened, it was because he had burned your letters and his.”
She rose at these words, and said in a penetrating voice,–
“And you could believe that,–you? Ah! M. de Boiscoran’s other crimes
are nothing in comparison with this! He is not satisfied with having
burnt our house, and ruined us: he means to dishonor us. He is not
satisfied with having murdered my husband: he must ruin the honor of
his wife also.”
She spoke so loud, that her voice must have been distinctly heard in
the vestibule.
“Lower, madam, I pray you speak lower,” said M. Folgat.
She cast upon him a crushing glance; and, raising her voice still
higher, she went on,–
“Yes, I understand very well that you are afraid of being heard. But I
–what have I to fear? I could wish the whole world to hear us, and to
judge between us. Lower, you say? Why should I speak less loud? Do you
think that if Count Claudieuse were not on his death-bed, this letter
would not have long since been in his hands? Ah, he would soon have
satisfaction for such an infamous letter, he! But I, a poor woman! I
have never seen so clearly that the world thinks my husband is lost
already, and that I am alone in this world, without a protector,
without friends.”
“But, madam, M. de Boiscoran pledges himself to the most perfect
secrecy.”
“Secrecy in what? In your cowardly insults, your abominable plots, of
which this, no doubt, is but a beginning?”
M. Folgat turned livid under this insult.
“Ah, take care, madam,” he said in a hoarse voice: “we have proof,
absolute, overwhelming proof.”
The countess stopped him by an imperious gesture, and with the
haughtiest disdain, grief, and wrath, she said,–
“Well, then, produce your proof. Go, hasten, act as you like. We shall
see if the vile calumnies of an incendiary can stain the pure
reputation of an honest woman. We shall see if a single speck of this
mud in which you wallow can reach up to me.”
And, throwing Jacques’s letter at M. Folgat’s feet, she went to the
door.
“Madam,” said M. Folgat once more,–"madam!”
She did not even condescend to turn round: she disappeared, leaving
him standing in the middle of the room, so overcome with amazement,
that he could not collect his thoughts. Fortunately Dr. Seignebos came
in.
“Upon my word!” he said, “I never thought the countess would take my
treachery so coolly. When she came out from you just now, she asked
me, in the same tone as every day, how I had found her husband, and
what was to be done. I told her"–
But the rest of the sentence remained unspoken: the doctor had become
aware of M. Folgat’s utter consternation.
“Why, what on earth is the matter?” he asked.
The young advocate looked at him with an utterly bewildered air.
“This is the matter: I ask myself whether I am awake or dreaming. This
is the matter: that, if this woman is guilty, she possesses an
audacity beyond all belief.”
“How, if? Have you changed your mind about her guilt?”
M. Folgat looked altogether disheartened.
“Ah!” he said, “I hardly know myself. Do you not see that I have lost
my head, that I do not know what to think, and what to believe?”
“Oh!”
“Yes, indeed! And yet, doctor, I am not a simpleton. I have now been
pleading five years in criminal courts: I have had to dive down into
the lowest depths of society; I have seen strange things, and met with
exceptional specimens, and heard fabulous stories"–
It was the doctor’s turn, now, to be amazed; and he actually forgot to
trouble his gold spectacles.
“Why? What did the countess say?” he asked.
“I might tell you every word,” replied M. Folgat, “and you would be
none the wiser. You ought to have been here, and seen her, and heard
her! What a woman! Not a muscle in her face was moving; her eye
remained limpid and clear; no emotion was felt in her voice. And with
what an air she defied me! But come, doctor, let us be gone!”
They went out, and had already gone about a third down the long avenue
in the garden, when they saw the oldest daughter of the countess
coming towards them, on her way to the house, accompanied by her
governess. Dr. Seignebos stopped, and pressing the arm of the young
advocate, and bending over to him, he whispered into his ear,–
“Mind!” he said. “You know the truth is in the lips of children.”
“What do you expect?” murmured M. Folgat.
“To settle a doubtful point. Hush! Let me manage it.”
By this time the little girl had come up to them. It was a very
graceful girl of eight or nine years, light haired, with large blue
eyes, tall for her age, and displaying all the intelligence of a young
girl, without her timidity.
“How are you, little Martha?” said the doctor to her in his gentlest
voice, which was very soft when he chose.
“Good-morning, gentlemen!” she replied with a nice little courtesy.
Dr. Seignebos bent down to kiss her rosy cheeks, and them, looking at
her, he said,–
“You look sad, Martha?”
“Yes, because papa and little sister are sick,” she replied with a
deep sigh.
“And also because you miss Valpinson?”
“Oh, yes!”
“Still it is very pretty here, and you have a large garden to play
in.”
She shook her head, and, lowering her voice, she said,–
“It is certainly very pretty here; but–I am afraid.”
“And of what, little one?”
She pointed to the statues, and all shuddering, she said,–
“In the evening, when it grows dark, I fancy they are moving. I think
I see people hiding behind the trees, like the man who wanted to kill
papa.”
“You ought to drive away those ugly notions, Miss Martha,” said M.
Folgat.
But Dr. Seignebos did not allow him to go on.
“What, Martha? I did not know you were so timid. I thought, on the
contrary, you were very brave. Your papa told me the night of the fire
you were not afraid of any thing.”
“Papa was right.”
“And yet, when you were aroused by the flames, it must have been
terrible.”
“Oh! it was not the flames which waked me, doctor.”
“Still the fire had broken out.”
“I was not asleep at that time, doctor. I had been roused by the
slamming of the door, which mamma had closed very noisily when she
came in.”
One and the same presentiment made M. Folgat tremble and the doctor.
“You must be mistaken, Martha,” the doctor went on. “Your mamma had
not come back at the time of the fire.”
“Oh, yes, sir!”
“No, you are mistaken.”
The little girl drew herself up with that solemn air which children
are apt to assume when their statements are doubted. She said,–
“I am quite sure of what I say, and I remember every thing perfectly.
I had been put to bed at the usual hour, and, as I was very tired with
playing, I had fallen asleep at once. While I was asleep, mamma had
gone out; but her coming back waked me up. As soon as she came in, she
bent over little sister’s bed, and looked at her for a moment so
sadly, that I thought I should cry. Then she went, and sat down by the
window; and from my bed, where I lay silently watching her, I saw the
tears running down her cheeks, when all of a sudden a shot was fired.”
M. Folgat and Dr. Seignebos looked anxiously at each other.
“Then, my little one,” insisted Dr. Seignebos, “you are quite sure
your mamma was in your room when the first shot was fired?”
“Certainly, doctor. And mamma, when she heard it, rose up straight,
and lowered her head, like one who listens. Almost immediately, the
second shot was fired. Mamma raised her hands to heaven, and cried
out, ’Great God!’ And then she went out, running fast.”
Never was a smile more false than that which Dr. Seignebos forced
himself to retain on his lips while the little girl was telling her
story.
“You have dreamed all that, Martha,” he said.
The governess here interposed, saying,–
“The young lady has not dreamed it, sir. I, also, heard the shots
fired; and I had just opened the door of my room to hear what was
going on, when I saw madame cross the landing swiftly, and rush down
stairs.
“Oh! I do not doubt it,” said the doctor, in the most indifferent tone
he could command: “the circumstance is very trifling.”
But the little girl was bent on finishing her story.
“When mamma had left,” she went on, “I became frightened, and raised
myself on my bed to listen. Soon I heard a noise which I did not know,
–cracking and snapping of wood, and then cries at a distance. I got
more frightened, jumped down, and ran to open the door. But I nearly
fell down, there was such a cloud of smoke and sparks. Still I did not
lose my head. I waked my little sister, and tried to get on the
staircase, when Cocoleu rushed in like a madman, and took us both
out.”
“Martha,” called a voice from the house, “Martha!”
The child cut short her story, and said,–
“Mamma is calling me.”
And, dropping again her nice little courtesy, she said,–
“Good-by, gentlemen!”
Martha had disappeared; and Dr. Seignebos and M. Folgat, still
standing on the same spot, looked at each other in utter distress.
“We have nothing more to do here,” said M. Folgat.
“No, indeed! Let us go back and make haste; for perhaps they are
waiting for me. You must breakfast with me.”
They went away very much disheartened, and so absorbed in their
defeat, that they forgot to return the salutations with which they
were greeted in the street,–a circumstance carefully noticed by
several watchful observers.
When the doctor reached home, he said to his servant,–
“This gentleman will breakfast with me. Give us a bottle of medis.”
And, when he had shown the advocate into his study, he asked,–
“And now what do you think of your adventure?”
M. Folgat looked completely undone.
“I cannot understand it,” he murmured.
“Could it be possible that the countess should have tutored the child
to say what she told us?”
“No.”
“And her governess?”
“Still less. A woman of that character trusts nobody. She struggles;
she triumphs or succumbs alone.”
“Then the child and the governess have told us the truth?”
“I am convinced of that.”
“So am I. Then she had no share in the murder of her husband?”
“Alas!”
M. Folgat did not notice that his “Alas!” was received by Dr.
Seignebos with an air of triumph. He had taken off his spectacles,
and, wiping them vigorously, he said,–
“If the countess is innocent, Jacques must be guilty, you think?
Jacques must have deceived us all, then?”
M. Folgat shook his head.
“I pray you, doctor, do not press me just now. Give me time to collect
my thoughts. I am bewildered by all these conjectures. No, I am sure
M. de Boiscoran has not told a falsehood, and the countess has been
his mistress. No, he has not deceived us; and on the night of the
crime he really had an interview with the countess. Did not Martha
tell us that her mother had gone out? And where could she have gone,
except to meet M. de Boiscoran?”
He paused a moment.
“Oh, come, come!” said the physician, “you need not be afraid of me.”
“Well, it might possibly be, that, after the countess had left M. de
Boiscoran, Fate might have stepped in. Jacques has told us how the
letters which he was burning had suddenly blazed up, and with such
violence that he was frightened. Who can tell whether some burning
fragments may not have set a straw-rick on fire? You can judge
yourself. On the point of leaving the place, M. de Boiscoran sees this
beginning of a fire. He hastens to put it out. His efforts are
unsuccessful. The fire increases step by step: it lights up the whole
front of the chateau. At that moment Count Claudieuse comes out.
Jacques thinks he has been watched and detected; he sees his marriage
broken off, his life ruined, his happiness destroyed; he loses his
head, aims, fires, and flees instantly. And thus you explain his
missing the count, and also this fact which seemed to preclude the
idea of premeditated murder, that the gun was loaded with small-shot.”
“Great God!” cried the doctor.
“What, what have I said?”
“Take care never to repeat that! The suggestion you make is so
fearfully plausible, that, if it becomes known, no one will ever
believe you when you tell the real truth.”
“The truth? Then you think I am mistaken?”
“Most assuredly.”
Then fixing his spectacles on his nose, Dr. Seignebos added,–
“I never could admit that the countess should have fired at her
husband. I now see that I was right. She has not committed the crime
directly; but she has done it indirectly.”
“Oh!”
“She would not be the first woman who has done so. What I imagine is
this: the countess had made up her mind, and arranged her plan, before
meeting Jacques. The murderer was already at his post. If she had
succeeded in winning Jacques back, her accomplice would have put away
his gun, and quietly gone to bed. As she could not induce Jacques to
give up his marriage, she made a sign, and the fire was lighted, and
the count was shot.”
The young advocate did not seem to be fully convinced.
“In that case, there would have been premeditation,” he objected; “and
how, then, came the gun to be loaded with small-shot?”
“The accomplice had not sense enough to know better.”
Although he saw very well the doctor’s drift, M. Folgat started up,–
“What?” he said, “always Cocoleu?”
Dr. Seignebos tapped his forehead with the end of his finger, and
replied,–
“When an idea has once made its way in there, it remains fixed. Yes,
the countess has an accomplice; and that accomplice is Cocoleu; and,
if he has no sense, you see the wretched idiot at least carries his
devotion and his discretion very far.”
“If what you say is true, doctor, we shall never get the key of this
affair; for Cocoleu will never confess.”
“Don’t swear to that. There is a way.”
He was interrupted by the sudden entrance of his servant.
“Sir,” said the latter, “there is a gendarme below who brings you a
man who has to be sent to the hospital at once.”
“Show them up,” said the doctor.
“And, while the servant was gone to do his bidding, the doctor said,–
“And here is the way. Now mind!”
A heavy step was heard shaking the stairs; and almost immediately a
gendarme appeared, who in one hand held a violin, and with the other
aided a poor creature, who seemed unable to walk alone.
“Goudar!” was on M. Folgat’s lips.
It was Goudar, really, but in what a state! His clothes muddy, and
torn, pale, with haggard eyes, his beard and his lips covered with a
white foam.
“The story is this,” said the gendarme. “This individual was playing
the fiddle in the court of the barrack, and we were looking out of the
window, when all of a sudden he fell on the ground, rolled about,
twisted and writhed, while he uttered fearful howls, and foamed like a
mad dog. We picked him up; and I bring him to you.”
“Leave us alone with him,” said the physician.
The gendarme went out; and, as soon as the door was shut, Goudar cried
with a voice full of intense disgust,–
“What a profession! Just look at me! What a disgrace if my wife should
see me in this state! Phew!”
And, pulling a handkerchief from his pocket, he wiped his face, and
drew from his mouth a small piece of soap.
“But the point is,” said the doctor, “that you have played the
epileptic so well, that the gendarmes have been taken in.”
“A fine trick indeed, and very creditable.”
“An excellent trick, since you can now quite safely go to the
hospital. They will put you in the same ward with Cocoleu, and I shall
come and see you every morning. You are free to act now.”
“Never mind me,” said the detective. “I have my plan.”
Then turning to M. Folgat, he added,–
“I am a prisoner now; but I have taken my precautions. The agent whom
I have sent to England will report to you. I have, besides, to ask a
favor at your hands. I have written to my wife to send her letters to
you: you can send them to me by the doctor. And now I am ready to
become Cocoleu’s companion, and I mean to earn the house in Vine
Street.”
Dr. Seignebos signed an order of admission. He recalled the gendarme;
and, after having praised his kindness, he asked him to take “that
poor devil” to the hospital. When he was alone once more with M.
Folgat, he said,–
“Now, my dear friend, let us consult. Shall we speak of what Martha
has told us and of Goudar’s plan. I think not; for M. Galpin is
watching us; and, if a mere suspicion of what is going on reaches the
prosecution, all is lost. Let us content ourselves, then, with
reporting to Jacques your interview with the countess; and as to the
rest, Silence!”
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
