


There was nothing more to be done for the magistrate, the commonwealth
attorney, or the mayor. The doctor might assuredly have used more
polite language; but people were accustomed to his brutal ways; for it
is surprising with what readiness men are tolerated in France, under
the pretext that they are as they are, and that they must be taken as
they are. The three gentlemen, therefore, left the room, after having
bid farewell to the countess, and after having promised to send the
count news of all that might be discovered.
The fire was going out for want of fuel. A few hours had sufficed to
destroy all that the hard work and incessant cares of many years had
accomplished. This charming and much envied estate presented now
nothing but a few half calcined walls, heaps of black and gray ashes,
and still glowing timbers, from which columns of smoke were slowly
rising upward. Thanks to Capt. Parenteau, all that they had been able
to save had been carried to a distance, and safely stored away under
the shelter of the ruins of the old castle. There, furniture and other
articles were piled up pell-mell. There, carts and agricultural
machines were standing about, empty casks, and sacks of oats and rye.
There, also, the cattle were gathered, that had been drawn from their
stalls with infinite labor, and at great risk of life,–horses, oxen,
some sheep, and a dozen cows, who lowed piteously. Few of the people
had left as yet. With greater zeal than ever the firemen, aided by the
peasants, deluged the remains of the dwelling-house with water. They
had nothing to fear from the fire; but they desired to keep the bodies
of their unfortunate companions from being entirely consumed.
“What a terrible scourge fire is!” said M. Seneschal.
Neither M. Galpin nor the mayor made any answer. They also felt their
hearts oppressed by the sad sight before them, in spite of all the
intense excitement before; for a fire is nothing as long as the
feverish excitement, and the hope of saving something, continue to
keep us up, and as long as the red flames illumine the horizon; but
the next day, when all is over, then we realize the extent of the
misfortune.
The firemen recognized the mayor, and greeted him with cheers. He went
rapidly towards them; and, for the first time since the alarm had been
raised, the magistrate and the attorney were alone. They were standing
close by each other, and for a moment kept silent, while each one
tried to read in the other’s eyes the secret of his thoughts. At last
M. Daubigeon asked,–
“Well?”
M. Galpin trembled.
“This is a fearful calamity,” he said.
“What is your opinion?”
“Ah! do I know it myself? I have lost my head: the whole thing looks
to me like a nightmare.”
“You cannot really believe that M. de Boiscoran is guilty?”
“I believe nothing. My reason tells me he is innocent. I feel he must
be innocent; and yet I see terrible evidence rising against him.”
The attorney was overwhelmed.
“Alas!” he said, “why did you, contrary to everybody’s opinion, insist
upon examining Cocoleu, a poor idiotic wretch?”
But the magistrate remonstrated–
“You do not mean to reproach me, sir, for having followed the impulses
of my conscience?”
“I reproach you for nothing.”
“A horrible crime has been committed; and my duty compelled me to do
all that lies in the power of man to discover the culprit.”
“Yes; and the man who is accused of the crime is your friend, and only
yesterday you spoke of his friendship as your best chance of success
in life.”
“Sir?”
“Are you surprised to find me so well informed? Ah, you do not know
that nothing escapes the idle curiosity of a village. I know that your
dearest hope was to become a member of M. de Boiscoran’s family, and
that you counted upon him to back you in your efforts to obtain the
hand of one of his cousins.”
“I do not deny that.”
“Unfortunately, you have been tempted by the prestige you might gain
in a great and famous trial. You have laid aside all prudence; and
your projects are forgotten. Whether M. de Boiscoran is innocent or
guilty, his family will never forgive you your interference. If he is
guilty, they will blame you for having handed him over to justice: if
he is innocent, they will blame you even more for having suspected
him.”
M. Galpin hung his head as if to conceal his trouble. Then he asked,–
“And what would you do in my place?”
“I would withdraw from the case, although it is rather late.”
“If I did so, I should risk my career.”
“Even that would be better for you than to engage in an affair in
which you cannot feel the calmness nor the impartiality which are the
first and indispensable virtues of an upright magistrate.”
The latter was becoming impatient. He exclaimed,–
“Sir, do you think I am a man to be turned aside from my duty by
considerations of friendship or personal interest?”
“I said nothing of the kind.”
“Did you not see just now how I carried on the inquiry? Did you see me
start when Cocoleu first mentioned M. de Boiscoran’s name? If he had
denounced any one else, I should probably have let the matter rest
there. But precisely because M. de Boiscoran is a friend of mine, and
because I have great expectations from him, I have insisted and
persisted, and I do so still.”
The commonwealth attorney shrugged his shoulders.
“That is it exactly,” he said. “Because M. de Boiscoran is a friend of
yours, you are afraid of being accused of weakness; and you are going
to be hard, pitiless, unjust even, against him. Because you had great
expectations from him, you will insist upon finding him guilty. And
you call yourself impartial?”
M. Galpin assumed all his usual rigidity, and said solemnly,–
“I am sure of myself!”
“Have a care!”
“My mind is made up, sir.”
It was time for M. Seneschal to join them again: he returned,
accompanied by Capt. Parenteau.
“Well, gentlemen,” he asked, “what have you resolved?”
“We are going to Boiscoran,” replied the magistrate.
“What! Immediately?”
“Yes: I wish to find M. de Boiscoran in bed. I am so anxious about it,
that I shall do without my clerk.”
Capt. Parenteau bowed, and said,–
“Your clerk is here, sir: he was but just inquiring for you."
Thereupon he called out as loud as he could,–
“Mechinet, Mechinet!”
A small gray-haired man, jovial and cheerful, came running up, and at
once proceeded to tell at full length how a neighbor had told him what
had happened, and how the magistrate had left town, whereupon he,
also, had started on foot, and come after him as fast as he could.
“Now will you go to Boiscoran?” asked the mayor.
“I do not know yet. Mechinet will have to look for some conveyance.”
Quick like lightning, the clerk was starting off, when M. Seneschal
held him back, saying,–
“Don’t go. I place my horse and my carriage at your disposal. Any one
of these peasants can drive you. Capt. Parenteau and I will get into
some farmer’s wagon, and thus get back to Sauveterre; for we ought to
be back as soon as possible. I have just heard alarming news. There
may be some disorder. The peasant-women who attend the market have
brought in most exciting reports, and exaggerated the calamities of
last night. They have started reports that ten or twelve men have been
killed, and that the incendiary, M. de Boiscoran, has been arrested.
The crowd has gone to poor Guillebault’s widow; and there have been
demonstrations before the houses of several of the principal
inhabitants of Sauveterre.”
In ordinary times, M. Seneschal would not have intrusted his famous
horse, Caraby, for any thing in the world, to the hands of a stranger.
He considered it the best horse in the province. But he was evidently
terribly upset, and betrayed it in his manner, and by the very efforts
he made to regain his official dignity and self-possession.
He made a sign, and his carriage was brought up, all ready. But, when
he asked for somebody to drive, no one came forward. All these good
people who had spent the night abroad were in great haste to return
home, where their cattle required their presence. When young Ribot saw
the others hesitate, he said,–
“Well, I’ll drive the justice.”
And, taking hold of the whip and the reins, he took his seat on the
front-bench, while the magistrate, the commonwealth attorney, and the
clerk filled the vehicle.
“Above all, take care of Caraby,” begged M. Seneschal, who at the last
moment felt almost overcome with anxiety for his favorite.
“Don’t be afraid, sir,” replied the young man, as he started the
horse. “If I strike too hard, M. Mechinet will stop me.”
This Mechinet, the magistrate’s clerk, was almost a power in
Sauveterre; and the greatest personages there paid their court to him.
His official duties were of very humble nature, and ill paid; but he
knew how to eke out his income by other occupations, of which the
court took no notice; and these added largely both to his importance
in the community and to his modest income.
As he was a skilful lithographer, he printed all the visiting-cards
which the people of Sauveterre ordered at the principal printing-
office of Sauveterre, where “The Independent” was published. An able
accountant, he kept books and made up accounts for some of the
principal merchants in town. Some of the country people who were fond
of litigation came to him for legal advice; and he drew up all kinds
of law papers. For many years now, he had been director of the
firemen’s band, and manager of the Orpheon. He was a correspondent of
certain Paris societies, and thus obtained free admission to the
theatre not only, but also to the sacred precincts behind the scenes.
Finally he was always ready to give writing-lessons, French lessons to
little girls, or music-lessons on the flute and the horn, to amateurs.
These varied talents had drawn upon him the hostility of all the other
teachers and public servants of the community, especially that of the
mayor’s clerk, and the clerks of the bank and great institutions of
Sauveterre. But all these enemies he had gradually conquered by the
unmistakable superiority of his ability; so that they fell in with the
universal habit, and, when any thing special happened, said to each
other,–
“Let us go and consult Mechinet.”
He himself concealed, under an appearance of imperturbable good
nature, the ambition by which he was devoured: he wanted to become
rich, and to rise in the world. In fact, Mechinet was a diplomat,
working in secret, but as cunning as Talleyrand. He had succeeded
already in making himself the one great personage of Sauveterre. The
town was full of him; nothing was done without him; and yet he had not
an enemy in the place.
The fact is, people were afraid of him, and dreaded his terrible
tongue. Not that he had ever injured anybody, he was too wise for
that; but they knew the harm he might do, if he chose, as he was
master of every important secret in Sauveterre, and the best informed
man in town as regarded all their little intrigues, their private
foibles, and their dark antecedents.
This gave him quite an exceptional position. As he was unmarried, he
lived with his sisters, the Misses Mechinet, who were the best
dressmakers in town, and, moreover, devout members of all kinds of
religious societies. Through them he heard all that was going on in
society, and was able to compare the current gossip with what he heard
in court, or at the newspaper office. Thus he could say pleasantly,–
“How could any thing escape me, when I have the church and the press,
the court and the theatre, to keep me informed?”
Such a man would have considered himself disgraced if he had not known
every detail of M. de Boiscoran’s private affairs. He did not
hesitate, therefore, while the carriage was rolling along on an
excellent road, in the fresh spring morning, to explain to his
companions the “case,” as he called it, of the accused nobleman.
M. de Boiscoran, called Jacques by his friends, was rarely on his
estate, and then only staid a month or so there. He was living in
Paris, where his family owned a comfortable house in University
Street. His parents were still alive.
His father, the Marquis de Boiscoran, the owner of a large landed
estate, a deputy under Louis Philippe, a representative in 1848, had
withdrawn from public life when the Second Empire was established, and
spent, since that time, all his money, and all his energies, in
collecting rare old books, and especially costly porcelain, on which
he had written a monograph.
His mother, a Chalusse by birth, had enjoyed the reputation of being
one of the most beautiful and most gifted ladies at the court of the
Citizen King. At a certain period in her life, unfortunately, slander
had attacked her; and about 1845 or 1846, it was reported that she had
had a remarkable affair with a young lawyer of distinction, who had
since become one of the austerest and most renowned judges. As she
grew old, the marchioness devoted herself more and more to politics,
as other women become pious. While her husband boasted that he had not
read a newspaper for ten years, she had made her /salon/ a kind of
parliamentary centre, which had its influence on political affairs.
Although Jacques de Boiscoran’s parents were still alive, he possessed
a considerable fortune of his own–five or six thousand dollars a
year. This fortune, which consisted of the Chateau of Boiscoran, the
farms, meadows, and forests belonging to it, had been left to him by
one of his uncles, the oldest brother of his father, who had died a
widower, and childless, in 1868. M. de Boiscoran was at this moment
about twenty-six or twenty-seven years old, dark complexion, tall,
strong, well made, not exactly a handsome man, but having, what was
worth more, one of those frank, intelligent faces which prepossess one
at first sight.
His character was less well known at Sauveterre than his person. Those
who had had any business with him described him as an honorable,
upright man: his companions spoke of him as cheerful and gay, fond of
pleasure, and always in good humor. At the time of the Prussian
invasion, he had been made a captain of one of the volunteer companies
of the district. He had led his men bravely under fire, and conducted
himself so well on the battlefield, that Gen. Chanzy had rewarded him,
when wounded, with the cross of the legion of honor.
“And such a man should have committed such a crime at Valpinson,” said
M. Daubigeon to the magistrate. “No, it is impossible! And no doubt he
will very easily scatter all our doubts to the four winds.”
“And that will be done at once,” said young Ribot; “for here we are.”
In many of the provinces of France the name of /chateau/ is given to
almost any little country-house with a weathercock on its pointed
roof. But Boiscoran was a real chateau. It had been built towards the
end of the seventeenth century, in wretched taste, but massively, like
a fortress. Its position is superb. It is surrounded on all sides by
woods and forests; and at the foot of the sloping garden flows a
little river, merrily splashing over its pebbly bed, and called the
Magpie on account of its perpetual babbling.
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
