


“Have you heard the news?”
“No: what is it?”
“Dionysia de Chandore has been to see M. de Boiscoran in prison.”
“Is it possible?”
“Yes, indeed! Twenty people have seen her come back from there,
leaning on the arm of the older Miss Lavarande. She went in at ten
minutes past ten, and she did not come out till a quarter-past three.”
“Is the young woman mad?”
“And the aunt–what do you think of the aunt?”
“She must be as mad as the niece.”
“And M. de Chandore?”
“He must have lost his senses to allow such a scandal. But you know
very well, grandfather and aunts never had any will but Dionysia’s.”
“A nice training!”
“And nice fruits of such an education! After such a scandal, no man
will be bold enough to marry her.”
Such were the comments on Dionysia’s visit to Jacques, when the news
became known. It flew at once all over town. The ladies “in society"
could not recover from it; for people are exceedingly virtuous at
Sauveterre, and hence they claim the right of being exceedingly strict
in their judgment. There is no trifling permitted on the score of
propriety.
The person who defies public opinion is lost. Now, public opinion was
decidedly against Jacques de Boiscoran. He was down, and everybody was
ready to kick him.
“Will he get out of it?”
This problem, which was day by day discussed at the “Literary Club,"
had called forth torrents of eloquence, terrible discussions, and even
one or two serious quarrels, one of which had ended in a duel. But
nobody asked any longer,–
“Is he innocent?”
Dr. Seignebos’s eloquence, the influence of M. Seneschal, and the
cunning plots of Mechinet, had all failed.
“Ah, what an interesting trial it will be!” said many people, who were
all eagerness to know who would be the presiding judge, in order to
ask him for tickets of admission. Day by day the interest in the trial
became deeper; and all who were in any way connected with it were
watched with great curiosity. Everybody wanted to know what they were
doing, what they thought, and what they had said.
They saw in the absence of the Marquis de Boiscoran an additional
proof of Jacques’s guilt. The continued presence of M. Folgat also
created no small wonder. His extreme reserve, which they ascribed to
his excessive and ill-placed pride, had made him generally disliked.
And now they said,–
“He must have hardly any thing to do in Paris, that he can spend so
many months in Sauveterre.”
The editor of “The Sauveterre Independent” naturally found the affair
a veritable gold-mine for his paper. He forgot his old quarrel with
the editor of “The Impartial Journal,” whom he accused of Bonapartism,
and who retaliated by calling him a Communist. Each day brought, in
addition to the usual mention under the “local” head, some article on
the “Boiscoran Case.” He wrote,–
 “The health of Count C., instead of improving, is declining
  visibly. He used to get up occasionally when he first came to
  Sauveterre; and now he rarely leaves his bed. The wound in the
  shoulder, which at first seemed to be the least dangerous, has
  suddenly become much inflamed, owing to the tropical heat of the
  last days. At one time gangrene was apprehended, and it was feared
  that amputation would become necessary. Yesterday Dr. S. seemed to
  be much disturbed.
 “And, as misfortunes never come singly, the youngest daughter of
  Count C. is very ill. She had the measles at the time of the fire;
  and the fright, the cold, and the removal, have brought on a
  relapse, which may be dangerous.
 “Amid all these cruel trials, the Countess C. is admirable in her
  devotion, her courage, and her resignation. Whenever she leaves
  the bedside of her dear patients to pray at church for them, she
  is received with the most touching sympathy and the most sincere
  admiration by the whole population.”
“Ah, that wretch Boiscoran!” cried the good people of Sauveterre when
they read such an article.
The next day, they found this,–
 “We have sent to the hospital to inquire from the lady superior how
  the poor idiot is, who has taken such a prominent part in the
  bloody drama at Valpinson. His mental condition remains unchanged
  since he has been examined by experts. The spark of intelligence
  which the crime had elicited seems to be extinguished entirely and
  forever. It is impossible to obtain a word from him. He is,
  however, not locked up. Inoffensive and gentle, like a poor animal
  that has lost its master, he wanders mournfully through the courts
  and gardens of the hospital. Dr. S., who used to take a lively
  interest in him, hardly ever sees him now.
 “It was thought at one time, that C. would be summoned to give
  evidence in the approaching trial. We are informed by high
  authority, that such a dramatic scene must not be expected to take
  place. C. will not appear before the jury.”
“Certainly, Cocoleu’s deposition must have been an interposition of
Providence,” said people who were not far from believing that it was a
genuine miracle.
The next day the editor took M. Galpin in hand.
 “M. G., the eminent magistrate, is very unwell just now, and very
  naturally so after an investigation of such length and importance
  as that which preceded the Boiscoran trial. We are told that he
  only awaits the decree of the court, to ask for a furlough and to
  go to one of the rural stations of the Pyrenees.”
Then came Jacques’s turn,–
 “M. J. de B. stands his imprisonment better than could be expected.
  According to direct information, his health is excellent, and his
  spirits do not seem to have suffered. He reads much, and spends
  part of the night in preparing his defence, and making notes for
  his counsel.”
Then came, from day to day, smaller items,–
 “M. J. de B. is no longer in close confinement.”
Or,–
 “M. de B. had this morning an interview with his counsel, M. M.,
  the most eminent member of our bar, and M. F., a young but
  distinguished advocate from Paris. The conference lasted several
  hours. We abstain from giving details; but our readers will
  understand the reserve required in the case of an accused who
  insists upon protesting energetically that he is innocent.”
And, again,–
 “M. de B. was yesterday visited by his mother.”
Or, finally,–
 “We hear at the last moment that the Marchioness de B. and M.
  Folgat have left for Paris. Our correspondent in P. writes us that
  the decree of the court will not be delayed much longer.”
Never had “The Sauveterre Independent” been read with so much
interest. And, as everybody endeavored to be better informed than his
neighbor, quite a number of idle men had assumed the duty of watching
Jacques’s friends, and spent their days in trying to find out what was
going on at M. de Chandore’s house. Thus it came about, that, on the
evening of Dionysia’s visit to Jacques, the street was full of curious
people. Towards half-past ten, they saw M. de Chandore’s carriage come
out of the courtyard, and draw up at the door. At eleven o’clock M. de
Chandore and Dr. Seignebos got in, the coachman whipped the horse, and
they drove off.
“Where can they be going?” asked they.
They followed the carriage. The two gentlemen drove to the station.
They had received a telegram, and were expecting the return of the
marchioness and M. Folgat, accompanied, this time, by the old marquis.
They reached there much too soon. The local branch railway which goes
to Sauveterre is not famous for regularity, and still reminds its
patrons occasionally of the old habits of stage-coaches, when the
driver or the conductor had, at the last moment, to stop to pick up
something they had forgotten. At a quarter-past midnight the train,
which ought to have been there twenty minutes before, had not yet been
signalled. Every thing around was silent and deserted. Through the
windows the station-master might be seen fast asleep in his huge
leather chair. Clerks and porters all were asleep, stretched out on
the benches of the waiting-room. But people are accustomed to such
delays at Sauveterre; they are prepared for being kept waiting: and
the doctor and M. de Chandore were walking up and down the platform,
being neither astonished nor impatient at the irregularity. Nor would
they have been much surprised if they had been told that they were
closely watched all the time: they knew their good town. Still it was
so. Two curious men, more obstinate than the others, had jumped into
the omnibus which runs between the station and the town; and now,
standing a little aside, they said to each other,–
“I say, what can they be waiting for?”
At last towards one o’clock, a bell rang, and the station seemed to
start into life. The station-master opened his door, the porters
stretched themselves and rubbed their eyes, oaths were heard, doors
slammed, and the large hand-barrows came in sight.
Then a low thunder-like noise came nearer and nearer; and almost
instantly a fierce red light at the far end of the track shone out in
the dark night like a ball of fire. M. de Chandore and the doctor
hastened to the waiting-room.
The train stopped. A door opened, and the marchioness appeared,
leaning on M. Folgat’s arm. The marquis, a travelling-bag in hand,
followed next.
“That was it!” said the volunteer spies, who had flattened their noses
against the window-panes.
And, as the train brought no other passengers, they succeeded in
making the omnibus conductor start at once, eager as they were to
proclaim the arrival of the prisoner’s father.
The hour was unfavorable: everybody was asleep; but they did not give
up the hope of finding somebody yet at the club. People stay up very
late at the club, for there is play going on there, and at times
pretty heavy play: you can lose your five hundred francs quite readily
there. Thus the indefatigable news-hunters had a fair chance of
finding open ears for their great piece of news. And yet, if they had
been less eager to spread it, they might have witnessed, perhaps not
entirely unmoved, this first interview between M. de Chandore and the
Marquis de Boiscoran.
By a natural impulse they had both hastened forward, and shook hands
in the most energetic manner. Tears stood in their eyes. They opened
their lips to speak; but they said nothing. Besides, there was no need
of words between them. That close embrace had told Jacques’s father
clearly enough what Dionysia’s grandfather must have suffered. They
remained thus standing motionless, looking at each other, when Dr.
Seignebos, who could not be still for any length of time, came up, and
asked,–
“The trunks are on the carriage: shall we go?”
They left the station. The night was clear; and on the horizon, above
the dark mass of the sleeping town, there rose against the pale-blue
sky the two towers of the old castle, which now served as prison to
Sauveterre.
“That is the place where my Jacques is kept,” murmured the marquis.
“There my son is imprisoned, accused of horrible crimes.”
“We will get him out of it,” said the doctor cheerfully, as he helped
the old gentleman into the carriage.
But in vain did he try, during the drive, to rouse, as he called it,
the spirits of his companions. His hopes found no echo in their
distressed hearts.
M. Folgat inquired after Dionysia, whom he had been surprised not to
see at the station. M. de Chandore replied that she had staid at home
with the Misses Lavarande, to keep M. Magloire company; and that was
all.
There are situations in which it is painful to talk. The marquis had
enough to do to suppress the spasmodic sobs which now and then would
rise in his throat. He was upset by the thought that he was at
Sauveterre. Whatever may be said to the contrary, distance does not
weaken our emotions. Shaking hands with M. de Chandore in person had
moved him more deeply than all the letters he had received for a
month. And when he saw Jacques’s prison from afar, he had the first
clear notion of the horrible tortures endured by his son. The
marchioness was utterly exhausted: she felt as if all the springs in
her system were broken.
M. de Chandore trembled when he looked at them, and saw how they all
were on the point of succumbing. If they despaired, what could he hope
for,–he, who knew how indissolubly Dionysia’s fate in life was
connected with Jacques?
At length the carriage stopped before his house. The door opened
instantly, and the marchioness found herself in Dionysia’s arms, and
soon after comfortably seated in an easy-chair. The others had
followed her. It was past two o’clock; but every minute now was
valuable. Arranging his spectacles, Dr. Seignebos said,–
“I propose that we exchange our information. I, for my part, I am
still at the same point. But you know my views. I do not give them up.
Cocoleu is an impostor, and it shall be proved. I appear to notice him
no longer; but, in reality, I watch him more closely than ever.”
Dionysia interrupted him, saying,–
“Before any thing is decided, there is one fact which you all ought to
know. Listen.”
Pale like death, for it cost her a great struggle to reveal thus the
secret of her heart, but with a voice full of energy, and an eye full
of fire, she told them what she had already confessed to her
grandfather; viz., the propositions she had made to Jacques, and his
obstinate refusal to accede to them.
“Well done, madame!” said Dr. Seignebos, full of enthusiasm. “Well
done! Jacques is very unfortunate, and still he is to be envied.”
Dionysia finished her recital. Then, turning with a triumphant air to
M. Magloire, she added,–
“After that, is there any one yet who could believe that Jacques is a
vile assassin?”
The eminent advocate of Sauveterre was not one of those men who prize
their opinions more highly than truth itself.
“I confess,” he said, “that, if I were to go and see Jacques to-morrow
for the first time, I should not speak to him as I did before.”
“And I,” exclaimed the Marquis de Boiscoran,–"I declare that I answer
for my son as for myself, and I mean to tell him so to-morrow.”
Then turning towards his wife, and speaking so low, that she alone
could hear him, he added,–
“And I hope you will forgive me those suspicions which now fill me
with horror.”
But the marchioness had no strength left: she fainted, and had to be
removed, accompanied by Dionysia and the Misses Lavarande. As soon as
they were out of the room, Dr. Seignebos locked the door, rested his
elbow on the chimney, and, taking off his spectacles to wipe them,
said to M. Folgat,–
“Now we can speak freely. What news do you bring us?”
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
