


By this single phrase M. Galpin made himself master of the situation,
and reduced the doctor to an inferior position, in which, it is true,
he had the mayor and the commonwealth attorney to bear him company.
There was nothing now to be thought of, but the crime that had been
committed, and the judge who was to punish the author. But he tried in
vain to assume all the rigidity of his official air and that contempt
for human feelings which has made justice so hateful to thousands. His
whole being was impregnated with intense satisfaction, up to his
beard, cut and trimmed like the box-hedges of an old-fashioned garden.
“Well, doctor,” he asked, “first of all, have you any objection to my
questioning your patient?”
“It would certainly be better for him to be left alone,” growled Dr.
Seignebos. “I have made him suffer enough this last hour; and I shall
directly begin again cutting out the small pieces of lead which have
honeycombed his flesh. But if it must be"–
“It must be.”
“Well, then, make haste; for the fever will set in presently.”
M. Daubigeon could not conceal his annoyance. He called out,–
“Galpin, Galpin!”
The other man paid no attention. Having taken a note-book and a pencil
from his pocket, he drew up close to the sick man’s bed, and asked him
in an undertone,–
“Are you strong enough, count, to answer my questions?”
“Oh, perfectly!”
“Then, pray tell me all you know of the sad events of to-night.”
With the aid of his wife and Dr. Seignebos, the count raised himself
on his pillows, and began thus,–
“Unfortunately, the little I know will be of no use in aiding justice
to discover the guilty man. It may have been eleven o’clock, for I am
not even quite sure of the hour, when I had gone to bed, and just
blown out my candle: suddenly a bright light fell upon the window. I
was amazed, and utterly confused; for I was in that state of
sleepiness which is not yet sleep, but very much like it. I said to
myself, ’What can this be?’ but I did not get up: I only was roused by
a great noise, like the crash of a falling wall; and then I jumped out
of bed, and said to myself, ’The house is on fire!’ What increased my
anxiety was the fact, which I at once recollected, that there were in
the courtyard, and all around the house, some sixteen thousand bundles
of dry wood, which had been cut last year. Half dressed, I rushed
downstairs. I was very much bewildered, I confess, and could hardly
succeed in opening the outer door: still I did open it at last. But I
had barely put my foot on the threshold, when I felt in my right side,
a little above the hip, a fierce pain, and heard at the same time,
quite close to me, a shot.”
The magistrate interrupted him by a gesture.
“Your statement, count, is certainly remarkably clear. But there is
one point we must try to establish. Were you really fired at the
moment you showed yourself at the door?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Then the murderer must have been quite near on the watch. He must
have known that the fire would bring you out; and he was lying in wait
for you.”
“That was and still is my impression,” declared the count.
M. Galpin turned to M. Daubigeon.
“Then,” he said to him, “the murder is the principal fact with which
we have to do; and the fire is only an aggravating circumstance,–the
means which the criminal employed in order to succeed the better in
perpetrating his crime.”
Then, returning to the count, he said,–
“Pray go on.”
“When I felt I was wounded,” continued Count Claudieuse, “my first
impulse was instinctively to rush forward to the place from which the
gun seemed to have been fired at me. I had not proceeded three yards,
when I felt the same pain once more in the shoulder and in the neck.
This second wound was more serous than the first; for I lost my
consciousness, my head began to swim and I fell.”
“You had not seen the murderer?”
“I beg your pardon. At the moment when I fell, I thought I saw a man
rush forth from behind a pile of fagots, cross the courtyard, and
disappear in the fields.”
“Would you recognize him?”
“No.”
“But you saw how he was dressed: you can give me a description?”
“No, I cannot. I felt as if there was a veil before my eyes; and he
passed me like a shadow.”
The magistrate could hardly conceal his disappointment.
“Never mind,” he said, “we’ll find him out. But go on, sir.”
The count shook his head.
“I have nothing more to say,” he replied. “I had fainted; and when I
recovered my consciousness, some hours later, I found myself here
lying on this bed.”
M. Galpin noted down the count’s answers with scrupulous exactness:
when he had done, he asked again,–
“We must return to the details of the attack, and examine them
minutely. Now, however, it is important to know what happened after
you fell. Who could tell us that?”
“My wife, sir.”
“I thought so. The countess, no doubt, got up when you rose.”
“My wife had not gone to bed.”
The magistrate turned suddenly to the countess; and at a glance he
perceived that her costume was not that of a lady who had been
suddenly roused from slumber by the burning of her house.”
“I see,” he said to himself.
“Bertha,” the count went on to state, “our youngest daughter, who is
lying there on that bed, under the blanket, has the measles, and is
suffering terribly. My wife was sitting up with her. Unfortunately the
windows of her room look upon the garden, on the side opposite to that
where the fire broke out.”
“How, then, did the countess become award of the accident?” asked the
magistrate.
Without waiting for a more direct question, the countess came forward
and said,–
“As my husband has just told you, I was sitting up with my little
Bertha. I was rather tired; for I had sat up the night before also,
and I had begun to nod, when a sudden noise aroused me. I was not
quite sure whether I had really heard such a noise; but just then a
second shot was heard. I left the room more astonished than
frightened. Ah, sir! The fire had already made such headway, that the
staircase was as light as in broad day. I went down in great haste.
The outer door was open. I went out; and there, some five or six yards
from me, I saw, by the light of the flames, the body of my husband
lying on the ground. I threw myself upon him; but he did not even hear
me; his heart had ceased to beat. I thought he was dead; I called for
help; I was in despair.”
M. Seneschal and M. Daubigeon trembled with excitement.
“Well, very well!” said M. Galpin, with an air of satisfaction,–"very
well done!”
“You know,” continued the countess, “how hard it is to rouse country-
people. It seems to me I remained ever so long alone there, kneeling
by the side of my husband. At last the brightness of the fire awakened
some of the farm-hands, the workmen, and our servants. They rushed
out, crying, ’Fire!’ When they saw me, they ran up and helped me carry
my husband to a place of safety; for the danger was increasing every
minute. The fire was spreading with terrific violence, thanks to a
furious wind. The barns were one vast mass of fire; the outbuildings
were burning; the distillery was in a blaze; and the roof of the
dwelling-house was flaming up in various places. And there was not one
cool head among them all. I was so utterly bewildered, that I forgot
all about my children; and their room was already in flames, when a
brave, bold fellow rushed in, and snatched them from the very jaws of
death. I did not come to myself till Dr. Seignebos arrived, and spoke
to me words of hope. This fire will probably ruin us; but what matters
that, so long as my husband and my children are safe?”
Dr. Seignebos had more than once given utterance to his contemptuous
impatience: he did not appreciate these preliminary steps. The others,
however, the mayor, the attorney, and even the servants, had hardly
been able to suppress their excitement. He shrugged his shoulders, and
growled between his teeth,–
“Mere formalities! How petty! How childish!”
After having taken off his spectacles, wiped them and replaced them
twenty times, he had sat down at the rickety table in the corner of
the room, and amused himself with arranging the fifteen or twenty shot
he had extracted from the count’s wounds, in long lines or small
circles. But, when the countess uttered her last words, he rose, and,
turning to M. Galpin, said in a curt tone,–
“Now, sir, I hope you will let me have my patient again.”
The magistrate was not a little incensed: there was reason enough,
surely; and, frowning fiercely, he said,–
“I appreciate, sir, the importance of your duties; but mine are, I
think, by no means less solemn nor less urgent.”
“Oh!”
“Consequently you will be pleased, sir, to grant me five minutes
more.”
“Ten, if it must be, sir. Only I warn you that every minute henceforth
may endanger the life of my patient.”
They had drawn near to each other, and were measuring each other with
defiant looks, which betrayed the bitterest animosity. They would
surely not quarrel at the bedside of a dying man? The countess seemed
to fear such a thing; for she said reproachfully,–
“Gentlemen, I pray, gentlemen"–
Perhaps her intervention would have been of no avail, if M. Seneschal
and M. Daubigeon had not stepped in, each addressing one of the two
adversaries. M. Galpin was apparently the most obstinate of the two;
for, in spite of all, he began once more to question the count, and
said,–
“I have only one more question to ask you, sir: Where and how were you
standing, where and how do you think the murderer was standing, at the
moment when the crime was committed?”
“Sir,” replied the count, evidently with a great effort, “I was
standing, as I told you, on the threshold of my door, facing the
courtyard. The murderer must have been standing some twenty yards off,
on my right, behind a pile of wood.”
When he had written down the answer of the wounded man, the magistrate
turned once more to the physician, and said,–
“You heard what was said, sir. It is for you now to aid justice by
telling us at what distance the murderer must have been when he
fired.”
“I don’t guess riddles,” replied the physician coarsely.
“Ah, have a care, sir!” said M. Galpin. “Justice, whom I here
represent, has the right and the means to enforce respect. You are a
physician, sir; and your science is able to answer my question with
almost mathematical accuracy.”
The physician laughed, and said,–
“Ah, indeed! Science has reached that point, has it? Which science?
Medical jurisprudence, no doubt,–that part of our profession which is
at the service of the courts, and obeys the judges’ behests.”
“Sir!”
But the doctor was not the man to allow himself to be defeated a
second time. He went on coolly,–
“I know what you are going to say; there is no handbook of medical
jurisprudence which does not peremptorily settle the question you ask
me. I have studied these handbooks, these formidable weapons which you
gentlemen of the bar know so well how to handle. I know the opinions
of a Devergie and an Orfila, I know even what Casper and Tardieu, and
a host of others teach on that subject. I am fully aware that these
gentlemen claim to be able to tell you by the inch at what distance a
shot has been fired. But I am not so skilful. I am only a poor
country-practitioner, a simple healer of diseases. And before I give
an opinion which may cost a poor devil his life, innocent though he
be, I must have time to reflect, to consult data, and to compare other
cases in my practice.”
He was so evidently right in reality, if not in form, that even M.
Galpin gave way.
“It is merely as a matter of information that I request your opinion,
sir,” he replied. “Your real and carefully-considered professional
opinion will, of course, be given in a special statement.”
“Ah, if that is the case!”
“Pray, inform me, then unofficially, what you think of the nature of
the wounds of Count Claudieuse.”
Dr. Seignebos settled his spectacles ceremoniously on his nose, and
then replied,–
“My impression, so far as I am now able to judge, is that the count
has stated the facts precisely as they were. I am quite ready to
believe that the murderer was lying in ambush behind one of the piles
of wood, and at the distance which he has mentioned. I am also able to
affirm that the two shots were fired at different distances,–one much
nearer than the other. The proof of it lies in the nature of the
wounds, one of which, near the hip may be scientifically called"–
“But we know at what distance a ball is spent,” broke in M. Seneschal,
whom the doctor’s dogmatic tone began to annoy.
“Ah, do we know that, indeed? You know it, M. Seneschal? Well, I
declare I do not know it. To be sure, I bear in mind, what you seem to
forget, that we have no longer, as in former days, only three or four
kinds of guns. Did you think of the immense variety of fire-arms,
French and English, American and German, which are nowadays found in
everybody’s hands? Do you not see, you who have been a lawyer and a
magistrate, that the whole legal question will be based upon this
grave and all-important point?”
Thereupon the physician resumed his instruments, resolved to give no
other answer, and was about to go to work once more when fearful cries
were heard without; and the lawyers, the mayor, and the countess
herself, rushed at once to the door.
These cries were, unfortunately, not uttered without cause. The roof
of the main building had just fallen in, burying under its ruins the
poor drummer who had a few hours ago beaten the alarm, and one of the
firemen, the most respected carpenter in Sauveterre, and a father of
five children.
Capt. Parenteau seemed to be maddened by this disaster; and all vied
with each other in efforts to rescue the poor fellows, who were
uttering shrieks of horror that rose high above the crash of falling
timbers. But all their endeavors were unavailing. One of the gendarmes
and a farmer, who had nearly succeeded in reaching the sufferers,
barely escaped being burnt themselves, and were only rescued after
having been dangerously injured. Then only it seemed as if all became
fully aware of the abominable crime committed by the incendiary. Then
only the clouds of smoke and the columns of fire, which rose high into
the air, were accompanied by fierce cries of vengeance rising
heavenwards.
“Death to the incendiary! Death!”
At the moment M. Seneschal felt himself inspired with a sudden
thought. He knew how cautious peasants are, and how difficult it is to
make them tell what they know. He climbed, therefore, upon a heap of
fallen beams, and said in a clear, loud voice,–
“Yes, my friends, you are right: death to the incendiary! Yes, the
unfortunate victims of the basest of all crimes must be avenged. We
must find out the incendiary; we must! You want it to be done, don’t
you? Well, it depends only on you. There must be some one among you
who knows something about this matter. Let him come forward and tell
us what he has seen or heard. Remember that the smallest trifle may be
a clew to the crime. You would be as bad as the incendiary himself, if
you concealed him. Just think it over, consider.”
Loud voices were heard in the crowd; then suddenly a voice said,–
“There is one here who can tell.”
“Who?”
“Cocoleu. He was there from the beginning. It was he who went and
brought the children of the countess out of their room. What has
become of him?–Cocoleu, Cocoleu!”
One must have lived in the country, among these simple-minded
peasants, to understand the excitement and the fury of all these men
and women as they crowded around the ruins of Valpinson. People in
town do not mind brigands, in general: they have their gas, their
strong doors, and the police. They are generally little afraid of
fire. They have their fire-alarms; and at the first spark the neighbor
cries, “Fire!” The engines come racing up; and water comes forth as if
by magic. But it is very different in the country: here every man is
constantly under a sense of his isolation. A simple latch protects his
door; and no one watches over his safety at night. If a murderer
should attack him, his cries could bring no help. If fire should break
out, his house would be burnt down before the neighbors could reach
it; and he is happy who can save his own life and that of his family.
Hence all these good people, whom the mayor’s words had deeply
excited, were eager to find out the only man who knew anything about
this calamity, Cocoleu.
He was well known among them, and for many years.
There was not one among them who had not given him a piece of bread,
or a bowl of soup, when he was hungry; not one of them had ever
refused him a night’s rest on the straw in his barn, when it was
raining or freezing, and the poor fellow wanted a shelter.
For Cocoleu was one of those unfortunate beings who labor under a
grievous physical or moral deformity.
Some twenty years ago, a wealthy land-owner in Brechy had sent to the
nearest town for half a dozen painters, whom he kept at his house
nearly a whole summer, painting and decorating his newly-built house.
One of these men had seduced a girl in the neighborhood, whom he had
bewitched by his long white blouse, his handsome brown mustache, his
good spirits, gay songs, and flattering speeches. But, when the work
was done, the tempter had flown away with the others, without thinking
any more of the poor girl than of the last cigar which he had smoked.
And yet she was expecting a child. When she could no longer conceal
her condition, she was turned out of the house in which she had been
employed; and her family, unable to support themselves, drove her away
without mercy. Overcome with grief, shame, and remorse, poor Colette
wandered from farm to farm, begging, insulted, laughed at, beaten even
at times. Thus it came about, that in a dark wood, one dismal winter
evening, she gave life to a male child. No one ever understood how
mother and child managed to survive. But both lived; and for many a
year they were seen in and around Sauveterre, covered with rags, and
living upon the dear-bought generosity of the peasants.
Then the mother died, utterly forsaken by human help, as she had
lived. They found her body, one morning, in a ditch by the wayside.
The child survived alone. He was then eight years old, quite strong
and tall for his age. A farmer took pity on him, and took him home.
The little wretch was not fit for anything: he could not even keep his
master’s cows. During his mother’s lifetime, his silence, his wild
looks, and his savage appearance, had been attributed to his wretched
mode of life. But when people began to be interested in him, they
found out that his intellect had never been aroused. He was an idiot,
and, besides, subject to that terrible nervous affection which at
times shakes the whole body and disfigures the face by the violence of
uncontrollable convulsions. He was not a deaf-mute; but he could only
stammer out with intense difficulty a few disjointed syllables.
Sometimes the country people would say to him,–
“Tell us your name, and you shall have a cent.”
Then it took him five minutes’ hard work to utter, amid a thousand
painful contortions, the name of his mother.
“Co-co-co-lette.”
Hence came his name Cocoleu. It had been ascertained that he was
utterly unable to do anything; and people ceased to interest
themselves in his behalf. The consequence was, that he became a
vagabond as of old.
It was about this time that Dr. Seignebos, on one of his visits, met
him one day on the public road.
This excellent man had, among other extraordinary notions, the
conviction that idiocy is nothing more than a defective state of the
brains, which may be remedied by the use of certain well-known
substances, such as phosphorus, for instance. He lost no time in
seizing upon this admirable opportunity to test his theory. Cocoleu
was sent for, and installed in his house. He subjected him to a
treatment which he kept secret; and only a druggist at Sauveterre, who
was also well known as entertaining very extraordinary notions, knew
what had happened. At the end of eighteen months, Cocoleu had fallen
off terribly: he talked perhaps, a little more fluently; but his
intellect had not been perceptibly improved.
Dr. Seignebos was discouraged. He made up a parcel of things which he
had given to his patient, put it into his hands, pushed him out of his
door, and told him never to come back again.
The doctor had rendered Cocoleu a sad service. The poor idiot had lost
the habit of privation: he had forgotten how to go from door to door,
asking for alms; and he would have perished, if his good fortune had
not led him to knock at the door of the house at Valpinson.
Count Claudieuse and his wife were touched by his wretchedness, and
determined to take charge of him. They gave him a room and a bed at
one of the farmhouses; but they could never induce him to stay there.
He was by nature a vagabond; and the instinct was too strong for him.
In winter, frost and snow kept him in for a little while; but as soon
as the first leaves came out, he went wandering again through forest
and field, remaining absent often for weeks altogether.
At last, however, something seemed to have been aroused in him, which
looked like the instinct of a domesticated animal. His attachment to
the countess resembled that of a dog, even in the capers and cries
with which he greeted her whenever he saw her. Often, when she went
out, he accompanied her, running and frolicking around her just like a
dog. He was also very fond of little girls, and seemed to resent it
when he was kept from them: for people were afraid his nervous attacks
might affect the children.
With time he had also become capable of performing some simple
service. He could be intrusted with certain messages: he could water
the flowers, summon a servant, or even carry a letter to the post-
office at Brechy. His progress in this respect was so marked, that
some of the more cunning peasants began to suspect that Cocoleu was
not so “innocent,” after all, as he looked, and that he was cleverly
playing the fool in order to enjoy life easily.
“We have him at last,” cried several voices at once. “Here he is; here
he is!”
The crowd made way promptly; and almost immediately a young man
appeared, led and pushed forward by several persons. Cocoleu’s
clothes, all in disorder, showed clearly that he had offered a stout
resistance. He was a youth of about eighteen years, very tall, quite
beardless, excessively thin, and so loosely jointed, that he looked
like a hunchback. A mass of reddish hair came down his low, retreating
forehead. His small eyes, his enormous mouth bristling with sharp
teeth, his broad flat nose, and his immense ears, gave to his face a
strange idiotic expression, and to his whole appearance a most painful
brutish air.
“What must we do with him?” asked the peasants of the mayor.
“We must take him before the magistrate, my friends,” replied M.
Seneschal,–"down there in that cottage, where you have carried the
count.”
“And we’ll make him talk,” threatened his captors. “You hear! Go on,
quick!”
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
