


The railway which connects Sauveterre with the Orleans line enjoys a
certain celebrity on account of a series of utterly useless curves,
which defy all common sense, and which would undoubtedly be the source
of countless accidents, if the trains were not prohibited from going
faster than eight or ten miles an hour.
The depot has been built–no doubt for the greater convenience of
travellers–at a distance of two miles from town, on a place where
formerly the first banker of Sauveterre had his beautiful gardens. The
pretty road which leads to it is lined on both sides with inns and
taverns, on market-days full of peasants, who try to rob each other,
glass in hand, and lips overflowing with protestations of honesty. On
ordinary days even, the road is quite lively; for the walk to the
railway has become a favorite promenade. People go out to see the
trains start or come in, to examine the new arrivals, or to exchange
confidences as to the reasons why Mr. or Mrs. So-and-so have made up
their mind to travel.
It was nine o’clock in the morning when the train which brought the
marchioness and Manuel Folgat at last reached Sauveterre. The former
was overcome by fatigue and anxiety, having spent the whole night in
discussing the chances for her son’s safety, and was all the more
exhausted as the lawyer had taken care not to encourage her hopes.
For he also shared, in secret at least, M. Chapelain’s doubts. He,
also, had said to himself, that a man like M. de Boiscoran is not apt
to be arrested, unless there are strong reasons, and almost
overwhelming proofs of his guilt in the hands of the authorities.
The train was slackening speed.
“If only Dionysia and her father,” sighed the marchioness, “have
thought of sending a carriage to meet us.”
“Why so?” asked Manuel Folgat.
“Because I do not want all the world to see my grief and my tears.”
The young lawyer shook his head, and said,–
“You will certainly not do that, madame, if you are disposed to follow
my advice.”
She looked at him quite amazed; but he insisted.
“I mean you must not look as if you wished not to be seen: that would
be a great, almost irreparable mistake. What would they think if they
saw you in tears and great distress? They would say you were sure of
your son’s guilt; and the few who may still doubt will doubt no
longer. You must control public opinion from the beginning; for it is
absolute in these small communities, where everybody is under somebody
else’s immediate influence. Public opinion is all powerful; and say
what you will, it controls even the jurymen in their deliberations.”
“That is true,” said the marchioness: “that is but too true.”
“Therefore, madame, you must summon all your energy, conceal your
maternal anxiety in your innermost heart, dry your tears, and show
nothing but the most perfect confidence. Let everybody say, as he sees
you, ’No mother could look so who thinks her son guilty.’ “
The marchioness straightened herself, and said,–
“You are right, sir; and I thank you. I must try to impress public
opinion as you say; and, so far from wishing to find the station
deserted, I shall be delighted to see it full of people. I will show
you what a woman can do who thinks of her son’s life.”
The Marchioness of Boiscoran was a woman of rare power.
Drawing her comb from her dressing-case, she repaired the disorder of
her coiffure; with a few skilful strokes she smoothed her dress; her
features, by a supreme effort of will, resumed their usual serenity;
she forced her lips to smile without betraying the effort it cost her;
and then she said in a clear, firm voice,–
“Look at me, sir. Can I show myself now?”
The train stopped at the station. Manuel Folgat jumped out lightly;
and, offering the marchioness his hand to assist her, he said,–
“You will be pleased with yourself, madam. Your courage will not be
useless. All Sauveterre seems to be here.
This was more than half true. Ever since the night before, a report
had been current,–no one knew how it had started,–that the
“murderer’s mother,” as they charitably called her, would arrive by
the nine o’clock train; and everybody had determined to happen to be
at the station at that hour. In a place where gossip lives for three
days upon the last new dress from Paris, such an opportunity for a
little excitement was not to be neglected. No one thought for a moment
of what the poor old lady would probably feel upon being compelled
thus to face a whole town; for at Sauveterre curiosity has at least
the merit, that it is not hypocritical. Everybody is openly
indiscreet, and by no means ashamed of it. They place themselves right
in front of you, and look at you, and try to find out the secret of
your joy or your grief.
It must be borne in mind, however, that public opinion was running
strongly against M. de Boiscoran. If there had been nothing against
him but the fire at Valpinson, and the attempts upon Count Claudieuse,
that would have been a small matter. But the fire had had terrible
consequences. Two men had perished in it; and two others had been so
severely wounded as to put their lives in jeopardy. Only the evening
before, a sad procession had passed through the streets of Sauveterre.
In a cart covered with a cloth, and followed by two priests, the
almost carbonized remains of Bolton the drummer, and of poor
Guillebault, had been brought home. The whole city had seen the widow
go to the mayor’s office, holding in her arms her youngest child,
while the four others clung to her dress.
All these misfortunes were traced back to Jacques, who was loaded with
curses; and the people now thought of receiving his mother, the
marchioness, with fierce hootings.
“There she is, there she is!” they said in the crowd, when she
appeared in the station, leaning upon M. Folgat’s arm.
But they did not say another word, so great was their surprise at her
appearance. Immediately two parties were formed. “She puts a bold face
on it,” said some; while others declared, “She is quite sure of her
son’s innocence.”
At all events, she had presence of mind enough to see what an
impression she produced, and how well she had done to follow M.
Folgat’s advice. It gave her additional strength. As she distinguished
in the crowd some people whom she knew, she went up to them, and,
smiling, said,–
“Well, you know what has happened to us. It is unheard of! Here is the
liberty of a man like my son at the mercy of the first foolish notion
that enters the head of a magistrate. I heard the news yesterday by
telegram, and came down at once with this gentleman, a friend of ours,
and one of the first lawyers of Paris.”
M. Folgat looked embarrassed: he would have liked more considerate
words. Still he could not help supporting the marchioness in what she
had said.
“These gentlemen of the court,” he said in measured tones, “will
perhaps be sorry for what they have done.”
Fortunately a young man, whose whole livery consisted in a gold-laced
cap, came up to them at this moment.
“M. de Chandore’s carriage is here,” he said.
“Very well,” replied the marchioness.
And bowing to the good people of Sauveterre, who were quite dumfounded
by her assurance, she said,–
“Pardon me if I leave you so soon; but M. de Chandore expects us. I
shall, however, be happy to call upon you soon, on my son’s arm.”
The house of the Chandore family stands on the other side of the New-
Market Place, at the very top of the street, which is hardly more than
a line of steps, which the mayor persistently calls upon the municipal
council to grade, and which the latter as persistently refuse to
improve. The building is quite new, massive but ugly, and has at the
side a pretentious little tower with a peaked roof, which Dr.
Seignebos calls a perpetual menace of the feudal system.
It is true the Chandores once upon a time were great feudal lords, and
for a long time exhibited a profound contempt for all who could not
boast of noble ancestors and a deep hatred of revolutionary ideas. But
if they had ever been formidable, they had long since ceased to be so.
Of the whole great family,–one of the most numerous and most powerful
of the province,–only one member survived, the Baron de Chandore, and
a girl, his granddaughter, betrothed to Jacques de Boiscoran. Dionysia
was an orphan. She was barely three years old, when within five
months, she lost her father, who fell in a duel, and her mother, who
had not the strength to survive the man whom she had loved. This was
certainly for the child a terrible misfortune; but she was not left
uncared for nor unloved. Her grandfather bestowed all his affections
upon her; and the two sisters of her mother, the Misses Lavarande,
then already no longer young, determined never to marry, so as to
devote themselves exclusively to their niece. From that day the two
good ladies had wished to live in the baron’s house; but from the
beginning he had utterly refused to listen to their propositions,
asserting that he was perfectly able himself to watch over the child,
and wanted to have her all to himself. All he would grant was, that
the ladies might spend the day with Dionysia whenever they chose.
Hence arose a certain rivalry between the aunts and the grandfather,
which led both parties to most amazing exaggerations. Each one did
what could be done to engage the affections of the little girl; each
one was willing to pay any price for the most trifling caress. At five
years Dionysia had every toy that had ever been invented. At ten she
was dressed like the first lady of the land, and had jewelry in
abundance.
The grandfather, in the meantime, had been metamorphosed from head to
foot. Rough, rigid, and severe, he had suddenly become a “love of a
father.” The fierce look had vanished from his eyes, the scorn from
his lips; and both had given way to soft glances and smooth words. He
was seen daily trotting through the streets, and going from shop to
shop on errands for his grandchild. He invited her little friends,
arranged picnics for her, helped her drive her hoops, and if needs be,
led in a cotillion.
If Dionysia looked displeased, he trembled. If she coughed, he turned
pale. Once she was sick: she had the measles. He staid up for twelve
nights in succession, and sent to Paris for doctors, who laughed in
his face.
And yet the two old ladies found means to exceed his folly.
If Dionysia learned any thing at all, it was only because she herself
insisted upon it: otherwise the writing-master and the music-master
would have been sent away at the slightest sign of weariness.
Sauveterre saw it, and shrugged its shoulders.
“What a wretched education!” the ladies said. “Such weakness is
absolutely unheard of. They tender the child a sorry service.”
There was no doubt that such almost incredible spoiling, such blind
devotion, and perpetual worship, came very near making of Dionysia the
most disagreeable little person that ever lived. But fortunately she
had one of those happy dispositions which cannot be spoiled; and
besides, she was perhaps saved from the danger by its very excess. As
she grew older she would say with a laugh,–
“Grandpapa Chandore, my aunts Lavarande, and I, we do just what we
choose.”
That was only a joke. Never did a young girl repay such sweet
affection with rarer and nobler qualities.
She was thus leading a happy life, free from all care, and was just
seventeen years old, when the great event of her life took place. M.
de Chandore one morning met Jacques de Boiscoran, whose uncle had been
a friend of his, and invited him to dinner. Jacques accepted the
invitation, and came. Dionysia saw him, and loved him.
Now, for the first time in her life, she had a secret unknown to
Grandpapa Chandore and to her aunts; and for two years the birds and
the flowers were the only confidants of this love of hers, which grew
up in her heart, sweet like a dream, idealized by absence, and fed by
memory.
For Jacques’s eyes remained blind for two years.
But the day on which they were opened he felt that his fate was
sealed. Nor did he hesitate a moment; and in less than a month after
that, the Marquis de Boiscoran came down to Sauveterre, and in all
form asked Dionysia’s hand for his son.
Ah! that was a heavy blow for Grandpapa Chandore.
He had, of course, often thought of the future marriage of his
grandchild; he had even at times spoken of it, and told her that he
was getting old, and should feel very much relieved when he should
have found her a good husband. But he talked of it as a distant thing,
very much as we speak of dying. M. de Boiscoran brought his true
feelings out. He shuddered at the idea of giving up Dionysia, of
seeing her prefer another man to himself, and of loving her children
best of all. He was quite inclined to throw the ambassador out of the
window.
Still he checked his feelings, and replied that he could give no reply
till he had consulted his granddaughter.
Poor grandpapa! At the very first words he uttered, she exclaimed,–
“Oh, I am so happy! But I expected it.”
M. de Chandore bent his head to conceal a tear which burned in his
eyes. Then he said very low,–
“Then the thing is settled.”
At once, rather comforted by the joy that was sparkling in his
grandchild’s eyes, he began reproaching himself for his selfishness,
and for being unhappy, when his Dionysia seemed to be so happy.
Jacques had, of course, been allowed to visit the house as a lover;
and the very day before the fire at Valpinson, after having long and
carefully counted the days absolutely required for all the purchases
of the trousseau, and all the formalities of the event, the wedding-
day had been finally fixed.
Thus Dionysia was struck down in the very height of her happiness,
when she heard, at the same time, of the terrible charges brought
against M. de Boiscoran, and of his arrest.
At first, thunderstruck, she had lain nearly ten minutes unconscious
in the arms of her aunts, who, like the grandfather, were themselves
utterly overcome with terror. But, as soon as she came to, she
exclaimed,–
“Am I mad to give way thus? Is it not evident that he is innocent?”
Then she had sent her telegram to the marquis, knowing well, that,
before taking any measures, it was all important to come to an
understanding with Jacques’s family. Then she had begged to be left
alone; and she had spent the night in counting the minutes that must
pass till the hour came when the train from Paris would bring her
help.
At eight o’clock she had come down to give orders herself that a
carriage should be sent to the station for the marchioness, adding
that they must drive back as fast as they could. Then she had gone
into the sitting-room to join her grandfather and her aunts. They
talked to her; but her thoughts were elsewhere.
At last a carriage was heard coming up rapidly, and stopping before
the house. She got up, rushed into the hall, and cried,–
“Here is Jacques’s mother!”
Continue...

This eBook of “Within an Inch of His Life” by Emile Gaboriau belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
