


MAKING LIGHT OF CHRIST AND SALVATION
Richard Baxter, was born in 1615, at Rowton, near Shrewsbury, in
England. After surmounting great difficulties in securing an education
for the ministry he was ordained in 1638, in the Church of England,
his first important charge being that of Kidderminster, where he
established his reputation as a powerful evangelical and controversial
preacher. Altho opposed to Cromwell’s extreme acts, he became a
chaplain in the army of the Rebellion. His influence was all on the
side of peace, however, and at the Restoration he was appointed
chaplain to Charles II.
Baxter left the Church of England on the promulgation of the Act of
Uniformity, and in 1662 retired to Acton in Middlesex, where he wrote
most of his works. The Acts of Indulgence enabled him to return to
London, where he remained until Judge Jeffreys imprisoned and fined
him on a charge of sedition. He was the most prolific writer and
controversialist of his day among nonconformists. Baxter left only two
works which seem likely to be of ever fresh interest, “The Saint’s
Rest” and “Calls to the Unconverted.” He died in London in 1691.
1615-1691
MAKING LIGHT OF CHRIST AND SALVATION
But they made light of it.–Matt, xxii., 5.
Beloved hearers; the office that God hath called us to is, by
declaring the glory of His grace, to help under Christ to the saving
of men’s souls. I hope you think not that I come hither to-day on
another errand. The Lord knows I had not set a foot out-of-doors but
in hope to succeed in this work for your souls. I have considered, and
often considered, what is the matter that so many thousands should
perish when God hath done so much for their salvation; and I find this
that is mentioned in my text is the cause. It is one of the wonders of
the world, that when God hath so loved the world as to send His Son,
and Christ hath made a satisfaction by His death sufficient for them
all, and offereth the benefits of it so freely to them, even without
money or price, that yet the most of the world should perish; yea,
the most of those that are thus called by His Word! Why, here is the
reason–when Christ hath done all this, men make light of it. God hath
showed that He is not unwilling; and Christ hath showed that He is not
unwilling that men should be restored to God’s favor and be saved; but
men are actually unwilling themselves. God takes not pleasure in the
death of sinners, but rather that they return and live. But men take
such pleasure in sin that they will die before they will return. The
Lord Jesus was content to be their physician, and hath provided them a
sufficient plaster of His own blood: but if men make light of it,
and will not apply it, what wonder if they perish after all? This
Scripture giveth us the reason of their perdition. This, sad
experience tells us, the most of the world is guilty of. It is a most
lamentable thing to see how most men do spend their care, their time,
their pains, for known vanities, while God and glory are cast aside;
that He who is all should seem to them as nothing, and that which
is nothing should seem to them as good as all; that God should set
mankind in such a race where heaven or hell is their certain end, and
that they should sit down, and loiter, or run after the childish toys
of the world, and so much forget the prize that they should run for.
Were it but possible for one of us to see the whole of this business
as the all-seeing God doth; to see at one view both heaven and hell,
which men are so near; and see what most men in the world are minding,
and what they are doing every day, it would be the saddest sight that
could be imagined. Oh, how should we marvel at their madness, and
lament their self-delusion! O poor distracted world! what is it you
run after? and what is it that you neglect? If God had never told them
what they were sent into the world to do, or whither they were
going, or what was before them in another world, then they had been
excusable; but He hath told them over and over, till they were weary
of it. Had He left it doubtful, there had been some excuse; but it is
His sealed word, and they profess to believe it, and would take it ill
of us if we should question whether they do believe it or not.
Beloved, I come not to accuse any of you particularly of this crime;
but seeing it is the commonest cause of men’s destruction, I suppose
you will judge it the fittest matter for our inquiry, and deserving
our greatest care for the cure. To which end I shall, (1) endeavor the
conviction of the guilty; (2) shall give them such considerations as
may tend to humble and reform them; (3) I shall conclude with such
direction as may help them that are willing to escape the destroying
power of this sin.
And for the first, consider: It is the case of most sinners to think
themselves freest from those sins that they are most enslaved to; and
one reason why we can not reform them is because we can not convince
them of their guilt. It is the nature of sin so far to blind and
befool the sinner, that he knoweth not what he doth, but thinketh he
is free from it when it reigneth in him, or when he is committing it:
it bringeth men to be so much unacquainted with themselves that they
know not what they think, or what they mean and intend, nor what they
love or hate, much less what they are habituated and disposed to.
They are alive to sin, and dead to all the reason, consideration,
and resolution that should recover them, as if it were only by their
sinning that we must know that they are alive. May I hope that you
that hear me to-day are but willing to know the truth of your case,
and then I shall be encouraged to proceed to an inquiry. God will
judge impartially; why should not we do so? Let me, therefore, by
these following questions, try whether none of you are slighters
of Christ and your own salvation. And follow me, I beseech you, by
putting them close to your own hearts, and faithfully answering them.
Things that men highly value will be remembered; they will be matter
of their freest and sweetest thoughts. This is a known case.
Do not those then make light of Christ and salvation that think of
them so seldom and coldly in comparison of other things? Follow thy
own heart, man, and observe what it daily runneth after; and then
judge whether it make not light of Christ.
We can not persuade men to one hour’s sober consideration what they
should do for an interest in Christ, or in thankfulness for His love,
and yet they will not believe that they make light of Him.
Things that we highly value will be matter of our discourse; the
judgment and heart will command the tongue. Freely and delightfully
will our speech run after them. This also is a known case.
Do not those men make light of Christ and salvation that shun the
mention of His name, unless it be in a vain or sinful use? Those that
love not the company where Christ and salvation is much talked of, but
think it troublesome, precise discourse: that had rather hear some
merry jests, or idle tales, or talk of their riches or business in the
world; when you may follow them from morning to night, and scarce have
a savory word of Christ; but perhaps some slight and weary mention
of Him sometimes; judge whether these make not light of Christ and
salvation. How seriously do they talk of the world and speak of
vanity! but how heartlessly do they make mention of Christ and
salvation!
The things that we highly value we would secure the possession of,
and therefore would take any convenient course to have all doubts and
fears about them well resolved. Do not those men then make light
of Christ and salvation that have lived twenty or thirty years in
uncertainty whether they have any part in these or not, and yet never
seek out for the right resolution of their doubts? Are all that hear
me this day certain they shall be saved? Oh, that they were! Oh, had
you not made light of salvation, you could not so easily bear such
doubting of it; you could not rest till you had made it sure, or done
your best to make it sure. Have you nobody to inquire of, that might
help you in such a work? Why, you have ministers that are purposely
appointed to that office. Have you gone to them, and told them the
doubtfulness of your case, and asked their help in the judging of your
condition? Alas! ministers may sit in their studies from one year to
another, before ten persons among a thousand will come to them on such
an errand! Do not these make light of Christ and salvation? When the
gospel pierceth the heart indeed, they cry out, “Men and brethren,
what shall we do to be saved?” Trembling and astonished, Paul cries
out, “Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do?” And so did the convinced
Jews to Peter. But when hear we such questions?
The things that we value do deeply affect us, and some motions will be
in the heart according to our estimation of them. O sirs, if men made
not light of these things, what working would there be in the hearts
of all our hearers! What strange affections would it raise in them to
hear of the matters of the world to come! How would their hearts melt
before the power of the gospel! What sorrow would be wrought in the
discovery of their sins! What astonishment at the consideration of
their misery! What unspeakable joy at the glad tidings of salvation by
the blood of Christ! What resolution would be raised in them upon the
discovery of their duty! Oh, what hearers should we have, if it were
not for this sin! Whereas now we are liker to weary them, or preach
them asleep with matters of this unspeakable moment. We talk to them
of Christ and salvation till we make their heads ache: little would
one think by their careless carriage that they heard and regarded what
we said, or tho we spoke at all to them.
Our estimation of things will be seen in the diligence of our
endeavors. That which we highliest value, we shall think no pains
too great to obtain. Do not those men then make light of Christ and
salvation that think all too much that they do for them; that murmur
at His service, and think it too grievous for them to endure? that ask
His service as Judas of the ointment. What need this waste? Can not
men be saved without so much ado? This is more ado than needs. For the
world they will labor all the day, and all their lives; but for Christ
and salvation they are afraid of doing too much. Let us preach to them
as long as we will, we can not bring them to relish or resolve upon a
life of holiness. Follow them to their houses, and you shall not hear
them read a chapter, nor call upon God with their families once a day;
nor will they allow Him that one day in seven which He hath separated
to His service. But pleasure, or worldly business, or idleness, must
have a part And many of them are so far hardened as to reproach them
that will not be as mad as themselves. And is not Christ worth the
seeking? Is not everlasting salvation worth more than all this? Doth
not that soul make light of all these that thinks his ease more worth
than they? Let but common sense judge.
That which we most highly value, we think we can not buy too dear.
Christ and salvation are freely given, and yet the most of men go
without them because they can not enjoy the world and them together.
They are called but to part with that which would hinder them Christ,
and they will not do it. They are called but to give God His own, and
to resign all to His will, and let go the profits and pleasures of
this world, when they must let go either Christ or them, and they will
not. They think this too dear a bargain, and say they can not spare
these things: they must hold their credit with men; they must look
to their estates: how shall they live else? They must have their
pleasure, whatsoever becomes of Christ and salvation: as if they could
live without Christ better than without these; as if they were afraid
of being losers by Christ, or could make a saving match by losing
their souls to gain the world. Christ hath told us over and over that
if we will not forsake all for Him we can not be His disciples. Far
are these men from forsaking all, and yet will needs think that they
are His disciples indeed.
That which men highly esteem, they would help their friends to as well
as themselves. Do not those men make light of Christ and salvation
that can take so much care to leave their children portions in the
world, and do so little to help them to heaven? that provide outward
necessaries so carefully for their families, but do so little to the
saving of their souls? Their neglected children and friends will
witness that either Christ, or their children’s souls, or both, were
made light of.
That which men highly esteem, they will so diligently seek after that
you may see it in the success, if it be a matter within their reach.
You may see how many make light of Christ, by the little knowledge
they have of Him, and the little communion with Him, and the
communication from Him; and the little, yea, none, of His special
grace in them. Alas! how many ministers can speak it to the sorrow of
their hearts, that many of their people know almost nothing of Christ,
tho they hear of Him daily! Nor know they what they must do to be
saved: if we ask them an account of these things, they answer as if
they understood not what we say to them, and tell us they are no
scholars, and therefore think they are excusable for their ignorance.
Oh, if these men had not made light of Christ and their salvation, but
had bestowed but half as much pains to know and enjoy Him as they have
done to understand the matters of their trades and callings in the
world, they would not have been so ignorant as they are: they make
light of these things, and therefore will not be at the pains to study
or learn them. When men that can learn the hardest trade in a few
years have not learned a catechism, nor how to understand their
creed, under twenty or thirty years’ preaching, nor can abide to
be questioned about such things, doth not this show that they have
slighted them in their hearts? How will these despisers of Christ and
salvation be able one day to look Him in the face, and to give an
account of these neglects?
Thus much I have spoken in order to your conviction. Do not some of
your consciences by this time smite you, and say, I am the man that
have made light of my salvation? If they do not, it is because you
make light of it still, for all that is said to you. But because, if
it be the will of the Lord, I would fain have this damning distemper
cured, and am loath to leave you in such a desperate condition, if I
knew how to remedy it, I will give you some considerations, which may
move you, if you be men of reason and understanding, to look better
about you; and I beseech you to weigh them, and make use of them as we
go, and lay open your hearts to the work of grace, and sadly bethink
you what a case you are in, if you prove such as make light of Christ.
Consider, 1. Thou makest light of Him that made not light of thee who
deserve it. Thou wast worthy of nothing but contempt. As a man, what
art thou but a worm to God? As a sinner, thou art far viler than
a toad: yet Christ was so far from making light of thee and thy
happiness, that He came down into the flesh, and lived a life of
suffering, and offered Himself a sacrifice to the justice which thou
hadst provoked, that thy miserable soul might have a remedy. It is no
less than miracles of love and mercy that He hath showed to us; and
yet shall we slight them after all?
Angels admire them, whom they less concern, and shall redeemed sinners
make light of them? What barbarous, yea, devilish–yea, worse than
devilish–ingratitude is this! The devils never had a savior offered
to them; but thou hast, and dost thou yet make light of Him?
2. Consider, the work of man’s salvation by Jesus Christ is the
masterpiece of all the works of God, wherein He would have His love
and mercy to be magnified. As the creation declareth. His goodness and
power, so doth redemption His goodness and mercy; He hath contrived
the very frame of His worship so that it shall much consist in the
magnifying of this work; and, after all this, will you make light of
it? “His name is wonderful.” “He did the work that none could do."
“Greater love could none show than His.” How great was the evil and
misery that He delivered us from! the good procured from us! All are
wonders, from His birth to His ascension; from our new birth to our
glorification, all are wonders of matchless mercy–and yet do you make
light of them?
3. You make light of matters of greatest excellency and moment in the
world: you know not what it is that you slight: had you well known,
you would not have done it. As Christ said to the woman of Samaria,
“Hadst thou known who it is that speaketh to thee, thou wouldst have
asked of Him the waters of life"; had they known they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory. So, had you known what Christ is, you
would not have made light of Him; had you been one day in heaven, and
but seen what they possess, and seen also what miserable souls must
endure that are shut out, you would never sure have made so light of
Christ.
O sirs, it is no trifles or jesting matters that the gospel speaks of.
I must needs profess to you that when I have the most serious thoughts
of these things myself, I am ready to marvel that such amazing matters
do not overwhelm the souls of men; that the greatness of the subject
doth not so overmatch our understandings and affections as even to
drive men besides themselves, but that God hath always somewhat
allayed it by the distance; much more that men should be so blockish
as to make light of them. O Lord, that men did but know what
everlasting glory and everlasting torments are: would they then hear
us as they do? would they read and think of these things as they do?
I profess I have been ready to wonder, when I have heard such
weighty things delivered, how people can forbear crying out in the
congregation; much more how they can rest till they have gone to their
ministers, and learned what they should do to be saved, that this
great business might be put out of doubt. Oh, that heaven and hell
should work no more on men! Oh, that everlastingness work no more! Oh,
how can you forbear when you are alone to think with yourselves what
it is to be everlastingly in joy or in torment! I wonder that such
thoughts do not break your sleep, and that they come not in your mind
when you are about your labor! I wonder how you can almost do anything
else! how you can have any quietness in your minds! How you can eat,
or drink, or rest, till you have got some ground of everlasting
consolations! Is that a man or a corpse that is not affected with
matters of this moment? that can be readier to sleep than to tremble
when he heareth how he must stand at the bar of God? Is that a man or
a clod of clay that can rise or lie down without being deeply affected
with his everlasting estate? that can follow his worldly business and
make nothing of the great business of salvation or damnation; and that
when they know it is hard at hand? Truly, sirs, when I think of the
weight of the matter, I wonder at the very best of God’s saints upon
the earth that they are no better, and do no more in so weighty a
case. I wonder at those whom the world accounteth more holy than
needs, and scorns for making too much ado, that they can put off
Christ and their souls with so little; that they pour not out their
souls in every supplication; that they are not more taken up with God;
that their thoughts be more serious in preparation for their account.
I wonder that they be not a hundred times more strict in their lives,
and more laborious and unwearied in striving for the crown, than they
are. And for myself, as I am ashamed of my dull and careless heart,
and of my slow and unprofitable course of life, so the Lord knows I am
ashamed of every sermon that I preach: when I think what I have been
speaking of, and who sent me, and that men’s salvation or damnation is
so much concerned in it, I am ready to tremble lest God should judge
me as a slighter of His truth and the souls of men, and lest in the
best sermon I should be guilty of their blood. Methinks we should not
speak a word to men in matters of such consequence without tears, or
the greatest earnestness that possibly we can: were not we too much
guilty of the sin which we reprove, it would be so. Whether we are
alone, or in company, methinks our end, and such an end, should still
be in our mind, and before our eyes; and we should sooner forget
anything, and set light by anything, or by all things, than by this.
Consider, 4. Who is it that sends this weighty message to you? Is it
not God Himself? Shall the God of heaven speak and men make light of
it? You would not slight the voice of an angel or a prince.
5. Whose salvation is it that you make light of? Is it not your own?
Are you no more near or dear to yourselves than to make light of your
own happiness or misery? Why, sirs, do you not care whether you be
saved or damned? Is self-love lost? are you turned your own enemies?
As he that slighteth his meat doth slight his life, so if you slight
Christ, whatsoever you may think, you will find it was your own
salvation that you slighted. Hear what He saith, “All they that hate
me love death.”
6. Your sin is greater, in that you profess to believe the gospel
which you make so light of. For a profest infidel to do it that
believes not that ever Christ died, or rose again, or doth not believe
that there is a heaven or hell, this were no such marvel–but for you,
that make it your creed, and your very religion, and call yourselves
Christians, and have been baptized into this faith, and seemed to
stand to it, this is the wonder, and hath no excuse. What! believe
that you shall live in endless joy or torment, and yet make no more of
it to escape torment, and obtain that joy! What! believe that God will
shortly judge you, and yet make no preparation for it! Either say
plainly, I am no Christian, I do not believe these wonderful things,
I will believe nothing but what I see, or else let your hearts be
affected with your belief, and live as you say you do believe. What do
you think when you repeat the creed, and mention Christ’s judgment and
everlasting life?
7. What are these things you set so much by as to prefer them before
Christ and the saving of your soul? Have you found a better friend, a
greater and a surer happiness than this? Good Lord! what dung is it
that men make so much of, while they set so light by everlasting
glory? What toys are they that are daily taken up with, while matters
of life and death are neglected? Why, sirs, if you had every one a
kingdom in your hopes, what were it in comparison of the everlasting
kingdom? I can not but look upon all the glory and dignity of this
world, lands and lordships, crowns and kingdoms, even as on some
brain-sick, beggarly fellow, that borroweth fine clothes, and plays
the part of a king or a lord for an hour on a stage, and then comes
down, and the sport is ended, and they are beggars again. Were it not
for God’s interest in the authority of magistrates, or for the service
they might do Him, I should judge no better of them. For, as to their
own glory, it is but a smoke: what matter is it whether you live poor
or rich, unless it were a greater matter to die rich than it is? You
know well enough that death levels all. What matter is it at judgment,
whether you be to answer for the life of a rich man or a poor man? Is
Dives, then, any better than Lazarus? Oh, that men knew what poor,
deceiving shadow they grasp at while they let go the everlasting
substance! The strongest, and richest, and most voluptuous sinners do
but lay in fuel for their sorrows, while they think they are gathering
together a treasure. Alas! they are asleep, and dream that they are
happy; but when they awake, what a change will they find! Their crown
is made of thorns; their pleasure hath such a sting as will stick in
the heart through all eternity, except unfeigned repentance do prevent
it. Oh, how sadly will these wretches be convinced ere long, what a
foolish bargain they made in selling Christ and their salvation for
these trifles! Let your farms and merchandise, then, save you, if they
can, and do that for you that Christ would have done. Cry then to
Baal, to save thee! Oh, what thoughts have drunkards and adulterers,
etc., of Christ, that will not part with the basest lust for Him? “For
a piece of bread,” saith Solomon, “such men do transgress.”
8. To set so light by Christ and salvation is a certain mark that thou
hast no part in them, and if thou so continue, that Christ will set
as light by thee: “Those that honor him he will honor, and those that
despise him shall be lightly esteemed.” Thou wilt feel one day that
thou canst not live without Him; thou wilt confess then thy need of
Him; and then thou mayest go look for a savior where thou wilt; for He
will be no Savior for thee hereafter, that wouldst not value Him, and
submit to Him here. Then who will prove the loser by thy contempt? Oh,
what a thing will it be for a poor miserable soul to cry to Christ for
help in the day of extremity, and to hear so sad an answer as this!
Thou didst set lightly by Me and My law in the day of thy prosperity,
and I will now set as light by thee in the day of thy adversity.
Read Prov. i., 24, to the end. Thou that, as Esau, didst sell thy
birthright for a mess of pottage, shalt then find no place for
repentance, tho thou seek it with tears. Do you think that Christ shed
His blood to save them that continue to make light of it? and to save
them, that value a cup of drink or a lust before His salvation? I tell
you, sirs, tho you set so light by Christ and salvation, God doth not
so: He will not give them on such terms as these: He valueth the blood
of His Son, and the everlasting glory, and He will make you value them
if ever you have them. Nay, this will be thy condemnation, and leaveth
no remedy. All the world can not save him that sets lightly by Christ.
None of them shall taste of His supper. Nor can you blame Him to deny
you what you made light of yourselves. Can you find fault if you miss
of the salvation which you slighted?
9. The time is near when Christ and salvation will not be made light
of as now they are. When God hath shaken those careless souls out of
their bodies, and you must answer for all your sins in your own name,
oh, then, what would you not give for a Savior! When a thousand bills
shall be brought in against you, and none to relieve you, then you
will consider, Oh! Christ would now have stood between me and the
wrath of God; had I not despised Him, He would have answered all.
When you see the world hath left you, and your companions in sin have
deceived themselves and you, and all your merry days are gone, then
what would you not give for that Christ and salvation that now you
account not worth your labor! Do you think that when you see the
judgment seat, and you are doomed to everlasting perdition for your
wickedness, that you should then make as light of Christ as now? Why
will you not judge now as you know you shall judge then? Will He then
be worth ten thousand worlds? And is He not now worth your highest
estimation and dearest affection?
10. God will not only deny thee that salvation thou madest light of,
but He will take from thee all that which thou didst value before it:
he that most highly esteems Christ shall have Him, and the creatures,
so far as they are good here, and Him without the creature hereafter,
because the creature is not useful; and he that sets more by the
creature than by Christ, shall have some of the creature without
Christ here, and neither Christ nor it hereafter.
So much of these considerations, which may show the true face of this
heinous sin.
What think you now, friends, of this business? Do you not see by this
time what a case that soul is in that maketh light of Christ and
salvation? What need then is there that you should take heed lest this
should prove your own case! The Lord knows it is too common a case.
Whoever is found guilty at the last of this sin, it were better for
that man he had never been born. It were better for him he had been a
Turk or Indian, that never had heard the name of a Savior, and that
never had salvation offered to him: for such men “have no cloak for
their sin.” Besides all the rest of their sins, they have this killing
sin to answer for, which will undo them. And this will aggravate their
misery, that Christ whom they set light by must be their Judge, and
for this sin will He judge them. Oh, that such would now consider how
they will answer that question that Christ put to their predecessors:
“How will ye escape the damnation of hell” or, “How shall we escape if
we neglect so great salvation?” Can you escape without a Christ? or
will a despised Christ save you then? If he be accurst that sets light
by father or mother, what then is he that sets light by Christ? It was
the heinous sin of the Jews, that among them were found such as set
light by father and mother. But among us, men slight the Father of
Spirits! In the name of God, brethren, I beseech you to consider how
you will then bear this anger which you now make light of! You that
can not make light of a little sickness or want, or of natural death,
no, not of a toothache, but groan as if you were undone; how will you
then make light of the fury of the Lord, which will burn against the
contemners of His grace! Doth it not behoove you beforehand to think
of these things?
Dearly beloved in the Lord, I have now done that work which I came
upon; what effect it hath, or will have, upon your hearts, I know not,
nor is it any further in my power to accomplish that which my soul
desireth for you. Were it the Lord’s will that I might have my wish
herein, the words that you have this day heard should so stick by you
that the secure should be awakened by them, and none of you should
perish by the slighting of your salvation. I can not follow you
to your several habitations to apply this word to your particular
necessities; but oh, that I could make every man’s conscience a
preacher to himself that it might do it, which is ever with you!
That the next time you go prayerless to bed, or about your business,
conscience might cry out, Dost thou set no more by Christ and thy
salvation? That the next time you are tempted to think hardly of a
holy and diligent life (I will not say to deride it as more ado than
needs), conscience might cry out to thee, Dost thou set so light by
Christ and thy salvation? That the next time you are ready to rush
upon unknown sin, and to please your fleshly desires against the
command of God, conscience might cry out, Is Christ and salvation no
more worth than to cast them away, or venture them for thy lust?
That when you are following the world with your most eager desires,
forgetting the world to come, and the change that is a little before
you, conscience might cry out to you, Is Christ and salvation no more
worth than so? That when you are next spending the Lord’s day in
idleness or vain sports, conscience might tell you what you are doing.
In a word, that in all your neglects of duty, your sticking at the
supposed labor or cost of a godly life, yea, in all your cold and lazy
prayers and performances, conscience might tell you how unsuitable
such endeavors are to the reward; and that Christ and salvation should
not be so slighted. I will say no more but this at this time, it is a
thousand pities that when God hath provided a Savior for the world,
and when Christ hath suffered so much for their sins, and made so full
a satisfaction to justice, and purchased so glorious a kingdom for
His saints, and all this is offered so freely to sinners, to lost,
unworthy sinners, even for nothing, that yet so many millions should
everlastingly perish because they make light of their Savior and
salvation, and prefer the vain world and their lusts before them. I
have delivered my message, the Lord open your hearts to receive it.
I have persuaded you with the word of truth and soberness; the Lord
persuade you more effectually, or else all this is lost. Amen.
Continue...

This eBook of “The World’s Great Sermons” by Grenville Kleiser belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The World's Great Sermons, Vol. 3By Grenville KleiserAt Amazon
