




The word “two-act” is used to describe any act played by two
people.  It has nothing to do with the number of scenes or acts
of a drama.  When two people present a “turn,” it is called a
two-act.  It is a booking-office term–a word made necessary by
the exigencies of vaudeville commerce.
If the manager of a theatre requires an acrobatic act to fill his
bill and balance his show he often inquires for an acrobatic
two-act.  It may matter little to him whether the act plays in One
or Full Stage–he wants an acrobatic act, and one presented by two
people.  If he requires any other kind of two-people-act, he
specifies the kind of two-act of which he is in need.
On the other hand, if a performer asks an author to write a
vaudeville two-act, an act of a certain definite character is
usually meant and understood.  For, among writers, the vaudeville
two-act–or “act in One” as it is often called–has come to mean
a talking act presented by two persons; furthermore, a talking act
that has certain well-defined characteristics.
The most carefully constructed definition cannot describe even the
simplest thing with satisfying exactness.  But the human mind is
so formed that it have a definition for a guide to learn anything
is new.  Therefore let us set up this dogmatic definition:
A pure vaudeville two-act is a humorous talking act performed
  by two persons.  It possesses unity of the characters, is not
  combined with songs, tricks or any other entertainment form, is
  marked by compression, follows a definite form of construction,
  and usually requires from ten to fifteen minutes for delivery.
You have noticed that this definition is merely that of the monologue
very slightly changed.  It differs from it only in the number of
persons required for its delivery.  But, like many such verbal
jugglings, the likeness of the two-act to the monologue is more
apparent than real.
Turn to the Appendix and read “The Art of Flirtation,” by Aaron
Hoffman. [1] It was chosen for publication in this volume as an
example of the vaudeville two-act, for two reasons:  First, it is
one of the best vaudeville two-acts ever written; second, a careful
study of it, in connection with “The German Senator,” will repay
the student by giving an insight into the difference in treatment
that the same author gives to the monologue and the two-act.
[1] The Art of Flirtation,” by Aaron Hoffman, has been used in
vaudeville, on the burlesque stage, and in various musical comedies,
for years and has stood the test of time.
Aside from the merely physical facts that two persons deliver the
vaudeville two-act and but one “does” the monologue, you will
notice in reading “The Art of Flirtation,” that the two-act depends
a surprising lot on “business” [1] to punch home its points and
win its laughs.  This is the first instance in our study of
vaudeville material in which “acting” [2] demands from the writer
studied consideration.
[1] Business means any movement an actor makes on the stage.
To walk across the stage, to step on a man’s toes, to pick up a
telephone, to drop a handkerchief, or even to grimace–if done to
drive the spoken words home, or to “get over” a meaning without
words–are all, with a thousand other gestures and movements,
stage business.
[2] Acting is action.  It comprises everything necessary to the
performing of a part in a play and includes business.
So large a part does the element of business play in the success
of the two-act that the early examples of this vaudeville form
were nearly all built out of bits of business.  And the business
was usually of the “slap-stick” kind.
Slap-stick humor wins its laughs by the use of physical methods,
having received its name from the stick with which one clown hits
another.
A slap-stick is so constructed that when a person is hit a light
blow with it, a second piece of wood slaps the first and a
surprisingly loud noise, as of a hard blow, is heard.  Children
always laugh at the slap-stick clowns and you can depend upon many
grown-ups, too, going into ecstasies of mirth.
Building upon this sure foundation, a class of comedians sprang
up who “worked up” the laughter by taking advantage of the human
delight in expectation.  For instance:  A man would lean over a
wall and gaze at some distant scene.  He was perfectly oblivious
to what was going on behind him.  The comedy character strolled
out on the stage with a stick in his hand.  He nearly walked into
the first man, then he saw the seat of the man’s trousers and the
provokingly tempting mark they offered.  In the early days of the
use of the slap-stick, the comedian would have spanked the man at
once, got one big laugh and have run off the stage in a comic
chase.  In the later days the comedian worked up his laugh into
many laughs, by spacing all of his actions in the delivery of the
blow.
As soon as the audience realized that the comedian had the opportunity
to spank the unsuspecting man, they laughed.  Then the comedian
would make elaborate preparations to deliver the blow.  He would
spit on his hands, grasp the stick firmly and take close aim–a
laugh.  Then he would take aim again and slowly swing the stick
over his shoulder ready to strike–a breathless titter.  Down would
come the stick–and stop a few inches short of the mark and the
comedian would say:  “It’s a shame to do it!”  This was a roar, for
the audience was primed to laugh and had to give vent to its
expectant delight.  A clever comedian could do this twice, or even
three times, varying the line each time.  But usually on the third
preparation he would strike–and the house would be convulsed.
In burlesque they sometimes used a woman for the victim, and the
laughter was consequently louder and longer.  It is an interesting
commentary on the advancement of all branches of the stage in
recent years that even in burlesque such extreme slap-stick methods
are now seldom used.  In vaudeville such an elemental bit of
slap-stick business is rarely, if ever, seen.  Happily, a woman
is now never the victim.
But it was upon such “sure-fire” [1] bits of business that the
early vaudeville two-acts–as well as many other acts–depended
for a large percentage of their laughs.  It mattered little what
were the lines they spoke.  They put their trust in business–and
invariably won.  But their business was always of the same type
as that “bit” [2] of spanking the unsuspecting man.  It depended
for its humor on the supposed infliction of pain.  It was always
physical–although by no means always even remotely suggestive.
[1] Any act or piece of business or line in a speech that can be
depended on to win laughter at every performance is called
sure-fire.
[2] Anything done on the stage may be called a bit.  A minor
character may have only a bit, and some one part of a scene that
the star may have, may be a bit.  The word is used to describe a
successful little scene that is complete in itself.
Because such acts did not depend on lines but on slap-stick humor,
they became known as slap-stick acts.  And because these vaudeville
two-acts–as we have elected to call them–were usually presented
by two men and worked in One, in front of a drop that represented
a street, they were called “sidewalk comedian slap-stick acts.”
Their material was a lot of jokes of the “Who was that lady I saw
you with last night?"–"She weren’t no lady, she was my wife,"
kind.  Two performers would throw together an act made up of
sure-fire comedy bits they had used in various shows, interpolate
a few old “gags"–and the vaudeville writer had very little
opportunity.
But to-day–as a study of “The Art of Flirtation” will show–wit
and structural skill in the material itself is of prime importance.
Therefore the writer is needed to supply vaudeville two-acts.  But
even to-day business still plays a very large part in the success
of the two-act.  It may even be considered fundamental to the
two-act’s success.  Therefore, before we consider the structural
elements that make for success in writing the two-act, we shall
take up the matter of two-act business.
The fact that we all laugh–in varying degrees–at the antics of
the circus clown, should be sufficient evidence of the permanence
of certain forms of humor to admit of a belief in the basic truth
that certain actions do in all times find a humorous response in
all hearts.  Certain things are fundamentally funny, and have made
our ancestors laugh, just as they make us laugh and will make our
descendants laugh.
“There’s no joke like an old joke,” is sarcastically but nevertheless
literally true.  There may even be more than a humorous
coincidence–perhaps an unconscious recognition of the sure-firedness
of certain actions–in the warnings received in childhood to “stop
that funny business.”
However this may be, wherever actors foregather and talk about
bits of stage business that have won and always will win laughs
for them, there are a score or more points on which they agree.
No matter how much they may quarrel about the effectiveness of
laugh-bits with which one or another has won a personal success–due,
perhaps, to his own peculiar personality–they unite in admitting
the universal effectiveness of certain good old stand-bys.
Weber and Fields–before they made so much money that they retired
to indulge in the pleasant pastime of producing shows–presented
probably the most famous of all the sidewalk comedian slap-stick
acts. [1] They elevated the slap-stick sidewalk conversation act
into national popularity and certainly reduced the business of
their performance to a science–or raised it to an art.  In an
article entitled “Adventures in Human Nature,” published in The
Associated Sunday Mazagines for June 23, 1912, Joe Weber and Lew
Fields have this to say about the stage business responsible, in
large measure, for the success of their famous two-act:
  The capitalizing of the audiences’ laughter we have set down in
  the following statistics, ranged in the order of their value.
  An audience will laugh loudest at these episodes:
  (1) When a man sticks one finger into another man’s eye.
  (2) When a man sticks two fingers into another man’s eyes.
  (3) When a man chokes another man and shakes his head from side
  to side.
  (4) When a man kicks another man.
  (5) When a man bumps up suddenly against another man and knocks
  him off his feet.
  (6) When a man steps on another man’s foot.
[1] The great success of the return of Weber and Fields to vaudeville
in 1915-16, with excerpts from their old successes, is only one
more proof of the perennial value of sure-fire business.
  Human nature–as we have analyzed it, with results that will be
  told you by the cashier at our bank–will laugh louder and oftener
  at these spectacles, in the respective order we have chronicled
  them, than at anything else one might name.  Human nature here,
  as before, insists that the object of the attacks–the other
  man–be not really hurt.
  Now, let us tell you how we arrived at our conclusions.  The eye
  is the most delicate part of the body.  If a man, therefore,
  pokes his two forefingers into the eyes of another man without
  hurting them, then human nature will make you scream with mirth;
  not at the sight of the poking of the fingers into the other
  man’s eyes (as you who have seen us do this trick night in and
  night out have imagined), but because you get all the sensations
  of such a dangerous act without there being any actual pain
  involved in the case of the man you were watching.  You laugh
  because human nature tells you to.  You laugh because the man
  who had the fingers stuck into his eyes might have been hurt
  badly, but wasn’t.
  The greatest laughter, the greatest comedy, is divided by a hair
  from the greatest tragedy.  Always remember that!  As the chance
  of pain, the proportion of physical misery, the proportion of
  tragedy, becomes diminished (see the other items in the table),
  so does the proportion of laughter become less and less.  We
  have often tried to figure out a way to do something to the
  other’s kneecap–second in delicacy only to the eye–but the
  danger involved is too great.  Once let us figure out the trick,
  however, and we shall have capitalized another item that may be
  listed high in our table.  Here is how you can verify the truth
  of our observations yourself:
  You have seen those small imitation tacks made of rubber.  Exhibit
  one, put it on a chair, ask a stranger to sit down–and everybody
  who is in on the joke will scream with mirth.  Try it with a
  real tack, and everybody will take on a serious face and will
  want to keep the man from sitting down.
George M. Cohan spent his boyhood on the vaudeville stage as one
of “The Four Cohans.”  In collaboration with George J. Nathan, Mr.
Cohan published in McClure’s Magazine for November, 1913, an article
entitled “The Mechanics of Emotion.”  Here is what he has to say
about some bits of business that are sure-fire laughs:  [1]
[1] These sure-fire bits of business should be considered as being
equally effective when used in any form of stage work.  Some of
them, however, lend themselves most readily to the vaudeville
two-act.
  Here, then, are a few of the hundred-odd things that you constantly
  laugh at on the stage, though, when you see them in cold type,
  you will probably be ashamed of doing so.
  (1) Giving a man a resounding whack on the back under the guise
  of friendship.  The laugh in this instance may be “built up"
  steadily in a climacteric way by repeating the blow three times
  at intervals of several minutes.
  (2) A man gives a woman a whack on the back, believing in an
  absent-minded moment that the woman (to whom he is talking) is
  a man.
  (3) One character steps on the sore foot of another character,
  causing the latter to jump with pain.
  (4) The spectacle of a man laden with many large bundles.
  (5) A man or a woman starts to lean his or her elbow on a table
  or the arm of a chair, the elbow slipping off abruptly and
  suddenly precipitating him or her forward.
  (6) One character imitating the walk of another character, who
  is walking in front of him and cannot see him.
  (7) A man consuming a drink of considerable size at one quick
  gulp.
  (8) A character who, on entering an “interior” or room scene,
  stumbles over a rug.  If the character in point be of the
  “dignified” sort, the power of this laugh provoker is doubled.
  (9) Intoxication in almost any form. [1]
[1] Intoxication, however, must never be revolting.  To be welcomed,
it must always be funny; in rare instances, it may be pathetic.
  (10) Two men in heated conversation.  One starts to leave.
  Suddenly, as if fearing the other will kick him while his back
  is turned, this man bends his body inward (as if he actually had
  been kicked) and sidles off.
  (11) A man who, in trying to light his cigar or cigarette, strikes
  match after match in an attempt to keep one lighted.  If the man
  throws each useless match vigorously to the floor with a muttered
  note of vexation the laughter will increase.
  (12) The use of a swear-word. [2]
[2] The use of swear-words is prohibited in most first-class
vaudeville theatres.  On the walls of every B. F. Keith Theatre
is posted this notice:  “The use of ’Damn’ and ’Hell’ is forbidden
on the stage of this theatre.  If a performer cannot do without
using them, he need not open here.”
  (13) A man proclaims his defiance of his wife while the latter
  is presumably out of hearing.  As the man is speaking, his wife’s
  voice is heard calling him.  Meekly he turns and goes to her.
  This device has many changes, such as employer and employee.
  All are equally effective.
  (14) A pair of lovers who try several times to kiss, and each
  time are interrupted by the entrance of some one or by the ringing
  of the doorbell or telephone-bell or something of the sort.
  (15) A bashful man and a not-bashful woman are seated on a bench
  or divan.  As the woman gradually edges up to the man, the man
  just as gradually edges away from her.
  All these “laugh-getters” are known to the experienced as “high
  class"; that is, they may all be used upon the legitimate stage.
  On the burlesque and vaudeville stages devices of a somewhat
  lower intellectual plane have established a permanent standing
  An authority on this phase of the subject is Mr. Frederick
  Wyckoff, who catalogues the following as a few of the tricks
  that make a vaudeville audience laugh:
  Open your coat and show a green vest, or pull out your shirt
  front and expose a red undershirt.  Another excellent thing to
  do is to wear a shirt without sleeves and pull off your coat
  repeatedly. [1]
[1] Such ancient methods of winning laughs, however, belong to
vaudeville yesterdays.  It should be remembered that Mr. Nathan,
who bore the labor of writing this excellent article, is blessed
with a satirical soul–which, undoubtedly, is the reason why he
is so excellent and so famous a dramatic critic.
  Ask the orchestra leader if he is married.
  Have the drummer put in an extra beat with the cymbals, then
  glare at him.
  Always use an expression which ends with the query, “Did he not?"
  Then say, “He did not.”
  The men who elaborated this kind of thing into a classic are
  Messrs. Weber and Fields.  They are the great presiding deities
  of “slap-stick” humor.  They have capitalized it to enormous
  financial profit.  They claim that Mr. Fields’ favorite trick
  of poking his forefinger periodically in Mr. Weber’s eye is worth
  a large fortune in itself.  A peculiarity of this kind of humor
  is that it finds its basis in the inflicting of pain.  A painful
  situation apparently contains elements of the ridiculous so long
  as the pain is not actually of a serious nature.  Here, too, the
  stage merely mirrors life itself.  We laugh at the person who
  falls on the ice, at the man who bumps against a chair or table
  in the dark, at the headache of the “morning after,” at the boy
  who eats green apples and pays the abdominal penalty, at the
  woman whose shoes are so tight they hurt her, at the person who
  is thrown to the floor by a sudden lurch of a street-car, and
  at the unfortunate who sits on a pin.  A man chasing his rolling
  hat in the street makes everybody laugh.
  The most successful tricks or jokes are all based on the idea
  of pain or embarrassment.  Tacks made of rubber, matches that
  explode or refuse to light, exploding cigars or cigarettes,
  fountain-pens that smear ink over the fingers immediately they
  are put to use, “electric” bells with pins secreted in their
  push buttons, and boutonnieres that squirt water into the face
  of the beholder, are a few familiar examples.
Here, then, we have the bits of business that three of the ablest
producers of the legitimate stage–all graduates from vaudeville,
by the way–agree upon as sure-fire for the vaudeville two-act.
Paradoxically, however, they should be considered not as instructive
of what you should copy, but as brilliant examples of what you
should avoid.  They belong more to vaudeville’s Past than to its
Present.  Audiences laughed at them yesterday–they may not laugh
at them tomorrow.  If you would win success, you must invent new
business in the light of the old successes.  The principles
underlying these laugh-getters remain the same forever.
If you will read again what Weber and Fields have to say about
their adventures in human nature, you will note that not once do
they mention the lines with which they accompanied the business
of their two-act.  Several times they mention situation–which is
the result of action, when it is not its cause–but the words by
which they accompanied those actions and explained those situations
they did not consider of enough importance to mention.  Every
successful two-act, every entertainment-form of which acting is
an element–the playlet and the full-evening play as well–prove
beyond the shadow of a doubt that what audiences laugh at–what
you and I laugh at–is not words, but actions and situations.
Later on, this most important truth–the very life-blood of stage
reality–will be taken up and considered at greater length in the
study of the playlet.  But it cannot be mentioned too often.  It
is a vital lesson that you must learn if you would achieve even
the most fleeting success in writing for the stage in general and
vaudeville in particular.
But by action is not meant running about the stage, or even wild
wavings of the arms.  There must be action in the idea–in the
thought–even though the performers stand perfectly still.
So it is not with words, witty sayings, funny observations and
topsy-turvy language alone that the writer works, when he constructs
a vaudeville two-act.  It is with clever ideas, expressed in
laughable situations and actions, that his brain is busy when he
begins to marshal to his aid the elements that enter into the
preparation of two-act material.
Continue...

This text of Writing for Vaudeville (Part A, also see Part B) by Brett Page is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Writing for VaudevilleBy Brett PageAt Amazon
