




It is in the hope of directing you to your market that this chapter
is designed.  But there is no form of writing for which it is more
difficult to point out a sure market than for vaudeville material.
Even the legitimate stage–with its notorious shifting of plans
to meet every veering wind–is not more fickle than the vaudeville
stage.  The reason for this is, of course, to be found in the fact
that the stage must mirror the mind of the nation, and the national
mind is ever changing.  But once let the public learn to love what
you have given them, and they will not jilt your offering in a
day.  The great advantage the writer of vaudeville material today
has over every one of his predecessors, lies in the fact that the
modern methods of handling the vaudeville business lend him security
in the profits of his success.
(a) The acceptable manuscript forms into which all vaudeville
material may be cast may be learned by consulting the examples
of the different vaudeville acts given in the appendix to this
volume.  A moment’s examination of them will show you that there
is no difference between the manuscript ways of presenting the
different acts.  All are made up of the names of characters,
business and dialogue.  Therefore they may all be discussed at the
same time.
(b) Have your manuscript typewritten. This suggestion has the
force of law.  While it would seem self-evident that a manuscript
written out in long hand has a mussy appearance, however neat the
writing may be, the many hand-written manuscripts I have tried to
read suggest the necessity for pointing out this fact.  You surely
handicap your manuscript by offering it in long hand to a busy
producer.
(c) The two recognized methods for the typing of stage manuscripts.
First, the entire manuscript is typed in black, blue or purple.
Then, after the manuscript is complete, the name of the character
above each speech is underlined in red ink, and every bit of
business throughout the manuscript is also underlined in red.
This method is illustrated below.
[Here, text originally underlined in red appear in all CAPS.]
Second, a typewriter using two colors is employed.  The name of
the character above each speech is typed in red, and red is used
to type the bits of business.  The speeches alone are typed in
black, blue or purple as the case may be.  The following example
illustrates this method.
Either of these methods serves the same purpose equally well.  The
aim is to separate the names and business from the dialogue, so
that the difference may be plain at a glance.  The use of either
of these ways of typing a manuscript is desirable, but not absolutely
necessary.
(d) Use a “record ribbon” in typewriting manuscript, because a
“copying ribbon “ smudges easily and will soil the hands of the
reader.  Observation of this mechanical point is a big help in
keeping a manuscript clean–and respecting the temper of your
judge.
(e) Neatness is a prime requisite in any manuscript offered for
sale.  Be sure that the finished copy is free from erasures and
penciled after-thoughts.  “Do all your after-thinking beforehand,"
or have a clean, new copy made.
(f) Re-copy a soiled manuscript as soon as it shows evidence of
handling.  Keep your “silent salesman” fresh in appearance.
(g) Bind your manuscript in a flexible cover to give it a neat
appearance and make it handy to read.
(h) Type your name and address in full on the outside of the
cover, and on the first white page.  Thus you stamp the manuscript
as your act, and it always bears your address in case of loss.
(i) Have your act copyrighted is a bit of advice that would seem
needless, but many performers and producers refuse to read an act
unless it is copyrighted.  The copyright–while it is not as good
proof in court as a public performance–is nevertheless a record
that on such and such a date the author deposited in the Library
of Congress a certain manuscript.  This record can be produced as
incontrovertible evidence of fact.  The view of the performer and
the producer is that he wishes to protect the author as much as
possible–but himself more.  He desires to place beyond all
possibility any charge of plagiarism.  Therefore, copyright the
final version of your act and typewrite on the cover the date of
copyright and the serial number.
(j) How to copyright the manuscript of a vaudeville act. Write
to the Register of Copyrights, Library of Congress, Washington,
D.C., asking him to send you the blank form prescribed by law to
copyright an unpublished dramatic composition.  Do not send stamps,
as it is unnecessary.  In addition to the blank you will receive
printed instructions for filling it out, and full information
covering the copyright process.  The fee is one dollar, which
includes a certificate of copyright entry.  This covers copyright
in the United States only; if you desire to copyright in a foreign
country, consult a lawyer.
(k) The preparation of a scene plot should not be a difficult
task if you will remember that you need merely draw a straight-line
diagram–such as are shown in the chapter on “The Vaudeville Stage
and its Dimensions"–so as to make your word-description perfectly
clear.  On this diagram it is customary to mark the position of
chairs, tables, telephones and other properties incidental to the
action of the story.  But a diagram is not absolutely necessary.
Written descriptions will be adequate, if they are carefully and
concisely worded.
(l) The preparation of property plots and light plots has been
mentioned in the chapter on “The Vaudeville Stage and Its Dimensions,"
therefore they require a word here.  They are merely a list of the
properties required and directions for any changes of lighting
that may occur in the act.  For a first presentation of a manuscript,
it is quite unnecessary for you to bother about the technical plots
(arrangement plans) of the stage.  If your manuscript is acceptable,
you may be quite sure that the producer will supply these plots
himself.
(m) Do not offer “parts” with your manuscript. A “part” consists
of the speeches and business indicated for one character, written
out in full, with the cues given by the other characters–the whole
bound so as to form a handy copy for the actor to study.  For
instance, there would be four “parts” in a four-people playlet
manuscript–therefore you would be offering a producer five
manuscripts in all, and the bulk of your material might deter a
busy man from reading it carefully.  If your manuscript progresses
in its sale to the point where parts are desired, the producer
will take care of this detail for you.  And until you have made a
sale, it is a waste of money to have parts made.
Unlike nearly every other specialized business, there is a market
in each city of the country for vaudeville material.  This market
is the stage door of the vaudeville theatre.  While it would be
unlikely that a dramatist would find a market for a long play at
the “legitimate” stage door–although this has happened–there are
peculiar reasons why the stage door may be your market-place.  A
large percentage of vaudeville performers are the owners of their
own acts.  They buy the material, produce it themselves, and play
in it themselves.  And they are ever on the lookout for new material.
Not only is there a market at the stage door, but that market
changes continually.  Without fear of exaggeration it may be said
that with the weekly and sometimes semi-weekly changes of the bill
in each house, there will in time flow past the stage door nearly
all the acts which later appear in vaudeville.
Offering a manuscript at the stage door, however, should not be
done without preparation.  As you would not rush up to a business
man on the street or spring at him when he emerges from his office
door, you certainly would not care to give a vaudeville performer
the impression that you were lying in wait for him.
(a) The personal introduction is a distinct advantage in any
business, therefore it would be an advantage for you to secure,
if possible, a personal introduction to the performer.  However,
you must be as discriminating in choosing the person to make that
introduction as you would were you selecting an endorser at a bank.
A stage-hand or an usher is likely to do you more harm than good.
The “mash notes” they may have carried “back stage” would discount
their value for you.  The manager of the theatre, however, might
arrange an introduction that would be of value.  At least he can
find out for you if the performer is in the market at the time.
(b) The preliminary letter is never amiss, therefore it would
seem advisable to write to the performer for whom you feel sure
you have an act that will fit.  Make the letter short.  Simply ask
him if he is in the market for material, state that you have an
act that you would like him to read, and close by requesting an
appointment at his convenience.
Do not take up his time by telling him what a fine act you have.
He does not know you, and if you praise it too highly he may be
inclined to believe that you do not have anything worth while.
But do not under-rate your material, either, in the hope of engaging
his attention by modesty.  Leave it for him to find out if you
have an act, first, that is worth while, and second, that fits him.
If you do not hear from the performer, you may be sure that he is
not interested in your act.  He may be out for the first few weeks
in a brand new act, and not in the market at all.  So if you do
not hear from him, wait until another act comes along and you see
someone for whom your act is “just made.”
(c) Should you receive a favorable reply to your request for an
appointment, you may be reasonably sure that your prospective
purchaser at least needs a new act.  In meeting your appointment,
be on time, and have someone with you.  A woman, of course, would
have a chaperon, precisely as she would if she were meeting any
other stranger.  And a man might care to have someone to engage
the attention of the performer’s companion and leave him an
uninterrupted opportunity to talk business.
(d) Ask for an immediate reading of your manuscript, or at least
request it read the next day, when you can be present while he is
reading it.  Do not leave a manuscript to be returned to you by
mail.  Vaudeville performers are as honest as any other class of
men, but they are busy people and the thing that is put off is
forgotten.  They are in one town today and miles away tomorrow,
and they may leave the manuscript on the bureau of their hotel
room intending to mail it at the last minute–and rush away and
forget it.  Therefore you should ask for an immediate reading.
It will take a performer only a few minutes to decide if he cares
to consider your act.  He knows of what he is in need–and usually
is prepared to tell you.
(e) Do not ask for specific criticism, for of all people in the
world vaudeville performers are the most good-hearted.  They would
rather please you than hurt you.  They will evade the point nine
times out of ten; so save them and yourself needless embarrassment.
And thus you may also avoid a false valuation of your manuscript.
(f) If the performer cannot use the act himself, and if the act
possesses merit, the chances are that he will suggest some other
performer who might want it.  If he does not suggest someone
himself, ask him.  Vaudeville performers know what other performers
want, because they are continually discussing plans for “next
season.”  You may thus pick up some valuable information, even if
you do not dispose of the particular manuscript you have for sale.
While you are likely at many turns of the sales road to have offered
you an opportunity to produce your own act, this method of finding
a market is rarely advisable.  You would not start a little magazine
to get your short-story into print; your story could not possess
that much value even if it were a marvel–how much less so if you
were unable to find someone willing to buy it!
But there is a still more important reason why you should not rush
into producing your act yourself.  Producing is a specialized
business, requiring wide experience and exact knowledge.  Besides,
it is one of the most expensive pastimes in the world.  Without a
most comprehensive experience and peculiar abilities, failure is
sure.  Do not attempt private production even if you are offered
the services of a performer or a producer in whom you have absolute
faith.  Remember, if they thought your act was really worth while
they would be anxious to reap the profits for themselves.
While any performer who owns his act is a producer in the sense
that he “produces” his act, there are men who make a business of
buying manuscripts, engaging people, and producing many acts in
which they do not themselves play.  Producers who may own a dozen
acts of all different kinds would seem to offer to the writer for
vaudeville an ideal market.  How, then, is the writer to get in
touch with them?
(a) Selling through a Play broker is a method that is precisely
the same as though you consigned a bill of goods to a commission
agent, and paid him for disposing of it.  The play broker reads
your manuscript and engages to try to dispose of it for you, or
returns it as not likely to fit in with the particular line of
business of which he makes a specialty.  If your act is really
good and yet the broker is able to make some suggestions that will
improve it, he is likely to offer such suggestions, purely in the
hope of earning a commission, and in this way he may prove of
distinct value as a critic.  In any event, if he accepts a manuscript
to sell for you, he will offer it in the quarters he thinks most
likely to produce it and will attend to all the business incidental
to the making of the contract.
For this service the broker charges a ten per cent commission.
This commission is paid either on the price of outright sale, or
on the royalty account.  If the act is sold on royalty, he will
collect the customary advance and also the weekly payments.  After
deducting his commission, he will remit the balance to you.
On the last page of this chapter you will find a partial list of
well-known play brokers.  Although I do not know of any who deal
exclusively in vaudeville material, any one of the agents who handles
long plays is glad to handle an exceptionally fine playlet.
(b) Seeking a personal interview with a producer is usually
productive of one result:  The office-boy says, “Leave your manuscript,
and he’ll read it and let you know.”  Anxious as he is to secure
good material, a man who is busily engaged in producing vaudeville
acts has little time to spend on granting personal interviews.
And there is another reason–he fears you will try to read your
act to him.  A personal reading by the author is either a most
distressing affair, because the average writer cannot read stage
material as it should be read, or else it is very dangerous to the
listener’s judgment.  Many a producer has been tricked into producing
an act whose merits a masterly reader has brought out so finely
that its fatal faults were forgotten.  And so the producer prefers
to read a manuscript himself.  Alone in his office he can concentrate
on the act in hand, and give to it the benefit of his best judgment.
(c) Offering a manuscript by mail is perfectly safe.  There has
never come to my knowledge one clearly proved instance of where a
producer has “stolen an idea.”
(d) Send your manuscript by registered mail and demand a return
receipt.  Thus you will save losses in the mail and hold a check
against the loss of your manuscript in the producer’s office.  And
when you send your manuscript by mail, invariably enclose stamps
to pay the return to you by registered delivery.  Better still,
enclose a self-addressed envelope with enough postage affixed to
insure both return and registry.
(e) Three weeks for consideration is about the usual time the
average producer requires to read a manuscript at his leisure.
In times when a producer is actively engaged in putting on an act,
he may not have an hour in the week he can call his own.  Therefore
have patience, and if you do not receive a reply from him in three
weeks, write again and courteously remind him that you would like
to have his decision at his earliest convenience.  Impatient letters
can only harm your chance.
What money can be made by writing vaudeville material?  This is
certainly the most interesting question the writer for vaudeville
can ask.  Like the prices of diamonds, the prices of vaudeville
acts depend on quality.  Every individual act, and each kind of
act, commands its own special price.  There are two big questions
involved in the pricing of every vaudeville manuscript.  First,
of what value is the act itself?  Second, what can the performer
or the producer afford to payor be made to pay for the act?
The first question cannot be answered for even a class of acts.
The value of each individual act determines its own price.  And
even here there enters the element inherent in all stage material–
a doubt of value until performance before an audience proves the
worth of the act.  For this reason, it is customary for the purchaser
of a vaudeville act to require that it first make good, before he
pays for it.  “Try and then buy,” is the average vaudevillian’s
motto.  If you are a good business man you will secure an advance
against royalty of just as much as you can make the producer “give
up.”  Precisely as in every other business, the price of service
depends upon the individual’s ability to “make a deal.”
The answer to the second question likewise depends upon the
vaudeville writer’s individual ability as a business man.  No hints
can be given you other than those that you may glean from a
consideration of average and record prices in the following
paragraphs.
(a) The monologue is usually sold outright.  The performer nearly
always will tell you–with no small degree of truth–that the
monologist makes the monologue, not the monologue the monologist.
Many a monologue has sold for five dollars, and the purchaser been
“stung” at that price.  But very rarely is a monologue bought
outright in manuscript–that is, before a try-out.  A monologue
must prove itself “there,” before a monologist will pay any more
than a small advance for the exclusive privilege of trying it out.
If the monologue proves itself, an outright offer will be made by
the performer.  While there are no “regular rates,” from two hundred
and fifty dollars to seven hundred dollars may be considered as
suggestive of the market value of the average successful monologue.
In addition to this, the monologist usually retains the author to
write new points and gags for him each week that he works.  This,
of course, increases the return from a monologue, and insures the
writer a small weekly income.
In very rare cases monologues are so good and, therefore, so
valuable that authors can retain the ownership and rent them out
for a weekly royalty.  In such a case, of course, the author engages
himself to keep the material up to the minute without extra
compensation.  But such monologues are so rare they can be counted
on the fingers of one hand.  There is little doubt that “The German
Senator” is one of the most valuable monologue properties–if it
does not stand in a class by itself–that has ever been written.
For many years it has returned to Aaron Hoffman a royalty of $100
a week, thirty and forty weeks in the year.  This may be considered
the record price for a monologue.
(b) The vaudeville two-act varies in price as greatly as the
monologue.  Like the monologue, it is usually sold outright.  The
performers use precisely the same argument about the two-act that
is used about the monologue.  It is maintained that the material
itself is not to be compared with the importance of its presentation.
When a two-act has been tried out and found “there,” the performers
or the producer will offer a price for it.
The same rule, that vaudeville material is worth only as much as
it will bring, applies to the two-act.  From two hundred and fifty
dollars to whatever you can get, may be considered suggestive of
two-act prices.  Although more two-acts have sold outright for
less than three hundred dollars than have sold above five hundred
dollars, a successful two-act may be made to yield a far greater
return if a royalty arrangement is secured.
Whether it is a two-act, or any other vaudeville act, the royalty
asking price is ten per cent of the weekly salary.  This rate is
difficult to enforce, and while five per cent is nearer the average,
the producer would rather pay a definite fixed figure each week,
than a percentage that must be reckoned on what may be a varying
salary.  Usually a compromise of a flat amount per playing week
is made when a royalty is agreed on.
(c) The playlet varies in returns amazingly.  While one small-time
producer pays no advance royalty and a flat weekly royalty of from
ten dollars to fifteen dollars a week–making his stand on the
fact that he gives a longer playing season than his average
competitor–many a big-time producer pays a good round advance and
as high as $100 a week royalty.
Edgar Allan Woolf has said:  “The desire for the one-act comedy is
so great that even an unknown writer can secure an advance royalty
as great as is paid to the author of a three-act play, if he has
written a playlet which seems to possess novelty of story and
cleverness of dialogue.”
George V. Hobart is reported to have had a variously-quoted number
of playlets playing at the same time, each one of which returned
him a weekly royalty of $100 a week.  And half a dozen other one-act
playwrights might be named who have had nearly equal success.
On the other hand, Porter Emerson Brown is quoted as saying:  “The
work of writing a playlet is nearly as great as writing a three-act
play, and the returns cannot be compared.”
One of the collaborators on a famous big-time success received
forty dollars a week for three seasons as his share.  Another
playlet writer was paid one hundred dollars a week for one act,
and only twenty dollars a week for another.  And a third was content
with a ten-dollars-a-week royalty on one act, at the same time
that another act of his was bringing him in fifty dollars a week.
These examples I have cited to demonstrate that the return from
the playlet is a most variable quantity.  The small-time pays less
than the big-time, and each individual act on both small- and
big-time pays a different royalty.
When a playlet–either comedy or straight dramatic–is accepted
for production, it is customary, although not an invariable rule,
that an advance royalty be paid “down.”  When the act proves
successful, one or more of three propositions may be offered the
writer:  outright sale at a price previously agreed upon; outright
sale to be paid in weekly royalties until an agreed upon figure
is reached, when ownership passes from the author to the producer;
the more customary weekly royalty.  As I have said before, what
price you receive for your act finally depends upon your keenness
in driving a bargain.
In nearly every case, outright sale has its advantage in the fact
that the author need not then worry about collecting his royalty.
Of course, when a recognized producer puts out the act there need
be no concern about the royalty, so in such instances a royalty
is preferable.  But in some cases, as when the performer is making
long jumps and has a hard time making railroad connections, a
weekly royalty has its disadvantages in causing worry to the author.
(d) The one-act musical comedy is usually bought outright–after
the act “gets over.”  While many a “book” is contracted for in
advance at a small figure, to be doubled or trebled on success,
it is also true that royalties are paid.  In this case, the custom
is to divide the royalty equally between the writer of the book
and lyrics, and the composer of the music.  When a third person
writes the verses of the songs and ensemble numbers, the royalty
is usually split three ways.  It would be misleading to quote any
figures on the musical comedy, for the reason that circumstances
vary so greatly with each that there are no standards.
(e) The burlesque tab pays about the same rates as the one-act
musical comedy, its kindred form.
(f) The popular song, unlike the other material treated in this
volume, has a well established royalty price:  one cent a copy is
the standard.  Of this, half a cent goes to the writer of the
lyric, and half a cent to the composer of the music.
As a popular song, to be considered successful, must sell anywhere
from half a million to a million copies, it is easy to estimate
the song-writer’s return.  If the same man writes both the words
and the music he will receive from five to ten thousand dollars–or
twenty-five hundred to five thousand dollars if he divides with
another–for being able to make the nation whistle.  Of course,
many song-writers have two successful songs selling in a year–
therefore you may double the figures above to estimate some successful
song-writers’ incomes.  But it may safely be said that the song-writer
who has an income of twelve thousand dollars a year is doing very
well indeed!  There are many more professional song-writers who
work year after year for the salary of the average business man
in every other line of endeavor.  Don’t count your royalty-chickens
too soon.
6. Important Lists of Addresses
SOME OF THE MORE PROMINENT PLAY BROKERS
AMERICAN PLAY COMPANY, 33 W. 42d St., New York
MARY ASQUITH, 145 W. 45th St, New York
ALICE KAUSER, 1402 Broadway, New York
DARCY AND WOLFORD, 114 W. 39th St., New York
KIRKPATRICK, LTD., 101 Park Ave., New York
MODERN PLAY CO., Columbus Circle, New York
LAURA D. WILK, 1476 Broadway, New York
GEORGE W. WINNIETT, 1402 Broadway, New York
PAUL SCOTT, 1402 Broadway, New York
SANGER AND JORDAN, 1430 Broadway, New York
MRS. M. A. LEMBECK, 220 W. 42nd St., New York
A LIST OF WELL KNOWN VAUDEVILLE PRODUCERS
The producers given here offer a market which varies so widely in
each instance that no attempt has been made to list their needs.
Some are interested in other lines of the amusement business as
well; and their activities elsewhere must be taken into consideration
as determining factors in their special market needs.  No division
of these producers into big-time and small-time producers is made,
because such a distinction would be likely to be misleading rather
than helpful.
ARTHUR HOPKINS, 1493 Broadway, New York
JOSEPH HART, 1520 Broadway, New York
JESSE L. LASKY, 120 W. 41St St., New York
PLAYLET PRODUCING COMPANY, 1564 Broadway, New York
B. A. ROLFE, 1493 Broadway, New York
JOE MAXWELL, INC., 360 W. 125th St., New York
ROLAND WEST PRODUCING COMPANY, 260 W. 42d St., New York
HARRY RAPF, 1564 Broadway, New York
PAT CASEY, 1499 Broadway, New York
BILLIE BURKE, 1495 Broadway, New York
JOE PAIGE SMITH, 1493 Broadway, New York
ALF. T. WILTON, 1564 Broadway, New York
JOHN C. PEEBLES, 1564 Broadway, New York
JAMES PLUNKETT, 1564 Broadway, New York
C. M. BLANCHARD, 1579 Broadway, New York
LEWIS AND GORDON, Columbia Theatre Building, 7th
  Ave. at 47th St., New York
MAX HART, 1564 Broadway, New York
JAMES J. ARMSTRONG, Columbia Theatre Building, 7th
  Ave. at 47th St., New York
WILLIAM A. BRADY, The Playhouse, 137 W. 48th St., New York
BART McHUGH, Land Title Building, Philadelphia
MENLO E. MOORE, 22 W. Monroe St., Chicago
MINNIE PALMER, 35 Dearborn St., Chicago
The following vaudeville circuits, while they may not maintain
regular producing departments, produce acts every now and then.
THE UNITED BOOKING OFFICES OF AMERICA, 1564
  Broadway, New York.  This organization books
  the B. F. Keith Theatres and allied small- and
  big-time houses
ORPHEUM CIRUIT COMPANY, 1564 Broadway, New York
LOEW’S THEATRICAL ENTERPRISES, 1493 Broadway, New York
POLI’S CIRCUIT, 1493 Broadway, New York
THE WESTERN VAUDEVILLE MANAGERS’ ASSOCIATION,
  Majestic Theatre Building, Chicago
GUS SUN CIRCUIT, New Sun Theatre Building,
  Springfield, Ohio
BERT LEVEY CIRCUIT, Alcazar Theatre Building, San Francisco
PANTAGE’S CIRCUIT, Seattle
SULLIVAN AND CONSIDINE, Seattle
To these markets nearly every booking agent and manager in the
vaudeville business might be added.  Each one has a list of acts
he handles that need new material from time to time.  And often
the agent or manager will add to his list of clients by producing
an exceptionally fine act himself.
The reason such a list is not given here is that it would require
a small volume merely for the names and addresses.  Consultation
of “The Clipper Red Book"–a handy directory of theatrical agents,
sold at ten cents–will supply this information.  A knowledge of
the special kinds of acts handled by each agent or manager, and
the producers previously given as well, may be gathered by a careful
reading of the various theatrical specialized journals.  This
knowledge can only be acquired a bit here and a little there through
persistent attention to the notices of new acts and announcements
of plans.
SAMUEL FRENCH, 28 W. 38th St., New York
T. S. DENNISON, Chicago
VARIETY, 1536 Broadway, New York
THE DRAMATIC MIRROR, 1493 Broadway, New York
THE NEW YORK MORNING TELEGRAPH, 50th St. &
  8th Ave., New York
THE NEW YORK STAR, 1499 Broadway, New York
THE CLIPPER, 47 W. 28th St., New York
THE BILLBOARD, 1465 Broadway, New York
THE DRAMATIC NEWS, 17 W. 42d St., New York
THE NEW YORK REVIEW, 121 W. 39th St., New York
THE THEATRE MAGAZINE, 8 W. 38th St., New York
THE GREEN BOOK MAGAZINE, North American Building,
  Chicago.
Continue...

This complete text of Writing for Vaudeville (Part B, also see Part A) by Brett Page is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
