




To achieve success in any art the artist must know his tools and
for what purposes they are designed.  Furthermore, to achieve the
highest success, he must know what he cannot do as well as what
he can do with them.
The vaudeville stage–considered as a material thing–lends itself
to only a few definite possibilities of use, and its scenery,
lights and stage-effects constitute the box of tools the vaudeville
writer has at his command.
The footlights are the equator of the theatre, separating the
“front of the house,” or auditorium, from the “back of the house,"
or stage.  The frame through which the audience views the stage
is the “proscenium arch.”  Flat against the stage side of the arch
run the “house curtain” and the asbestos curtain that are raised
at the beginning and lowered at the end of the performance.
That portion of the stage which lies between the curving footlights
and a line drawn between the bases of the proscenium arch is called
the “apron.”  The apron is very wide in old-fashioned theatres,
but is seldom more than two or three feet wide in recently built
houses.
1. One
Back of the proscenium arch–four feet or more behind it–you have
noticed canvas-covered wings painted in neutral-toned draperies
to harmonize with every sort of curtain, and you have noticed that
they are pushed forward or drawn back as it is found necessary to
widen or make narrow the stage opening.  These first wings, called
“tormentors,” [1] extend upward from the floor–anywhere from
18 to 25 feet,–to the “Grand Drapery” and “Working Drapery,” or
first “border,” which extend and hang just in front of them across
the stage and hide the stage-rigging from the audience.  The space
lying between the tormentors and a line drawn between the bases
of the proscenium arch is called “One.”
[1] No one of the score I have asked for the origin of the word
tormentor has been able to give it.  They all say they have asked
old-time stage-carpenters, but even they did not know.
It is in One that monologues, most “single acts"–that is, acts
presented by one person–and many “two-acts"–acts requiring but
two people–are played.
Behind the tormentors is a curtain called the “olio,” which
fulfills the triple purpose of hiding the rest of the stage, serving
as scenery for acts in One and often as a curtain to raise and
lower on acts playing in the space back of One.
2. Two
Five, or six, or even seven feet behind the tormentors you have
noticed another set of wings which–extending parallel with the
tormentors–serve to mask the rest of stage.  The space between
these wings and the line of the olio is called “Two.”
In Two, acts such as flirtation-acts–a man and a woman playing
lover-like scenes–which use scenery or small “props,” and all
other turns requiring but a small playing space, are staged.
3. Three
An equal number of feet back of the wings that bound Two, are wings
that serve as boundaries for “Three.”
In Three, playlets that require but shallow sets, and other acts
that need not more than twelve feet for presentation, are played.
4. Four or Full Stage
Behind the wings that bound Three are another pair of wings, set
an equal number of feet back, which serve as the boundaries of
“Four.”  But, as there are rarely more than four entrances on any
stage, Four is usually called “Full Stage.”
In Full Stage are presented all acts such as acrobatic acts, animal
turns, musical comedies, playlets and other pretentious acts that
require deep sets and a wide playing space.
5. Bare Stage
Sometimes the very point of a playlet depends upon showing not the
conventional stage, as it is commonly seen, but the real stage as
it is, unset with scenery; therefore sometimes the entire stage
is used as the playing stage, and then in the vernacular it is
called “Bare Stage.” [1]
[1] The New Leader, written by Aaron Hoffman and played for so
many years by Sam Mann & Company, is an excellent example of a
Bare Stage act.
On the opposite page is a diagram of the stage of Keith’s Palace
Theatre, New York City.  A comparison of the preceding definitions
with this diagram should give a clear understanding of the vaudeville
playing stage.
At audience-right–or stage-left–flat against the extended wall
of the proscenium arch in the First Entrance (to One) there is
usually a signal-board equipped with push buttons presided over
by the stage-manager.  The stage-manager is the autocrat behind
the scenes.  His duty is to see that the program is run smoothly
without the slightest hitch or wait between acts and to raise and
lower the olio, or to signal the act-curtain up or down, on
cues. [2]
[2] A cue is a certain word or action regarded as the signal for
some other speech or action by another actor, or the signal for
the lights to change or a bell to ring or something to happen
during the course of a dramatic entertainment.
When an act is ready to begin, the stage-manager pushes a button
to signal the olio up or raises it himself–if, that drop [1] is
worked from the stage–and on the last cue he pushes another button
to signal the curtain down, or lowers it himself, as the case may
be.  He keeps time on the various acts and sees that the performers
are ready when their turn arrives.  Under the stage-manager are
the various departments to which the working of scenery and effects
are entrusted.
[1] A drop is the general name for a curtain of canvas–painted
to represent some scene and stretched on a batten–a long, thick
strip of wood–pocketed in the lower end to give the canvas the
required stability. Sets of lines are tied to the upper batten
on which the drop is tied and thus the drop can be raised or lowered
to its place on the stage.  There are sets of lines in the rear
boundaries of One, Two, Three and Four, and drops can be hung
on any desired set.
As a rule the stage-manager is also the stage-carpenter.  As such
he, the wizard of scenery, has charge of the men, and is able to
erect a palace, construct a tenement, raise a garden or a forest,
or supply you with a city street in an instant.
Up on the wall of the stage, just under a network of iron called
the “gridiron"–on which there are innumerable pulleys through
which run ropes or “lines” that carry the scenery–there is, in
the older houses, a balcony called the “fly-gallery.”  Into the
fly-gallery run the ends of all the lines that are attached to the
counter-weighted drops and curtains; and in the gallery are the
flymen who pull madly on these ropes to lift or lower the curtains
and drops when the signal flashes under the finger of the stage-manager
at the signal-board below.  But in the newer houses nearly all
drops and scenery are worked from the stage level, and the
fly-gallery–if there is one–is deserted.  When a “set” is to be
made, the stage-carpenter takes his place in the centre of the
stage and claps his hands a certain number of times to make his
men understand which particular set is wanted–if the sequence of
the sets has not yet been determined and written down for the
flymen to follow in definite order.  Then the flymen lower a drop
to its place on the stage and the “grips” push out the “flats"
that make the wall of a room or the wings that form the scenery
of a forest–or whatever the set may be.
Into the mimic room that the grips are setting comes the
Property-man–"Props,” in stage argot–with his assistants, who
place in the designated positions the furniture, bric-a-brac,
pianos, and other properties, that the story enacted in this room
demands.
After the act has been presented and the curtain has been rung
down, the order to “strike” is given and the clearers run in and
take away all the furniture and properties, while the property-man
substitutes the new furniture and properties that are needed.
This is done at the same time the grips and fly men are changing
the scenery.  No regiment is better trained in its duties.  The
property-man of the average vaudeville theatre is a hard-worked
chap.  Beside being an expert in properties, he must be something
of an actor, for if there is an “extra man” needed in a playlet
with a line or two to speak, it is on him that the duty falls.
He must be ready on the instant with all sorts of effects, such
as glass-crashes and wood-crashes, when a noise like a man being
thrown downstairs or through a window is required, or if a doorbell
or a telephone-bell must ring at a certain instant on a certain
cue, or the noise of thunder, the wash of the sea on the shore,
or any one of a hundred other effects be desired.
Upon the electrician fall all the duties of Jove in the delicate
matter of making the sun to shine or the moon to cast its pale
rays over a lover’s scene.  Next to the stage-manager’s signal-board,
or in a gallery right over it, or perhaps on the other side of the
stage, stands the electric switch-board.  From here all the stage
lights and the lights in the auditorium and all over the front of
the house are operated.
From the footlights with their red and white and blue and vari-tinted
bulbs, to the borders that light the scenery from above, the
bunch-lights that shed required lights through windows, the
grate-logs, the lamps and chandeliers that light the mimic rooms
themselves, and the spot-light operated by the man in the haven
of the gallery gods out front, all are under the direction of the
electrician who sits up in his little gallery and makes the moonlight
suddenly give place to blazing sunlight on a cue.
It is to the stage-manager and the stage-carpenter, the property-man
and the electrician, that are due the working of the stage miracles
that delight us in the theatres.
In the ancient days before even candles were invented–the rush-light
days of Shakespere and his predecessors–plays were presented in
open court-yards or, as in France, in tennis-courts in the broad
daylight.  A proscenium arch was all the scenery usually thought
necessary in these outdoor performances, and when the plays were
given indoors even the most realistic scenery would have been of
little value in the rush-lit semi-darkness.  Then, indeed, the
play was the thing.  A character walked into the STORY and out of
it again; and “place” was left to the imagination of the audience,
aided by the changing of a sign that stated where the story had
chosen to move itself.
As the centuries rolled along, improvements in lighting methods
made indoor theatrical presentations more common and brought scenery
into effective use.  The invention of the kerosene lamp and later
the invention of gas brought enough light upon the stage to permit
the actor to step back from the footlights into a wider working-space
set with the rooms and streets of real life.  Then with the electric
light came the scenic revolution that emancipated the stage forever
from enforced gloomy darkness, permitted the actor’s expressive
face to be seen farther back from the footlights, and made of the
proscenium arch the frame of a picture.
“It is for this picture-frame stage that every dramatist is composing
his plays,” Brander Matthews says; “and his methods are of necessity
those of the picture-frame stage; just as the methods of the
Elizabethan dramatic poet were of necessity those of the platform
stage.”  And on the same page:  The influence of the realistic
movement of the middle of the nineteenth century imposed on the
stage-manager the duty of making every scene characteristic of the
period and of the people, and of relating the characters closely
to their environment.” [1]
[1] The Study of the Drama, Brander Matthews.
On the vaudeville stage to-day, when all the sciences and the arts
have come to the aid of the drama, there is no period nor place,
nor even a feeling of atmosphere, that cannot be reproduced with
amazing truth and beauty of effect.  Everything in the way of
scenery is artistically possible, from the squalid room of the
tenement-dweller to the blossoming garden before the palace of a
king–but artistic possibility and financial advisability are two
very different things.
If an act is designed to win success by spectacular appeal, there
is no doubt that it is good business for the producer to spend as
much money as is necessary to make his effects more beautiful and
more amazing than anything ever before seen upon the stage.  But
even here he must hold his expenses down to the minimum that will
prove a good investment, and what he may spend is dependent on
what the vaudeville managers will pay for the privilege of showing
that act in their houses.
But it is not worth spectacular acts that the vaudeville writer
has particularly to deal.  His problem is not compounded of
extravagant scenery, gorgeous properties, trick-scenes and
light-effects.  Like Shakespere, for him the play–the story–is
the thing.  The problem he faces is an embarrassment of riches.
With everything artistically possible, what is financially advisable?
The highest praise a vaudevillian can conjure up out of his vast
reservoir of enthusiastic adjectives to apply to any act is, “It
can be played in the alley and knock ’em cold.”  In plain English
he means, the STORY is so good that it doesn’t require scenery.
Scenery, in the business of vaudeville–please note the word
“business"–has no artistic meaning.  If the owner of a dwelling
house could rent his property with the rooms unpapered and the
woodwork unpainted, he would gladly do so and pocket the saving,
wouldn’t he?  In precisely the same spirit the vaudeville-act owner
would sell his act without going to the expense of buying and
transporting scenery, if he could get the same price for it.  To
the vaudevillian scenery is a business investment.
Because he can get more money for his act if it is properly mounted
in a pleasing picture, the vaudeville producer invests in scenery.
But he has to figure closely, just as every other business man is
compelled to scheme and contrive in dollars and cents, or the
business asset of scenery will turn into a white elephant and eat
up all his profits.
Jesse L. Lasky, whose many pleasing musical acts will be remembered,
had many a near-failure at the beginning of his vaudeville-producing
career because of his artistic leaning toward the beautiful in
stage setting.  His subsequent successes were no less pleasing
because he learned the magic of the scenery mystery.  Lasky is but
one example, and were it not that the names of vaudeville acts are
but fleeting memories, dimmed and eclipsed by the crowded impressions
of many acts seen at one sitting, there might be given an amazing
list of beautiful little entertainments that have failed because
of the transportation cost of the scenery they required.
When a producer is approached with a request to read a vaudeville
act he invariably asks, “What scenery?”  His problem is in two
parts:
1. He must decide whether the merits of the act, itself, justify
him in investing his money in scenery on the gamble that the act
will be a success.
2. If the act proves a success, can the scenery be transported
from town to town at so low a cost that the added price he can get
for the act will allow a gross profit large enough to repay the
original cost of the scenery and leave a net profit?
An experience of my own in producing a very small act–small enough
to be in the primary class–may be as amusing as it is typical.
My partners and I decided to put out a quartet.  We engaged four
good singers, two of them men, and two women.  I wrote the little
story that introduced them in a humorous way and we set to work
rehearsing.  At the same time the scenic artist hung three nice
big canvases on his paint frames and laid out a charming street-scene
in the Italian Quarter of Anywhere, the interior of a squalid
tenement and the throne room of a palace.
The first drop was designed to be hung behind the Olio–for the
act opened in One–and when the Olio went up, after the act’s name
was hung out, the lights dimmed to the blue and soft green of
evening in the Quarter.  Then the soprano commenced singing, the
tenor took up the duet, and they opened the act by walking
rhythmically with the popular ballad air to stage-centre in the
amber of the spot-light.  When the duet was finished, on came the
baritone, and then the contralto, and there was a little comedy
before they sang their first quartet number.
Then the first drop was lifted in darkness and the scene changed
to the interior of the squalid tenement in which the pathos of the
little story unfolded, and a characteristic song was sung.  At
length the scene changed to the throne room of the palace, where
the plot resolved itself into happiness and the little opera closed
with the “Quartet from Rigoletto.”
The act was a success; it never received less than five bows and
always took two encores.  But we paid three hundred and fifty
dollars for those miracles of drops, my partners and I, and we
used them only one week.
In the first place, the drops were too big for the stage on which
we “tried out” the act.  We could not use them there and played
before the house street-drop and in the house palace set.  The act
went very well.  We shipped the drops at length-rates–as all
scenery is charged for by expressmen and railroads–to the next
town.  There we used them and the act went better.  It was a
question whether the bigger success was due to the smoother working
of the act or to the beautiful drops.
The price for which the act was playing at that breaking-in period
led me to ponder the cost of transporting the drops in their
rolled-up form on the battens.  Therefore when I was informed that
the stage in the next town was a small one, I had a bright idea.
I ordered the stage-carpenter to take the drops from their battens,
discard the battens, and put pockets on the lower ends of the drops
and equip the upper ends with tie ropes so the drops could be tied
on the battens used in the various houses.  The drops would then
fit small or large stages equally well and could be folded up into
a small enough space to tuck in a trunk and save all the excess
transportation charges.
Of course the drops folded up all right, but they unfolded in chips
of scaled-off paint.  In the excitement, or the desire to “take a
chance,” I had not given a thought to the plain fact that the drops
were not aniline.  They were doomed to chip in time anyway, and
folding only hastened their end.  Still, we received just as much
money for the act all the time we were playing it, as though we
had carried the beautiful drops.
Now comes the third lesson of this incident:  Although we were
precisely three hundred and sixty-eight dollars “out” on account
of the drops, we really saved money in the end because we were
forced to discard them.  The local union of the International
Association of Theatrical Stage Employees–Stage Hands’ Union,
for short–tried to assess me in the town where we first used the
drops, for the salary of a stage-carpenter.  According to their
then iron-clad rule, before which managers had to bow, the scenery
of every act carrying as many as three drops on battens had to be
hung and taken down by the act’s own stage-carpenter–at forty
dollars a week.  They could not collect from such an act today
because the rules have been changed, but our act was liable, under
the old rules, and I evaded it only by diplomacy.  But even to-day
every act that carries a full set of scenery–such as a playlet
requiring a special set–must carry its own stage-carpenter.
Therefore, to the problem of original cost and transportation
expense, now add the charge of forty dollars a week against
scenery–and an average of five dollars a week extra railroad fare
for the stage-carpenter–and you begin to perceive why a vaudeville
producer asks, when you request him to read an act:  “What scenery?”
There is no intention of decrying the use of special scenery in
vaudeville.  Some of the very best and most profitable acts, even
aside from great scenic one-act dramas like “The System,” [1] would
be comparatively valueless without their individual sets.  And
furthermore the use of scenery, with the far-reaching possibilities
of the special set in all its beauty and–on this side of the
water–hitherto unrealized effectiveness, has not yet even approached
its noon.  Together with the ceaseless advance of the art of
mounting a full-evening play on the legitimate stage [2] will go
the no less artistic vaudeville act.  But, for the writer anxious
to make a success of vaudeville writing, the special set should
be decried.  Indeed, the special set ought not to enter into the
writer’s problem at all.
[1] See Appendix.  [2] The Theatre of To-Day, Hiram Kelly Moderwell’s
book on the modem theatre, will repay reading by anyone particularly
interested in the special set and its possibilities.
No scenery can make up for weakness of story.  Rather, like a paste
diamond in an exquisitely chased, pure gold setting, the paste
story will appear at greater disadvantage:  because of the very
beauty of its surroundings.  The writer should make his story so
fine that it will sparkle brilliantly in any setting.
The only thought that successful vaudeville writers give to scenery
is to indicate in their manuscripts the surroundings that “relate
the characters closely to their environment.”
It requires no ability to imagine startling and beautiful scenic
effects that cost a lot of money to produce–that is no “trick."
The vaudeville scenery magic lies in making use of simple scenes
that can be carried at little cost–or, better still for the new
writer, in twisting the combinations of drops and sets to be found
in every vaudeville house to new uses.
Continue...

This text of Writing for Vaudeville (Part A, also see Part B) by Brett Page is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Writing for VaudevilleBy Brett PageAt Amazon
