




Unless you have a definite order to write a one-act musical comedy,
it would seem, from the comparatively small part the writer has
in the final effect, that the novice had better not write the
musical comedy at all.  Although this would appear to be clear
from the discussion of the elements in the preceding chapter, I
want to make it even more emphatic by saying that more than once
I have written a musical comedy act for the “small time” in a few
hours–and have then spent weeks dovetailing it to fit the musical
numbers introduced and whipping the whole act into the aspect of
a “production.”
But there is one time when even the amateur may write a musical
comedy–when he has a great idea.  But I do not mean the average
musical comedy idea–I mean such an idea as that which made “The
Naked Truth” so successful.  And in the hope that you may possess
such an idea, I offer a few hints that may prove helpful in casting
your idea into smooth musical comedy form.
As I have already discussed plot in the chapters devoted to the
playlet, and have taken up the structure of the monologue and the
two-act in the chapters on those forms, there is now no need for
considering “writing” at all save for a single hint.  Yet even
this one suggestion deals less with the formal “writing” element
than with the “feel” of the material.  It is stated rather humorously
by Thomas J. Gray, who has written many successful one-act musical
comedies, varying in style from “Gus Edwards’ School Boys and
Girls” to “The Vaudeville Revue of 1915"–a musical travesty on
prevailing ideas–and the books of a few long musical successes,
from comedy scenes in “Watch your Step” to “Ned Wayburn’s Town
Topics,” that “Musical comedy, from a vaudeville standpoint, and
a ’Broadway’ or two-dollar standpoint, are two different things.
A writer has to treat them in entirely different ways, as a doctor
would two different patients suffering from the same ailment.  In
vaudeville an author has to remember that nearly everyone in the
audience has some one particular favorite on the bill–you have
to write something funny enough to:  please the admirers of the
acrobat, the magician, the dancer, the dramatic artist, the rag-time
singer and the moving pictures.  But in ’Broadway’ musical comedy
it is easier to please the audiences because they usually know
what the show is about before they buy their tickets, and they
know what to expect.  That’s why you can tell ’vaudeville stuff’
in a ’Broadway’ show–it’s the lines the audience laugh at.
“To put it in a different way, let me say that while in two-dollar
musical comedy you can get by with ’smart lines’ and snickers, in
vaudeville musical comedy you have to go deeper than the lip-laughter.
You must waken the laughter that lies deep down and rises in
appreciative roars.  It is in ability to create situations that
will produce this type of laughter that the one-act musical comedy
writer’s success lies.”
While it is not absolutely necessary to open a musical comedy with
an ensemble number, many fine acts do so open.  And the ensemble
finish seems to be the rule.  Therefore let us assume that you
wish to form your musical comedy on this usual style.  As your act
should run anywhere from thirty to fifty minutes, and as your
opening number will consume scarcely two minutes, and your closing
ensemble perhaps three, you have–on a thirty-five minute basis–
thirty minutes in which to bring in your third ensemble, your other
musical numbers and your dialogue.
The third ensemble–probably a chorus number, with the tenor or
the ingenue, or both, working in front of the chorus–will consume
anywhere from five to seven minutes.  Then your solo will take
about three minutes.  And if you have a duet or a trio, count four
minutes more.  So you have about eighteen minutes for your plot
and comedy–including specialties.
While these time hints are obviously not exact, they are suggestive
of the fact that you should time everything which enters into your
act.  And having timed your musical elements by some such rough
standard as this–or, better still, by slowly reading your lyrics
as though you were singing–you should set down for your own
guidance a schedule that will look something like this:
    Opening ensemble............. 2 minutes
    Dialogue
       Introducing Plot,
       First Comedy Scenes....... 4   “
    Solo......................... 3   “
    Dialogue
       Comedy and Specialties.... 5   “
    Ensemble number.............. 5   “
    Dialogue
       Specialties, Comedy.
       Plot climax–perhaps
       a “big” love scene,
       leading into.............. 7   “
    Duet......................... 4   “
    Dialogue
       Plot Solution–the
       final arrangement
       of characters............. 2   “
    Closing ensemble............. 3   “
                                 ________
                                 35   “
Of course this imaginary schedule is not the only schedule that
can be used; also bear firmly in mind that you may make any
arrangement of your elements that you desire, within the musical
comedy form.  Let me repeat what I am never tired of saying, that
a rigid adherence to any existing form of vaudeville act is as
likely to be disastrous as a too wild desire to be original.  Be
as unconventional as you can be within the necessary conventional
limits.  This is the way to success.
You have your big idea, and you have the safe, conventional ensemble
opening, or a semi-ensemble novelty opening.  Also you have a solo
number for the tenor or the ingenue, with the chorus working behind
them.  Finally you have your ensemble ending.  Now, within these
boundaries, arrange your solo and duet–or dispense with them, as
you feel best fits your plot and your comedy.  Develop your story
by comedy situations–don’t depend upon lines.  Place your big
scene in the last big dialogue space–the seven minutes of the
foregoing schedule–and then bring your act to an end with a great
big musical finish.
Although the schedule given allows plenty of time for costume
changes, you must not consider your schedule as a ready-made
formula.  Read it and learn the lesson it points out–then cast
it aside.  Test every minute of your act by the test of time.  Be
especially careful to give your chorus and your principal characters
time to make costume changes.
In gauging the minutes these changes will take, time yourself in
making actual changes of clothing.  Remember that you must allow
one minute to get to the dressing room and return to the stage.
But do not make the mistake of supposing that the first test you
make in changing your own clothes will be the actual time it will
take experienced dressers to change.  You yourself can cut down
your time record by practice–and your clothes are not equipped
with time-saving fasteners.  Furthermore, it often happens that
the most complicated dress is worn in the first scene and a very
quick change is prepared for by under-dressing–that is, wearing
some of the garments of the next change under the pretentious
over-garments of the preceding scene.  These are merely stripped
off and the person is ready dressed to go back on the stage in
half a minute.
But precise exactness in costume changes need not worry you very
much.  If you have been reasonably exact, the producer–upon whom
the costume changes and the costumes themselves depend–will add
a minute of dialogue here or take away a minute there, to make the
act run as it should.
Certain songs lend themselves more readily to effective staging,
and these are called “production songs.”  For instance:  “Alexander’s
Ragtime Band” could be–and often was–put on with a real band.
The principal character could sing the first verse and the chorus
alone.  Then the chorus girls could come out in regimentals, each
one “playing” some instrument–the music faked by the orchestra
or produced by “zobos"–and when they were all on the stage, the
chorus could be played again with rousing effect.  During the
second verse, sung as a solo, the girls could act out the lines.
Then with the repetitioin of the chorus, they could produce funny
characteristic effects on the instruments.  And then they could
all exit–waiting for the audience to bring them back for the
novelties the audience would expect to be introduced in an encore.
This is often the way a “popular song” is “plugged” in cabarets,
musical comedies, burlesque, and in vaudeville.  It is made so
attractive that it is repeated again and again–and so drummed
into the ears of the audience that they go out whistling it.  Ned
Wayburn demonstrated this in his vaudeville act “Staging an Act."
He took a commonplace melody and built it up into a production–then
the audience liked it.  George Cohan did precisely the same thing
in his “Hello, Broadway"; taking a silly lyric and a melody, he
told the audience he was going to make ’em like it; and he did–by
“producing it.”
But not every “popular song” lends itself to production treatment.
For instance, how would you go about producing “When it Strikes
Home”?  How would you stage “When I Lost You”?  Or–to show you
that serious songs are not the only ones that may not be producible–
how would you put on “Oh, How that German Could Love”?  Of course you
could bring the chorus on in couples and have them sing such a
sentimental song to each other–but that would not, in the fullest
sense, be producing it.
Just as not every “popular song” can be produced, so not every
production song can be made popular.  You have never whistled that
song produced in “Staging an Act,” nor have you ever whistled
Cohan’s song from “Hello, Broadway.”  If they ever had any names
I have forgotten them, but the audience liked them immensely at
the time.
As many production songs are good only for stage purposes, and
therefore are not a source of much financial profit to their
writers, there is no need for me to describe their special differences
and the way to go about writing them.  Furthermore, their elements
are precisely the same as those of any other song–with the exception
that each chorus is fitted with different catch lines in the place
of the regular punch lines, and there may be any number of different
verses. [1] Now having your “big" idea, and having built it up
with your musical elements carefully spaced to allow for costume
changes, perhaps having made your comedy rise out of the monologue
and the two-act to good plot advantage, and having developed your
story to its climax in the last part of your act, you assemble all
your people, join the loose plot ends and bring your musical comedy
to a close with a rousing ensemble finish.
[1] See Chapter XXII.
The word “tab” is vaudeville’s way of saying “tabloid,” or condensed
version.  While vaudeville is in itself a series of tabloid
entertainments, “tab” is used to identify the form of a musical
comedy act which may run longer than the average one-act musical
comedy.  Although a tabloid is almost invariably in one act, it
is hardly ever in only one scene.  There are usually several
different sets used, and the uninterrupted forty-five minutes, or
even more than an hour, are designed to give a greater effect of
bigness to the production.
But the greatest difference between the one-act musical comedy and
the burlesque tab does not lie in playing-time, nor bigness of
effect.  While a one-act musical comedy is usually intended to be
made up of carefully joined and new humorous situations, the
burlesque tab–you will recall the definition of burlesque–depends
upon older and more crude humor.
James Madison, whose “My Old Kentucky Home” [1] has been chosen
as showing clearly the elements peculiar to the burlesque tab,
describes the difference in this way:
“Burlesque does not depend for success upon smoothly joined plot,
musical numbers or pictorial effects.  Neither does it depend upon
lines.  Making its appeal particularly to those who like their
humor of the elemental kind, the burlesque tab often uses slap-stick
comedy methods.  Frankly acknowledging this, vaudeville burlesque
nevertheless makes a clean appeal.  It does not countenance either
word or gesture that could offend.  Since its purpose is to raise
uproarious laughter, it does not take time to smooth the changes
from one comedy bit to the next, but one bit follows another
swiftly, with the frankly avowed purpose to amuse, and to amuse
for the moment only.  Finally, the burlesque tab comes to an end
swiftly:  it has made use of a plot merely for the purpose of
stringing on comedy bits, and having come toward the close, it
boldly states that fact, as it were, by a swift rearrangement of
characters–and then ends.”
[1] See the Appendix
While the burlesque tab nearly always opens with an ensemble number,
and almost invariably ends with an ensemble, there may be more
solos, duets, trios, quartets and ensembles than are used by the
musical comedy–if the act is designed to run for a longer time.
But as its appeal is made by humor rather than by musical or
pictorial effect, the burlesque tab places the emphasis on the
humor.  It does this by giving more time to comedy and by making
its comedy more elemental, more uproarious.
In a burlesque tab, the comedy bits are never barred by age–providing
they are sure-fire–and therefore they are sometimes reminiscent.
[2] The effort to give them freshness and newness is to relate the
happenings to different characters, and to introduce the bits in
novel ways.
[2] Mr. Madison informed me that the “statuary bit” in “My Old
Kentucky Home” is one of the oldest “bits” in the show business.
It is even older than Weber and Field’s first use of it a generation
ago.
Therefore, it would seem obvious that the writing of the burlesque
tab is not “writing” at all.  It is stage managing.  And as the
comedy bits are in many cases parts of the history of the
stage–written down in the memories of actor and producer–the
novice had better not devote his thoughts to writing burlesque.
However, if he can produce bits of new business that will be
sure-fire, he may find the burlesque tab for him the most profitable
of all opportunities the vaudeville stage has to offer.  That,
however, is a rare condition for the beginner.
Continue...

This complete text of Writing for Vaudeville (Part B, also see Part A) by Brett Page is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
