




“THE GERMAN SENATOR,” A Monologue, by Aaron Hoffman.
“THE ART OF FLIRTATION,” A Two-Act, by Aaron Hoffman.
“AFTER THE SHOWER,” A Flirtation Two-Act, by Louis Weslyn.
“THE VILLAIN STILL PURSUED HER,” A Travesty Playlet, by Arthur
Denvir.
“THE LOLLARD,” A Comedy Playlet, by Edgar Allan Woolf.
“BLACKMAIL,” A Tragic Playlet, by Richard Harding Davis.
“THE SYSTEM,” A Melodramatic Playlet, by Taylor Granville.
“A PERSIAN GARDEN,” A One-Act Musical Comedy, by Edgar Allan Woolf.
“My OLD KENTUCKY HOME,” A One-Act Burlesque, by James Madison.
A WORD ABOUT THE ACTS
The nine acts which are given, complete, in the following pages
are representative of the very best in vaudeville.  Naturally,
they do not show every possible vaudeville variation–a series of
volumes would be required for that–but, taken together, they
represent all the forms of the talking vaudeville act that are
commonly seen.
THE MONOLOGUE
The German Senator
This monologue by Aaron Hoffman has been chosen as perhaps the
best example of the pure monologue ever written.  Originally used
by Cliff Gordon–continually being changed to keep it up-to-the-minute–it
has, since his death, been presented by numerous successors of the
first “German Senator.”  It is doubtful if any other dramatic
work–or any other writing–of equal length, and certainly no
monologue, has returned to its author so much money as “The German
Senator” has earned.
THE TWO-ACTS
The Art of Flirtation
For more years than perhaps any other vaudeville two-act, this
exceptionally fine example of two-act form has been used by various
famous German comedians.  It may be considered to stand in much
the same relation to the two-act that “The German Senator” does
to the monologue.  Its author, also Mr. Aaron Hoffman, holds a
unique position among vaudeville and musical comedy writers.
After the Shower
This delightful little example of lover’s nonsense was played for
more than four years by Lola Merrill and Frank Otto.  It has been
instanced as one of the daintiest and finest flirtation-couple-acts
that the two-a-day has seen.  Mr. Louis Weslyn has written perhaps
more successful acts of this particular style than any other author.
THE PLAYLETS
The Villain Still Pursued Her
This travesty, one of the most successful on record, was used for
years to star Mrs. Frank Sheridan.  Written by Mr. Arthur Denvir,
whose specialty is travesties, it undoubtedly became the inspiration
for the many similar acts that created the travesty-vogue of
1912-15.
The Lollard
Edgar Allan Woolf, who wrote this delightful satirical comedy, is
perhaps the most successful writer of playlets in this country.
For many years he has turned out success after success for famous
legitimate stars, while still other performers have become vaudeville
stars in his acts.  Mr. Woolf himself chose “The Lollard” as
representative of his best comedies.  The star role, Angela Maxwell,
was created in this country by Miss Regina Cornelli, and in England
by Miss Hilda Trevelyan.
Blackmail
Richard Harding Davis needs no introduction.  This remarkable
little tragedy was produced for the Orpheum Circuit by Mr. Charles
Feleky, who declares it to be “the best tragic playlet I have
produced.”  From so eminent a vaudeville producer, this is, indeed,
high praise.  The character of Richard Fallon was created by Mr.
Walter Hampden.
The System
Without doubt, this act is the best of the many big productions
with which Mr. Taylor Granville has supplied The United Booking
Offices of America, during his many years as a producing star.
Mr. Junie McCree, who collaborated with Mr. Granville, was once
president of “The White Rats,” the vaudeville actors’ union, and
is now a successful vaudeville writer.  Mr. Edward Clark, the third
collaborator, has written many successful vaudeville acts.
“The System” is said to have been characterized by Mr. George M.
Cohan as the best one-act melodrama he ever saw.  Its extraordinary
popularity in this country and in England is but added proof of
the tenseness of its scenes and its great ending.
THE ONE-ACT MUSICAL COMEDY
A Persian Garden
Played by Louis Simons season after season, this real comedy set
to music is without question Mr. Edgar Allan Woolf’s best effort
in this field.  Unlike the usual musical comedy, this act possesses
dialogue interest as well as pleasing brilliancy.  It has won its
many years of success not because of scenery, costumes and the
chorus, but by the sterling worth apparent in the manuscript
divorced from them.
THE BURLESQUE TAB
My Old Kentucky Home
Perhaps the most characteristic of the burlesque acts in vaudeville,
this “Tab” has been played in various guises in the two-a-day and
in burlesque for many seasons.  It is the work of a writer who
justly prides himself on his intimate knowledge of the burlesque
form, and who possesses the most complete library of burlesque
manuscripts in America.  To the thousands of readers of “Madison’s
Budget,” James Madison requires no introduction.
Permission to publish these acts has, in each instance, been
personally granted to the author of this volume.  This kind
permission covers publication in this book only.  Republication
of these acts in whole or in part, in any form whatsoever, is
expressly prohibited.
Stage presentation of any of the acts is likewise forbidden.  A
Special Warning has been inserted in the introductory page of
every act, at the request of each author.  The reason for such
repetition is to be found in the commercial value of successful
vaudeville material, and in the fact that the general public has
never precisely understood the reservations permitted to the author
of a dramatic work under the copyright law.  Infringements of any
sort are subject to severe penalties under United States law and
will be rigidly prosecuted.
To the writers of these acts the author of this volume wishes to
express his deep appreciation for the permissions that enable him
to print as illustrations of his text some of the finest acts that
vaudeville has ever seen.
The German Senator
A Monologue
By Aaron Hoffman
Author of “The Politicians,” “The Belle of Avenue A,”
“The Newly-weds and their Baby”, “Let George Do It,”
“School Days,” Etc., Etc.
THE GERMAN SENATOR
My dear friends and falling citizens:
My heart fills up with vaccination to be disabled to come out here
before such an intelligence massage of people and have the chance
to undress such a large conglomerated aggravation.
I do not come before you like other political speakers, with false
pride in one hand and the Star Strangled Banana in the other.
I come before you as a true, sterilized citizen, a man who is for
the public and against the people, and I want to tell you, my
’steemed friends, when I look back on the early hysterics of our
country, and think how our forefathers strangled to make this
country voss iss is it; when you think of the lives that was loosed
and the blood that was shredded, we got to feel a feeling of
patriotic symptoms–we got to feel a patriotic symp–symps–you
got to feel the patri–you can’t help it, you got to feel it.
I tell you, our hearts must fill up with indigestion when we look
out to see the Statue of Liberty, the way she stands, all alone,
dressed up in nothing, with a light in her hand, showing her
freedom.
And what a fine place they picked out for Liberty to stand.
With Coney Island on one side and Blackwell’s Island on the other.
And when she stands there now, looking on the country the way it
is and what she has to stand for, I tell you tears and tears must
drop from her eyes.  Well, to prove it–look at the ocean she
filled up.
And no wonder she’s crying.  Read the nuisance papers.  See what
is going on.
Look what the country owes.
According to the last report of the Secretary of the Pleasury, the
United States owes five billion dollars.
Nobody knows what we owe it for;
And nobody ever sees what we have got for it; [1]
[1] Here begins the “Panama Canal point,” referred to in Chapter
V. It continues until the “End of Panama Canal Point” footnote
below.
First read the monologue including this point, then read it skipping
the point–thus you will see, first, what a complete “point” is;
second, what “blending” means; and third, how a monologist may
shorten or lengthen his routine by leaving out or including a
point. [end footnote]
And if you go to Washington, the Capsule of the United States, and
ask them, THEY don’t even know THEMSELVES.
Then they say, what keeps the country broke is the Pay-no-more
Canal.
It cost the Government nine thousand dollars an hour to dig the
canal.  THINK OF THAT!
Nine thousand dollars an hour for digging, and the worst of it is,
they ain’t digging.
Up to date, it has cost a hundred and seventy million dollars to
dig a hole–they’ve been at it for over nine years–and the only
hole they’ve dug is in the United States Treasury.
Every six months, the Chief Engineer, he comes up with a report;
He says:  “Mr. Congress, the canal is getting better every day, a
million dollars MORE please.”
He gets the money, goes out, buys a couple of shovels, then sends
back a telegram:  HOORAY–The digging is very good, the two oceans
will soon be one.
Can you beat that?
Before they started the canal it didn’t cost us nothing, and we
had two oceans.
And by the time they get through, it’ll cost us three hundred
million and we’ll only have one.
And now that the canal is nearly finished, it looks like it was
going to get us into trouble.
Japan is against it on one side and England don’t like it on the
other.
And that’s why we’ve got to have a navy. [1]
[1] End of “Panama Canal point.”  See footnote above, also Chapter
V.
Of course, we’ve got a navy.
But everybody is kicking about it.
Why should they kick?
All we appropriated for the navy last year was four million dollars.
And there’s eighty million people in this country.
And that figures a nickel apiece.
And what the hell kind of a navy do you expect for a nickel?
Still they are crying that the country is in destitution circumstances.
That is inconsis–inconsis–you can’t deny it.
Our country has got a superabum, a superabum–a superabum–we’ve
got a lot of money.
There’s money lying in the treasury that never was touched.  And
the first fellow that will touch it will get six months.
The whole trouble is the trusts.
Look what the cold storage trust have done with the eggs.  Sixty
cents a dozen–for the good ones.  And the good ones are rotten.
Then they say the reason prices are going up is because wages are
getting higher.
But why should they raise the price of eggs?
The chickens ain’t getting any more wages.
And if meat goes up any higher, it will be worth more than money.
Then there won’t be any money.
Instead of carrying money in your pocket, you’ll carry meat around.
A sirloin steak will be worth a thousand dollar bill.
When you go down to the bank to make a deposit, instead of giving
the cashier a thousand dollar bill, you’ll slip him a sirloin
steak.
If you ask him for change, he’ll give you a hunk of bologny.
If they keep on, we won’t be able to live at all.
Statistics prove that the average wages of the workingman is one
dollar a day.
Out of that, he’s got to spend fifty cents a day for food; fifty-five
cents for rent; ten cents for car fare.
And at the end of a hard day’s work–he owes himself fifteen cents.
Yet the rich people say that the poor people are getting prosperous.
They say, look at our streets.  You see nothing but automobiles.
You don’t see half the poor people now that you used to.
Certainly you don’t.
Half of them have already been run over and the other half is
afraid to come out.
Why, between the automobiles and the trusts the poor man hasn’t
got a chance to live.
And if only the gas trust gets a little stronger, the price of gas
will go up so high a poor man won’t even be able to commit suicide.
They’ll have him both ways.  He can’t live and he can’t die.
And that’s why I am with the socialists.
They say, “Down with the trusts!  Do away with money.  Make everything
equal.”
Imagine a fellow going into a jewelry store and saying:
“Give me a diamond ring, here’s a lemon.”
But the socialists have got some good ideas for the working people.
And my heart and soul is with the labor class of people.  I am for
labor unions.
But what help are the labor unions to the working man?
Look at it in the right light.
A man pays twenty-five dollars to join a union.  He gets a job in
a shop for two dollars a day, works two weeks, the union gets out
on a strike and he owes himself a dollar.
The unions are crying the days are too long.
They want the days shorter.  They want the days should be eight
hours long.
But think of the fellows out in the North Pole where the days are
six months long.  That’s the place for the poor man to live.
When the landlord comes around and says, “Rent,” all you have to
do is to tell him to come around the day after tomorrow.
Then Andrew Carnigger, he comes out and tells us you should save
money and put it in the bank.
What’s the use of putting your money in the bank?
It’s easy enough to put it in, but it aint so easy to get it out.
When you want to take your money out, you got to give the cashier
sixty days notice.
And did you ever figure out how far a cashier can go in sixty days?
Then they say, as the world goes on, we are improving.
It’s ridiculum.
We were better off years ago than we are now.
Look at Adam in the Garden of Eat-ing.
Life to him was a pleasure;
There was a fellow that had nothing to worry about.
Anything he wanted he could get.
But the darn fool had to get lonesome.
And that’s the guy that started all our troubles.
We would be all right today, if it wasn’t for Adam and Evil.
Then they say that Adam fell for an apple.
It just shows how men have improved.
No man would fall for an apple today.
It would have to be a peach.
And I tell you, it’s no wonder that women feel stuck up.  They say
they can do more than men can do.
That’s very true, when you go back to the first woman, Eve.
She was only one little woman, all by herself, and she put the
whole human race on the bum.
Could a man do that?
And yet she was only a rib out of Adam’s side.
It just goes to show you what a cheap proposition woman was.
Nowadays, when you want to marry a woman, you got to buy a diamond
ring, take her to the theatres, buy her taxicheaters, and what’s
left of your wages you got to spend on candy and tango trots and
turkey teas.  There’s where Adam had it on all of us.
All Eve cost him was one bone.
It all goes to show you how much better off man was in those days
than today, and while John D. Rottenfeller, the great Philosopede,
he comes out and says, nobody has a right to be poor; he says,
anybody can live on eighteen dollars a week.
He don’t have to tell us that.
Let him tell us how to get the eighteen.
And still that great statesment, William Chinning Bryan, he comes
out and says, we are living in a great country.  He says we are
living in a country of excitement intelligence and education.
That’s very true.
Look at our public school system.
A child can go to school for nothing, and when he grows up to be
a man and he is thoroughly educated, he can go into the public
school and be a teacher and get fifty dollars a month.
And the janitor gets ninety-five.
That shows you how education is coming to the front.  Wouldn’t it
better, instead of sending a child to school, to learn him to clean
out a cellar?
And what’s the cause of all the trouble?
The House of Representatives.
We send them to Washington to look out for the people and the only
time they look out for the people is when they look out the window
and see them coming.
Then they get $7,500 a year.  They spend $10,000 a year, and at
the end of the year they have $100,000 saved.
No wonder they are careless with our money.
That’s all they got to do.  Sit around Washington and touch the
treasury.
Every couple of days a fellow comes into Congress and says:
“Good morning, Congress, let me have $4,000,000.”
That’s all they do, is make touches for millions.
You never heard of those suckers making a touch for a quarter, or
a half a dollar.
To show you what they do with our money, look at our Weather Bureau
Department.
We pay a fellow $10,000 a year.  For what?
To tell us when it’s going to rain.
And he don’t know himself.
But he don’t want to know.
He knows that if he ever guesses it right, he is going to lose his
job.  But believe me, it’s a soft job.
Nothing to do.
He gets up in the morning, eats a nice breakfast, smokes a good
fat cigar; then he looks out of the window and says, “Fine weather
to-day.”
Then he takes his umbrella and goes out for a walk.  I tell you,
my dear friends, the way the country stands now, the country stands
on the brink of a preci–the country stands on the brink of a
precip–and if somebody shoves it, it is going over.
And the cause of all the trouble in the country is the crooked
politics.
And that’s why the women suffering gents have gotten together and
are fighting for their rights.
And you can’t blame them.
Now I see where one married woman has hit on a great idea.
She says there’s only one protection for the wives.
And that’s a wives’ union.
Imagine a union for wives.
A couple gets married.
And as soon as they get settled, along comes the walking delegate
and orders a strike.
Then imagine thousands and thousands of wives walking up and down
the streets on strike, and scabs taking their places.
Author of “Toblitz, or The End of the World,”
“The New Leader,” “The Son of Solomon,”
“The Speaker of the House,” Etc., Etc.
STRAIGHT:  Say, whenever we go out together, you always got a kick
coming.  What’s the matter with you?
COMEDIAN:  Nothing is the matter with me.
STRAIGHT:  With you always everything is the matter.
COMEDIAN:  What’s the trouble?
STRAIGHT:  The trouble is you don’t know nothing.
COMEDIAN:  Yes, I do.
STRAIGHT:  You know!  If I only knew one-half of what you don’t know,
I would know twice as much as the smartest man in the world.
COMEDIAN:  What you got against me?
STRAIGHT:  You ain’t a gentlemen.
COMEDIAN:  What is a gentlemen?
STRAIGHT:  A gentlemen is a man who knows how to act senseless vit
people no matter vat happens.
COMEDIAN:  I am a gentlemen, I always act senseless.
STRAIGHT:  You are a gentlemen!  Look at you.  How can a man be a
gentlemen with such a face like that.  There are two kinds of
men–gentlemen and rummies.  I am a gentlemen, you are a rummy.
COMEDIAN:  I am a rummy?  I know how to act vit people.  Ven you
met your friends down the street, vat did you say to them?
STRAIGHT:  I said come on and have a drink.  I spoke like a gentlemen.
COMEDIAN:  And ve all vent to have a drink.
STRAIGHT:  Ve did.
COMEDIAN:  Didn’t I pay for it?
STRAIGHT:  Sure–that shows you are a rummy.
COMEDIAN:  No, that shows I was a gentlemen.
STRAIGHT:  Dat’s right.  In a saloon you are a gentlemen.
COMEDIAN:  Sure I am.  I act just a bartender.
STRAIGHT:  But the trouble with you is you don’t know how to mingle.
COMEDIAN:  Oh, I can mingle.
STRAIGHT:  You don’t know the first thing about mingling.  As a
mingler you are a flivver.  Among men you are all right, but as
soon as I take you out to some parties and dinners and you see
some women around, your brains get loose.
COMEDIAN:  Why–what do I do?
STRAIGHT:  It makes no resemblance what you do or what you say.
No matter how you do it–no matter how you say it, the women get
insulted.  You ain’t got the least consumtion how to be disagreeable
to the ladies.
COMEDIAN:  Oh, I know how to be disagreeable to a lady.  You ought
to hear me talk to my wife.
STRAIGHT:  To your wife?  Any man can be disagreeable to his wife.
But tink of other women–the trouble with you is, you have no, as
the French people say, you have no savoir faire.
COMEDIAN:  No what?
STRAIGHT:  I say that you ain’t got no, what the French people call,
savoir faire.
COMEDIAN:  What’s dot?
STRAIGHT:  Savoir faire.
COMEDIAN:  Oh, I can salve for fair.
STRAIGHT:  You can salve for fair; yes, but you ain’t got no
savoir faire.  You are not a mingler.  You have no vit, no humor.
You ain’t got no esprit.
COMEDIAN:  Vere do you get all dose words?
STRAIGHT:  I get them because I am a gentlemen.
COMEDIAN:  Then I’m glad I am a rummy.
STRAIGHT:  Sure you’re a rummy.  If you wasn’t a rummy, you’d have
esprit.
COMEDIAN:  Oh, I had a spree lots of times.
STRAIGHT:  Not a spree.  I mean esprit.  I mean you ain’t got no
refinement–like me.  I got polish.
COMEDIAN:  You’re a shine.
STRAIGHT:  No, I ain’t a shine.  I am a lady killer.
COMEDIAN:  One look at you is enough to kill any lady.
STRAIGHT:  I am a Beau Brummel.  Ven I am with the ladies, I talk
to dem vit soft words; I whisper sweet nothings, but you, you rummy
you, you don’t know how to make the ladies feel unhappy.
COMEDIAN:  How do you make them unhappy?
STRAIGHT:  You got to be disagreeable to them.
COMEDIAN:  And vat do you do to be disagreeable to ladies?
STRAIGHT:  The only vay to be disagreeable to a lady, you got to
flirt vit her.
COMEDIAN:  Flirt.  Vat does that mean flirt?
STRAIGHT:  Flirting is a thing that begins in nothing.  You say
something, you talk like everything and you mean nothing, and it
liable to end up in anything.  A flirtation is a clan-destination
meeting with a lady.
COMEDIAN:  Vat kind of a meeting is dot?
STRAIGHT:  Don’t you know? Ven you flirt, you meet a pretty woman
in a shady spot.
COMEDIAN:  Oh, you meet a shady woman in a pretty spot.
STRAIGHT:  Not a shady woman.  A pretty woman in a shady spot.
COMEDIAN:  How do you know so much about flirting?
STRAIGHT:  Now you come to it.  I got here a book on the art of
flirtation.  Here it is. (biz. shows book.)
COMEDIAN:  What is the name of that book?
STRAIGHT:  The art of flirtation.  How to make a lady fall in love
with you for ten cents.
COMEDIAN:  A lady fell in love with me once and it cost me Five
Hundred Dollars.
STRAIGHT:  That’s because you didn’t have this book.  This book
tells you how to make love.  This book is full of the finest kind
of love.
COMEDIAN:  For ten cents.
STRAIGHT:  Yes, for ten cents.
COMEDIAN:  Oh, it’s ten cents love.
STRAIGHT:  No, it ain’t ten-cent love.  It’s fine love (opens book).
See–here is the destructions.  Right on the first page you learn
something.  See–how to flirt with a handkerchief.
COMEDIAN:  Who wants to flirt with a handkerchief?  I want to flirt
with a woman.
STRAIGHT:  Listen to what the book says.  To a flirter all things
have got a language.  According to this book, flirters can speak
with the eye, with the fan, with the cane, with the umbrella, with
the handkerchief, with anything.  This book tells you how to do it.
COMEDIAN:  For ten cents.
STRAIGHT:  Shut up.  Now when you see a pretty woman coming along
who wants to flirt with you, what is the first thing a man should
do?
COMEDIAN:  Run the other way.
STRAIGHT:  No, no.  This is the handkerchief flirtation.  As soon
as a pretty woman makes eyes at you, you put your hands in your
pockets.
COMEDIAN:  And hold on to your money.
STRAIGHT:  No, you take out your handkerchief. (biz.)
COMEDIAN:  Suppose you ain’t got a handkerchief?
STRAIGHT:  Every flirter must have a handkerchief.  It says it in
the book.  Now you shake the handkerchief three times like this
(biz.). Do you know what that means?
COMEDIAN:  (Biz. of shaking head.)
STRAIGHT:  That means you want her to give you–
COMEDIAN:  Ten cents.
STRAIGHT:  No.  Dat means you want her to give you a smile.  So you
shake the handkerchief three times like this (biz.), then you draw
it across you mouth like this (biz.). What does that mean?
COMEDIAN:  That means you just had a glass of beer.
STRAIGHT:  No, dat means “I would like to speak with you.”
COMEDIAN:  And does she answer?
STRAIGHT:  She got to, it says it in the book.
COMEDIAN:  Does she answer you with a handkerchief?
STRAIGHT:  Yes, or she might umbrella.
COMEDIAN:  Over the head.
STRAIGHT:  Sure.  If she answers you with de umbrella over the head,
that means something.  Ven she holds the umbrella over her head,
she means that she is a married woman.
COMEDIAN:  Den you quit flirting.
STRAIGHT:  No, den you commence.  If she shakes it dis way (biz.),
dat means–
COMEDIAN:  Her husband is coming.
STRAIGHT:  No.  Dat means “You look good to me.”  Den you hold your
handkerchief by the corner like dis (biz.).
COMEDIAN:  Vat does that mean?
STRAIGHT:  Meet me on the corner.
COMEDIAN:  Och, dat’s fine (takes handkerchief). Den if you hold
it dis way, dat means (biz.) “Are you on the square?”
STRAIGHT:  You are learning already.  You will soon be a flirter.
Now I vill show you how you flirt according to the book.  You are
a man flirter, and I am a beautiful female.
COMEDIAN:  You are what?
STRAIGHT:  A female.  A female.
COMEDIAN:  Vat’s dat, a female?
STRAIGHT:  A female.  Don’t you know what fee means?  Fee, that
means money.  Male, that means man.  Female.  That means “Get money
from a man.”  That’s a female.  I am a beautiful woman and just
to teach you how to flirt, I am going to take a walk thro’ the
park.
COMEDIAN:  I thought you were a gentlemen.
STRAIGHT:  No.  No.  Just for an instance I am a lady.  I will walk
past in a reckless way, and I will make eyes at you.
COMEDIAN:  If you do, I will smash my nose in your face.
STRAIGHT:  No.  No.  When I make eyes at you, you must wave your
handkerchief at me three times.  Den you reproach me vit all the
disrespect in the world and den you take off your hat and you say
something.  Vat do you say?
COMEDIAN:  Ten cents.
STRAIGHT:  No.  No.  You say something pleasant.  You speak of the
weather, for instance.  You say “Good-evening, Madam, nice day.”
COMEDIAN:  Suppose it ain’t a nice day?
STRAIGHT:  No matter what kind of a day it is, you speak about it.
Now I’m the lady and I am coming.  Get ready.
(STRAIGHT does burlesque walk around COMEDIAN. . . .  STRAIGHT
stops and drops handkerchief.)
COMEDIAN:  Say–you dropped something.
STRAIGHT:  I know it.  I know it.  Flirt.  Flirt.
(COMEDIAN biz. of pulling out red handkerchief.)
COMEDIAN:  I am flirting.  I am flirting.
STRAIGHT:  What are you trying to do, flag a train?  Why don’t you
pick up my handkerchief?
COMEDIAN:  I don’t need any, I got one.
STRAIGHT:  (Picks up handkerchief and turns.)  Oh, you rummy you.
Why don’t you reproach me and say something about the weather?
COMEDIAN:  All right, you do it again.
STRAIGHT:  Now don’t be bashful!  Don’t be bashful!  Here I come
(biz. of walk).
COMEDIAN:  (pose with hat.)  Good evening.  Are you a flirter?
STRAIGHT:  Oh you fool (gives COMEDIAN a push).
COMEDIAN:  Oh, what a mean lady dat is.
STRAIGHT:  You musn’t ask her if she’s a flirter.  You must say
something.  De way it says in the book.  You must speak of something.
If you can’t speak of anything else, speak of the weather.
COMEDIAN:  All right, I’ll do it again this time.
STRAIGHT:  This is the last time I’ll be a lady for you.  Here I
come (biz.).
COMEDIAN:  Good evening, Mrs. Lady.  Sloppy weather we’re having.
STRAIGHT:  Sloppy weather!  It’s no use; I can’t teach you how to
be a flirter, you got to learn it from the book.  Listen.  Here
is what it says.  “After you made the acquaintanceship of de lady,
you should call at her house in the evening.  As you open the gate
you look up at the vindow and she will wave a handkerchief like
this (biz.). That means, somebody is vaiting for you.”
COMEDIAN:  The bulldog.
STRAIGHT:  No.  The flirtess.  “You valk quickly to the door.”
COMEDIAN:  The bulldog after you.
STRAIGHT:  Dere is no bulldog in this.  You don’t flirt vith a
bulldog.
COMEDIAN:  But suppose the bulldog flirts with you?
STRAIGHT:  Shut up.  “She meets you at the door.  You have your
handkerchief on your arm” (biz.)
COMEDIAN:  And the dog on my leg.
STRAIGHT:  No, the handkerchief is on your arm.  Dat means “Can I
come in?”
COMEDIAN:  And den what do you do?
STRAIGHT:  If she says “Yes,” you go in the parlor, you sit on the
sofa, side by side, you take her hand.
COMEDIAN:  And she takes your vatch.
STRAIGHT:  No.  You take her hand, den you say:  “Whose goo-goo
luvin’ baby is oosum?”
COMEDIAN:  Does it say that in the book?
STRAIGHT:  Sure.
COMEDIAN:  Let me see it.  (COMEDIAN tears out page.)  Den vat do you
do?
STRAIGHT:  You put her vaist around your arms–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  Den you squeeze it–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  She’ll press her head upon your manly shoulder–
COMEDIAN:  And den–
STRAIGHT:  She looks up into your eyes–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  You put the other arm around her–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  You hold her tight–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  You turn down the gas–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  She sighs–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  You sigh–
COMEDIAN:  And den?
STRAIGHT:  Dat’s the end of the book.
COMEDIAN:  Is dat all?
STRAIGHT:  Sure.  What do you want for ten cents?
COMEDIAN:  But vat do you do after you turn down the gas?
STRAIGHT:  Do you expect the book to tell you everything?
A TWO-ACT FOR A
MAN AND WOMAN
By
Louis Weslyn
Author of “At the News Stand,” “The Girl and
the Pearl,” “An Easy Mary,” “A Campus Flirtation,” Etc., Etc.
CHARACTERS
THE FELLOW                      THE GIRL
SCENE:  A pretty country lane in One, (Special drop) supposed to
be near Lake George.  Rustic bench on R. of stage.  When the
orchestra begins the music for the act, the girl enters, dressed
in a fashionable tailor-made gown, and carrying parasol.  She comes
on laughing, from L., and glancing back over her shoulder at THE
FELLOW, who follows after her, a few paces behind.  THE GIRL wears
only one glove, and THE FELLOW is holding out the other one to her
as he makes his entrance.  He is dressed in a natty light summer
suit and wears a neat straw hat.
THE GIRL:  (As she comes on with a little run.)  I don’t see why on
earth you insist upon following me.
THE FELLOW:  (Lifting his hat.)  I never knew why I was on earth
until I met you.  (Waving glove at her.)  Say, this is your glove–you
know it’s your glove.
THE GIRL:  (Laughingly.)  It must belong to somebody else.
THE FELLOW:  No, it doesn’t. I saw you drop it.  Besides, you are
wearing only one glove, and this one matches it.
THE GIRL:  (Stopping on right of stage near rustic bench and turning
to face him, holding out her hand.)  You are right.  It is my
glove.  I’ll take it, please.
THE FELLOW:  (Stopping to gaze at her admiringly.)  No, on second
thought, I’ll keep it.  (He folds it up tenderly, and places it in
the upper left-hand pocket of his coat.)  I’ll keep it right here,
too,–near my heart.
THE GIRL:  Oh, what nonsense!  You’ve never seen me but three times
in your life.
THE FELLOW:  (Coming nearer her.)  Yes–that’s true.  And you look
better every time I see you.  Say, you do look awfully nice this
morning.  Nobody would think, from your appearance, that you
belonged to a camping party here on the shore of Lake George.  I
guess that thunder storm last night didn’t bother you a little
bit.  Why, you look as if you were out for a stroll on Fifth Avenue.
THE GIRL:  (Aside.)  Little does he know that I got caught in that
shower and am now wearing my chum, Genevieve’s, gown.  (To him.)
What a jollier you are!  You look pretty natty yourself this morning,
it seems to me.
THE FELLOW:  (Aside.)  This suit of clothes I got from Tommy Higgins
has made a hit with her.  I guess I’ll just let her think they
belong to me, and won’t tell her that I got soaked in the rain
last night.  (To her, lifting his hat again.)  I’m tickled nearly
to death to have you say such complimentary things to me.  It makes
me glad I came on this camping trip.
THE GIRL:  You belong to the camping party flying the flag of the
skull and cross-bones, don’t you?
THE FELLOW:  Yes–all the boys are young doctors, except me.
THE GIRL:  And what are you?
THE FELLOW:  I’m the patient.
THE GIRL:  Are you sick?
THE FELLOW:  Love-sick.
THE GIRL:  (Turning up her nose.)  How ridiculous!  What brought you
to Lake George?
THE FELLOW:  You.
THE GIRL:  I!  Oh, you are too absurd for anything.  Give me my
glove, please, and let me go.
THE FELLOW:  (Coming still nearer.)  Don’t be rash.  There’s no place
to go.  All of your camping party have gone on a boating trip
except yourself.  You’re surely not going back there and hang
around the camp all alone?
THE GIRL:  (In surprise.)  How did YOU know that the rest of my party
had gone away for the day?
THE FELLOW:  I saw ’em start.  Why didn’t you go with ’em?
THE GIRL:  I had nothing to wear but this tailor-made gown, and a
girl can’t go boating in a dress like this.  I only intended to
stay two days when I came up here from New York to join the camp,
and was not prepared with enough clothes.  I’ve sent home for
clothes and am expecting them to arrive at the camp this morning–
that’s why I didn’t go boating, since you are impertinent enough
to ask.  (She gives him an indignant look.)
THE FELLOW:  I beg your pardon.  Won’t you sit down?
THE GIRL:  No, I will not.  (Still looking quite indignant, she sits
down immediately on bench.  He sits down beside her.)
THE FELLOW:  Neither will I.  (He looks at her out of the corners
of his eyes, and she turns her face away, nervously tapping the
stage with one foot.)
THE GIRL:  You seem to know all that has been going on at our camp.
I believe you have been spying on us.
THE FELLOW:  Not at all.  I know one of the girls in your camp.
THE GIRL:  (Sarcastically.)  Oh, you do!  (She tosses her head.)  So
you have been following me up in order to send some message to
another girl.  Who is she?
THE FELLOW:  Genevieve Patterson.
THE GIRL:  (Aside.)  I’ll never let him know now that I have on
Genevieve’s clothes.
THE FELLOW:  But you’re mistaken.  I’ve already sent the message.
It was about you.
THE GIRL:  About me?  What about me?
THE FELLOW:  I wanted Genevieve to introduce us.  Say–you haven’t
told me your name yet.
THE GIRL:  I don’t intend to.  I think you are very forward.
THE FELLOW:  Shall I tell you my name?
THE GIRL:  By no means.
THE FELLOW:  You’re not interested?
THE GIRL:  Not a bit.
(There is a pause.  She keeps her head turned away.  He looks
upward and all around, somewhat embarrassed.)
THE FELLOW:  (Finally breaking the silence.)  Are there any bugs in
your camp?
THE GIRL:  (Facing him angrily.)  Sir!
THE FELLOW:  I mean gnats, mosquitoes–things like that.
THE GIRL:  Yes.  I was badly bitten last night by a mosquito.
THE FELLOW:  (Very much interested.)  Where did he get you?
THE GIRL:  (Laughing.)  Well, you are so fresh that I can’t be mad
at you.  You’re too funny.  Since you want to know so much, he got
me on the knee.  I wasn’t far-seeing enough to bring mosquito
netting.  It’s a bad bite.
THE FELLOW:  Is it possible?
THE GIRL:  Don’t you believe it?
THE FELLOW:  Well, I’m not far-seeing enough to know for sure.  (With
a sly glance at her knees.)
THE GIRL:  How silly of you!  But say–I know a joke on you.  I saw
you fall in the lake yesterday.
THE FELLOW:  (Nodding his head.)  While I was fishing?
THE GIRL:  Yes; it was so amusing.  I don’t know when I’ve enjoyed
such a hearty joke.  How did you come to fall in?
THE FELLOW:  I didn’t come to fall in.  I came to fish.
THE GIRL:  I also saw that man with the camera over in your camp.
What was he dojng?
THE FELLOW:  Oh, he was a moving picture man from New York.  He was
taking moving pictures of our cheese.
THE GIRL:  Preposterous!  Have you caught any fish since you came?
THE FELLOW:  Only a dog-fish, with a litter of puppies.
THE GIRL:  (With wide-open eyes.)  How interesting!  What did you do
with them?
THE FELLOW:  We made frankfurter sausages out of the little ones,
and we are using the big one to guard the camp.
THE GIRL:  To guard the camp?
THE FELLOW:  Yes–it’s a watch-dog fish.
THE GIRL:  Well, I’ve heard of sea-dogs, but I never knew before
that–
THE FELLOW:  Oh, yes–quite common.  I suppose, of course, you heard
the cat-fish having a concert last night.
THE GIRL:  No–surely you are joking.
THE FELLOW:  No, indeed–they were all tom-cats.
THE GIRL:  Who ever heard of such a thing?
THE FELLOW:  Well, you’ve heard of tom-cods, haven’t you?
THE GIRL:  Yes, of course, but–
THE FELLOW:  Well, why not tom-cats then?  Say, you must be sure
to come over to our camp and see the collection in our private
aquarium.  We have two compartments, and keep the little daughter
fish on one side, and–
THE GIRL:  The daughter fish!
THE FELLOW:  (Nodding his head.)  Yes, and the son-fish on the
other.  (THE GIRL springs to her feet, angrily.)
THE GIRL:  You are simply guying me.  I shan’t listen to you another
moment.  Give me my glove, sir, I demand it.
THE FELLOW:  (Also jumping to his feet and grasping her by the arm.)
Oh, please don’t get mad.  We were getting along so nicely, too.
THE GIRL:  (Sneeringly.) “WE” were getting along so nicely.  You
mean YOU were.  I wasn’t.
THE FELLOW:  Yes, you were doing FINE. You were listening to me,
and I can get along all right with anybody that will listen to me.
Besides–ah-ah–fraulein–mam’selle–you know, I don’t know your
name–besides I–I–I like you.  I–I think you’re the sweetest
girl I’ve ever seen.
THE GIRL:  (Turning her head away, and releasing her arm from his
grasp.)  Oh, pshaw!  You’ve said that to a hundred girls.
THE FELLOW:  No–believe me, I have not.  YOU’VE made a mighty big
hit with me.  I’m hard hit this time.  I–
THE GIRL:  (Laughing in spite of herself.)  Oh, you foolish boy.
How can you expect me to believe you?  I’ll bet anything that your
coat pockets are filled with love letters from other girls this
very minute.
THE FELLOW:  You are wrong.  You are unjust.  Clementina, you are–
THE GIRL:  (Indignant again.)  Clementina!  How dare you address
me by such a ridiculous–
THE FELLOW:  Oh, pardon me.  I thought Clementina was quite poetic.
Besides, I’ve got to call you something.  You do me a terrible
injustice.  On my word of honor–as a–as a fisherman–I haven’t
a love letter in my coat pocket–or anywhere else.  I am young,
innocent, virtuous and–
THE GIRL:  (Bursting into laughter again.)  And utterly foolish, I
should judge.  You are afraid to let me search your pockets.
THE FELLOW:  Afraid?  Who’s afraid?  Me afraid!  Well, I’d be tickled
to death to have you search my pockets.  I dare you to search
my pockets.  I dare you–understand?  (He faces her and throws up
his hands over his head.)
THE GIRL:  You dare me, do you?  Well, I just won’t take a dare.
I’ll do it.
THE FELLOW:  Go ahead and do it.  I repeat, I dare you!  If you
doubt my word, prove to your satisfaction that I never lie.  I
dare you!
THE GIRL:  (Leaning her parasol against bench, and stepping up to
him in very business-like manner.)  Very well, then.  I accept your
challenge.  You can’t bluff me out.  I believe that ALL men lie
when they talk to women, and I am under the impression that you
are no exception.  Keep your hands up in the air–promise?
THE FELLOW:  I promise.
THE GIRL:  This is the first time I’ve ever held up anybody, but
here goes.  (She searches his right-hand pocket.)  I don’t suppose
you’ve ever been robbed before?
THE FELLOW:  Oh, yes–I was once surrounded by a band of robbers.
THE GIRL:  (Still searching.)  Indeed!  On a public highway?
THE FELLOW:  (Still holding up his hands.)  No, in a New York hotel
cafe.  They were the waiters.
THE GIRL:  (Taking her hand out of right-hand pocket.)  Well, there’s
nothing in that one but a box of matches.  How about this one?
(She thrusts her hand into the lower left-hand pocket, and pulls
out a letter, written on dainty writing paper.)  Ah! this is what
I expected to find.  Perfumed note paper.  (She looks at it
critically.)  Yes, this is the one–no need to search further.
THE FELLOW:  What the devil!–(His hands drop to his sides, and he
opens his eyes in amazement.)
THE GIRL:  (Turning on him angrily.)  Sir–such language!
THE FELLOW:  Oh, I beg your pardon–but–but–(He points to letter.)
I–I–that letter isn’t mine.  I can’t understand how it got into
my pocket.  I–(Suddenly a look of enlightenment comes into his
face.  Aside, he says.)  By thunder!–I had forgotten all about it.
This suit of clothes belongs to Tommy Higgins.  Oh, what a mess
I’ve made of it.  She’ll never believe me now if I tell her I am
wearing another fellow’s suit.  (To her, excitedly.)  Say–listen
to me, honestly that letter was not written to me, Tommy Higgins,
you see–
THE GIRL:  (Waving him aside.)  No excuses.  You probably thought
you didn’t have it with you.  Falsehoods are always found out, you
see.  I was right.  You are like all the rest of the men–a born
liar–only with this difference–you are a bigger liar than the
average.  You are really in a class all by yourself.  (With the
letter held out before her, she scans it eagerly.)
Oh, this is immense!–this is delicious!
THE FELLOW:  (Making a grab for the letter.)  Give that to me, please.
THE GIRL:  Not on your life.  It may not be proper to read other
people’s letters, but the present circumstances are unusual.  I
shall certainly read it–and read it aloud.  I want to make you
swallow every word and see how they agree with you.  Listen to I
this, you barbaric Ananias.  (She reads aloud.) “My beloved
Affinity–Come back to town next Saturday without fail.  Just slip
away from the other boys at the camp.  Tell them that an important
business matter demands your presence in the city.  I am crazy to
see you.  Life without you is very stupid.  Come to me, my dearest,
without delay.
                   Always your own,
                  
                                  Clementina.”
THE FELLOW:  (Collapsing in a heap on the bench.)  CLEMENTINA!!
THE GIRL:  (Folding up the letter and looking at him in utter scorn.)
So that’s where you got the name!  So you were thinking of the
writer of this letter when you addressed ME by the name of Clementina
a while ago.  Simply outrageous!  (She stamps her feet.)
THE FELLOW:  (With a groan.)  Oh, Lord!  I just happened to say
“Clementina” because I thought it was a pretty name.  Won’t you
believe me?  I don’t know who this Clementina is.  I never saw the
writer of that letter in all my life.  That letter was meant for
Tommy Higgins.  This suit of clothes–
THE GIRL:  (Interrupting.)  Don’t even attempt to make ridiculous
explanations.  Don’t make yourself more of a liar than you have
already proved.  I won’t listen to another word from you.  I didn’t
want to listen to you in the first place.  Here is your affinity’s
letter, sir.  (She hands it to him.  He takes it and stuffs it
angrily into the coat pocket.)  Now, let me have my parasol, please,
and my glove.  (She reaches for the parasol, but he catches it up
and holds it behind his back, as he rises from the bench.)
THE FELLOW:  You shall not go away until you hear what I want to
say.  Tommy Higgins–
THE GIRL:  Oh, bother Tommy Higgins!
THE FELLOW:  Yes.  That’s what I say–only stronger.  But listen,
please–
THE GIRL:  Don’t discuss the matter further.  My parasol and glove;
sir!  (She is facing him angrily.)
THE FELLOW:  Oh, come now.  Don’t be so hard on a fellow.  I tell
you that letter wasn’t written to me.  What if I should search
your pockets and find a letter that belonged to somebody else?
How would you feel about it?
THE GIRL:  You would never find anything in MY pockets that I am
ashamed of–that is, if I HAD any pockets.  But I have no pockets.
THE FELLOW:  (Pointing with one hand at the right side of her
jacket.)  I beg your pardon.  It seems that you know how to tell
’em, too.  What’s that, if it isn’t a pocket?
THE GIRL:  (In embarrassment.)  Oh–yes–so it is.  (Aside.)  I had
forgotten that I was wearing Genevieve’s suit.
THE FELLOW:  Well, turn about is fair play, isn’t it?  I’m going
to search your pocket now.
THE GIRL:  You mean to insinuate that I have anything in my pocket
of a compromising nature?  How dare you!
THE FELLOW:  You won’t believe ME!  Why should I believe you?  For
all I know, you may be a far different kind of girl than I took
you to be.
THE GIRL:  (Very angry.)  You are insulting, sir.  But since I stooped
so low as to search your pockets, I will give you the satisfaction
of searching mine–and then that will be an end of our acquaintance.
You can then go your way–and I’ll go my way.
THE FELLOW:  We’ll see about that.  Hold up your hands.
THE GIRL:  (Darting furious glances at him and holding her hands
over her head.)  Very well, sir.  Hurry up, please, and have it
over with.  (THE FELLOW very deliberately goes to bench, leans the
parasol up against it, just as THE GIRL had done before, and
imitating the business-like way in which she had gone through his
pockets, he comes up to her and pushes up his coat sleeves, as if
preparing for a serious piece of business.)
THE FELLOW:  (Still mimicing her manner.)  I don’t suppose you’ve
ever been held up before?
THE GIRL:  (Icily.)  No–you are the first burglar I have ever met.
THE FELLOW:  Promise to hold your hands up until I have finished?
THE GIRL:  (Scornfully.)  Of course, I’m a girl of my word.
THE FELLOW:  All right then.  (He deliberately kisses her squarely
on the lips, while her hands are held up over her head.  She gives
a cry and starts to drop her hands and push him away, but he catches
her arms and gently holds them up over her head again.)  No, no,
I’m not through yet.
THE GIRL:  You are a brute.  You are not worthy to associate with
a respectable girl.  (THE FELLOW thrusts his hands into the pocket
of her jacket and puns out a box of cigarettes and a letter.  He
holds them up before her horrified eyes.)
THE FELLOW:  Well.  I’ll be–(He starts to say “damned,” but stops
just in time.  THE GIRL’S arms drop limply to her sides, and with
eyes staring in complete bewilderment she staggers to the bench
and collapses down upon it.)
THE GIRL:  Good heavens!
THE FELLOW:  (Blinking his eyes at the articles which he holds
before him.)  What innocent playthings!  A box of Pall Malls and a
letter–no doubt, an affinity letter.  (He shakes his head, soberly.)
Well, well!  And you just said I wasn’t fit to associate with you.
THE GIRL:  (Her breast heaving in great agitation.)  Oh, this is a
terrible mistake!  What could Genevieve have been doing with those
things?
THE FELLOW:  (Turning on her, quickly.)  Genevieve?
THE GIRL:  Yes, Genevieve.
THE FELLOW:  Genevieve Patterson.
THE GIRL:  Yes, Genevieve Patterson–the girl you know–my best
friend.  Oh, can’t you understand?  Those things don’t belong to
me.  They are–(She stops abruptly, bites her lips, clasps her
hands.  Then says, aside.)  Oh, what am I doing?  I mustn’t allow
Genevieve’s reputation to be ruined.  I might as well take the
blame and brave it out myself.  This situation is frightful.  (She
turns to him again.)  I can’t explain, but don’t–oh, please don’t
think that I–that I–(She stops, looking as if she is about to
cry.)
THE FELLOW:  (Again looking at the articles and shaking his head.)
And you always looked like such a nice girl, too.  Cigarettes–and–
(He opens up the letter.)
THE GIRL:  (Suddenly springing to her feet.) You must not read that
letter.  It does not belong to me.  You have no right to read that
letter.
THE FELLOW:  But you read the letter that didn’t belong to me.
THE GIRL:  It did belong to you.
THE FELLOW:  It didn’t!
THE GIRL:  DID!
THE FELLOW:  Didn’t!
THE GIRL:  (Running forward and trying to grab the letter, which
he holds out of her reach.)  I forbid you to read that letter.
I swear to you, it is not mine.
THE FELLOW:  (Still holding it out of her reach and looking it
over.)  By George!  You are right–it is NOT yours.  It is MINE!
THE GIRL:  YOURS?
THE FELLOW:  Yes, mine.  It’s the very message I sent to Genevieve
Patterson yesterday–the letter in which I asked for an introduction
to you.  (He hands it to her.)  Here–read it yourself, if you don’t
believe me this time.  (THE GIRL wonderingly takes the letter and
reads it to herself, her lips moving and her eyes wide open in
surprise.)
THE GIRL:  (As she finishes she looks sweetly up at him.)  Then you
are NOT such a liar after all.  You did tell me the truth.
THE FELLOW:  Nothing but the truth.
THE GIRL:  But what about that other letter?
THE FELLOW:  (Taking her by the shoulder and speaking quickly.)
Now, you’ve got to listen.  That other letter was written to Tommy
Higgins.  I was caught in the shower last night, and had to borrow
this suit of clothes from Tommy.
THE GIRL:  (A glad smile gradually coming over her face.)  O-h-h!
THE FELLOW:  But how did you come to have my letter written to
Genevieve?
THE GIRL:  Oh, don’t you understand?  (She looks at him beseechingly.)
THE FELLOW:  (The truth suddenly striking him.)  Oh-h-h-!  I see!  You
got caught in the shower, too.  You borrowed that tailor-made suit
from Genevieve.
THE GIRL:  Can you doubt it?
THE FELLOW:  But the cigarettes?
THE GIRL:  I can’t account for them.  I only know–
THE FELLOW:  Never mind.  I don’t care.  (He stuffs the cigarettes
into his own pocket and grasps both of her hands in his own.)  Tell
me–you don’t think I’m the biggest liar in the world, do you?
THE GIRL:  (Archly.)  No–not quite.
THE FELLOW:  (Slipping his arm around her.)  And if you were
married–to–to a fellow like me, you’d make him an awfully good
wife, wouldn’t you?
THE GIRL:  (Laughing.). No–I’d try to make HIM a good husband.  (He
bends over and is just about to kiss her when a MAN’S VOICE is
heard off stage to the Right.)
MAN’S VOICE:  (Off stage.)  Hey, there, Miss–your trunk has come.
(THE FELLOW and THE GIRL spring apart, guiltily.)
THE FELLOW:  (Bitterly.)  Just when I had it all cinched.  (THE GIRL
runs to the bench, picks up her parasol, still laughing.)
THE GIRL:  It’s the wagon from the railroad station, with my clothes
from town.  Good-bye.  (She starts off, Right.)
THE FELLOW:  But you’re coming back again?
THE GIRL:  Well–maybe–perhaps–If you’re good.  (She exits laughing.)
THE FELLOW:  She’s got me going.  My head’s in a muddle, and I feel
like a sailor full of horn-pipes.  And that reminds me of Tommy
Higgins’ latest song.  It goes like this:  (Here is introduced comic
song.  At finish THE GIRL comes running on from Right, dressed in
a pretty summer dress, and carrying another pretty silk parasol.
THE FELLOW takes his hat off and holding it high over his head,
exclaims:) Here comes the rainbow after the shower!
THE GIRL:  I must explain to you–I saw Genevieve–the cigarettes
belong to her brother, Jack.
THE FELLOW:  And I’ve just found out what belongs to me.
THE GIRL:  What?
THE FELLOW:  You!  (He takes her parasol, opens it, and holds it in
front of them for an instant so that their faces are hidden from
audience.  This is music cue for the Conversation Number which
brings the sketch to a finish.)
A TRAVESTY
By
Arthur Denvir
Author of “Busy Isabel,” “How Ignatius Got
Pneumonia,” “When Wit Won,” “The War
Correspondent,” Etc., Etc.
CHARACTERS
GLADYS DRESSUITCASE . . . . . A Deserted Wife
ALPHONSO DRESSUITCASE . . . . Her Dying Che-ild
MOE REISS DRESSUITCASE. . . . Her Fugitive Husband
BIRDIE BEDSLATZ . . . . . . . Her Doll-faced Rival
ALGERNON O’FLAHERTY . . . . . The Villain Who Pursued Her
SCENE OF PROLOGUE
STREET IN ONE. . . LIGHTS OUT
Music:  “Mendelssohn’s Spring Song,” Played in discords.  Spot Light
on L. I.
PROLOGUE
Enter GLADYS wearing linen duster and dragging a big rope to which
is attached a case of beer with about eight empty bottles in it.
She stops C.
GLADYS:  (Tearfully.)  At last I am almost home.  Eleven miles walk
from the sweat shop here, and that’s some hoofing it, believe me.
(Sways.)  Oh, I am faint (Looks over shoulder at beer case.), faint
for the want of my Coca-Cola.  (Enter ALGERNON R. I–wears slouch
hat, heavy moustache, red shirt and high boots.  She is facing L.)
Oh, I have a hunch I’m being shadowed–flagged by a track-walker!
But I mustn’t think of that.  (Starts to drag case L.)  I must get
home to my dying child.  He needs me–he needs me.  (Exits L. I.)
ALGERNON:  (Goes L. C. and looks after her.)  It is Gladys–found
at last!  (Enter BIRDIE L. I. She is in bright red with white plumes
and is a beautiful, radiant adventuress. )
BIRDIE:  Did you get a good look at her?
ALGERNON:  Yes–it’s Gladys and she’s down and out–(Both together:)
Curse her!
ALGERNON:  Now I can begin pursuing her again.
BIRDIE:  Yes, and I can gloat over her misery–and gloating’s the
best thing I do.
ALGERNON:  Come (fiercely!) We are wasting time.
BIRDIE:  She’ll never know me with this dark hair and no make-up on.
ALGERNON:  (At L. I–still more fiercely.)  Can that junk!  Come!
(Exits L. I.)
BIRDIE:  (Going to L. I.)  He has me in his power.  I must follow
him.  Curse him!  (Exits after ALGERNON.  Enter MOE REISS in bum
evening-clothes and opera hat.  Carries cane.)
MOE REISS:  (Reading from back of envelope.)  Down this street and
turn into the alley full of ash cans!  I’m on the right track at
last.  Once more I shall see my wife and my little boy!  Of course,
she’ll be sore because I ran away and deserted her, leaving her
no alimony except the dying che-ild.  But I must produce a real
wife and child from somewhere or I’ll lose the $9.75 my uncle left
me.  (Goes L. musingly.)  Why do I love money so?  Ay, that’s the
question.  (Looking up at gallery.)  And what’s the answer?  (Points
off L. with cane–dramatically.)  We shall see–we shall see.  (Dashes
off L.)
The lights go out, and the Drop in One takes all the time that the
clock strikes sixteen or seventeen to go up, so it is timed very
slowly.
FULL STAGE SCENE
THE WRETCHED HOME OF GLADYS
A Mott Street Garret–everything of the poorest description.  Old
table down stage R., with chair on either side and waste paper
basket in front.  Cot bed down stage L. Old cupboard up stage C.
Small stand at head of cot.
PHONSIE lies in cot, head up stage, covered up.  He should weigh
over two hundred pounds.  He wears Buster Brown wig and nightie
that buttons up the back.  GLADYS is seated at table d. s. R.,
sewing on a tiny handkerchief.  She is magnificently dressed and
wears all the jewelry she can carry.  Pile of handkerchiefs at
back of table within reach and a waste basket in front of table
where she can throw handkerchiefs when used.
As curtain rises, the clock off stage slowly strikes for the
sixteenth or seventeenth time.
GLADYS:  Five o’clock and my sewing still unfinished.  Oh, it must
be done to-night.  There’s the rent–six dollars.  To-day is
Friday–bargain day–I wonder if the landlord would take four
ninety-eight.
(Business.  PHONSIE snores.)  And my child needs more medicine.
The dog biscuits haven’t helped him a bit, and his stomach is too
weak to digest the skin foods.  (Wood crash off stage.)  How restless
he is, poor little tot!!!!  Fatherless and deserted, sick and
emaciated–eight years have I passed in this wretched place,
hopeless, hapless, hipless.  At times the struggle seems more than
I can bear, but I must be brave for my child, my little one.  (Buries
face in hands.) (Business.  Sews.)
PHONSIE:  (Business.)  Mommer!  Mommer!  Are you there?  (Blows pea
blower at her.)
GLADYS:  (Hand to cheek where he hit her.)  Yes, dolling, mommer is
here.
PHONSIE:  Say, mommer, am I dying?  (Loud and toughly.)
GLADYS:  (Sadly.)  I am afraid not, my treasure.
PHONSIE:  Why not, mommer?
GLADYS:  You are too great a pest to die, sweetheart.
PHONSIE:  But the good always die young, don’t they, mommer?
GLADYS:  (Still sewing.)  But you were not speaking about the good–you
were speaking of yourself, my precious.
PHONSIE:  Ain’t I good, mommer, don’t you think?
GLADYS:  (Business.)  Oh, I don’t dare to think!!!!  (Moves up stage.)
PHONSIE:  Don’t think if it hurts you, mommer.
GLADYS:  (At dresser.)  But come, it is time for your medicine.
(Shows enormous pill.)
PHONSIE:  (Scared.)  What is that, mommer?
GLADYS:  Just a horse pill, baby.  (Puts it in his mouth.)  There,
that will help cure mother’s little man.  (At table.)
PHONSIE:  Gee!  That tasted fierce.  (Business.  Knock.)  Some one is
knocking, mommer.
GLADYS:  They’re always knocking mommer.  (At door.)
VOICE:  Have yez th’ rint?
GLADYS:  I haven’t.
VOICE:  Much obliged.
GLADYS:  You’re welcome.
PHONSIE:  Who was that, mommer?
GLADYS:  That was only the landlord for the rent.  Alas, I cannot
raise it.
PHONSIE:  Then if you can’t raise the rent, raise me, mommer.  Can’t
I have the spot-light to die with?
GLADYS:  Why certainly you shall have one.  Mr. Electrician, will
you kindly give my dying child a spot-light?  (Business.)  There,
dearest, there’s your spot-light.
PHONSIE:  (Laughs.)  Oh, that’s fine.  Mommer, can I have visions?
GLADYS:  Why surely, dear, you can have all the visions you want.
(Shoves opium pipe in his mouth and lights it.)  Now tell mommer
what you see, baby!
PHONSIE:  Oh, mommer, I see awful things.  I can see the Gerry
society pinching me.  And oh, mommer, I can see New York, [1] and
there ain’t a gambling house in the town.
[1] Substitute name of any big city.
GLADYS:  He’s blind!!!!  My child’s gone blind!!!!  (PHONSIE snores.)
He sleeps at last, my child, my little dying child!!!!  (Enter
ALGERNON and BIRDIE.)
GLADYS:  (Discovers ALGERNON.)  You!!!!  (ALGERNON turns to Orchestra
and conducts Chord with cane.) (GLADYS Left, ALGERNON C., BIRDIE R.)
ALGERNON:  (Chord.)  Yes, Gladys Dressuitcase, once more we meet!!!!!
GLADYS:  And the lady with the Brooklyn [1] gown!!  Ah, you will
start, but I know you in spite of your disguise, Birdie Bedslatz.
[1] Substitute name of the local gag town.
BIRDIE:  Disguise!  What disguise?
GLADYS:  Woman, you cannot deceive me.  You’ve been to the dry-dock
and had your face scraped.
BIRDIE:  So, you still want war?
GLADYS:  No, I want justice!!!!  (ALGERNON conducts Chord.)  You have
tracked me like sleuthhounds.  You have hunted me down after all
these years.  You have robbed me of home, husband, honor and
friends.  What then is left me?  (L.)
BIRDIE:  (Menacingly.)  There is always the river.
GLADYS:  What, you dare suggest that, you with your past!
BIRDIE:  How dare you mention that to me!  I am now writing Sunday
stories for the New York “American.” [2] (Crosses to left and sits.)
[2] Substitute name of the local sensational newspaper.
GLADYS:  (Stunned.)  Sophie Lyons, now I see it all.
ALGERNON:  (Center.)  I have here a mortgage.
GLADYS:  A mortgage!!!!  What is it on?
ALGERNON:  I don’t know.  What difference does that make?  It is a
mortgage.  That’s all that’s necessary.
GLADYS:  Can it be a mortgage on the old farm?
ALGERNON:  (Moves over to R.)  Certainly, on the old farm!!!!  The
dear old homestead in New Hampshire.  (Takes paper from pocket.
Crosses over to GLADYS.)  I have also the paper that always goes
with the mortgage.  Sign this paper and the mortgage shall be
yours, refuse–and–do you mind my coming closer so that I can
hiss this in your ear?
GLADYS:  Not at all, come right over.
ALGERNON:  (Close to GLADYS.)  Refuse (Hiss), I say, and you and
your child shall be thrown into the streets to starve.  (Hiss.)
GLADYS:  (Crosses R.)  Oh, I must have time to drink–I mean think.
But this is infamous.  The landlord will–
ALGERNON:  I am the landlord.  Now will you sign the papers?
GLADYS:  No, a thousand times no!!!!!  (Chord.) (ALGERNON conducts
Chord.)  No!!!!
BIRDIE:  (Hand to ear.)  Good gracious, don’t scream so, where do
you think you are?
ALGERNON:  You won’t sign?
GLADYS:  No, do your worst, throw me into the street with my child.
He is sick, dying!!!!
ALGERNON:  What’s the matter with him?  (Goes to bed.) (PHONSIE is
heaving and whistling.)  Great heavens, he has the heaves.  (Goes R.)
BIRDIE:  What are you doing for him?
GLADYS:  Trying the hot air treatment.
BIRDIE:  I should think you would be expert at that.
GLADYS:  The doctor says he has grey matter in his brain.
BIRDIE:  (Comes down L.)  I am sorry, very sorry.
ALGERNON:  Sorry!  Bah, this is a cheap play for sympathy!  (To
GLADYS:) Will you sign the papers?
GLADYS:  Never, I defy you:  (To BIRDIE.)  As for you, beautiful fiend
that you are, you came between me and my husband; you stole him
from me with your dog-faced beauty; I mean doll-faced.  But I can
see your finish, I can see you taking poison in about fifteen
minutes.
BIRDIE:  (Over to ALGERNON.)  Put me wise, is this true?
ALGERNON:  No, ’tis false, false as hell!!!!!  (Points up.)
GLADYS:  It’s true, as true as heaven.  (Points down.)  I swear it.
ALGERNON:  (Crosses up to GLADYS.)  Why, curse you, I’ll–
GLADYS:  (With pistol.)  Stand back!!!!!  I’m a desperate woman!!!!!
ALGERNON:  (Center.)  Foiled, curse the luck, foiled by a mere slip
of a girl.
BIRDIE:  What’s to be done?
ALGERNON:  (Yells.)  Silence!!!!  (Business.)  Once aboard the lugger
the girl must and shall be mine!!!!
BIRDIE:  But how do you propose to lug her there?  (ALGERNON moves
up to door.)
GLADYS:  Oh, I see it all.  You have brought this she-devil here
to work off her bad gags on me.  Man, have you no heart?
ALGERNON:  (Comes down C.)  Of course I have a heart.  I have also
eyes, ears, nose, tongue and–
BIRDIE:  Brains, calves’ brains–breaded.
ALGERNON:  That will be about all from you.  Go, leave us!
BIRDIE:  Alone?
ALGERNON:  Alone!
GLADYS:  Alone!
PHONSIE:  (In sepulchral tone.)  Oh, Gee!
BIRDIE:  But it’s hardly decent.  You need a tamer.
ALGERNON:  Go!  (Crosses to R.)  Go, I say, before it is too late.
BIRDIE:  Oh, there’s no hurry.  Every place is open.
ALGERNON:  Don’t sass me, Birdie Bedslatz, but clear out, scat!!!!
BIRDIE:  Ain’t he the awful scamp?  (Starts to door.)
GLADYS:  (Clinging to her.)  No, you cannot, must not go.  Don’t
leave me alone with that piano mover.
BIRDIE:  I must go.  I have poison to buy.  (At door.)  Ah, Algernon
O’Flaherty, if there was more men in the world like you, there’d
be less women like me–I just love to say that.  Ta–ta.  (PHONSIE
blows pea-shooter at her as she Exits.  She screams and grabs
cheek.)
ALGERNON:  (To GLADYS back.)  So, proud beauty, at last we are alone!
GLADYS:  Inhuman monster!!!  What new villainy do you propose?
ALGERNON:  None, it’s all old stuff.  Listen, Gladys.  When I see
you again, all the old love revives and I grow mad, mad.
GLADYS:  You dare to speak of love to me?  Why, from the first
moment I saw you, I despised you.  And now I tell you to your face
that I hate and loathe you, for the vile, contemptible wretch that
you are.
ALGERNON:  (Center.)  Be careful, girl!  I can give you wealth, money,
jewels–jewels fit for a king’s ransom.
GLADYS:  (Runs into his arms.)  Oh, you can–Where are they?
ALGERNON:  They are in hock for the moment, but see, here are the
tickets.  I shall get them out, anon.
GLADYS:  Dastardly wretch!!!!!  With your pawn tickets to try and
cop out a poor sewing girl.  (Up at door.)  There is the door, go!
(Points other way.)
ALGERNON:  (Up to her.)  Why curse you, I’ll–
GLADYS:  Strike, you coward!  (Chord.) (ALGERNON conducts Chord.)
ALGERNON:  Coward!!!!  (He conducts same Chord an Octave higher.)
GLADYS:  Yes, coward. . . . Now go, and never cross this threshold
again!!
ALGERNON:  (Going up stage.)  So, I’m fired with the threshold gag?
Very well, I go, but I shall return. . . .  I shall return!  (Exits.)
PHONSIE:  (Blows pea-blower after him.)  Who was that big stiff,
mommer, the instalment man?
GLADYS:  No, darling, he is the floor-walker in a slaughter house.
PHONSIE:  Mommer, when do I eat?
GLADYS:  Alas, we cannot buy food, we are penniless.
PHONSIE:  If you would only put your jewels in soak, mommer.
GLADYS:  What, hock me sparks?  Never!  I may starve, yes, but I’ll
starve like a lady in all my finery!
PHONSIE:  Mommer, I want to eat.
GLADYS:  What shall I do?  My child hungry, dying, without even the
price of a shave!  Oh, my heart is like my brother on the railroad,
breaking–breaking–breaking–(Weeps.)
PHONSIE:  Ah, don’t cry, mommer.  You’ll have the whole place damp.
You keep on sewing and I’ll keep on dying.
GLADYS:  Very well.  (Drying eyes.)  But first I’ll go out and get
a can of beer.  Thank goodness, we always have beer money.
PHONSIE:  Oh yes, mommer, do rush the growler.  Me coppers is
toastin’. And don’t forget your misery cape and the music that
goes with you, will you, mommer?
GLADYS:  I’ll get those.
PHONSIE:  And you’d better take some handkerchiefs.  You may want
to cry.  But don’t cry in the beer, mommer, it makes it flat.
GLADYS:  Thank you, baby, I do love to weep.  Oh, if we only had a
blizzard, I’d take you out in your nightie.  But wait, sweetheart,
wait till it goes below zero.  Then you shall go out with mommer,
bare-footed.
PHONSIE:  Don’t stand chewing the rag with the bartender, will you,
mommer?
GLADYS:  Only till he puts a second head on the beer.  (Exit R.)
PHONSIE:  Gee, it’s fierce to be a stage child and dying.  I wonder
where my popper is?  I want my popper–I want my popper.  (Bawls.)
MOE REISS:  (Enters.)  Why, what is the matter, my little man?
PHONSIE:  Oh, I’m so lonely, I want my popper.
MOE REISS:  And where is your popper?
PHONSIE:  Mommer says he is in Philadelphia.  (Sniffles.)
MOE REISS:  (Lifts hat reverently.)  Dead, and his child doesn’t
know.  And where is your mama?
PHONSIE:  Oh, she’s went out to chase the can.
MOE REISS:  And what is your name, my little man?
PHONSIE:  Alphonso.  Ain’t that practically the limit?
MOE REISS:  Alphonso?  I once had a little boy named Alphonso, who
might have been about your age.
PHONSIE:  And what prevented him?
MOE REISS:  (Sighs.)  Alas, I lost him!
PHONSIE:  That was awful careless of you.  You oughtn’t to have
took him out without his chain.  (Sniffs.)
MOE REISS:  What’s the matter with your nose?
PHONSIE:  I have the glanders–and the heaves.  I get all the horse
diseases.  Father was a race track tout.
MOE REISS:  A race track tout?  What is your last name?
PHONSIE:  Dressuitcase, Alphonso Dressuitcase.
MOE REISS:  Dressuitcase?  And have you heavy shingle marks on your
person, great blue welts?
PHONSIE:  You bet I have, and my popper put them there, too.
MOE REISS:  Why, it’s my boy, Phonsie, my little Phonsie.  Don’t
you know me?  It’s popper.  (Slams him in face hard with open hand.)
PHONSIE:  Well, your style is familiar, but you don’t need to show
off!
GLADYS:  (Enters.  Carrying Growler carefully.)  Moe!  Moe!  My husband!
(Buries face in can.)
MOE REISS:  Gladys!  Gladys!  My wife!  (Takes can from GLADYS.)
PHONSIE:  (Comes between them.)  Here, I want to have my fever
reduced.  (Back to bed.)
GLADYS:  Where have you been all these years, Moe?
MOE REISS:  Just bumming around, just bumming around.  When I
deserted you and copped out Birdie Bedslatz, I went from bad to
worse, from Jersey City to Hoboken. [1] When my senses returned,
I was insane.
[1] Local.
GLADYS:  My poor husband, how you must have suffered!
MOE REISS:  At heart, I was always true to you and our little boy,
and I want to come back home.
GLADYS:  But tell me, Moe, how are you fixed?  (Tries to feel his
vest pocket.)
MOE REISS:  Fine, I am running a swell gambling joint.
GLADYS:  Splendid!  Now, Phonsie shall have proper nourishment.
MOE REISS:  He shall have all the food he can eat.  (Up to bed.)
GLADYS:  Yes, and all the beer he can drink.
MOE REISS:  Great heavens, I could never pay for that.
GLADYS:  Ah, then he will have to cut out his souse.  Dear little
chap; he loved to get tanked up.  Oh look at him, Moe, he is the
living image of you.  I think if he lives, he will be a great bull
fighter.  (PHONSIE has finished the beer, and is sucking at a nipple
on large bottle marked “Pure Rye.”)
MOE REISS:  Then he does take after me–dear little chap.  (Hits him.)
GLADYS:  Indeed he does.  But is it safe for you to come here, Moe?
MOE REISS:  Not with Whitman [1] on my trail.  You know, Gladys,
in the eyes of the world, I am guilty.
[1] Local District Attorney.
GLADYS:  Then the world lies.  (Chord.  ALGERNON comes on from R. I
and conducts and then Exits.)  I still trust you, my husband, though
the police want you for stealing moth balls.  (Crash off.)  What’s
that?  (Runs to door.)  Oh, it’s the health department.  They have
come with the garbage wagon to arrest you.  Quick, in there.  (Points
to door R.)
MOE REISS:  No, let them come.  I am here to see my wife and here
I shall remain.
GLADYS:  But for our child’s sake.  See, he holds up his little
hands and pleads for you to go.  (PHONSIE in pugilistic attitude.)
PHONSIE:  Say, pop, if you don’t get a wiggle on and duck in there,
there’ll be something doing.  (Business.)
MOE REISS:  My boy, I can refuse you nothing.  (Exits.)
GLADYS:  (At door C.)  They are sneaking up, on rubbers!  (To PHONSIE.)
Lie down, Fido.  (Guarding door R. Enter ALGERNON and BIRDIE, Door C.)
ALGERNON:  There’s some hellish mystery here!
BIRDIE:  You can search me.
ALGERNON:  (Sees GLADYS.)  Aha!  Now will you sign those papers?
GLADYS:  Never.  (Bus.)  I’ll sign nothing.  (Down R.)
ALGERNON:  (Takes carrot from his hip pocket.)  You won’t?  There,
curse you, take that.  (Hits her in neck with carrot.)
GLADYS:  In the neck!  In the neck, where I always get it!
ALGERNON:  (Center.)  Quick, Birdie, seize the child and run.
BIRDIE:  (Left, looks scornfully at PHONSIE.)  You’ve got your nerve.
He weighs a ton!!
PHONSIE:  Oh!  She’s going to kidnap me!!  Assistance!!
ALGERNON:  Silence!!  Enough!!  (To GLADYS.)  I have just come from
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
GLADYS:  Well?
ALGERNON:  I have reported to them that your child has the heaves.
GLADYS:  Well?
ALGERNON:  The Society is sending a horse ambulance to take him to
the dump.
GLADYS:  Dump?  To the dump?!!!  No, no, it’s a cruel, hideous jest!
Take away my little dying boy?  It would kill him, you understand,
it would kill him!!
PHONSIE:  (Toughly.)  Sure, it would kill me!!  (Bites off big chew
of Tobacco.)
ALGERNON:  Nevertheless, in five minutes the horse ambulance will
be here.
GLADYS:  Oh no! no! no!  What if my child should die?
ALGERNON:  Then they will make glue out of his carcass.
GLADYS:  Glue.  Aw!  (Shakes snow on herself from box hanging over
the table L.)
PHONSIE:  I don’t want to be no glue, mommer, I’d be all stuck up.
GLADYS:  (Goes C. to PHONSIE.)  Why this fiendish plot?  What have
I done that you thus pursue me?
ALGERNON:  (R. C.)  You repulsed my hellish caresses.
GLADYS:  Oh, I will do anything to save my child.  I’ll try to love
you. . . .  I will love!  See?  (Business.) (Into his arms.)  I love
you now!
MOE REISS:  (Enter, center.)  What’s this?  My wife in that man’s
arms?  Oh!  (Crosses L.)
GLADYS:  (At right, to MOE REISS.)  Oh, Moe, I can explain.  (Grabs
his throat and shakes him.)
MOE REISS:  (To GLADYS.)  Explain!!!  How?  I go away and desert you
for eight years.  (Turns from her and goes L.)  In that short absence
you forget your husband.  (Turns to her.)  I return to find you in
his arms, before my very nose.  (Smashes PHONSIE in face.) (Business.)
(He sees BIRDIE.)  You, Birdie!
BIRDIE:  Yes, I, little Birdie–Birdie on the spot.
MOE REISS:  Ah, you she-fiend, you lady demon!  (Kisses her.)
GLADYS:  (Screams.)  No, no!  (Runs to him.)  It’s all a plot!  A hideous
plot to part us!  This man has complained to the S. P. C. A. that
our little Phonsie has the heaves.  They are sending a horse
ambulance to take him to the dump!  They’ll make glue out of his
carcass!  (To ALGERNON.)  You see what you have done!  (Beats him on
back.)  Tell my husband, you devil, tell him the truth!!!
ALGERNON:  (To MOE REISS) (C.)  Well, if you must know the truth,
your wife loves me and was forcing her caresses upon me when you
entered.
MOE REISS:  It’s true then, it’s true?
PHONSIE:  (Sits up.)  No, popper, it’s false, and I can prove it.
ALGERNON:  The child is delirious from the heaves!
PHONSIE:  I’ll heave you out of here in a minute.  Listen, popper,
mommer’s done the best she could.  It ain’t easy to nurse a dying
child who is liable to croak at any moment.  But she’s done that,
popper, she’s often went without her dill pickle so I could have
my spavin cure.  She thought I might get well and strong and maybe
get a job as a safe mover.  But I’ve been so busy dying I couldn’t
go to work.  (Shakes fist at ALGERNON.)  Don’t believe that man,
popper; I’m dying, cross my heart if I ain’t dying, so I couldn’t
tell a lie.  (Back to bed.)
MOE REISS:  Oh, my boy!  My boy! (heart-brokenly.) (Hits PHONSIE.)
GLADYS:  Dh, Moe Reiss, don’t you believe him?
ALGERNON:  (Left of C.)  Of course not, he saw you with your arms
around my neck.
MOE REISS:  Yes, I saw it, I seen it.
BIRDIE:  I can swear to it, if necessary.
PHONSIE:  I can swear too, popper, want to hear me?
MOE REISS:  No, I have heard enough.  Now I intend to act.  (Throws
off coat, L.)
ALGERNON:  What do you mean?
MOE REISS:  I mean that either you or I will never leave this place
alive.  For I tell you plainly, as sure as there is a poker game
above us, I mean to kill you!
ALGERNON:  (Throws off coat and hat.)  Well, if it’s a roughhouse
you’re looking for, I’m right there with the goods.  (Struggle.)
PHONSIE:  Give him an upper cut, popper, soak him!!!
BIRDIE:  Knife him, Algernon, knife him!  (Has out her hat pin.)
(During struggle, PHONSIE shoots three times.) (As they struggle
to window, ALGERNON turns back, and PHONSIE sees [after third shot]
his vest is a target and fires three times.  Bell on each shot.)
Curse you, you’ve got me.  Here are your three cigars.  (Falls
dead, C.)
MOE REISS:  (Kneels and feels heart.)  Dead!!!  Who could have done
this?
PHONSIE:  Father, I cannot tell a lie, I done it with my little
hatchet.  (Shows big gun and a picture of George Washington.  All
the others lift American flags and wave them.) (PHONSIE L. waving
flag, MOE and GLADYS C. BIRDIE dead in chair R.)
STAR SPANGLED BANNER, FF, AS CURTAIN FALLS
BY
EDGAR ALLAN WOOLF
Author of “Youth,” “Little Mother,” “Mon
Desir,” “The Locks at Panama,"
“Lady Gossip,” Etc., Etc.
THE LOLLARD
CHARACTERS
   ANGELA MAXWELL               HARRY MAXWELL
   FRED SALTUS                  MISS CAREY
SCENE:  The apartment of Miss Carey, a hardworking modiste about
45 years of age, rather sharp in manner, very prudish and a hater
of men.
                TIME:  About 2 A.M.
When the curtain rises, the stage is dark.  First, “feminine snores"
are heard, then a sharp ringing of bell.  Then MISS CAREY from her
bed in next room (curtained off, but partly visible) calls out:
MISS CAREY:  Who is it?
VOICE:  (Off stage.)  It’s me.  Open!
MISS CAREY:  (Poking her night-capped head out of curtains.)  Well,
who are you?
VOICE:  (Off stage.)  You don’t know me.  But that’s all right.
Please let me in–hurry!  Hurry!
MISS CAREY:  (Rising and getting into a kimono.)  Well–whoever you
are–what do you mean by waking me at two in the morning?  I’ll
report this to the janitor.  (She turns up light and opens door.
ANGELA MAXWELL rushes in–in fluffy peignoir–her hair in pretty
disorder–her hands full of wearing apparel, etc., as if she just
snatched same up in haste.  An opera coat, a pair of slippers, etc.)
ANGELA:  (Rushing in–closing door after her and silencing MISS
CAREY by the mysterious way she seizes her by the wrist.)  Listen,
you don’t know me, but I’ve just left my husband.
MISS CAREY:  (Sharply.)  Well, that’s no reason why I should leave
my bed.
ANGELA:  (Reassuringly.)  You can go right back again, dear–in fact,
I’ll go with you and we’ll talk it over there.
MISS CAREY:  I don’t wish to talk it over anywhere, and–
ANGELA:  Well, surely, you don’t think it was wrong of me to leave
Harry–now do you?
MISS CAREY:  I never blame any woman for leaving any man.
ANGELA:  See, I knew it.  After I fired the Wedgewood vase at
him–and just for doing it he was brute enough to call me “Vixen,"–
I snatched up as much as I could that was worth taking, and left him
forever.  (Suddenly, as she sees dress on model.)  Oh, what a
lovely little frock.  (Back to other tone.)  Yes, forever; and it
was only when I stood out in the cold hall that I realized it would
have been better to have left him forever when I was all dressed
in the morning.  (Beginning to shiver and weep.)  Take my advice,
dear, if you ever leave your husband, never do it on a cold night.
MISS CAREY:  (Sharply.)  I’m not married.
ANGELA:  (Weeping copiously and shivering.)  Well, then, you needn’t
bother, dear, about the weather, ’cause you never will be married.
MISS CAREY:  No, I never will–catch me selling my freedom to any
selfish brute of a man.
ANGELA:  (As before.)  See, I knew it.  I said to myself, that little
lady on the second floor who makes dresses with a long, thin nose–
MISS CAREY:  (Outraged.)  Makes dresses with a long, thin nose?
ANGELA:  Yes–she’s the only one in the whole apartment house I can
go to–she’s the only one won’t give Harry right.
MISS CAREY:  No man is ever right.
ANGELA:  I’m commencing to believe all men are brutes.
MISS CAREY:  Of course they are.  (Commencing to thaw.)  Have a cup
of tea.  (She goes to table to prepare tea things.)
ANGELA:  Thanks–I brought my own tea with me.  (Takes a little paper
bag of tea out of one of the slippers and crosses to MISS CAREY.)
If I had struck him with the vase, I could understand his calling
me “Vixen” (Beginning to weep again.)–but I only flung it at him,
’cause I cracked it by accident in the morning, and I didn’t want
him to find it out.  He was always calling me “butter-fingers."
(Sits at opposite side of table.)
MISS CAREY:  Oh, he was always calling you names.
ANGELA:  No, that’s all he ever called me–"Butter-fingers.”  (Cries
again.)
MISS CAREY:  (Pouring tea.)  Oh, he’s the kind that just loves to
stay home and nag.
ANGELA:  I’d like to catch any husband I ever get, nag.
MISS CAREY:  Oh, a pouter–I know that kind.
ANGELA:  Oh, no.  Why, every time I insulted him he kissed me–the
brute.  (After a second’s pause.)  But–excuse me–how do you know
so many kinds of men if you’ve never been married?
MISS CAREY:  (Quickly.)  Boarders–to make ends meet, I’ve always
had to have a male boarder since I was left an orphan.  (She
rises–turns her back to audience–gives a touch to her pigtail,
during the laugh to this line.  This business always builds laugh.)
ANGELA:  (Absent-mindedly.)  Well, I’ve heard that male boarders are
very nice.
MISS CAREY:  I’ve never had a nice one yet, but I’ve named nearly
all the style male brutes there are.  What kind of a brute have
you?  (She sips tea.)
ANGELA:  Why, I don’t know–I’ve often wondered–you might call
Harry a “lollard.”
MISS CAREY:  A lollard?
ANGELA:  Yes, I invented the word, and believe me, a woman suffers
with a lollard.  (At this, MISS CAREY lets her spoon fall in cup.)
MISS CAREY:  I should think she would.  How did a sweet young thing
like you ever meet such a type of a vertebrate?
ANGELA:  At a military ball, and oh Mrs.–
MISS CAREY:  Miss Carey.
ANGELA:  Miss Carey–he was the handsomest specimen.  His hair
looked so spick–his shoulders were so big and broad–his teeth
so white–and his skin, well, Miss Carey, if you’d seen him, I’ll
bet you’d have just gone crazy to kiss him yourself.  (MISS CAREY,
who is drinking tea, nearly chokes on this–coughing on the tea
which goes down the wrong way.)
MISS CAREY:  (After the business.)  How did he lose his looks?
ANGELA:  By becoming a lollard.  Listen!  (They pull chairs in front
of table together, teacups in hand.)  It happened on the honeymoon–
on the train–as we sat hand in hand, when all at once, the wind
through the window, started to blow his hair the wrong way, and
oh, Miss Carey, what do you think I discovered?
MISS CAREY: He had been branded on the head as a criminal.
ANGELA:  Oh nothing so pleasant as that–but the hair that I thought
grew so lovely and plentifully, had been coaxed by a wet brush
from the back over the front, and from the east over to the west.
(Indicates by imitating action on her own head.)
MISS CAREY: Oh, a lollard is a disappointment of the hair.
ANGELA: No, Miss Carey, no.  Listen.  I said, “Oh, Harry, your
hair which I thought grew so evenly and plentifully all over your
head really only grows in patches.”  He only answered, “Yes, and
now that we’re married, Angela, I don’t have to fool you by brushing
it fancy anymore.”  In despair, I moaned “Yes, Harry–fool me–go
on love, fool me and brush it fancy.”
MISS CAREY; (Rising and crossing R.)  That was your first mistake.
No woman should ever call any man “love.”
ANGELA:  Oh, I didn’t know what I said–I was so busy the whole
journey pulling his hair from the back to the front and the east
to the west (Same business of illustrating.)–and then, oh Miss
Carey, what do you think was the next thing I discovered?
MISS CAREY:  (In horror.)  His teeth only grew in patches.
ANGELA:  No, but I had fallen in love with a pair of tailor’s
shoulder-pads–yes–when he took off his coat that night, he shrunk
so, I screamed (Pause–as laugh comes here.)–thinking I was in a
room with a strange man–but all he muttered was “Angie, I can
loll about in easy things now, I’m married"–and that’s how gradually
his refined feet began to look like canal-boats–his skin only
looked kissable the days he shaved–twice a week–his teeth became
tobacco stained–and to-night–to-night, Miss Carey, he stopped
wearing hemstitched pajamas and took to wearing canton flannel
night shirts.  (In depth of woe after the big laugh this gets.)
Miss Carey, have you ever seen a man in a canton flannel night
shirt?
MISS CAREY:  (After an expression of horror.)  I told you I am not
married.
ANGELA:  (Innocently.)  Oh, excuse me, I was thinking of your boarders.
(MISS CAREY screams “what” and shows herself insulted beyond words.)
Is it any wonder my love for him has grown cold?  Men expect a
woman to primp up for them–we must always look our best to hold
their love–but once they wheedle us into signing our names to the
marriage contract–they think (Suddenly, seeing dress again.)–Oh
Miss Carey, what do you charge for a frock like that?
MISS CAREY:  I have no night rates for gowns, Mrs.–
ANGELA:  Just call me Angie–’cause I probably will live with you
now.  (Slips her arm through MISS CAREY’S, laying her head on the
older woman’s shoulder.)
MISS CAREY:  (Disengaging her.)  We’ll talk that over in the morning–
if you want, you may sleep upon that couch–I’ll put out the light.
(She does so.)  I’m going to bed–I must get a little rest.  (She
gives a sharp turn and goes to her room.  Blue light floods stage.
Through the half open curtain she is seen having trouble with her
bed covers–getting them too high up, then too far down, etc.  Big
laughs on this business.)
ANGELA:  (Taking down hair.)  Miss Carey, you said you were an
orphan–I’m an orphan, too.  (There is no answer.)  I can’t tell you
how I appreciate your insisting on my staying–let me make your
breakfast in the morning, Miss Carey.  (No answer.)  Harry might at
least try to find me.  Aren’t men brutes, Miss Carey?
MISS CAREY:  (Loudly from within.)  They certainly are.
ANGELA:  (Lets peignoir slip off her shoulders, is in pretty silk
pajamas.)  In the morning, I must think how I can earn my own living.
(She lies down as snores come from next room.)  Miss Carey, are you
asleep?  (Snore.)  Oh dear, she’s asleep before I am–she might have
waited.  (A key is heard in the door–Angela sits up in alarm–as
key turns, she screams.)  Oh Miss Carey, wake up–someone’s at the
door–wake up.  (Miss Carey jumps up and out of bed.)
MISS CAREY:  Good Lord–what is it now?  (Puts up light–the door
opens, and immaculately dressed, handsome young man in evening
clothes, white gloves, etc., enters–FRED SALTUS.)
ANGELA:  Burglars!  (She runs behind curtain of MISS CAREY’S room.)
MISS CAREY:  You simpleton.  I told you I had a male boarder.  This
is it, Mr. Saltus.
FRED:  Oh, Miss Carey, pardon me–I’d have come in by the back door,
but I didn’t know you were entertaining company.
MISS CAREY:  I’m not entertaining anyone–I’m trying to get a little
rest before it’s time for me to get up–and young lady, if you’ll
come out of my room and let me in, I’ll beg of you not to disturb
me again.  (She shoves ANGELA out in her pajamas, unintentionally
knocking her into MR. SALTUS, and goes back to bed.) (Ad. lib.
talk.)
ANGELA:  (Embarrassed and rushing behind the frock on the dressmaker’s
figure.)  I’ve made her awfully cross–but I thought it must be a
burglar–’cause, you see, I never knew boarders were allowed out
so late at night.
FRED:  (Recognizing her.)  What are you doing here?
ANGELA:  (Forced to confess.)  I’ve left my husband.  (He gives a
whistle of surprise.) You know he’s the man on the floor below–you
may have seen me with him–once in a great while.
FRED:  I’ve seen you often (Delighted.)–and so you’ve left him, eh?
ANGELA:  Yes–and I’m really quite upset about it–naturally he’s
the first husband I’ve ever left–and you can imagine how a woman
feels if you’ve left your husband–that is your wife.  (All in one
breath.)  Are you married?
FRED:  No indeed–not a chance.
ANGELA:  (Quickly fishes her opera cloak off couch–slips it over
her and goes to couch.)  Then come here and sit down.  (He does so.)
I should think the girls would all be crazy about you.
FRED:  Oh–they are–are you boarding here too now?
ANGELA:  Yes, but Miss Carey doesn’t know it yet.
FRED:  Tell me, have you ever noticed me coming in or going out of
the building?
ANGELA:  Oh yes, indeed–I used to point you out to Harry and show
him how you always looked so immaculate and dapper–just as he
used to look before we were married.  (Starting to weep.)
FRED:  Oh, you’ll go back to your home to-morrow.
ANGELA:  No–I’ll never enter it again–never again–except for
lunch.
FRED:  Then you’re planning a divorce?
ANGELA:  (As it dawns on her–with a smile.)  I suppose it would be
well to get something like that.
FRED:  Is he in love with another woman?
ANGELA:  (Indignantly.)  My Harry–I guess not.  (His hand is stretched
toward her–in anger she slaps it.)
FRED:  Then you’ll never get it (Making love to her.) unless you
fall in love with another man and let your husband get the divorce.
ANGELA:  (Innocently.)  I think I’d like that better–I’ll tell Miss
Carey (She approaches curtain–a snore makes her change her
mind.)–I’ll tell her later.
FRED:  I’m awfully glad I’m a fellow boarder here.  (He advances
to her–as he is about to put his arm about her–suddenly a pounding
on door and a gruff voice without:) Open–open!
ANGELA:  (In terror.)  Oh, it’s my husband–it’s Harry.
FRED:  Don’t talk, or he’ll hear you.
ANGELA:  I’ll hide–and you open, or he’ll break down the door.
FRED:  I’ll have nothing to do with this mixup.
HARRY:  (Loudly, without.)  Open, or I’ll bang–down–the–door.
ANGELA:  If you don’t open, he’ll do it–he’s a regular “door-banger.”
FRED:  Well, I’ll not.
ANGELA:  Then I’ll get Miss Carey.  (Up to curtains again.)  Miss
Carey–Miss Carey–get up.
MISS CAREY:  (Sticking her head out of curtains.)  My Gawd, what is
it now?
ANGELA:  (After struggle as to how to explain.)  My husband is here
to see us.
MISS CAREY:  Confound your husband.
HARRY:  (Outside.)  I want my wife.
ANGELA:  (Pleading.)  Oh, Miss Carey, the poor man wants his wife–
tell him I’m not here.
MISS CAREY:  (Jumping up–to FRED.)  You go to your room, Mr.
Saltus–I’ll bet you were afraid to open the door.  (FRED goes to
his room.)  And you go into my bed–if he sees you, I’ll never get
any sleep.
ANGELA:  Don’t hurt my Harry’s feelings, Miss Carey–he’s awfully
sensitive.  (She goes behind curtains.)
MISS CAREY:  No, I won’t hurt his feelings–(Opening door fiercely
for HARRY.)  What do you want?
HARRY:  (Pushing her aside as he rushes in.)  My wife–she’s in here.
MISS CAREY:  (Following him down.)  She’s not here–and you get
out–what do you mean by waking me up at this hour?
HARRY:  I’ve waked up everybody else in the building–why should
you sleep?
MISS CAREY:  I’ve never seen you before, but now that I have, I
don’t wonder your wife left you.
HARRY:  Madam, you look like a woman who could sympathize with a
man.
MISS CAREY:  With a man?  Never–now get out.
HARRY:  (Making a tour of the room–she following.)  Not till I’ve
searched your place–my wife must be here.
MISS CAREY:  I don’t know your wife–and I don’t want to.
HARRY:  Why, madam–I’m crazy about her–suppose I’m the only man
in the world who would be, but she’s my doll.
MISS CAREY:  Well, you’ve lost your doll–good night.
HARRY:  Oh, I’ll get her back again–but a change has seemed to
come over her of late, and to-night she broke out in a fury and
hit me violently over the head with a Wedgewood vase.
ANGELA:  (Rushing out–ready to slap him again.)  Oh Harry, I did
not–it never touched you.
MISS CAREY:  (Throwing up her hands.)  Now I’ll never get to sleep.
HARRY:  (Turning on MISS CAREY.)  Oh, I understand it all–it’s you
who’ve come between us–you designing, deceitful homebreaker.
MISS CAREY:  You leave my apartment–you impertinent man.
HARRY:  Not without my wife.
ANGELA:  Then you’ll stay forever–’cause I’m not going with you.
(She sits right of little table.)
MISS CAREY:  See here–you argue this out between you–but I’m going
to bed–but don’t you argue above a whisper or I’ll ring for the
police–the idea of you two galavanting about my apartments.
(Going behind curtains.)
(A funny scene ensues between husband and wife–they start their
argument in whispered pantomime–she shakes her finger at him–he
shakes back at her–it finally grows slightly louder and louder
until they are yelling at each other.)
ANGELA:  (Screaming.)  If you say the vase hit you–you’re a wicked–
HARRY:  I don’t care anything about the vase–you’re coming downstairs
with me.  (He pulls her off chair and swings her R.)
ANGELA:  (Falling on couch.)  I’m not.
HARRY:  (Grabbing her again.)  You are.
ANGELA:  I’m not.  (He tries to pull her to door–she bites his
finger, and breaking away, runs up to curtains again.)  Miss Carey,
Miss Carey, wake up, he bit me.  (MISS CAREY dashes out in fury,
ANGELA hangs to her.)  Oh, Miss Carey, you’re the only one I have
in all the world to keep me from this monster.  Oh, Miss Carey,
pity me, make believe you’re my mother.
MISS CAREY:  I told you I’m not married.
ANGELA:  Well, think how you’d feel if you were and I were your own
little girl and a wicked man was ill-treating me, etc.  (She finally
touches the mother vein in MISS CAREY.)
MISS CAREY:  (Affected.)  Go into my room, dear.  (She leads her up
to bed behind curtains.  After Angela disappears behind curtains,
MISS CAREY turns–facing HARRY.)  I’ll settle with this viper.
(Coming down.)  Aren’t you ashamed of yourself?
HARRY:  Why should I’be ashamed?
MISS CAREY:  (Resolutely.)  Because you’re a lollard.
HARRY:  I’m what?
MISS CAREY:  You’re one of those vile creatures whose hair grows
from east to west.  (Dramatically.)  Where are your refined feet
now? )
HARRY:  (Thinking she’s mad.)  What on earth are you talking about?
MISS CAREY:  The man she fell in love with and married was spick
and span–his shoulders were big and broad–his teeth were white–and
his skin–well, if he were standing before me now, I’d be just
crazy to kiss him myself.
HARRY:  I was all that you say when I married her–that’s how I won
her.
MISS CAREY:  And now you’re not all that I say–that’s how you lost
her.  You can’t blame a little woman if she thinks she’s getting
a man of gold and she finds she’s got a gold brick.
HARRY:  Why, I’m not different now than I was then–only before I was
married I was like all men, I did everything to appear at my best–
to fool her.
MISS CAREY:  Fool her now–we women love to be fooled.  We want to
be proud of our husbands.  Most of us get gold bricks, but we don’t
want anyone else to know it.
HARRY:  By George, there may be something in all this.  How did you
come to know it?
MISS CAREY:  I’m an old maid, and old maids know more about men
than anyone–that’s why they stay old maids.  What were you wearing
the first time you met?
HARRY:  (Reminiscently.)  A suit of regimentals.
MISS CAREY:  (Hurrying up to door.)  Quick, go downstairs and put
’em on and come up as quick as you can.
HARRY:  (Looks at himself in glass near door.)  By George–you’re
right.  Oh, Miss Carey, I am a lollard.  (He runs off.)
MISS CAREY:  You’re a lollard, all right.  Now young woman–get
your things together and get ready to go–young woman, do you hear
me?  (She goes up to curtains, and opens them–there lies ANGELA
cozily huddled in a heap, fast asleep.)  Well, if the little fluff
hasn’t fallen asleep.  Here–wake up–the idea.
ANGELA:  (In her sleep.)  Harry, be gentle with Miss Carey–she can’t
help it.  (MISS CAREY shakes her so she jumps up.)  Oh Miss Carey–
hello.
MISS CAREY:  Now get your things together–your husband is coming
for you in a minute.
ANGELA:  (A la Ibsen.)  I shall never return to Harry again–
I’ve left him for life.
MISS CAREY:  You’ll not stay here all that time.
ANGELA:  (As she comes down, dreamily.)  No, I intend to marry
another–and oh, Miss Carey, his hair is so spick–his shoulders
so broad–his teeth are so white.
MISS CAREY:  Good Lord, woman, now you’re commencing with another.
Who is it?
ANGELA:  Surely you must have foreseen my danger–I’m in love with
your boarder.
MISS CAREY:  Why, you must be crazy–girl–I won’t let you enter
into such a madness.
ANGELA:  (In horror.)  Oh Miss Carey, don’t tell me you’re in love
with him yourself.  (MISS CAREY sinks in chair.)  But you’ll not get
him.
MISS CAREY:  Why, my dear, I wouldn’t have him for a birth-day
present and neither will you.  (After an ad lib. argument.)  We’ll
see.  (She calls off in next room.)  Fire!  Fire!!  Fire!!!
(ANGELA gets scared and starts to run one way as FRED runs in–in
canton flannels without toupee, etc., etc.  ANGELA flops.  After
audience has seen FRED’S condition, he realizes presence of ladies
and rushes back to door–sticking his head out.)
FRED:  Where?  Where’s the fire?
MISS CAREY:  Go back to your bed, Mr. Saltus.  (With a look at
ANGELA.)  There was a fire.
ANGELA:  (Disgusted.)  But Miss Carey–has–put–it–out.
(On word “out” she gestures him out of room and out of her life.
FRED closes door as he withdraws head.)
ANGELA:  Oh Miss Carey, what an awful lollard that is.  (There is
a ring at bell.)
(Music commences sweet melody.)
MISS CAREY:  (Knowing it is HARRY.)  Open the door and see who it is.
(ANGELA opens the door–HARRY stands there in regimentals–handsome,
young and dapper.  ANGELA falls back in admiration.)
HARRY:  Angela.
ANGELA:  Oh, Harry darling!
MISS CAREY:  He does look good!
ANGELA:  (As she picks up her belongings.)  I’m going home with you.
MISS CAREY:  (As ANGELA goes up to HARRY.)  Don’t forget your tea
dress.  (Hands her the little bag.)
ANGELA:  I’m so tired, Harry–take me home.  (He lifts his tired
little wife up in his arms and as he goes out, she mutters:) You’re
not such a bad lollard after all.
MISS CAREY:  (Going to put out light.)  Now, thank Gawd, I’ll get a
little sleep.
CURTAIN FALLS
Author of “Van Bibber Stories,” “Soldiers of Fortune,"
The Playlets, “The Littlest Girl,” played by Robert
Hilliard for ten years, “Miss Civilization,” etc., and
many full-evening plays.
CHARACTERS
RICHARD FALLON, a millionaire mine owner.
“LOU” MOHUN, a crook.
KELLY, a Pinkerton detective.
MRS. HOWARD:
SCENE
The scene shows the interior of the sitting room of a suite in a
New York hotel of the class of the Hotel Astor or Claridge.  In
the back wall a door opens into what is the bedroom of the suite.
The hinges of this door are on the right, the door knob on the
left.  On the wall on either side of the door is hung a framed
copy of a picture by Gibson or Christy.  In the left wall, half
way down, is a door leading to the hall.  Higher up against the
wall is a writing desk on which are writing materials and a hand
telephone.  Above this pinned to the wall is a blue-print map.
In front of the desk is a gilt chair without arms.  Above and to
the right of the gilt chair is a Morris chair facing the audience.
In the seat of the chair is a valise; over the back hangs a man’s
coat.
In the right wall are two windows with practical blinds.  Below
them against the wall, stretches a leather sofa.  On it is a
suitcase, beside it on the floor a pair of men’s boots.  Below the
sofa and slightly to the left stands a table, sufficiently heavy
to bear the weight of a man leaning against it.  On this table are
magazines, a man’s sombrero, a box of safety matches, a pitcher
of ice water and a glass, and hanging over the edge of the table,
in view of the audience, are two blue prints held down by pieces
of ore.  The light that comes through the two windows is of a sunny
day in August.
WHEN THE CURTAIN RISES
RICHARD FALLON is discovered at table arranging the specimens of
ore upon the blue prints.  He is a young man of thirty-five, his
face is deeply tanned, his manner is rough and breezy.  He is
without a coat, and his trousers are held up by a belt.  He is
smoking a cigar.
FALLON crosses to Morris chair, opens valise, turns over papers,
clothing, fails to find that for which he is looking and closes
the valise.  He recrosses to suit case which is at lower end of
the sofa.  He breaks it open and searches through more papers,
shirts, coats.  Takes out another blue print, tightly rolled.
Unrolls it, studies it, and apparently satisfied, with his left
hand, places it on table.
In attempting to close the suit case the half nearer the audience
slips over the foot of the sofa, and there falls from it to the floor,
a heavy “bull dog” revolver.  FALLON stares at it, puzzled, as
though trying to recall when he placed it in his suit case.  Picks
it up.  Looks at it.  Throws it carelessly into suit case and shuts
it.  His manner shows he attaches no importance to the revolver.
He now surveys the blue prints and the specimens of ore, as might
a hostess, who is expecting guests, survey her dinner table.  He
crosses to hand telephone.
FALLON:  (To ’phone.)  Give me the room clerk, please.  Hello?  This
is Mr. Fallon.  I’m expecting two gentlemen at five o’clock.  Send
them right up.  And, not now, but when they come, send me up a box
of your best cigars and some rye and seltzer.  Thank you.  (Starts
to leave telephone, but is recalled.)  What?  A lady?  I don’t know
any.  I don’t know a soul in New York!  What’s her name?  What–Mrs.
Tom Howard?  For heaven’s sake!  Tell her I’ll be there in one
second!  What?  Why certainly!  Tell her to come right up.  (He rises,
muttering joyfully.)  Well, well, well!
(Takes his coat from chair and puts it on.  Lifts valise from chair
and places it behind writing desk.  Kicks boots under sofa.  Places
cigar on edge of table in view of audience.  Looks about for mirror
and finding none, brushes his hair with his hands, and arranges
his tie.  Goes to door L. and opens it, expectantly.)
MRS. HOWARD enters.  She is a young woman of thirty.  Her face is
sweet, sad, innocent.  She is dressed in white–well, but simply.
Nothing about her suggests anything of the fast, or adventuress
type.
Well, Helen!  This is fine!  God bless you, this is the best thing
that’s come my way since I left Alaska.  And I never saw you looking
better.
MRS. HOWARD:  (Taking his hand.)  And, it’s good to see you, Dick.
(She staggers and sways slightly as though about to faint.)  Can I
sit down?  (She moves to Morris chair and sits back in it.)
FALLON: (In alarm.)  What is it?  Are you ill?
MRS. HOWARD:  No, I’m–I’m so glad to find you–I was afraid!  I was
afraid I wouldn’t find you, and I had to see you.  (Leaning
forward, in great distress.)  I’m in trouble, Dick–terrible trouble.
FALLON:  (Joyfully.)  And you’ve come to me to help you?
MRS. HOWARD:  Yes.
FALLON:  That’s fine!  That’s bully.  I thought, maybe, you’d just
come to talk over old times.  (Eagerly.)  And that would have been
fine, too, understand–but if you’ve come to me because you’re in
trouble, then I know you’re still my good friend, my dear old pal.
(Briskly.)  Now, listen, you say you’re in trouble.  Well, you knew
me when I was down and out in San Francisco, living on free lunches
and chop suey.  Now, look at me, Helen, I’m a bloated capitalist.
I’m a millionaire.
MRS. HOWARD:  (Nervously.)  I know, Dick, and I’m so glad!  That’s
how I knew you were here, I read about you this morning in the
papers.
FALLON:  And half they said is true, too.  See those blue prints?
Each one of them means a gold mine, and at five, I’m to unload
them on some of the biggest swells in Wall Street.  (Gently.)  Now,
all that that means is this:  I don’t know what your trouble is,
but, if money can cure it, you haven’t got any trouble.
MRS. HOWARD:  Dick, you’re just as generous and kind.  You haven’t
changed in any way.
FALLON:  I haven’t changed toward you.  How’s that husband of yours?
(Jokingly.)  I’d ought to shot that fellow.
MRS. HOWARD:  (In distress.)  That’s why I came, Dick.  Oh, Dick–
FALLON:  (Anxiously, incredulously.)  Don’t tell me there’s any
trouble between you and Tom?  Why, old Tom he just worships you.
He loves you like–
MRS. HOWARD:  That’s it.  And I want to keep his love.
FALLON:  (Laughingly.)  Keep his love?  Is that all you’ve got to
worry about?  (Throughout the following scene, Mrs. Howard speaks
in a fateful voice, like a woman beaten and hopeless.)
MRS. HOWARD:  Dick, did you ever guess why I didn’t marry you?
FALLON:  No, I knew.  You didn’t marry me because you didn’t love
me, and you did love Tom.
MRS. HOWARD:  No, I didn’t know Tom then.  And I thought I loved
you, until I met Tom.  But I didn’t marry you, because it wouldn’t
have been honest–because, three years before I met you, I had
lived with a man–as his wife.
FALLON:  Helen!  (His tone is one of amazement, but not of reproach.
In his astonishment, he picks the cigar from the table, puffs at
it standing and partly seated on the table.)
MRS. HOWARD:  (In the same dead level, hopeless voice.)  I was
seventeen years old.  I was a waiter girl at one of Fred Harvey’s
restaurants on the Santa Fe.  I was married to this man before a
magistrate.  (Fallon lifts his head.)  Three months later, when
he’d grown tired of me, he told me the magistrate who had married
us was not a magistrate but a friend of his, a man named Louis
Mohun, and he brought this man to live with us.  I should have
left him then, that was where I did wrong.  That was all I did
that was wrong.  But, I couldn’t leave him, I couldn’t, because I
was going to be a mother–and in spite of what he had done–I
begged him to marry me.
FALLON:  And–he wouldn’t?
MRS. HOWARD:  Maybe he would–but–he was killed.
FALLON:  (Eagerly.)  You?
MRS. HOWARD.  (In horror.)  God, no!
FALLON:  It’s a pity.  That’s what you should have done.
MRS. HOWARD:  He was a gambler, one night he cheated–the man he
cheated, shot him.  Then–my baby–died!  After two years I came
to San Francisco and met you and Tom.  Then you went to Klondike
and I married Tom.
FALLON:  And, you told Tom?
MRS. HOWARD:  (Lowering her face.)
FALLON:  Helen!
MRS. HOWARP:  I know, but I was afraid.  I loved him so, and I was
afraid.
FALLON:  But Tom would have understood.  Why, you thought you were
married.
MRS. HOWARD:  I was afraid.  I loved him too much.  I was too happy,
and I was afraid I’d lose him.  (FALLON shakes his head.)  But, we
were leaving San Francisco forever–to live in the East–where I
thought no one knew me.
FALLON:  Well?
MRS. HOWARD:  Well, one man knew me.  Mohun, the man who played the
magistrate.  He came East, too.  Three years ago he saw me one
night with Tom in a theatre.  He followed us and found out where
I lived.  The next morning he came to see me, and threatened to
tell!  And, I was terrified, I lost my head and gave him money.
(Slowly.)  And I have been giving him money ever since.
FALLON:  Helen!  You!  Fall for blackmail?  Why, that isn’t you.
You’re no coward!  You should have told the swine to go to Hell,
and as soon as Tom came home, you should have told him the whole
story.
MRS. HOWARD:  (Fiercely.)  My story, yes!  But not a story Mohun
threatens to tell!  In a week he had it all backed up with letters,
telegrams, God knows what he didn’t make me out to be–a vile,
degraded creature.
FALLON:  And who’d have believed it?
MRS. HOWARD:  Everybody!  He proved it!  And my children.  He threatened
to stop my children on the way to school and explain to them what
kind of a woman their mother was.  So, I paid and paid and paid.
I robbed Tom, I robbed the children.  I cheated them of food, and
clothes, I’ve seen Tom look almost ashamed of us.  And when I’d
taken all I’d dared from Tom, I pretended I wanted to be more
independent, and I learned typewriting, and needlework and decorating,
and I worked at night, and when Tom was at the office–to earn
money–to give to Mohun.  And each time he said it was the last,
and each time he came back demanding more.  God knows what he does
with it, he throws it away–on drink, on women, opium.
FALLON:  Dope fiend, too, hey?
MRS. HOWARD:  He’s that, too; he’s everything that’s vile; inhuman,
pitiless, degenerate.  Sometimes, I wonder why God lets him live.
(Her voice drops to a whisper.)  Sometimes, I almost pray to God
to let him die.  (FALLON who already has determined to kill MOHUN,
receives this speech with indifference, and continues grimly to
puff on his cigar.)  He’s killed my happiness, he’s killing me.
In keeping him alive, I’ve grown ill and old.  I see the children
growing away from me, I see Tom drawing away from me.  And now,
after all my struggles, after all my torture, Tom must be told.
Mohun is in some new trouble.  He must have a thousand dollars!
I can no more give him a thousand dollars than I can give him New
York City.  But, if I don’t, he’ll tell! What am I to do?
FALLON:  (Unmoved.)  When did you see this–this thing last?
MRS. HOWARD:  This morning.  He’d read about you in the papers.
He knows I knew you in San Francisco.  He said you’d “struck it
rich,” and that you’d give me the money.  (Rises, and comes to him.)
But, get this straight, Dick.  I didn’t come here for money.  I
don’t want money.  I won’t take money.  I came to you because you
are my best friend, and Tom’s best friend, and because I need a
man’s brain, a man’s advice.
FALLON:  (Contemptuously.)  Advice!  Hell!  Am I the sort of man that
gives girls–advice? (With rough tenderness.)  Now, you go home
to Tom, and tell him I’m coming to dinner.  (Impressively.)  And
leave this leech to me.  And, don’t worry.  This thing never
happened, it’s just a bad dream, a nightmare.  Just throw it from
your shoulders like a miner drops his pack.  It’s never coming
back into your life again.
MRS. HOWARD:  (Earnestly.)  No!  I won’t let you pay that man!  He’d
hound you, as he’s hounded me!
FALLON:  (Indignantly.)  Pay him?  Me?  I haven’t got enough money
to pay him!
MRS. HOWARD:  What!
FALLON:  No man on earth has money enough to pay blackmail.
Helen, this is what I think of a blackmailer:  The lowest thing
that crawls, is a man that sends a woman into the streets to earn
money for him.  Here, in New York, you call them “cadets.”  Now,
there’s only one thing on earth lower than a cadet, and that’s the
blackmailer, the man who gets money from a woman–by threatening
her good name–who uses her past as a club–who drags out some
unhappy act of hers for which she’s repented, in tears, on her
knees, which the world has forgotten, which God has forgiven.
And, for that past sin, that’s forgotten and forgiven, this
blackguard crucifies her.  And the woman–to protect her husband
and her children, as you have done–to protect her own good name,
that she’s worked for and won, starves herself to feed that leech.
And, you ask me, if I’m going to feed him, too!  Not me!  Helen,
down in lower California, there are black bats, the Mexican calls
“Vampire” bats.  They come at night and fasten on the sides of
the horses and drink their blood.  And, in the morning when you
come to saddle up, you’ll find the horses too weak to walk, and
hanging to their flanks these vampires, swollen and bloated and
drunk with blood.  Now, I’ve just as much sympathy for Mr. Mohun,
as I have for those vampires, and, I’m going to treat him just as
I treat them!  Where is he?
MRS. HOWARD:  Downstairs.  In the cafe.
FALLON:  Here, in this hotel?
MRS. HOWARD:  Yes.
FALLON:  (Half to himself.)  Good!
MRS. HOWARD:  He said he’d wait until I telephoned him that you
would pay.  If you won’t, he’s going straight to Tom.
FALLON:  He is, is he?  Helen, I hate to have you speak to him
again, but, unless he hears your voice, he won’t come upstairs.
(Motions towards telephone.)  Tell him I’ll see him in ten minutes.
Tell him I’ve agreed to make it all right.
MRS. HOWARD:  But, how, Dick, how?
FALLON:  Don’t you worry about that.  I’m going to send him away.
Out of the country.  He won’t trouble you any more.
MRS. HOWARD:  But he won’t go.  He’s promised me to go many times–
FALLON:  Yes, but he’s not dealing with a woman, now, he’s dealing
with a man, with boots on.  Do as I tell you.
(MRS. HOWARD sits at writing desk and takes receiver off telephone.
FALLON leans against table right, puffing quickly on his cigar,
and glancing impatiently at the valise that holds his revolver.)
MRS. HOWARD:  Give me the cafe, please.  Is this the cafe?  I want
to speak to a Mr. Mohun, he is waiting to be called up–oh, thank
you.  (To FALLON.)  He’s coming.  (To ’phone.)  I have seen that man
and he says he’ll take up that debt, and pay it.  Yes, now, at
once.  You’re to wait for ten minutes, until he can get the
money, and then, he’ll telephone you to come up.  I don’t know,
I’ll ask.  (To Fallon.)  He says it must be in cash.
FALLON:  (Sarcastically.)  Why, certainly!  That’ll be all right.
(MRS. HOWARD Places her hand over the mouth piece.)
MRS. HOWARD:  I’ll not let you pay him!
FALLON:  I’m not going to!  I’m going to give him just what’s coming
to him.  Tell him, it’ll be all right.
MRS. HOWARD:  (To ’phone.)  He says to tell you, it’ll be all right.
The room is 210 on the third floor.  In ten minutes, yes.  (She
rises.)
FALLON:  Now, then, you go back to Tom and get dinner ready.  Don’t
forget I’m coming to dinner.  And the children must come to
dinner, too.  We’ll have a happy, good old-time reunion.
MRS. HOWARD:  (With hand on door knob of door left.)  Dick, how can
I thank you?
FALLON:  Don’t let me catch you trying.
MRS. HOWARD:  God bless you, Dick.  (With a sudden hope.)  And you
really believe you can make him go?
FALLON:  Don’t worry!  I’m sure of it.
MRS. HOWARD:  And, you think he won’t come back?
FALLON:  (After a pause, gravely.)  I know he won’t come back.
MRS. HOWARD:  God bless you, Dick!
FALLON:  See you at dinner.
(MRS. HOWARD exits.  FALLON stands considering, and chewing on his
cigar.  Then, he crosses room briskly and lowers the blind at each
window.  Opens valise and examines revolver.  Places the revolver
in his left hip pocket.  Then, in a matter-of-course manner from
his right hand pocket, he draws his automatic pistol.  This, as
though assured he would find loaded, he examines in a quick,
perfunctory way, and replaces.  He crosses left to desk, and taking
from it a cheque book, writes out a cheque, which he tears from
the book, and holds in his right hand.  With left hand he removes
the receiver from the telephone.)
Give me Murray Hill 2828.  Hello, is this the Corn and Grain Bank?
I want to speak to the cashier.  Hello, is that the cashier?  This
is Richard Fallon, of San Francisco, speaking from the Hotel
Wisteria.  I opened an account with you day before yesterday, for
two hundred thousand dollars.  Yes, this is Mr. Fallon speaking.
I made out a cheque yesterday payable to Louis Mohun (Glances at
cheque.), dated August 4th, for two thousand dollars.  I want to
know if he’s cashed it in yet?  He hasn’t, hey?  Good!  (He continues
to look at cheque, to impress upon audience, that the cheque they
have just seen him write, is the one which he is speaking about.)
Well, I want to stop payment on that cheque.  Yes, yes.  I made
it out under pressure, and I’ve decided not to stand for it.  Yes,
sort of a hold up!  I guess that’s why he was afraid to cash it.
You’ll attend to that, will you?  Thank you.  Good-bye.  (He takes
an envelope from desk, places cheque in it and puts envelope in
his breast pocket.  Again takes off receiver.)  Hello, give me the
cashier, please.  Am I speaking to the cashier of the hotel?  This
is Mr. Fallon in room 210.  Is your hotel detective in the lobby?
He is?  Good!  What–what sort of a man is he, is he a man I can
rely on?  A Pinkerton, hey?  That’s good enough!  Well, I wish you’d
give him a thousand dollars for me in hundreds.  Ten hundred-dollar
bills, and before you send them up, I wish you’d mark them and
take their numbers.  What?  No, there’s no trouble.  I just want
to see that the right bills go to the right people, that’s all.
Thank you.
(He crosses to door centre, and taking key from the bedroom side,
places it in keyhole on side of door in view of the audience.  He
turns the key several times.  He takes the revolver from his left
hip pocket and holding it in his right hand, rehearses shooting
under his left arm through his coat which he holds from him by the
fingers of his left hand.  Shifting revolver to his left hand, he
takes the automatic from his right hip pocket, and goes through
the motions of firing with both guns in opposite directions.  His
pantomine must show he intends making use of both guns at the same
time, using one apparently upon himself, and the other, in earnest,
upon another person.  He replaces the revolvers in his pockets.
There is a knock at the door.)
Come in.
(KELLY enters.  In his hand he carries an envelope.  He is an
elderly man with grey hair, neatly dressed and carrying a straw
hat.  He has an air of authority.  His manner to FALLON is
respectful.)
KELLY:  Afternoon, Mr. Fallon.  I am Kelly, the house detective.
FALLON:  Yes, I know.  I’ve seen you in the lobby.
KELLY:  Mr. Parmelee said I was to give you this.  (Gives envelope
to FALLON.  FALLON takes out ten yellow-back bills.)  There ought
to be a thousand dollars there in hundreds.
FALLON:  That’s right.  Now, will you just sit over there, and as
I read the numbers, you write them down.
KELLY:  Mr. Parmelee made a note of the numbers, Mr. Fallon.
FALLON:  I know.  I want you to identify them too.
KELLY:  I can do that.  I saw him mark them.
FALLON:  Good.  And if you saw these bills in the next five minutes
you’d be able to swear they’re the same bills you gave me?
KELLY:  Sure.  (Starts towards door.)
FALLON:  Wait a minute.  Sit down, Kelly.  (KELLY seats himself in
Morris chair, holding his hat between his knees.)  Kelly, this hotel
engages you from the Pinkertons to stay around the place, and–protect
the guests?
KELLY:  Yes, sir.
FALLON:  Well, there’s a man downstairs thinks he has a claim on
this money.  Now, I’d like you to wait in that bedroom and listen
to what he says with a view to putting him in jail.
KELLY:  Blackmail, Mr. Fallon?
FALLON:  Yes, blackmail.
KELLY:  (Eagerly.)  And you’re not going to stand for it?
FALLON:  I am not!
KELLY:  (Earnestly.)  Good!  That’s the only way to treat those dogs.
Never give up, never give up!
FALLON:  No, but yesterday, I had to give up.  He put a gun at
my head.
KELLY:  (Excitedly.)  Where?  Not in this hotel?
FALLON:  Yes, in this room.  I gave him a cheque for two thousand
dollars.  That made him think I was easy, and he telephoned this
morning that he’s coming back for another thousand, and he wants
it in cash.  That’s why I marked those bills.
KELLY:  Why, we got him now!  He’s as good as dead.
FALLON:  (Startled.)  What?
KELLY:  I say, we’ve got him nailed now.
FALLON:  Oh, yes.  (Pause.)  He hasn’t turned in the cheque yet–I’ve
just called up the bank to find out.  I guess he means to hold
that over my head, hey?
KELLY:  More likely he’s afraid of it.  (Eagerly.)  We may get
that back, too.  We may find it on him.
FALLON:  What?  Yes, as you say, we may find it on him.
KELLY:  (Eagerly.)  And as soon as he gets those bills in his clothes,
you give me the high sign (Fiercely.)–and we’ll nail him!
FALLON:  Yes, we’ll nail him.  And, if he puts his gun in my face
today, he won’t catch me empty-handed the second time.  (Draws
automatic from his pocket.)  I’m ready for him, today!
KELLY:  (Greatly concerned.)  Here, none of that stuff, Mr. Fallon.
A gentleman like you can’t take that chance.
FALLON:  Chance?  Kelly, I haven’t always lived in a swell hotel.
The man that gets the drop on me–when I’ve got a gun–has got
to be damned quick.
KELLY:  That’s just what I mean!  I’m not thinking of him, I’m
thinking of you.  Give me that gun.
FALLON:  Certainly not.
KELLY:  You don’t want to go to jail for a rat like that.
FALLON:  I don’t mean to go to jail, and, I don’t mean to die,
either.  For the last six years I’ve been living on melted ice and
bacon.  Now, I’m worth seven million dollars.  I’m thirty-five
years old and my life is in front of me.  And, I don’t mean to
waste one hour of it in a jail, and I don’t mean to let any
blackmailer take it away from me.
KELLY:  You don’t want no judge to take it away from you, either!
You’re not in the Klondike.
FALLON:  I guess, I’ve got a right to defend myself, anywhere.
KELLY:  Yes, but you’ll get excited and–
FALLON:  (Quietly.)  I?  Excited?  I never get excited.  The last
time I was excited was when I was seven years old, and the circus
came to town.
KELLY:  Don’t mix up in this.  What am I here for?
FALLON:  You won’t be here.  How can you help me in that room, when
a fellow’s pumping lead into my stomach in this one?
KELLY:  He won’t pump no lead.
FALLON:  (Carelessly.)  I hope not.  But, if he does, he’s got to
do it awful quick.  (Motions towards centre door.)  Now, you go in
there and shut the door, and I’ll talk out here.  And you tell me
if you can hear what I say?  (KELLY goes into bedroom and closes
door.  FALLON walks to door R. with his back turned towards KELLY.)
Have you got the door shut tight?
KELLY:  (From bedroom.)  Yes.
FALLON:  (Speaks in a loud tone, to an imaginary person.)  No, not
another penny.  If I pay you, will you promise not to take the
story to the newspapers?  I give you this thousand dollars–(Turns
towards centre door.  KELLY opens door.)  Could you hear me?
KELLY:  Yes, I could hear you, but he won’t talk that loud.  You
put him in that chair (Points to Morris chair.)–so that he’ll sit
facing me, and you stand over there (Points at safe.)–so then
he’ll have to speak up.
FALLON:  I see.  Are you all ready?
KELLY:  Yes.  (KELLY closes door.  FALLON goes to desk.  Lifts both
guns from his pocket an inch or two, and then takes receiver from
telephone.  To ’phone.)  Give me the cafe, please.  Is this the
cafe?  There’s a Mr. Mohun down there waiting to hear from Mr.
Fallon–yes.  All right.  Tell him to come up.  (KELLY opens door.)
KELLY:  Hist.  Listen, this guy knows what he’s up against; he knows
it might land him in Sing Sing and he’ll be leery of this door
being shut.  So, if he insists on looking in here, you speak up
loud, and say, “That’s my bedroom.  It’s empty.”  Say it quick
enough to give me time to get out into the hall.
FALLON:  I see.
KELLY:  Then, when he’s had his look around, you slam the door shut
again, and I’ll come back into the bedroom.  Have you got it?
FALLON:  I understand.  (In loud voice.)  That’s my bedroom.  It’s
empty.
KELLY:  That’s the office for me to sneak into the hall.  (In bedroom,
he disappears right.)
FALLON:  (At open door, rehearsing.)  You see, the room is empty.
(Closes the door with a bang.  Pause, then he calls.)  Are you there
now, Kelly?
KELLY:  Yes, I’m here.
(FALLON stands looking at the key in the door.  For an instant his
hand falters over it as though he would risk turning it.  Then,
he shakes his head, and walks to table right.  There is a low knock
at door left.)
FALLON:  Come in.
(MOHUN enters door left.  He is lean, keen faced, watchful.  He
is a head taller than FALLON.  His manner always has an undercurrent
of insolence.)
MOHUN:  Afternoon.  Am I speaking to Mr. Fallon?
FALLON:  Yes.  Lou Mohun?
MOHUN:  Yes.  (MOHUN stands warily at the door.  Glances cautiously
around the room.  Bends over quite openly to look under the sofa.
For some seconds his eyes rest with a smile on bedroom door.  He
speaks slowly, unemotionally.)  A mutual friend of ours said you
wanted to see me.
FALLON:  (Sharply.)  We’ve no mutual friend.  No one’s in this but
you and me.  You want to get that straight!
MOHUN:  (Easily.)  All right.  That’s all right.  Well, what do you
want to see me about?
(FALLON speaks in a loud voice.  In the speeches that follow, it
must be apparent that his loud tone and excited manner is assumed,
and is intended only to convince KELLY.)
FALLON:  I understand, you think you have a claim on me for a
thousand dollars.  And, I’m going to give it to you.  But, first,
I want a plain talk with you.  (Sharply.)  Are you listening to me?
MOHUN:  No, not yet.  Before there’s any plain talking, I want to
know where that door leads to.
FALLON:  What door?  That?  (In a louder voice.)  That’s my bedroom. 
It’s empty.  Is that what you want?  Think I got someone in there?
Do you want to look for yourself?  (Opens door.)  Go on in, and look.
(MOHUN takes a step forward, and peers past FALLON into bedroom.)
Go on, search it. Look under the bed.
MOHUN:  I guess that’s all right.
FALLON:  Don’t you want to look?
MOHUN:  (Falling back to door left.)  Not now.  No need to, if you’re
willing to let me.  (Impatiently.)  Go on.  What is it you want with
me?  (FALLON closes door with a slam.  Comes down to table.)
FALLON:  What do I want?  I want you to understand that this is the
last time you come to me for money.
MOHUN:  (Indifferently.)  That’s all right.
FALLON:  No, its not all right.  (Takes out bills.)  Before I give
you this, you’ve got to promise me to keep silent.  I’ll stand for
no more blackmail.
MOHUN:  Don’t talk so loud.  I’m not deaf.  Look here, Mr. Fallon,
I didn’t come here to be shouted at, I came here to get the money
you promised me.
FALLON:  Well, here it is.  (Gives him bills.  MOHUN sticks them in
his right-hand vest pocket.)  No, you listen to me.  (As soon as he
obtains the money, MOHUN’S manner changes.  He is amused, and
insolent.)
MOHUN:  No, not a bit like it.  Now that I’ve got this, you’ll
have to listen to me.  (Moves deliberately to Morris chair and seats
himself) Mr. Fallon, I don’t like your tone.
FALLON:  (Slowly.)  You–don’t–like my tone?  I don’t think I
understand you.
MOHUN:  You talk like you had a whip over me.  You don’t seem to see
that I got you dead to rights.
FALLON:  (In pretended alarm.)  Have you?
MOHUN:  Have I?  I got a mortgage on you for life.  You got in wrong
when you gave me that money.  Don’t you see that?  Mr. Fallon,
I’ve been taking out information about you.  Some ’Frisco lads
tell me you used to be pretty sweet on a certain party, but she
chucked you and married the other fellow.  But the first day you
come back a millionaire she visits your rooms–and you give her a
thousand dollars!  Why?  She can’t tell.  You can’t tell.  But I
can tell.  I can tell her husband.  He’s only got to ask the
hotel clerk and the cashier and the bell hops, and when I’ve told
my story as I’ll tell it–he’s liable to shoot you.  (There is a
pause during which FALLON stares at MOHUN incredulously.)  Let it
sink in, Mr. Fallon.
FALLON:  (Quietly.)  I am–letting it sink in.
MOHUN:  Now, a thousand dollars is all well enough from a lady that
has to scrape to find it, but a thousand dollars from a millionaire
like you is a joke.  And unless you want me to go to the husband,
you’ll come across with fifty thousand dollars, and until I get
it, I’m not going to leave this room.
FALLON:  (Solemnly.)  Then, I don’t believe you are going to leave
this room.
MOHUN:  (Impudently.)  Oh, I’ll go when I’m ready.
FALLON:  (Going up close to centre door.)  Let me understand you.
You are going to this husband with a lie that will wreck his faith
in his wife, that will wreck his faith in his best friend, unless
I give you a thousand dollars?
MOHUN:  No!  Fifty thousand dollars!
FALLON:  Fifty thousand.  It’s the same thing.  But, you’d keep
quiet for ten dollars, wouldn’t you, if that was all I had?
MOHUN:  (Grinning at him.)  If that was all you had.
FALLON:  (In a whisper, slowly, impressively.)  Then, Mr. Mohun (He
raises his right arm.), may–God–have mercy–on your soul.  (In
loud, excited tones and purposely, so that MOHUN can see him, he
turns his face towards the centre door.)  I won’t pay that fifty
thousand.  I won’t stand for blackmail, you’re robbing–(MOHUN
leaps to his feet, and points at centre door.)
MOHUN:  (Fiercely.)  Here.  What are you doing?  You’re trying to
trap me?  There is someone in that room.  (FALLON laughs mockingly
at MOHUN, but speaks for KELLY to hear.)
FALLON:  Don’t go near that room.  (With his left hand he quickly
turns the key in the door.)  Don’t lock that door!  Don’t lock that
door!  Kelly, he’s locked the door.  (He draws the revolver from his
left pocket.  KELLY is heard shaking the handle of the door, and
beating upon the panel.  FALLON speaks in a whisper.)  I told you,
you’d never leave this room, Mr. Mohun.  (In a loud, excited tone.)
Drop that gun.  Drop that gun.  Don’t point that gun at me!  (Still
smiling mockingly at MOHUN, FALLON shoots twice through his own
coat on the left side, throws the gun at MOHUN’S feet, and drawing
his automatic pistol, shoves it against MOHUN’S stomach and fires.
MOHUN falls back into the Morris chair dead.) (Shouts loudly.)
Break in the door.  Break in the door.  (From his pocket he takes
the envelope containing the cheque, and sticks it into the inside
pocket of MOHUN’S coat.  Then turns to table, right, as KELLY
bursts open the door and sees MOHUN.)
KELLY:  My God, Mr. Fallon.  I told you to give me that gun!
FALLON:  Have I hurt him?
KELLY:  (Bending over body.)  Hurt him?  You’ve killed him!  (FALLON
with his face turned from KELLY, smiles.  He speaks with pretended
emotion.)  Killed him?  Here, you’re an officer.  (Throws gun on
table.)  I give myself up.  (KELLY runs to hand telephone.  FALLON
picks up his cigar from the table and a box of matches.  Starts
to light cigar, but seeing KELLY at ’phone hesitates and listens
eagerly.)
KELLY:  (To ’phone.)  Send the hotel doctor here.  Quick!  Mr. Fallon’s
wounded.  (To FALLON.)  Are you badly hurt?  (FALLON places his left
hand on his left hip under the coat and removes it showing the
fingers covered with blood.)
FALLON:  Only scratched.
KELLY:  (To ’phone.)  Some crank tried to shoot him up.  Mr. Fallon
fired back and killed him.  (Pause.) No!  Mr. Fallon killed him!
(Pause.)  Of course, in self-defense, you fool, of course, in
self-defense!  (KELLY slams back the receiver, and rising quickly,
turns to the right and stands with hands on his hips, and back to
audience, gazing down at MOHUN.  He does not once look at FALLON.)
FALLON:  (On hearing the words “in self-defense” sighs, smiles and
striking the match, lights the cigar as
THE CURTAIN FALLS.
BY
TAYLOR GRANVILLE
Author, producer and star of “The Star Bout,” “The
Futurity Winner,” “The Yellow Streak,” Etc., Etc.
                IN COLLABORATION WITH
    JUNIE MCCREE          AND      EDWARD CLARK
Author of “The Marital          Author of “The Winning
Coach,” “Neighbors,” “Coon    Widows,” “When We Grow
Town Divorcons,” Etc., Etc.      Up,” Etc., Etc.
CHARACTERS
BILLY BRADLEY . . . . . . Alias “The Eel."
DAN MCCARTHY  . . . . . . Inspector of Police.
TIM DUGAN . . . . . . . . Lieutenant of Police.
JAMES O’MARA. . . . . . . Desk Lieutenant.
OFFICER FLYNN . . . . . . Patrolman.
BOBBY PERKINS . . . . . . A Police Reporter.
HAROLD BROOKTHORNE  . . . A Cub Reporter.
MR. INBAD . . . . . . . . A Souse.
JIM, TOM  . . . . . . . . Central Office Men.
MRS. DEMMING WORTHINGTON. A Noted Horsewoman.
JANITRESS . . . . . . . . At 327 East Broadway.
GOLDIE MARSHALL . . . . . The Eel’s “Gal.”
Policemen, Citizens, Morbid Crowds, Etc.
SCENE I
POLICE STATION, NEW YORK CITY.  EVENING
Door C. Door L. 2nd E. leading below to cells.  Windows in flat
R. and L. showing two green lights in front of Station.  Street
backing, showing the other side of Street.  Bench at L. window,
chair at R. window.  Small platform R. 2, with desk, railing, etc.
Chairs on Platform.
AT RISE:  (O’Mara at desk speaking through telephone.  PERKINS in
chair R., writing.  FLYNN searching INBAD, who is intoxicated.)
O’MARA:  (Speaking through ’phone.)  All right!  Good-bye!  (Puts
’phone down.)  Take him down, that fellow is a champion souse.
INBAD:  (As FLYNN is jerking him off L.)  Thatsh what I am, and I’ll
defend my title against all comers.  (Exit INBAD followed by FLYNN.)
PERKINS:  (Coming R. to O’MARA.)  That Worthington robbery will make
a corking story, if it’s true.  (Starts for door C.)
O’MARA:  Well, why don’t you wait till the pinch comes off and then
get the story for sure?
PERKINS:  Your word’s good enough.
O’MARA:  But I haven’t given you me word.  I don’t know whether
they’ve nailed him yet or not.
PERKINS:  (Coming back to desk railing R.) (Disappointed.)  Oh, I
thought you said they’d got him.
O’MARA:  That’s the way you reporters twist everything.  I said
“Dugan was after him,” that’s all.
PERKINS:  Well, that’s as good as got him; anything Dugan sets out
to get, comes pretty near materializing.  (Starts C., stops on
meeting BROOKY, who enters door C.)  Hello!  Brooky!  Just in time.
Here’s a chance for you to distinguish yourself in your new capacity.
BROOKY:  (Coming C.)  Got a story?
PERKINS:  A pippin!  Listen to this.  (Reads from notes.) “Police
fishing.  Make a big haul!  Throw out the dragnet and once more
capture the Eel.”  A very slippery article.
BROOKY:  I don’t understand.
PERKINS:  Oh, can’t you understand, the Eel is the nickname, the
alias of one of the slickest crooks in the country, Billy Bradley.
BROOKY:  Billy Bradley?  Oh yes, I’ve heard of him.
PERKINS:  Well, that’s the Eel.
BROOKY:  Oh I see; well, what about him?
PERKINS:  He’s been taken, or at least is going to be.
BROOKY:  What’s he done?
PERKINS:  (Looking at BROOKY surprised.)  You’re up on that Worthington
robbery, aren’t you?
BROOKY:  What robbery is that?
PERKINS:  (Disgusted.)  Don’t tell me you don’t know that burglars
entered Mrs. Demming Worthington’s house last night, and made off
with a five thousand dollar necklace?
BROOKY:  I hadn’t heard of it.
PERKINS:  Good heavens, man! hasn’t your paper got it?
BROOKY:  (Going L.)  I don’t know.  I never read our paper.  (Perkins
follows BROOKY in disgust.)
O’MARA:  (Smiling.)  Well, I don’t know but what you’re just as well
off.  (Enter INSPECTOR door C., O’MARA comes from behind desk and
stands above it for INSPECTOR to cross him.)
PERKINS:  Good evenin’, Inspector.
INSPECTOR:  (Glancing about room, without stopping, goes straight
to stool behind desk.)  How are you, boys!  (INSPECTOR salutes O’MARA
as he passes him, O’MARA returns the salute, then goes to upper
end of desk, where he stands.)
BROOKY:  How do you do, sir.
INSPECTOR:  (Back of desk.)  Well, O’Mara.  They’ve got the Eel.
O’MARA:  They have?
INSPECTOR:  Dugan is on his way up with him now.
PERKINS:  I guess it will go pretty hard with him, won’t it Inspector?
INSPECTOR:  If he is guilty.
PERKINS:  Well, he is, isn’t he?
INSPECTOR:  I believe every man innocent until proven guilty.
BROOKY:  Bravo, Inspector!  Those are my sentiments.
INSPECTOR:  I’ve sent for Mrs. Worthington.  When we get her, Goldie,
the Eel and Dugan together, we shall be able to get a clearer view
on the matter.  Bring up Goldie.  (O’MARA exits door L.)
PERKINS:  (Coming R. C.)  Inspector, has this girl Goldie Marshall
ever been up before?
INSPECTOR:  Well, she’s been arrested a number of times, on
shop-lifting charges, but we’ve never been able to prove anything
on her.
PERKINS:  Perhaps she’s square after all.
INSPECTOR:  Not at all unlikely; as I said before, I believe a
person innocent until proven guilty.
BROOKY:  (Crossing R. to railing of desk.)  And as I said before–Bravo,
old chap.  (The INSPECTOR looks at BROOKY sternly and he retires
up stage R. confusedly, bumping into chair, sits in it.)
PERKINS:  (Crossing R. to railing.)  Inspector?
INSPECTOR:  Well?
PERKINS:  I suppose many a person has been railroaded through the
System?
INSPECTOR:  (Rising angrily.)  System!  How dare you!  What do you
mean?
PERKINS:  I–I–beg your pardon, Inspector, I–
BROOKY:  (Rising from chair and coming down L.  of PERKINS.)
I say, don’t make a bally ass of yourself.
INSPECTOR:  Don’t ever let me hear you say that again.  (Voices of
O’MARA and GOLDIE are heard off L.) (Enter GOLDIE, followed by
O’MARA.  Door L.)
GOLDIE:  (Jerking away from O’MARA.)  Well, don’t yank my arm off.
(Looking around room.)  I know the way.  (Starts R.)
O’MARA:  (Following GOLDIE, catches her by the back of neck as she
reaches C.)  Don’t give me any back talk or I’ll yank your neck off.
INSPECTOR:  O’Mara! let go your hold.  Don’t forget you’re dealing
with a woman.  (O’MARA releases hold.)
GOLDIE:  (Mockingly courteous.)  Thanks, Inspector!  What’ll I send
you for Christmas, a bunch of sweet forget-me-nots or a barrel of
pickles?
INSPECTOR:  Goldie, don’t be so incorrigible.
GOLDIE:  Gee! but you’re an educated guy.
INSPECTOR:  Have a seat.  (O’MARA jumps for chair with mock politeness.)
GOLDIE:  (To reporters.)  He’s polite, too.  (Crosses to chair.)
INSPECTOR:  Well, Goldie!
GOLDIE:  (Sitting.)  Well, Inspector!
INSPECTOR:  Do you intend to stay here to-night or are you going
to get bail?
GOLDIE:  Where would I get bail?
INSPECTOR:  I thought perhaps some gentleman friend of yours–
GOLDIE:  (Rising angrily.)  I ain’t got no gentlemen friends.  What
do you think I am, a Moll?  (Sits.)
INSPECTOR:  Don’t make any grand stand play now, Goldie!
GOLDIE:  Well, if you mean that I’m a bad girl, you’d better not
say it (Rising, crosses to desk and pounds angrily on railing.),
’cause I ain’t, see?
INSPECTOR:  Well, you don’t deny that you and the Eel are sweethearts?
GOLDIE:  Was, yes.  Gee, we was goin’ to get married, until in a
jealous huff he tried to kill me and was shipped for two years for
assault and battery, but it wasn’t none of my doin’s.
INSPECTOR:  Didn’t you prefer charges against him?
GOLDIE:  I did not.  Do you think I’d squeal on a pal?  If it wasn’t
for Dugan, they’d turn the Eel loose.  (Sits.)
INSPECTOR:  Why Dugan?
GOLDIE:  Didn’t he shove him in?
INSPECTOR:  He was simply acting in his official duty.
GOLDIE:  Official duty, my eye.
INSPECTOR:  What other motive could Mr. Dugan possibly have had?
GOLDIE:  (With a sneer.)  Maybe you don’t know.  Well, I’ll tell
you.  He thought by shovin’ the Eel out of the way, he could get
me.
INSPECTOR:  And did he?
GOLDIE:  Not so as you could notice it.  I ain’t no fall guy for
nobody.
INSPECTOR:  Now that the Eel’s been sprung, are you going back to
him?
GOLDIE:  (Almost in tears.)  Oh gee!  I wish I could, but there’s
nothing doin’, he’s sore on me.
INSPECTOR:  When did you last see him?
GOLDIE:  Just before he went up, two years ago.
INSPECTOR:  How about this Worthington robbery, wasn’t he in on it?
GOLDIE:  (Hastily.)  No, he wasn’t.
INSPECTOR:  (Quickly.)  Who was?
GOLDIE:  (After a slight pause as though to confess.)  Well, I’ll
tell you.  There was three of us, me, Jesse James, and Christopher
Columbus.  (Looks first at INSPECTOR then to PERKINS.)  Ah, put it
down on your little yellow paper.
INSPECTOR:  (Angrily.)  Answers like that’ll get you nothing here.
GOLDIE:  See, you won’t believe me when I tell you.
INSPECTOR:  Silence, I say!  (To O’MARA.)  Take her down.  (GOLDIE
rises from chair leisurely and strolls impudently L. as she comes
to BROOKY.)  Oh, poo! poo!
INSPECTOR:  (Stopping GOLDIE at door L.)  And you’ll stay down unless
you have a confession to make.
GOLDIE:  (At door L.)  Say, Inspector, if you’re waitin’ for a
confession from me, you’ll wait until pigs fly kites.  (Exit door
L. GOLDIE followed by O’MARA.) (PERKINS and BROOKY look off after
them.)
BROOKY:  What a little terror!
PERKINS:  Looks mighty like her work, doesn’t it, Inspector?
INSPECTOR:  No!  The job has all the ear marks of the Eel, but she
undoubtedly is his accomplice.  (Enter MRS. WORTHINGTON door C.,
she looks around uncomfortably and as she comes down C., BROOKY
and PERKINS on seeing her, remove their hats.  INSPECTOR rises and
indicates chair R. C.)  Ah!  Mrs. Worthington!  (Indicating Reporters.)
Have you any objection to talking for publication?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  (Looking toward Reports.)  No, not at all.  (PERKINS
has note paper and takes down as she talks.)
INSPECTOR:  Will you kindly be seated?  And we shall proceed?  (MRS.
W. sits.)  Now in the first place, how long had this girl, Goldie
Marshall, been in your employ?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Just one week.
INSPECTOR:  (Half aside.)  That’s about the time the Eel was sprung.
(To Mrs. W.)  Had you missed anything else up to the time of this
robbery?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  No, nothing.
INSPECTOR:  Who else was in the house at the time, besides yourself
and the maid?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Only my guests who were at dinner with me.  Mr.
Appleby and his wife.
INSPECTOR:  The horseowner?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Yes, and a Miss Hazelton from Pittsburgh.
INSPECTOR:  Would you suspect them?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Well, hardly.
INSPECTOR:  Anyone else?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Yes, Mr. Dugan.
INSPECTOR:  What Dugan?
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Why, your Mr. Dugan here.
INSPECTOR:  Oh, Tim Dugan.
MRS. WORTHINGTON:  Yes, we’re great friends, and he frequently dines
at my house.  (Low murmur begins in the distance and grows louder.
MRS. W. rises in fear and appeals to the INSPECTOR, who comes from
behind the desk and–)
INSPECTOR:  Don’t be alarmed, Mrs. Worthington, just step behind
the desk.  (MRS. WORTHINGTON steps back of desk and sits in chair
below stool.  INSPECTOR replaces the chair in which MRS. W. has
been sitting in front of the window R. C. then returns to back of
desk where he stands.  The REPORTERS at first sound show excitement,
PERKINS goes to door C. and looks off R. B.)
PERKINS:  (At door C.)  It’s Dugan and he’s got the Eel.  (Goes down
L. C.) (DUGAN is seen out of window R. bringing the EEL along, who
is hand-cuffed.  They are followed by a noisy crowd.  DUGAN throws
the EEL down, C., then chases the crowd away from door C.)
EEL:  (Looks around smiling until he sees INSPECTOR.)  Hello,
Inspector!  Gee! it’s real oil for the wicks of my lamps to see you
again.
DUGAN:  (Coming down C.)  Yes, he’s tickled to death to see you,
ain’t you, Billy?
EEL:  (Angrily.)  The Eel to you, Copper; Billy to my pals.
INSPECTOR:  Well, Billy!
EEL:  That’s right, Inspector, you’re my pal.  (Movement from
INSPECTOR.)  Oh, I ain’t forgot when you was just a plain Bull and
saved me from doin’ my first bit on a phoney charge.  They tried
to railroad me, you remember, and Dugan here was runnin’ the engine.
INSPECTOR:  Oh, you’ve got Dugan wrong, Billy, he bears you no
malice.
EEL:  No, it’s a mistake, he just loves me.  Say, he thinks so much
of me, that if he saw me drowning, he’d bring me a glass of water.
DUGAN:  You know why you were brought here?
EEL:  Sure, so’s you could railroad me again.
INSPECTOR:  Nonsense, Dugan has nothing against you personally.
EEL:  Oh yes he has; when he was new on the force, I beat him up
good.  He was only a harness cop then, and one night he thought
he made me coppin’ a super from a lush, which you know ain’t my
graft.  He started to fan me with a sap, so I just clubbed my smoke
wagon, and before I got through with him, I made him a pick-up for
the ambulance, and he ain’t never forgot it.
INSPECTOR:  What do you know about this Worthington robbery?  (EEL
looks around suspiciously.)  Before you answer, Billy, I warn you
to be careful, everything you say will be used against you.
EEL:  Yes, and everything I don’t say will be used, too.  I know
the system.
DUGAN:  (Crossing R. to EEL.  REPORTERS follow.)  Well, what have
you got to say?
EEL:  (Taking time, looks around.)  You don’t think I’m goin’ to
address this Mass Meeting here.  (BROOKY looks L. to see if there
is anyone else there.)
INSPECTOR:  You’re not afraid to talk in front of a couple of
newspaper reporters, are you?
EEL:  (Grinning at INSPECTOR to gain time.)  Roosevelt gets a dollar
a word, where do I come in?  (Resignedly.)  All right, flag the
pencil pushers and I’ll gab my nob.  (DUGAN turns L. to tell the
REPORTERS to go.  BROOKY says he don’t understand.  PERKINS pulls
him off door C., remonstrating, going R.) (The INSPECTOR signs to
DUGAN that they will now grill the EEL.)
INSPECTOR:  This lady I suppose you know.
EEL:  (Looks at MRS. WORTHINGTON.)  I never lamped her before in my
life.
DUGAN:  That is Mrs. Worthington, the lady you robbed.
EEL:  (Banteringly to MRS. WORTHINGTON to gain time.)  Is it?  How
do you do, pleased to meet you.  Gee! but you must be an awful
mark to be robbed.  (INSPECTOR raps on desk.)  What was it I stole
from you, Mrs. Worthington?
DUGAN:  Nix on that bull.  You know what you stole.
EEL:  Yes, and I suppose you know what I stole before I stole it.
DUGAN:  With dips like you, I always look far ahead.
EEL:  Get out! you couldn’t look far enough ahead to see the ashes
on your cigar.  Why, if it wasn’t for your stool pigeons–
DUGAN:  That’s enough out of you.
EEL:  Oh, go chase yourself.  (DUGAN smashes at EEL, who ducks around
back of him.)
INSPECTOR:  Dugan!!!  (When Dugan locates the EEL, he goes after him
again.  MRS. WORTHINGTON screams.)
INSPECTOR:  None of that, Dugan!  Remember, he had no marks on him
when you brought him in.  (DUGAN crosses L. in front of EEL and
looks off door L.  in subdued rage.)  A little more civility out
of you, Bradley.
EEL:  All right, Inspector.  (To MRS. W.)  I beg your pardon, lady.
INSPECTOR:  You have been brought here as a suspect in a five
thousand dollar jewelry theft which happened at the home of Mrs.
Worthington last night.  (EEL makes no move.)  Circumstances point
strongly in your direction.  Your former sweetheart, Goldie Marshall,
was serving as maid to Mrs. Worthington at the time of the robbery.
EEL:  And you think I planted her there as a stall.
DUGAN:  Goldie spilled that much, and we didn’t, have to third
degree her.
EEL:  So Goldie declared me in on this?
INSPECTOR:  She couldn’t help it, we knew it was a two-man’s job.
EEL:  She snitched me into a frame-up.
DUGAN:  Same as she did two years ago.
EEL:  Why say, Inspector, I ain’t seen Goldie since I was sprung
from the Pen.
DUGAN:  Is that so?  I got it straight that the first place you
mozied to was Goldie’s flat on East Broadway.  You were trailed.
EEL:  Sure I was, by one of you pathfinders at the Central Office.
Oh, I’ve played tag with you before; Dugan, whatever you say, is.
INSPECTOR:  Then you admit–
EEL:  I don’t admit nothin’.
INSPECTOR:  Be careful what you say.  Have you retained counsel?
EEL:  A mouthpiece!  What for?
INSPECTOR:  You’ve got to be represented.  Have you any money?
EEL:  Sure!  I left the hotel of Zebra clothed with a pocket full
of smiles and a wad of joy.  (INSPECTOR whispers for O’MARA to bring
up GOLDIE.  O’MARA exits door L.)
INSPECTOR:  Well, the state will furnish you with an attorney.
EEL:  What, one of them record shysters?  Eighty years old and never
won a case.  No, thanks, Inspector.  I’ll plead my own case; then
I got at least a chance to beat this rap.
DUGAN:  You’d have a swell time pleading your own case.
EEL:  Yes, and believe me I’ll spring a sensation when I open up.
I’ll show up some of this rotten graft.  I’ll bust “The System “
to smithereens.  Dugan, I won’t be railroaded–(EEL crosses in
rage L. to Dugan.)
INSPECTOR:  Bradley! hold your tongue, you’ve said enough.
EEL:  I ain’t said half what I’m going to say–
INSPECTOR:  (Fiercely.)  Not another word out of you.  Do you
understand?
EEL:  (Coming down.)  All right, Inspector.  I don’t want to get
anybody that’s right, in bad, but I’ve got something up my sleeve.
(DUGAN laughs and goes up stage.) (GOLDIE enters door L. brought
in by O’MARA.  She is startled at seeing EEL, then pleadingly:)
GOLDIE:  Billy!  (EEL turns and is about to go to GOLDIE but stops.)
EEL:  You snitched again!  You snitched again!  (Running L. to GOLDIE
with arms up as though to hit her with hand-cuffs.  GOLDIE snatches
his upraised arms.)
GOLDIE:  Oh no, Billy!  True as God I didn’t!
DUGAN:  (Aside to INSPECTOR.)  Let’s leave them alone, they’ll talk.
(MRS. WORTHINGTON, INSPECTOR, DUGAN and O’MARA exit door R.)
GOLDIE:  (Still holding EEL’S arms.)  Why, I’d rather die than snitch.
EEL:  (Jerking away and going R.)  How about two years ago?
GOLDIE:  I didn’t even then when you left me dying.  They framed
you while I was in the hospital.
EEL:  Who?
GOLDIE:  Dugan and his–
EEL:  Sh!!!  Oh if I could only believe you, kid.
GOLDIE:  Look at me, Billy.  Do you think I’d snitch?
EEL:  (Looks at her, then pushes her head roughly back.) No, I can’t
believe you did it, kid.  (EEL takes GOLDIE in his arms.)
GOLDIE:  (Sobbingly.)  I’m so glad to see you again.
EEL:  Me, too, kid.  Gee, your head feels as natural on my shoulder
as a piece of pie on a prize-fighter’s knife.  (EEL takes GOLDIE
from his shoulder and says inquiringly.)  But what are you doing
here?
GOLDIE:  (Drying her tears.)  Bein’ held on suspicion, but they can’t
get met I’m protected.  Dugan’s got to–
EEL:  Nix on the crackin’, don’t shoot your trap, they’re leavin’
us together for a stall.  Talk about something else.  (EEL turns
R. and GOLDIE grabs his hand.)  Do you still love me?
GOLDIE:  Always.
EEL:  Will you marry me?
GOLDIE:  If you want me to.
EEL:  You know I do.  (Looks around suspiciously.)  Say, if I beat
this rap (DUGAN comes, on door R., and stands at upper end of
desk), let’s get spliced and go out West, turn over a new leaf,
and begin life all over again, far away from the subway world where
the sun of happiness is always clouded and the ace of joy is
coppered.  What do you say?
GOLDIE:  Gee! them’s the kindest words you’ve ever said to me.  (Then
lightly.)  And I’ll march down the aisle with you, with my hair in
a braid.
EEL:  Great!!  Gee, I wonder if we could make our get-away now.  (Both
start for door C., but DUGAN, who has come down behind them, stops
them.)
DUGAN:  How do you do!  Would you like to take a little trip out in
the air with me?
GOLDIE:  Say, I’d rather be home with the headache, than at the
Movies with a guy like you.  (Crosses L.) (INSPECTOR enters door
R. going behind desk.)
INSPECTOR:  Well, have you got anything to say to me before I lock
you up for the night?
EEL:  Nothin’, except that it’s a frame-up, and we defy you to go
through with it.
INSPECTOR:  Take ’em down.
DUGAN:  (Above door L.)  Come on.  (EEL starts for door L.)
GOLDIE:  Good-night, Inspector.
INSPECTOR:  Good-night.
EEL:  (Turning at door L.)  Same from me, Inspector.
INSPECTOR:  Good-night, Bradley.  (DUGAN shoves the EEL roughly off.
GOLDIE circles around and switches in front of DUGAN.)  By the way,
Goldie, what’s the number of your flat on East Broadway?
GOLDIE:  (Hesitatingly at door L.) 327, Inspector.
INSPECTOR:  Thanks.
GOLDIE:  (Impudently.)  You’re welcome.  (Exit door L. followed by
DUGAN.) (O’MARA locks door after them.)
INSPECTOR:  (Calling O’MARA.)  O’Mara!
O’MARA:  (At door L.)  Yes, sir.
INSPECTOR:  I want a wire installed at 327 East Broadway.
O’MARA:  (In front of desk.)  Goldie’s flat?
INSPECTOR:  Yes.  I’m leaving it to you to see that the orders are
carried out to the letter.
O’MARA:  Yes, sir, to-morrow.
INSPECTOR:  To-night, at once.  I’m going to turn them loose.  You
understand?
O’MARA:  (Looks puzzled, then face brightens.)  I understand.
DARK CHANGE
SCENE II
STREET SCENE, IN EAST BROADWAY
Showing flat house with stoop.  Time:  The same evening.  A small
boy enters L. with bottle of milk, goes up steps door C., rings
bell, clicker sounds, and he exits door C. MAGGIE enters door C.
She is an East side janitress.  She has a tin pail on her arm
around which is wrapped newspaper.  She walks off L. PERKINS and
BROOKY are heard off R.)
PERKINS:  (Entering R. briskly.)  Come on, Brooky, don’t be so slow.
BROOKY:  (Straggling in after PERKINS.)  I say, old chap, this sort
of work is most laborious.  This flitting from one tram to another,
and being jostled and ordered to “step lively” by vulgar guards,
and running, yes actually running.  It’s not only bad taste, old
man, but positively undignified.  (Dusting shoes with handkerchief,
L., PERKINS is up in vestibule of door C.)
PERKINS:  If you want to supply your paper with live news, you’ve
got to keep hustling.
BROOKY:  Very true, but it seems such a waste of energy.
PERKINS:  (Coming down to BROOKY.)  No energy is wasted that is
productive of flaring headlines.  Now take that note pad I gave
you, and get your pencil busy with a description of this neighborhood.
(Goes R. making notes.)
BROOKY:  (Taking paper and pencil from pockets after a search for
them.)  This is more like being a Scotland Yarder than a reporter.
PERKINS:  A Scotland Yarder!
BROOKY:  I should say detective.
PERKINS:  (Coming L.)  Let me tell you something, Brooky.  The
reporters and newspapers unravel more cases than the police.
BROOKY:  I dare say you do.  You’re so damned inquisitive.
PERKINS:  It isn’t inquisitiveness, my boy, it’s just being on the
level with the public.
BROOKY:  (Laughing.)  You know, some great man said, “The public be
damned.”
PERKINS:  He wasn’t a great man, he was an ignorant man.  The public
will stand for just so much, then look out; let your mind wander
back to the history of the French Revolution.  An infuriated public
is the most ferocious blood-lapping animal in the earth’s jungle.
BROOKY:  Perky, I adore your descriptive talents.
PERKINS:  (Going up into vestibule and ringing bell.)  You make me
sick.
BROOKY:  But surely you’re not going to enter that apartment house
unannounced?
PERKINS:  No, I’ll tell them a couple of reporters want some news,
then you’ll hear language no paper can print.
BROOKY:  Why, are they all foreigners?
PERKINS:  Say, Brooky, you’re a perfect ass.
BROOKY:  No, my dear fellow, none of us are perfect.
PERKINS:  (Coming down out of vestibule to BROOKY.)  Now listen, I
told you that I had inside information that the EEL and GOLDIE
were to be released, that’s why I hustled you over here.  I could
have come alone, but I let you in on a big scoop for your paper.
BROOKY:  Righto, old chap, righto; but what bothers me is, what’s
it all about?
PERKINS:  It’s about time you got next to yourself.
BROOKY:  Another impossible metaphor, my dear fellow; how can one
get next to one’s self without being twins?
PERKINS:  Brooky, Englishmen as a rule are thick, but you are a
density of thickness that is impenetrable.
BROOKY:  Yes, I know I am a rare sort.
PERKINS:  Now, we haven’t time to argue a lot of piffle.  The girl
isn’t in yet, there’s no answer to my ring, so let’s stroll around
and come back later.  (Exit R.)
BROOKY:  (Not seeing that PERKINS has gone.)  Righto! old man, we’ll
stroll, for if there’s anything that I like, its having a nice
little–(Seeing that PERKINS is gone.)  Perkins! you said stroll.
Don’t run, don’t run, it’s so damned undignified.  (Exit R.) (Enter
L., O’MARA dressed in citizen’s clothes.  He looks at number on
house then motions off for TOM to come on.  TOM comes on L., they
go up into vestibule and look for names on bells.  Enter Officer
FLYNN, stealthily.)
FLYNN:  Come on, now, you don’t live there, I’ve had my eye on you
for five minutes.
O’MARA:  (Coming down from vestibule to FLYNN.)  Well, keep your eye
on something else, if you know what’s good for you.  (Takes badge
out of pocket.)
FLYNN:  (Surprised.)  Central Officer!  (Whistles and walks off R.)
O’MARA:  (Returning to vestibule.)  Ring any bell?
TOM:  No, her flat’s on the second floor, so I’ll ring up the top
flat.  (TOM rings the bell and sound of electric door opener is
heard, they both exit door C.) (FLYNN strolls back on from R. ad
MAGGIE enters from L.)
FLYNN:  Hello, Maggie! been out to get the evening paper?  There
is not much in it.
MAGGIE:  There’s enough in it to quench me thirst after a hard day’s
work.
FLYNN:  I see you’ve got the paper wrapped around something good.
MAGGIE:  I have that, and it’s meself instead of the paper’ll be
wrapped around it in a minute.  (Light goes up in window above.)
FLYNN:  I see you’ve got a new tenant.  Is she hard on you?
MAGGIE:  Divel-a-bit!  She’s a nice respectable dacent girl, and
aisy to get along with.  I never seen her with no men folks.  Maybe
she’s a widdy, as I’d like to be.
FLYNN:  A widow?  What’s the matter with your old man?
MAGGIE:  He ain’t worth powder enough to blow up a cock-roach.
FLYNN:  Is he working?
MAGGIE:  He ain’t done a tap since the civil war.
FLYNN:  That’s quite a vacation.
MAGGIE:  Vacation?  It’s a life sentence of laziness.
FLYNN:  There’s many a good man layin’ off.
MAGGIE:  No, the good men are dyin’ off, it’s the bums that are
layin’ off.
FLYNN:  (Looking at house.)  Well, the landlord of this house ain’t
particular about his tenants.
MAGGIE:  Not a bit, it’s been a nest for thieves ever since I came
here.
FLYNN:  Well, they’ve got to live somewhere, the jails are overcrowded.
MAGGIE:  Oh, I don’t mind thim, they can steal nothin’ from me but
me old man, and they’re welcome to him without usin’ a jimmy.
FLYNN:  A jimmy?  You’re getting on to the thief slang.
MAGGIE:  Why wouldn’t I?  That’s all I hear mornin’ and night from
“Tommy the Rat,” “Tim the Flim,” and “John the Con.”
FLYNN:  You know all their monakers?
MAGGIE:  I do that.  Say, they’ve given me a monaker, too.
FLYNN:  What do they call you?
MAGGIE:  “Mag the Jag.”
FLYNN:  (Laughs.)  Well, I must be off.  (Starts off R.)
MAGGIE:  (As she goes up into vestibule.)  Won’t you come in and
have a sup of beer and a pull at the old man’s pipe?
FLYNN:  I can’t, I’ve got a stationary post.
MAGGIE:  Look at that now, that shows where you stand.  Good-night,
John.
FLYNN:  Good-night, Maggie.  (Exits R.) (Enter EEL and GOLDIE arm
in arm, talking earnestly.  As they come to steps, GOLDIE goes up
and unlocks door.  EEL sees FLYNN coming up on R., he lights
cigarette and motions to go in.  GOLDIE exits door C. FLYNN comes
up to EEL, who throws the match in his face and disappears door
C. as FLYNN is rubbing his eyes.)
DARK CHANGE
SCENE III
SAME NIGHT, INTERIOR OF GOLDIE’S FLAT
Living room, bedroom, and kitchen can be seen.  At rise, O’MARA
and TOM are installing the dictagraph, on wall L. C. TOM is standing
on chair L. C. He places the instrument–then runs his hand down
to wire.)
TOM:  All right, Jim, hand me that picture.
O’MARA:  (C. handing TOM framed picture.)  Here you are, Tom.
TOM:  (Hangs picture over dictagraph, gets off of chair and backs
off, seeing if it’s placed right.)  There, that’ll do, I guess.
O’MARA:  Nobody would ever suspect anything’s been happening here.
TOM:  (Picking up bits of wire and tools from floor L. C. O’MARA
puts chair TOM has been standing on, R. and brings bag C.)  Pick
up these pieces.  Did you give the Inspector the office?
O’MARA:  Twenty minutes ago.
TOM:  (Putting scraps into bag.)  The job took a little longer than
I thought it would.
O’MARA:  (Closing bag and handing it to TOM.)  Yes, and we’d better
get a gait on out of here, or the EEL and his girl will be walkin’
in on us.  (Door slams off stage.)
BOTH:  What’s that!
O’MARA:  It must be them!
TOM:  (Starts for door R.)
O’MARA:  We can’t go that way.
TOM:  (Indicating the window L.)  The fire escape, quick.  (TOM crosses
quickly to window L., opens it, and goes through.)
O’MARA:  (Follows TOM, but stops at window L.)  Wait a minute!  (Goes
back, turns out light, then goes through window, closing it after
him.) (Footsteps begin on steps off stage as O’MARA pulls down
window.)  Stage is in darkness but for the moonlight that streams
in through window L. Steps sound closer.  Key rattles and door is
unlocked.  Door R. opens just a bit at first, then GOLDIE enters,
followed by the EEL.)
EEL:  (Holding GOLDIE back.)  Wait a minute, kid, till I strike a
match.
GOLDIE:  Oh, never mind, Billy, I don’t need one.  (Gropes her way
C. and turns on light.  EEL stays at door R. listening to hear if
they are followed.)  Home again!  Gee! but that guy what said “ther
ain’t no place like home” must have travelled some.
EEL:  (Turning around.)  Yep!  Gee, but this is some swell dump you
got here, Kid!
GOLDIE:  Ain’t this classy?
(The EEL hurries into bedroom and then into kitchen as though
looking for some one.  GOLDIE follows him, but stops at kitchen
door.)  What are you looking for, the ice-box?
EEL:  (Coming down to C. R. of GOLDIE.)  No, it ain’t that.
GOLDIE:  What then, lookin’ for a sleeper?
EEL:  No telling what they’re up to.  You don’t think they’ve given
us our liberty, without a string to it, do you?  They’re Indian
givers, they are.
(Starts for door R.)
GOLDIE:  Gee, Billy!  I hadn’t thought of that.  (Goes into bedroom
and lights electric light L. of bedroom off C.)
EEL:  (R. C. looking at door R.)  I kind of thought I saw a light
through the bottom of this door, when we was coming up the stairs.
GOLDIE:  (Coming down C.)  Oh, it must have been the reflection of
the moon.  (Takes off hat and puts it on dresser in bedroom.  EEL
crosses room backwards to L., holding hand in moonlight to make
the shadow on bottom of door.  GOLDIE watches him.  EEL then turns
to window and GOLDIE looks under bed.)
EEL:  (Excitedly.)  This latch is sprung.
GOLDIE:  I must have left it open, when they hiked me down to the
club house.
EEL:  Are you sure?
GOLDIE:  SURE!
EEL:  (Going down L.)  Well, then, I guess we’re all right for the
present at least.
GOLDIE:  (Coming down C. with travelling bag which she has taken
off of bed.)  Yes, until Dugan finds out we’ve been sprung, and
then he’ll be after us like a cat after a mouse.  (Puts bag on table
up R.)
EEL:  We’ll be on a rattler for Chi, before that.  How long will
it take you to pack?
GOLDIE:  (Going into bedroom.)  About a half hour.
EEL:  That’s good.  If Dugan does go after us (Chuckles.), he’s got
to get us first.
GOLDIE:  (Coming down C. with kimono which she has taken from door
C. in bedroom, and is folding.)  Say, Billy, I guess I’d better
lock this door.  (Starts for door, but his next line stops her.)
EEL:  He can’t break in here without a search warrant, and he can’t
get that before Monday.  (Lying down on couch.)
GOLDIE:  Well, what’s he going to get it on then?  (Putting kimono
in bag on table R., picking up a pair of shoes from the floor near
table, but the EEL’s next line stops her.)
EEL:  (Still on couch.)  You ought to know Dugan well enough by this
time.  He’ll get something on us, leave it to him.
GOLDIE:  (Stopping thoughtfully in door C., then throwing shoes on
floor near bed decisively and coming down C.)  If he does, I’ll
turn squealer for the first time in my life.
EEL:  (Jumping off of couch quickly.)  Don’t you do it.  I could
never look you square in the eyes again if you did.
GOLDIE:  It ain’t no worse to squeal than it is to steal.
EEL:  Yes, it is, Kid, God’ll forgive a thief, but he hates a
squealer.
GOLDIE:  Maybe you’re right, Billy.  Well, I guess we’d better get
a move on.  (Going into bedroom and getting hair brush off of
dresser.)  We can’t get out of here any too soon to suit me.  (Putting
brush in bag on Table R., then smiling at EEL.)
EEL:  You betcher!  (Goes to mantle L. and leans against it
thoughtfully.)
GOLDIE:  (Coming C.)  What’s on your mind now?
EEL:  I was just thinkin’ of that first job I’d have to do when we
get to Chi.
GOLDIE:  What do you mean?
EEL:  Gee, Goldie, I hate to go back to the old life.  (Sits on
sofa L.)
GOLDIE:  Old life?  I thought you said we was goin’ to begin all
over again, and live like decent, respectable people?
EEL:  I know, but you’ve got to have money to be respectable.
GOLDIE:  Well, we’ll get the money.
EEL:  That’s what I hate about it.  Having to get it that way.
GOLDIE:  But Billy, I mean honestly, work for it.
EEL:  (Rising and coming R.)  Yes, but supposing we can’t get work?
And supposing we can’t hold it after we do get it?
GOLDIE:  If they go digging into our past, it’ll be tough rowing.
But there (caressing EEL.), don’t let’s worry till we come to the
bridge.  Wait until we get to Chicago.  (Goes into bedroom and takes
down coat which is hanging on door C.)
EEL:  (Lies on couch L.)  Have you got enough cale to carry us over
there?
GOLDIE:  (Brushing off coat at door C.)  What?
EEL:  I say, have you got enough money to hold us till we get to
Chi?
GOLDIE:  (C. looking in surprise.)  Why no, Billy, I ain’t got no
money.
EEL:  (Surprised, slowly rising from couch to sitting position.)
What?
GOLDIE:  I ain’t got a cent.  I thought you had the sugar.
EEL:  Me?
GOLDIE:  AIN’T you got no money neither?
EEL:  (Throwing away cigarette and going R.)  I ain’t got enough
money to buy the controlling interest in a rotten egg.  (Goldie
throws coat on couch.)  How about that necklace?
GOLDIE:  Why, Dugan’s got it.
EEL:  Well, how about your share?
GOLDIE:  Well, he promised I was going to get five hundred out of
it, but now that you’re sprung, I suppose I’ll have to whistle for
it.
EEL:  Well, I see where I have to get to work before we get to
Chicago.
GOLDIE:  (Turning him around quickly.)  What do you mean?
EEL:  Well, we’ve got to get to Chi, and as the railroads are very
particular, somebody’ll have to pay our fares.  I won’t be long.
(Crosses L. in front of GOLDIE and gets hat and coat off of sofa.
GOLDIE runs to door R., then as EEL turns:)
GOLDIE:  Oh no, no, don’t, please don’t. We’re going to be good,
you said so yourself.  We’re going to travel the straight road.
EEL:  (C. with hat and coat in hand.)  But that road won’t take us
to Chi.  (Pause.)  You see, there’s no other way out of it.  (Starts
toward door but GOLDIE stops him pleadingly.)
GOLDIE:  Oh no, you musn’t, you shan’t. I won’t go with you if you
do.  I won’t go!  I won’t go!  (Becomes hysterical, pounds on door,
then begins to cry.)
EEL:  (Putting arm around her.)  There, there, don’t cry.  Look!  (He
turns her around and then puts his hat and coat in chair above
door R.) (GOLDIE takes his hands in relief The EEL pats her cheek.)
You see, I’ll do as you say.  (Crossing down C.)  I’ll cut it out.
GOLDIE:  (Following the EEL and putting her arms around him.)  I
knew you would.
EEL:  Oh, you did?  Well, what’s the next move?
GOLDIE:  I don’t know, Billy.
EEL:  There you are.  (Crosses L.)  We’re no better off than we were
before.  By Monday, Dugan’ll have me back in the Tombs, maybe on
a charge of murder.  You know that he ain’t going to rest while
I’m loose.
GOLDIE:  Then why not let me end it all?
EEL:  Not by squealing.
GOLDIE:  It will be that sooner or later.
EEL:  (Coming R. slowly.)  No, the best way is to let me go out and
get some money.  (Crossing GOLDIE and going toward hat and coat on
chair R.)
GOLDIE:  (Stopping him.)  But, Billy, you promised me–
EEL:  (Turning to GOLDIE.)  I don’t mean to rob anybody (Scratches
head in puzzled way, then brightly, as thought strikes him), I
mean to borrow it.
GOLDIE:  (Joyfully.)  Borrow it?
EEL:  Yes, I’ll knock a guy down, strip him of his leather, get his
name and address, then when we get to Chicago, I’ll send it back
to him.
GOLDIE:  (Shaking her head and smiling.)  Oh no, it won’t do.
EEL:  Why?
GOLDIE:  You might forget his address.  (Going up C. into bedroom.)
Now, you come and help me pack the trunk.  (Stopping.)  Oh Billy,
come help me pull this trunk in there.  (Disappearing to R. of
trunk.  EEL comes and takes L. end and they carry it into living
room and place it C. under chandelier to open up stage.  As they
carry it down stage she speaks.)  There are a few more things to
go in.
EEL:  (As they set trunk down.)  I’ve got it.
GOLDIE:  What?
EEL:  I know where I can get that money.
GoLDffi:  Where?
EEL:  Isaacson.
GOLDIE:  What Isaacson?
EEL:  Why the fence on Second Ave.  I’m aces with him.
GOLDIE:  Yes, but what have you got to pawn?
EEL:  I don’t need nothing.  I’ve thrown thousands of dollars his
way in business, he’ll lend me a century sure.  I’ll be back in
fifteen minutes.  (Goes to chair and gets coat and hat, then starts
for door R.)
GOLDIE:  Wait!  (Crosses to mantel L. and gets keys from up stage
end.)  Here, take my keys.  (Coming back to C. above trunk where EEL
meets her putting on coat and hat.)  To make sure, we’d better work
on signals.
EEL:  (Taking keys.)  How do you mean?
GOLDIE:  In case anything happens while you’re gone, when you come
back, ring the bell downstairs three times.  If I don’t answer,
everything’s O. K., come up; but if I do answer, don’t come up,
see?
EEL:  If you don’t answer, everything’s all right, come up; but if
you do answer, don’t come up.
GOLDIE:  That’s it.
EEL:  I got you.  (Goes to door R. Opens it quickly to see if anyone
is there.  Closes door, footsteps are heard in hall, then going
downstairs, then door slams.)
GOLDIE:  (Listens intently until door slams, then begins to pack
trunk.  Opens trunk first.  Gets jacket from couch where she has
thrown it, puts it in trunk.  Goes up into bedroom and gets skirt
which hangs out of sight on end of dresser.  Comes down C. shaking
skirt.  Long, low whistle stops her, then club raps.)  Bull’s!!
(Looks up at light burning, turns it out and closes the trunk at
the same time.  Stands still until she sees the shadow of man’s
hand in the moonlight on the wall R.  Frightened exclamation, then
cowers on sofa.  DUGAN appears at window, looks in, then raises
window and enters, closing window after him.  Takes gun out of
pocket, then goes up into kitchen and bedroom.  At door C. he sees
GOLDIE, points gun at her.
DUGAN:  Ah!  (GOLDIE springs to her feet with frightened exclamation,
and DUGAN says:) don’t squawk or I’ll pop sure!
GOLDIE:  (Nervously.)  Me squawk?  What do you think I am, a school
teacher?
DUGAN:  (Goes to door R., opens it to see if anyone is there, closes
it and locks door.  Comes to C., turns on light, then puts gun in
pocket.  Coming L. to GOLDIE.)  I don’t want to frighten you.
GOLDIE:  (L. nervously.)  I know, but one look at you would scare
some people to death.
DUGAN:  Am I that homely?
GOLDIE:  Homely?  Why an undershot bulldog is a peacock, ’long side
of you.
DUGAN:  Ain’t I welcome?
GOLDIE:  You’re about as welcome as a rainy holiday.  (Sits on sofa.)
DUGAN:  Say, Goldie, we’ve been almost more than friends in the
last two years.
GOLDIE:  You mean almost friends.  (Rising.)  Never more.  Dugan, you
know why I’ve been your go-between in the System.  Because you
promised to let up on the Eel.
DUGAN:  I’ll never let up on him.  He’s a crook.
GOLDIE:  Well, what are you?  (Turns L. away from DUGAN.)
DUGAN:  Don’t get sore, Goldie.  You know I want you for myself.
(Puts his arms around GOLDIE’S waist.)
GOLDIE:  Well, you’re wasting time.  (Pulls savagely away from him
and crosses R.)
DUGAN:  (Following GOLDIE R.)  Am I?  I’ll get you, or I’ll send you
both up for years.
GOLDIE:  (Savagely into DUGAN’s face.)  Is that why you had me steal
that necklace?
DUGAN:  Yes, if you want to know it, I’ve been trying for two years
to get something on you, and now I’ve got you.
GOLDIE:  Well, suppose I squeal.
DUGAN:  It’s my word against yours, the word of an officer against
a crook.
GOLDIE:  Say, Dugan, if looks of contempt would hurt a man’s feelings,
I’d disable you with a squint.  (DUGAN goes L., getting necklace
out of pocket; GOLDIE is in panic for fear EEL will ring the bell,
but she crosses and sits on trunk.)
DUGAN:  Goldie, this necklace will bring four thousand dollars from
a Buffalo fence, and if you’ll say three words, “I love you,” the
price is yours.  Won’t you say them, Goldie?  Just three words?
GOLDIE:  (Thinks it over, then looks at DUGAN.)  Go–to–Hell.
DUGAN:  (Going L. puts back necklace and takes out red wallet, then
comes C. to GOLDIE.)  Well, how does this strike you?  Here’s twenty
thousand dollars.  It’s all yours for the asking.  Twenty thousand
dollars.  (Sits on trunk beside GOLDIE.)
GOLDIE:  Gee, but you’re doing a land office business.
DUGAN:  I’ve got no kick coming.  Why say, I can take care of you
in real style.  Why waste your time on the EEL?  I can make more
money in a week than he can steal in a year.
GOLDIE:  That’s because you’re a better thief than he is.  (Rises
and goes R.)
DUGAN:  I wouldn’t say that.  (Following GOLDIE R.)  Come on, Goldie
(putting his arms around her, with purse in front of her face),
what’s the answer?
GOLDIE:  (Apparently weakening.)  Twenty thousand dollars!  Gee,
that’s a lot of money, and I could live right.
DUGAN:  (Greedily, as though he has won her.)  Sure you could.  I’d
set you up like a Queen, and between us we could milk the Tenderloin
dry.
GOLDIE:  But the Eel?
DUGAN:  (Crossing L. and putting wallet away.)  I’ll attend to him!
(Then to GOLDIE who has come L.)  Listen to this!  Ten minutes after
you two were turned loose, an old man was beaten and robbed, not
two blocks from here.  He never came to!  (GOLDIE backs R. in horror.
DUGAN follows.)  He died on his way to Bellevue.  Do you know who
the murderer is?  I’m here to arrest him on the charge of murder.
GOLDIE:  (In mad rage.)  You lie, Dugan!  Billy said you’d frame him,
but you won’t this time–(GOLDIE flies at DUGAN as though to scratch
his eyes out, but he struggles with her and throws her to the floor
L.)  No, Dugan, not murder, that would mean the chair!  (GOLDIE on
knees pleading to DUGAN.  Bell rings three times, they both start.
DUGAN puzzled and surprised, and GOLDIE terror-stricken, wondering
what to do.  Then the thought of the bell on the wall comes.
Looking at DUGAN with a forced smile and still on the floor.)  Oh,
I wonder who that can be?  (By the last two words she is on her
feet and makes a dash for the bell up L., but DUGAN reaches it
firse.)
DUGAN:  No, you don’t. I’m wise.  “If I answer, don’t come up."
(GOLDIE, in disgusted rage, goes down to head of couch, followed
by DUGAN.)  Old stuff, Goldie.  Let him come, I want him.  (Door
slams off stage.  GOLDIE starts and DUGAN goes to door R. and
unlocks it.  They both stand rigid.  DUGAN with gun in hand, while
footsteps come nearer.  As door opens and EEL enters.)
GOLDIE:  Look out, Billy!  (DUGAN grabs EEL’S hand and throws him
in the room and locks the door.  While he is doing this EEL runs
across room over trunk and disappears behind sofa.  When DUGAN
turns, he can’t locate EEL and points gun up into bedroom.)
DUGAN:  Hands up, Billy!  Hands up!  (He then locates EEL behind
sofa.)  I won’t tell you again!  Hands up!  (The EEL holds hands up
and appears behind sofa.) (GOLDIE is up C. behind trunk.)  Goldie,
frisk him clean.  (GOLDIE protests.)  Come on!  Come on!  (DUGAN points
gun at EEL, and GOLDIE runs to him and goes through his pockets.
She finds tobacco bag which she hands to DUGAN.  He doesn’t take
it, and she drops it on floor.)  Get to his gun pocket.  Get to his
gun pocket.  (GOLDIE hesitates, then goes to EEL’S hip pocket, where
she finds a roll of money.  She tries to put it back but DUGAN
sees it.)  Come on, hand it over.  (GOLDIE appeals to the EEL who
pantomimes to do so, and she hands it to DUGAN.)  This is the money
he took from the man he killed.  (Putting money into red wallet and
returning wallet to pocket.)
EEL:  Do you think I’d frisk a stiff?  Let me tell you something,
Dugan.  (Throwing hat on floor.)  You staked me two years ago in the
Pen, and then tried to make me believe that Goldie was in on the frame.
You lied like a yellow dog, Dugan, and you know it.  Yes, I am a crook
and a thief, and I’ve robbed a lot of people, but I’m just a little
bit above you, Dugan, just a little bit above you.  Because, I never
took money from a woman, and that’s part of your graft.  (DUGAN takes
out gun as though to hit EEL with it.  GOLDIE grabs his arm and bites
his hand and he drops the gun; Noise begins off stage.  GOLDIE runs
to door R. while EEL and DUGAN struggle.  DUGAN throws EEL off and
goes toward window L. EEL sees gun on floor R., runs and gets it,
but GOLDIE prevents his shooting it.  The Police break in the door
at this point.  One catches GOLDIE as she is running toward the
window L. Another, who comes through the window, catches the EEL.
The Inspector stands at door R., crowd back of him.  DUGAN comes
down to him.)
DUGAN:  Well, Inspector, I got him.  He robbed and croaked an old
man.  I got him with the goods on!
INSPECTOR:  Let these people go!  (Pointing to DUGAN.)  There’s your
man, arrest him!  (GOLDIE and the EEL are released.)
DUGAN:  Inspector, you’ve got nothing on me.
INSPECTOR:  No?  (Crossing to DUGAN.)  Well, there’s a dictagraph in
this room (GOLDIE rushes into EEL’S arms.), and we’ve got everything
on you, you dog.  You’re a disgrace to all mankind.  It is unclean
curs like you that have bred a cancer in the department, and pointed
the finger of suspicion at ten thousand honest policemen.  But
that cancer must be cut out, and the operation begins now.  Take
him away.  (Policemen hand-cuff DUGAN, who struggles, then resignedly
walks off, preceded and followed by police.  The INSPECTOR follows
them, but stops and turns at door R.)  Well, Billy!  (EEL and GOLDIE
come C. and stand in front of trunk.)
EEL:  Well, Inspector?
INSPECTOR:  If you’re going to live square, stick to it.  (EEL takes
GOLDIE’S hand.)  I never want to see you at headquarters again.
(EEL drops his head and GOLDIE puts her arm around him.)  I won’t
even need you as a witness.  The dictagraph has recorded all.  (EEL
and GOLDIE pleased.)  Good-night!  (INSPECTOR exits, closing door
after him.)
EEL and GOLDIE:  Good-night, Inspector!  (They both listen until his
footsteps die off, and door slams.  Then EEL runs to door to listen,
and GOLDIE sits dejectedly on trunk.)
GOLDIE:  Well, we’re broke again.  (Tearfully.)  We can’t go West
now, so there’s no use packing.  (The EEL goes stealthily to window
L., looks out, pulls dictagraph from wall, then comes down R. of
GOLDIE who is sitting on trunk and has watched him.  He taps her
on the shoulder, taking DUGAN’S red wallet out of pocket.)
EEL:  Go right ahead and pack!  (GOLDIE looks astounded, and begins
to laugh.)
CURTAIN
First picture.  (Both sitting on trunk counting money.)
A MUSICAL COMEDYIN ONE ACT
BOOKS AND LYRICS BY
EDGAR ALLAN WOOLF
Author of “The Lollard,” “The Lady of the Press,"
“A College Proposition,” “Master Willie Hewes, or
The Lady of the Sonnets,” Etc., Etc.
MUSIC BY
ANATOL FRIEDLAND
Composer of “My Little Dream Girl,” “My
Sweet Adair,” Etc., Etc.
CHARACTERS
(Order in which they appear.)
ROSE                       DUDLEY STANFORD
LETTY                      PHIL
BETTY                      DOWLEH
SHEIK ABU MIRZAH           NEHMID DUCKIN
MRS. SCHUYLER              HAMILTON SCHUYLER
               PAUL MORGAN
SCENE
The Rose Gardens of the American Legation in Persia–the entrance
to the building on left.  Large Persian jardinieres on right with
a large Persian Rose Tree.
OPENING NUMBER
ROSE:  “The Girl in the Persian Rug.”  After number off stage is
heard in old man’s voice:  “Illa au Rose aboukar.”
GIRLS:  (Running up.)  Oh–here comes the old Sheik now.  (Enter the
old SHEIK ABU MIRZAH preceded by Persian servant.)
ABU:  Ah–ma Rosa Persh–ma waf to be–to-morrow we marry, eh?  (The
SHEIK carries eartrumpet.)
ROSE:  (Running from him in alarm.)  Oh, don’t touch me–don’t–don’t!
(They are both yelling at each other as MRS. SCHUYLER enters first
arch and sees ROSE’S actions–she is flashy–an ex-chorus girl–married
to the retiring consul.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Say, tie a can to that duet.  What’s the matter?
ROSE:  (Crossing to her.)  Oh, Mrs. Schuyler, I won’t marry him–I
hate him!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Oh, the poor old prune.  (Crossing to ABU, garrulously.)
How are you, Sheik?  Our little ward, Rose, is so young and foolish!
But I was just that innocent when I was in the chorus.  When I
came out of it, believe me, I was a different woman.  (Enter Persian
servant.)
SERVANT:  The new consul wants to know when we are going to move out–
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Not till after Rose’s wedding to-morrow.  (ROSE
utters exclamation of rage, slaps the SHEIK’S face and exits.)  I
was just that emotional until I’d been married a few times–Come,
Sheik–my husband won’t return from Tabris till this evening–join
me in a cocktail.  (She illustrates drink in pantomime.)
ABU:  (Understanding pantomime.)  Yes!  Yes!  (LETTY and BETTY go up
to table and chair C.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Mousta, two cocktails on my back porch.  Come,
Sheik–Sheik!  (Business with girls.)  This way to the dog house.
(Takes hold of chain on his ear trumpet and passes him in.  Girls
have gone off.)  Oh–and, Mousta–don’t put any cherries in–they
take up too much room in the glass.  (She exits one way–Waiter,
another.)
(MUSIC.  Entrance of men.)
PAUL:  (Entering with DUDLEY.)  Well, there are some beautiful girls
in our new Persian home–has Phil brought our things from the boat?
Phil!  Phil!  (Phil enters with all the luggage.)
PHIL:  (Meekly.)  Here I am, sir.–
PAUL:  (As if brushing mosquitoes away.)  Oh gee! these Persian
mosquitoes!  (Finally kills one on his own face.)
PHIL:  (Hungrily.)  When are we going to have lunch, sir?
PAUL:  Well, there are several little things I want you to do first.
(Whacking him on one side of face.)  Another mosquito.
PHIL:  (Gratefully.)  Oh, thank you, sir.
DUDLEY:  Paul, you look as if you were mashed on that Madison
girl–(Sees mosquito on PHIL’s face.)  Another mosquito.  (Whacks
him on other side of face.)
PHIL:  Oh, thank you, sir–I have never seen such extreme kindness.
(Both whack him this time–one on each side of face.)
PAUL:  Ho!  Ho!  Two of them this time.
PHIL:  Probably twins.
DUDLEY:  I’ll go in and see when the retiring consul will move out.
PAUL:  All right, and I’ll get a bite of luncheon awhile.  (DUDLEY
exits.)
PHIL:  (Hungrily.)  Oh–are you going to have your luncheon alone?
(PAUL sees mosquito on PHIL–is about to kill it–PHIL falls back.)
Ah–let it live–let it live.
PAUL:  Now–you run in the house and take our things out of the
grips.
PHIL:  Is there any other little thing I can do for you?
PAUL:  Not till after I’ve had my lunch.
PHIL:  Thank you, sir!  (PHIL looks a starved look at him–exits
into house–stumbling over bundles.) (ROSE is heard singing off-stage
chorus of “My Little Persian Rose"–enters humming.)
PAUL:  (As he hears her singing.)  It’s Miss Madison–I know her
sweet voice!
ROSE:  (As she enters and sees PAUL, she stops singing, embarrassed.)
Oh, I didn’t know you were here.  (The music continues faintly in
orchestra.)
PAUL:  I’m not–I’m in heaven when I hear you sing.
ROSE:  Oh, I hope you don’t mean my singing kills you.
PAUL:  No–for then, I’m afraid I wouldn’t be in heaven.  What was
that song?
ROSE:  An old Persian poet taught me the words.
PAUL:  (Ardently.)  Oh, how I love–those words.  Are you going back
to America with Mr. and Mrs. Schuyler?
ROSE:  (Sadly.)  No, I must stay here in Persia.
PAUL:  (Forgetting himself.)  Hooray!
ROSE:  Ah–but you don’t know.
PAUL:  Know what?
ROSE:  Don’t ask me now–good day, sir.  (She courtesies and runs
off.)
(Music in orchestra stops.)
PAUL:  I wonder what she meant by that?
PHIL:  (Rushing on.)  I’ve taken out your things.  Now, may I eat?
(Persian servant enters in haste.)
SERVANT:  Oh please, sir, the Sheik has drunk three cocktails, and
Mrs. Schuyler says he is disgusting.  Quick, get someone to take him
home.
PAUL:  Phil–do you hear?  The Sheik’s disgusting–take him home.
(Servants exit.)
PHIL:  (As he exits.)  Is there any little thing I can do for you?
PAUL:  Not just now.  (PHIL exits.)  The melody of that song haunts
me.  (He starts to hum it.) (PHIL enters with SHEIK on his
shoulders–struggles to get him off.  Finally exits with him.  As
he exits, MRS. SCHUYLER enters first arch.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  I hope he gets the old fool home, all right.  (Sees
PAUL.)  Oho–it looks good to mother.  (Business of humming same
song.)
PAUL:  (Turning and seeing her, with great surprise.)  Agnes!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Startled.)  Mercy, where was I Agnes?
PAUL:  (Crosses to MRS. SCHUYLER.)  Have you forgotten–the summer
I met you in Niagara Falls?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Niagara Falls?  I must have been on one of my
honeymoons–oh, yes–of course–Mr. Morgan.  (They shake hands.)
You see, I’ve met so many mushy men.  (He sighs.)  What makes you
look so unhappy?
PAUL:  I’m in love with a girl.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Only one?  Why so economical?
PAUL:  Ah–I’m afraid you don’t know what real love is.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Oh, yes I do!  Real love is the kind that lasts after
you’ve heard a man sleeping right out loud.  Who’s the girl?
PAUL:  Miss Madison.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Surprised.)  Our Rose?  Not on your life.  To-morrow,
before we return to America, she’s to marry the Abu Mirzah, and
nothing can prevent it.
PAUL:  (In horror.)  She’s being sacrificed to that old mummy–I’ll
kill him.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  The doctors say he is so strong, nothing can kill
him, except his fondness for Persian plums, and there is a mandate
out inflicting death upon any man who sends him any.  (ROSE enters.)
PAUL:  (Crossing to her.)  Oh, Miss Madison, I’ve just heard–
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Rose–go to the grape arbor at once–I’ll join you
there presently.  (DUDLEY enters.)
DUDLEY:  Say, Paul–I–(Sees MRS. SCHUYLER–with surprise.)  Lena–
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Du, “Allmaechtiger Strohsach"–where was I Lena?
DUDLEY:  Have you forgotten, in Germany, Unter den Linden?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Germany?  Oh, the man who made love to me over a
plate of frankfurters?  Well–well–wie geht’s!  Tell me, do you
think I’ve grown stouter since the days when I was Lena?  (PAUL
laughs.)
DUDLEY:  Not a bit.  (PAUL and ROSE laugh.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Seeing ROSE and PAUL in earnest conversation.)
Excuse me.  (She crosses and grabs ROSE.)  Rose, there’s some grape
juice waiting for us in the grape arbor.  (She sends ROSE off.)
(Boys step toward MRS. SCHUYLER.)  Boys–later–when Rose has gone,
you may come and crush a grape with me in the arbor.  (She exits.)
PAUL:  Aber nit!  Dud, she’s determined to keep us apart–you must
help me–go and grab her, and run her off into the house.
DUDLEY:  Lena–not much–she once flung a glass at my head.
PAUL:  Well, then, where’s Phil?  (Calls.)  Phil–Phil!  (DUDLEY calls
also.  PHIL rushes on.)
PHIL:  Am I going to eat?
PAUL:  Quick, go and grab Mrs. Schuyler in the grape arbor.
PHIL:  Grab her in the grape arbor?
PAUL:  (Pushing them off.)  And run her into the house.  Quick.  (He
pushes PHIL off one way.)  And you run into the house and hold her
there.  (Rushes DUDLEY into house.)  I’ll run to the grape arbor to
join Rose when she’s alone.  (He exits.) (PHIL enters, pushing MRS.
SCHUYLER toward the house.  They enter from grape arbor.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Beating him with parasol.)  The idea!  What’s the
meaning of this?  You little runt!  (Pushing him off.) (Ad lib
talk.)  Who are you, anyhow?
PHIL:  (Turning and seeing her.)  Maggie!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (As before.)  For the love of the Chambermaids’
Union, where was I Maggie?
PHIL:  Don’t you remember when I was a “merry merry” with you in
the “Blonde Broilers’ Burlesque” troupe?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Were you one of the Blonde Broilers?
PHIL:  Sure, I was the fellow that came out in the last act disguised
as a bench.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Finally remembering him.)  Oh, you dear old Benchie!
(They embrace.)  And I used to come in and sit all over you.
PHIL:  That’s how I came to fall in love with you.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  A man always thinks more of a woman when she sits
on him.
PHIL:  Do she?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  She do.
PHIL:  Come and sit on me now.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Coyly.)  Oh, you fascinating devil.
PHIL:  Ah, go on–ah, sit on me.  (Business of sitting–nearly
flopping–finally getting on his knee.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  You’re not the bench you used to be!
PHIL:  You’re not the sitter you used to be.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Remember the night you let me flop?
PHIL:  I couldn’t get into my part at all that night.  I kept saying
to myself:  Phillip, be a bench, be a bench; but when I felt you
near me, all the benchiness left me.  When you sat on me, I put
my arms about you, like this.  (Does so.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Ah–how it all comes back to me now!  When you would
put your arms about me, I would close my eyes and make believe it
was Otis Skinner.  (Business.)
PHIL:  And then before all the crowd, I kissed you so.  (He illustrates
as PAUL enters with ROSE from arbor.)
PAUL:  (Seeing PHIL and MRS. SCHUYLER.)  Well–(They break apart.)
I’m surprised!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Works PHIL around to hide him first, then turns
him around to PAUL.)  You wouldn’t be if you were as used to it as
I am.
PAUL:  (Aside to PHIL.)  What did I tell you to do?
(PHIL seizes MRS. SCHUYLER and runs her into house–she saying:
“What’s the idea,” etc., till off.) (Sunset falls upon scene.)
SONG–PAUL and ROSE–"My Little Persian Rose.”  (ROSE exits at end
of song.)
PAUL:  (Left alone.)  I won’t let her marry him.  (A girl passes,
crying out “Persian Plums–who will buy?”)
PAUL:  Persian Plums–Mrs. Schuyler said the old Sheik had such a
passion for them, they might prove his death.  Here!  Girl–let me
have a basket.  (Hands her a roll of money.)  There!  (As he comes
down with plums, the girl exits.)  But she said whoever was caught
sending him any would suffer the penalty of death.  (Gets idea and
calls off.)  Phil–Phil!  (Moonlight effect.  As PHIL enters, anxiously,
PAUL extends the basket of plums to him.)
PHIL:  (Taking plums, greedily.)  Oh thanks, I was starving–
PAUL:  (Stopping him as he is about to eat.)  Here–here–they’re
not for you.  Quick–take them to the palace of the old Sheik Abu
Mirzah.
PHIL:  But I left him asleep in his bed, sir.
PAUL:  Well, place them where he’ll see them when he wakes, and
(ominously) don’t let anyone catch you with them, for the country
is full of revolutionists and it might mean death.
PHIL:  (Trembling.)  My death!  Is there any other little thing I can
do for you?
PAUL:  No.  (Several pistol shots are heard.  PHIL drops plums and
starts to run into house.  PAUL catches him by the hair–business.)
You coward!  I’m surprised!  Go to the Palace of the Abu Mirzah.  (He
places basket in PHIL’s hands.)  Go!
(As PHIL backs off with plums, he bumps into a fierce looking
Persian who enters.  PHIL starts and has comedy exit.  The Persian
is the Emir Shahrud, who has disguised himself as DOWLEH the chef.
DOWLEH grinds his teeth at PAUL, who runs off.)
(DOWLEH sneaks over to house mysteriously–sees someone coming,
and then runs and hides behind rosebush.)
(Now, moonlight floods scene.  MRS. SCHUYLER enters in evening
gown with LETTY and BETTY.  Waiter enters and sets two tables.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Turn up the lights!
LETTY:  Our last night in Persia.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  I’ve ordered my “paflouka” out here.  (MRS. SCHUYLER
crosses to rosebush and, DOWLER jumps out at her.)  Mercy–how you
scared me!
DOWLEH:  Fatima!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Now, I’m a cigarette!
DOWLEH:  You are cruel to me–the noble Prince of Persia, who just
to be near you, disguised himself as a cook.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Prince, I eat your cooking–that’s kind enough.
DOWLEH:  (Business.)  Yes, I love you so that one day I hear a lady
say you paint your face–I put a secret poison in her food–she
took one taste–in ten seconds, she die.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  It serves her right for telling the truth.
DOWLEH:  Come!  Fly with me!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Oh Prince, I’ve flown so much in my days, there
isn’t another flap left in me.  (Throws him off.)  Go–serve my
“paflouka!”
DOWLEH:  You throw me down–very well–I will be revenged.  (Grinds
his teeth in her ear.)  Mmmm-ha!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (With start, holding ear.)  He bit me.  (The girls
come down as DOWLEH goes off bumping into DUDLEY, who enters in
dress clothes–he swears at DUDLEY, in Persian and exits.)
DUDLEY:  (To MRS. SCHUYLER.)  Oh Lena–if it’s you that has made him
mad, I’d advise you not to taste any of his food again.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Why?
DUDLEY:  I just heard he’s under suspicion of having put poison
in a lady’s food, which killed her in ten seconds.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Ten seconds!  Then it was true.  (Waiter enters with
“paftouka.”) Oh my beautiful paflouka–and it smells so good.
DUDLEY:  But Lena–you daren’t touch it unless you get someone
to try it first.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Will you?
DUDLEY:  Excuse me.  (She turns to the three–they all decline.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Oh, if heaven would only send some unsuspecting
imbecile to taste my paflouka for me–(PHIL backs on from grape
arbor–looking to see if he’s being followed.)  Heaven has sent it
hither.  (She steps PHIL’s way.  As he bumps into her, he starts.)
Hello!
PHIL:  (After start.)  Hello.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Why, what’s the matter?
PHIL:  Oh, I’m faint–for food.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Aside to others.)  Oh, it’s a shame to do it.  (To
PHIL.)  How would you like to “paflouka” with me?
PHIL:  (After business.)  No–before I do anything else, I must eat.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  To “paflouka” is to eat.
PHIL:  Well–hurry–let’s do it.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (To waiter.)  Now, Mousta place my “rakoush” before
him.
PHIL:  (As waiter places soup and roll before him.)  Oh, it looks
like soup.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Crossing to him.)  I always start with something
hot.
PHIL:  (Takes spoonful.)  It is soup!  (As he goes for second spoonful,
they hold his hand.)
WARNING:  Could not break paragraph:
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Counting.)  One–two–three–four–five–six–
seven–eight–nine–ten–(Looking at him.)  How do you feel?
PHIL:  (Completely puzzled.)  Well, I can’t say I feel just full yet.
DUDLEY:  Go on, take a bite of roll.
PHIL:  Thank you!  (He takes one bite–as he goes for second bite,
DUDLEY holds his hand–as they all count ten.  Looking from one
to another.)  Say, what is this–a prize fight?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Looking at him closely.) (DUDLEY takes roll from
PHIL.)  It’s all right–he still lives–I feel better now.
PHIL:  I’m glad of that.  (He starts to take another spoonful of
soup.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Mousta, bring my rakoush.  (Just as PHIL gets spoon
to mouth, MOUSTA grabs it out of his hand and crosses with soup
and roll to MRS. SCHUYLER, saying to PHIL in Persian:  “Rekkra milta
suss.”)
PHIL:  Say, isn’t there some mistake?  I understood that was my
rakoush.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  No, dear boy–it’s ours.  (She starts to eat.)
PHIL:  I guess that’s what they call to paflouka.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Oh, it tastes good.
PHIL:  It sounds good.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Now, Mousta, my bird and salad.  (He exits.)
PHIL:  I hope the bird’s an ostrich.  (He hears MRS. SCHUYLER drink
soup.) (Enter MOUSTA–crosses with bird to MRS. SCHUYLER.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  No–place it before him.
PHIL:  Yes–put it down–put it down.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  No one can cook a bird like Princey.
PHIL:  A bird?  It looks like an insect!  (He sees them approaching
him as before and grabbing the bird in his hand starts to make off
with it–they seize him and throw him into chair.)
PHIL:  (As DUDLEY snatches bird from him.)  Say, what kind of a game
is this anyhow?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  I’ll explain.  The chef is enraged at me, and as
he’s under suspicion of having put poison in a lady’s food that
killed her in ten seconds–
PHIL:  (Jumping up in alarm.)  Poison?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (With DUDLEY’S help setting him down again.)  Yes,
so we got you to try my food on–
PHIL:  Oh, I see–I’m the dog.
DUDLEY:  Precisely.  Now go on–taste that bird.
PHIL:  No, thanks–I’ve had enough.
ALL:  (Together.)  Go on–commence!  (Business of making him taste
bird.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  One–
PHIL:  (Finishing counting for her.)  Two–(To nine.) (As he reaches
ten, he sneezes.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  I’m afraid to look.  (Business of PHIL tasting bird,
then getting idea of pretending to be poisoned, he commences to
get a fit.)  Help!  Bring a chair!  (They finally get his feet on
chair.)  Well, we got him on the chair anyhow.
DUDLEY:  He’s poisoned–
LETTY and BETTY:  We’ve killed him.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Come on–let’s beat it–(They all run off.  PHIL
gets up to grab all the food, when DUDLEY is heard off, calling
“Lena."–He flops back with a jump to same dead position on floor.
Finally gets up, grabs all the food and exits.  MRS. SCHUYLER
re-enters.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  He’s gone and he’s taken all the food with him.
Quick, Mousta, clear away all these things.  (Paul enters.)
PAUL:  Mrs. Schuyler, I’m really in love with Rose.  (DOWLEH enters
now in Persian dress clothes.)
DOWLEH:  Ah, Fatima–can I see you alone?  (DUDLEY enters.)
DUDLEY:  Oh, Lena, could I see you alone?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  If any more turn up, I’ll scream.  (LETTY and BETTY
run on, carrying a note.)
LETTY:  An important letter.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Opening it.)  From my husband.
BETTY:  I’m afraid it’s bad news.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Bad news!  P’raps he’s coming home earlier than I
expected.  (Reads:) “Dear Becky!”
ALL THE MEN:  Becky!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Yes, we met at Arverne!  “I have heard of your
carrying on with four old sweethearts:  Had it been one, I would
have killed him quietly and let the matter drop, but four are too
many.  I shall kill them all and divorce you.  Expect me at
ten.–Hamilton.”  Oh, gentlemen, this is awful–Hamilton is unlike
most men–he means what he says–
PAUL:  (Following.)  But surely you can find a few more to help us
defend ourselves.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Ah, you don’t know Hamilton.  When he’s angry, an
army couldn’t withstand him.
DOWLEH:  If your husband kills, I will kill him.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Ah, that doesn’t worry me–but he may cut my
allowance.
DUDLEY:  (Following.)  We must save you from such a fate.
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Save me?  You could!  If there was one among you
brave enough to say:  “I am the only guy here ever loved your wife.
Kill me, but don’t cut her allowance.”
MEN:  (Going up stage.)  Excuse me!  (Waiter enters with straws in
glass, from arbor.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Ah–straws–the very thing–gentlemen.
(Takes them out of glasses.)  Come–choose–whoever has the shortest
straw is to show his courage and die for me–who is it?  Who is
it?  (PHIL enters–they see him–drop straws–and seize him.)
PAUL:  Phil!
MEN:  Ah!  Welcome to our city.  Welcome!  Welcome!
PHIL:  Is there any little thing I can do for you?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Yes.  My husband will be here at any moment to kill
these gentlemen and divorce me.  You can save us all by saying you
are the only old sweetheart of mine here.
PHIL:  Excuse me!
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Oh, Benchie!  Think of your bench days when I used
to sit on you–
PHIL:  If you’d only sit on me now, I’d feel safer–
PAUL:  Now don’t be a fool.  When he comes, say:  “I am the only
man here ever had an affair with your wife.  What have you to say
about it?”
ALL:  (Together.)  Repeat that now.
PHIL:  (In terror.)  I am the only man here ever had anything to do
with your wife–just like that.  (An automobile horn heard.)
GIRLS:  Oh, here he is–(They run off.  Business of men holding
PHIL and finally rushing off as an enormous figure in Persian
“get-up” enters.)
MRS. SCHUYLER:  (Picking up PHIL.)  Benchie, it’s sweet and accommodating
of you to die for these three gentlemen–a favor I shan’t forget.
(From behind the Persian giant steps a midget in swell citizen
clothes)–"It’s Hamilton–(Mrs. Schuyler picks him up and kisses
him.)  Oh, Hamilton-I’m so glad you’ve come.  (Crossing to Persian.)
And Nehmid Duckin–it is an honor to have the prime minister with
us.  I’ll go for a stroll with you and come back when (Turning to
husband) you’re through with this gentleman.
NEHMID:  (In deep voice.)  Is he the one?
MRS. SCHUYLER:  Yes–you’re looking great.  (Takes his arm.)
NEHMID:  So are you!  (In deep tones to PHIL.)  And now sir, you
explain.  (Exits with Mrs. Schuyler.) (PHIL stands in terror,
thinking a powerful foe stands behind him.  In reality, it is the
midget husband.  PHIL tries to talk.  At first he cannot.)
PHIL:  (After comedy biz.)  I have a wife with an affair–I mean an
affair with your wife–what have you to say about it?
MR. SCHUYLER:  (In piping voice.)  I’m very angry.  (PHIL starts–looks
up to see where voice comes from–doesn’t see anyone–walks and
bumps into HAMILTON–rolls up his sleeves.)
PHIL:  (Bravely.)  What have you to say about it?  (Slaps his hand
over his mouth.)  Don’t say a word–I’ve been waiting for something
like you to show up.  (He backs HAMILTON off–his hand on his face.)
FINALE:  (During this, ROSE enters in bridal costume to be wed to
SHEIK.  Servant enters announcing his death from eating Persian
Plums.
SONG:  “Who Sent These Persian Plums?”
Then, final meeting and happiness of lovers and comedy characters
and picture as “My Little Persian Rose” is repeated for
CURTAIN
A BURLESQUE IN ONE ACT
BY
JAMES MADISON
Author of “Love Blossoms,” “Cohen from Bridgeport,"
“Before and After,” Monologues for Nat M. Wills,
Joe Welch, Etc., Etc., Author and Publisher
“Madison’s Budget.”
CHARACTERS
OLD BLACK JOE . . . . . . . . An ex-slave, eighty years of age
ARTHUR MAYNARD. . . . . . . . . Owner of a Kentucky Plantation
VIOLA MAYNARD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . His Daughter
CHARLIE DOOLITTLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Her Sweetheart
EDGAR TREMBLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . With a heart of stone
MRS. ALICE WILSON. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A frail widow
HARVEY SLICK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . An adventurer
FELIX FAKE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . His assistant
CHLORINDA SOURGRASS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . A lady of color
CISSIE, LOTTIE, FANNIE,
  TILLIE, GOLDIE, DORA, 
  MAGGIE, MABEL, GERTIE. . . . . . . . . . . .  Invited Guests
SCENE:  Garden of ARTHUR MAYNARD’S plantation.  Landscape backing.
Set house at left with practical veranda (if possible). Wood wings
at right.  Set tree up stage at right behind which old pocketbook
containing a number of greenbacks is concealed.  Bench in front
of tree.  Pedestal up stage at left, dog-house at right.
DISCOVERED:  (At rise of curtain an invisible CHORUS is heard singing
“My Old Kentucky Home.”  Then GOLDIE and other invited girl friends
come on stage and sing a MEDLEY OF POPULAR CHORUSES.  At conclusion
of medley, VIOLA enters from house.)
VIOLA:  Girls, do you know why I’ve invited you all today?
FANNIE:  To tell us that you’re engaged to be married.
VIOLA:  Nothing so fortunate.  This is my father’s birthday, and
I’ve arranged a little celebration in his honor, and I want you
all to participate.
LOTTIE:  We won’t do a thing but enjoy ourselves.
VIOLA:  But there’s one dark cloud, girls.
(CHLORINDA enters from house.)
TILLIE:  Yes, here comes the dark cloud now.
VIOLA:  The dark cloud I refer to is Mrs. Wilson, who calls herself
a widow and who has been hanging around father for the last few
months in the hope that he’ll make her Mrs. Maynard number two.
DORA:  The hussy!
MAGGIE:  The cat!
VIOLA:  I wouldn’t care if she loved father, but I suspect that all
she’s after is his money.
CHLORINDA:  His mazuma.
GERTIE:  Get on to the African Jew!
LOTTIE:  Any woman that wants to fool your father has to get up
early in the morning.
VIOLA:  Mrs. Wilson sometimes looks as if she stays up all night.
(All girls laugh.)
VIOLA:  If she only knew that the old plantation is mortgaged up
to the roof, I guess she wouldn’t be so anxious about marrying
father.
VIOLA:  (To CHLORINDA.)  Well, Chlorinda, what brings you out here?
CHLORINDA:  I jes’ came out to say dat refreshments am ready in de
house if de young ladies am thirsty or hungry.
(CHORUS by ladies of company, then they exit into house.  VIOLA
remains on stage.)
(CHARLIE DOOLITTLE enters from R. and stealing up softly behind
VIOLA, puts his hands over her eyes.)
CHARLIE:  Guess who it is?
VIOLA:  Is it a human being?
CHARLIE:  (Effeminately.)  Why, I like that!  Of course, it is.
VIOLA:  It’s Lottie.
CHARLIE:  No.
VIOLA:  Then it’s Fanny.
CHARLIE:  No.
VIOLA:  Then it must be Lillie.
CHARLIE:  No; you silly goose, it’s Charlie.
VIOLA:  (In disgust.)  I thought you said it was a human being?
CHARLIE:  Just for that you must sit down on the bench and give me
a kiss.
VIOLA:  Wait a minute till I go into the house and get a veil.  The
sunlight hurts my eyes.  (She exits at L.)
CHARLIE:  (Moving towards R.)  That will just give me time to go
into the grove and smoke a cigarette.  (Exits.)
(Enter CHLORINDA from house.  She has a green veil on, which hides
her face; she sits down on bench.)
CHLORINDA:  Ebery wench on dis plantation has got a fellah ’ceptin
me, so I went to a fortune tellah an’ she said Ah should sit on
dis heah bench ebery day and ah nice fellah would come along.
Well, I’se been doing it now for ovah a month an’ Ah habent seen
no nice fellah yet; in fact, Ah habent seen a fellah of any kind.
(Enter CHARLIE from R.)
CHARLIE:  Ah, there, my sugar plum.
CHLORINDA:  Ain’t he jes’ too sweet for anything?
CHARLIE:  So you love your baby?
CHLORINDA:  ’Deed I do, honey.
CHARLIE:  Then lay your beautiful head on my manly breast and let
me pour sweet words of love into your ear.
CHLORINDA:  Go to it, kiddo.  (Business of CHARLIE petting CHLORINDA.)
CHARLIE:  And now, ain’t you going to, give me a nice, sweet kiss,
darling?
CHLORINDA:  Help yourself to as many as you want.
(CHLORINDA lifts veil just enough to let CHARLIE touch her lips.
He does not, however, notice that she is colored, and is busily
engaged hugging and kissing her, as VIOLA enters from house; she
is very much surprised.)
VIOLA:  Charlie Doolittle, what does this mean?  (CHLORINDA raises
her veil, then laughs and runs into house.)
CHARLIE:  (Discovering his error.)  Why, my dear, it’s all a mistake;
I thought–that is to say–er–
VIOLA:  I’m not surprised at your embarrassment.  The idea of making
love to our colored cook the minute my back is turned.
CHARLIE:  If you’ll just let me explain–
VIOLA:  Explain nothing.  I’m going to tell my father how you’ve
insulted me.  He doesn’t like you, anyhow, and if he ever catches
you on the premises, your life won’t be worth 23 cents in Confederate
money.  (VIOLA exits into house.)
CHARLIE:  Ain’t she the exasperating creature!  I declare, she’s
made me so peevish, I could crush a grape.  The idea of telling
me her father doesn’t like me.  Why shouldn’t he like me?  (ARTHUR
MAYNARD appears in back-ground unnoticed by CHARLIE.)  But, anyhow,
I’m not afraid of her father.  Why, if he were to stand before me
right at this moment, I’d–
MAYNARD:  (Stepping suddenly to the front.)  Well, what would you do?
CHARLIE:  I’d run like the devil.  (Runs off stage at R.)
MAYNARD:  I’m going to keep that disgusting fellow off the premises
if I have to notify the dog-catcher.  (Notices pedestal.)  Ever
since a tornado knocked that statue off its pedestal, this garden
has looked rather bare, so I’ve put an advertisement into the
newspaper, offering five hundred dollars for a suitable statue to
take its place.
(Mrs. Wilson enters from R. and coughs gently to attract MR.
MAYNARD’S attention.)
MAYNARD:  (Turning around.)  Why, Mrs. Wilson!
MRS. WILSON:  Good morning, Mr. Maynard!
(Both talking at the same time.)  This is indeed a surprise.  I did
not expect to see you as early as this.  How are you feeling?
Good?  That’s good.  Lovely day, isn’t it?
MAYNARD:  I have often wanted to ask you, Mrs. Wilson, where is
your husband?
MRS. WILSON:  I don’t know.
MAYNARD:  What’s that, you don’t know where your husband is?
MRS. WILSON:  No; you see, he is dead–
MAYNARD:  (Laughingly.)  I understand.  Did he leave you much?
MRS. WILSON:  Yes, nearly every night.
MAYNARD:  No, no; I mean, did he leave you any property?
MRS. WILSON:  Yes, five small children, and believe me, Mr. Maynard,
it’s hard to lose a husband when you have five children.  Do you
think I ought to get another?
MAYNARD:  No; I think five are enough.
MRS. WILSON:  I see you will have your joke.
MAYNARD:  Are you fond of horses?
MRS. WILSON:  I love horses.
MAYNARD:  Well, come down to the stable and I’ll show you some of
the finest thoroughbreds you ever looked at.  (They both exit Right
I.)
(Enter HARVEY SLICK and FELIX FAKE at centre; HARVEY carries a
heavy blackthorn walking stick.)
HARVEY:  Now remember, you’re a statue.
FELIX:  You’re a liar.
HARVEY:  Don’t call me a liar.
FELIX:  Then don’t call me a statue.
HARVEY:  Don’t you understand, the guy what owns this plantation
offers five hundred dollars for a statue and I’ve come to get the
money.
FELIX:  But what have I got to do with all this?
HARVEY:  You’re the statue.
FELIX:  Go on; I never was a statue in my life.
HARVEY:  All you have to do is to get on that pedestal and stand
perfectly still.
FELIX:  Oh, I just have to stand perfectly still.
HARVEY:  That’s the idea.  Don’t move a muscle.
FELIX:  But suppose a fly hops on my nose?
HARVEY:  Don’t notice it.
FELIX:  Or suppose some bad boys throw stones at me?
HARVEY:  Why, my boy, simply don’t notice it.
FELIX:  I don’t think I want the job.
HARVEY:  Why, of course you do.  The figure you are to represent
is called “Ajax defying the lightning.”
FELIX:  Oh, a jackass defying the lightning.
HARVEY:  No, Ajax; but look sharp, for here comes Mr. Maynard now.
Quick, jump on the pedestal.
(HARVEY hands stick to FELIX, who quickly jumps on pedestal and
poses in funny position, as Maynard enters from right.)
MAYNARD:  (To HARVEY.)  Well, sir, what can I do for you?
HARVEY:  You advertised for a statue, I believe.
MAYNARD:  I did, sir.
HARVEY:  Well, I think I’ve got just what you want–"a jackass
defying the lightning.”
MAYNARD:  What’s that?
HARVEY:  Excuse me, I mean “Ajax.” (Aside, and pointing to FELIX.)
That son of a gun has got me talking that way now.
MAYNARD:  I’ll be pleased to look at your statue.
HARVEY:  (Pointing to FELIX on pedestal.)  Here it is, sir.
MAYNARD:  (After surveying it critically.)  What material is the
statue made of?
HARVEY:  Brass–pure brass.
MAYNARD:  I think the statue will suit me except that the nose is
a bit too long.
HARVEY:  Well, you can easily take off a piece with a hammer and
chisel.
MAYNARD:  Why, so I can.  But here’s another objection.  Suppose
thieves come around some night and steal the statue?
HARVEY:  All you have to do is to bore a hole through one of its
legs, pass a chain through it and fasten to the pedestal.  (FELIX
works up this situation by comic mugging.)
MAYNARD:  A very good idea.  How much do you want for the statue?
HARVEY:  Five hundred dollars.
MAYNARD:  That’s a lot of money, but I think I shall buy it anyhow.
HARVEY:  Well, just hand over the five hundred, and the statue is
yours.  (MAYNARD and HARVEY move to a position in front of the
statue.  MAYNARD takes a roll of bills from his pocket and in
handling them, drops one.  As he bends forward to pick it up, FELIX
pokes him with the stick, knocking him over frontwards.  MAYNARD
thinks HARVEY has kicked him.)
MAYNARD:  (To Harvey.)  What do you mean by kicking me, sir?
HARVEY:  Why, I didn’t kick you.
MAYNARD:  If I hadn’t set my heart on owning the statue, I’d call
the deal off right now.
HARVEY:  (Starting to get a bit angry.)  I tell you I didn’t kick
you.
MAYNARD:  Well, don’t do it again.  Here’s your money.  (MAYNARD
hands HARVEY roll of bills, who counts it and lets the last bill
fall on stage.  In stooping to pick it up, FELIX pokes HARVEY,
causing him to fall over frontwards.  HARVEY thinks MAYNARD has
kicked him.)
HARVEY:  (To MAYNARD.)  A joke’s a joke, but this is going entirely
too far.
MAYNARD:  What on earth are you talking about?
HARVEY:  You just kicked me.
MAYNARD:  I didn’t.
HARVEY:  You did.
MAYNARD:  I didn’t.
FELIX:  Shut up.
MAYNARD and HARVEY:  (Both talking together.)
Don’t tell me to shut up.  I didn’t tell you to shut up.  Well,
somebody did.
HARVEY:  I’m awful thirsty.
MAYNARD:  I’ll go into the house and get you a glass of wine.
FELIX:  Well, hurry up about it.
MAYNARD:  (Thinking HARVEY spoke.)  I never heard such impudence in
all my life.  Why, the idea!
(Exits into house.)
FELIX:  Yes, the idea.
HARVEY:  Well, I got the old fool’s money all right.
FELIX:  Where’s my share?
HARVEY:  (Laughing.)  Now, who ever heard of a statue having mo-non-ey.
FELIX:  But you promised me half of the five hundred dollars.
HARVEY:  Well, suppose I did; you don’t expect me to keep my word,
do you?  You’d be a pretty looking sight, carrying two hundred and
fifty dollars around with you.  Why, I’d have to lay for you in
some dark alley and take it away from you.  I want you to understand
that I’m the wise guy of this combination and if you want any of
my money, you’ve got to take it away from me.  (HARVEY has taken a
position just in front of FELIX, who is still on the pedestal.
FELIX slips his hand slyly into HARVEY’S pocket and takes all the
money.)
HARVEY:  (Moving to centre exit.)  Well, so long, Felix, so long,
and remember, Felix, that money is the root of all evil.
(HARVEY exits.)
FELIX:  (Holding up roll of bills.)  Well, I’ve extracted some of
the root all right, all right.  (FELIX exits at right.)
(Big SINGING NUMBER by VIOLA and ladies of company.)
(Then, MR. MAYNARD enters from the house.)
GOLDIE:  In behalf of all your friends who are assembled here today,
Mr. Maynard, I want to congratulate you on your birthday anniversary.
MAYNARD:  Ah, thank you, ladies, I appreciate your good wishes very
much.
DORA:  I hope you will live to be a hundred years old.
MAYNARD:  (Laughing.)  I hope so–but why should the Lord take me
for a hundred when he can get me at 70?
(OLD BLACK JOE comes ambling in from Right to melody of “Old Black
Joe.”)
MAYNARD:  Well, Old Black Joe, how are you feeling today?
JOE:  Well, Massa, I’se got rheumatiz in the lef’ shoulder–an’
de lumbago in mah back–an’ I don’ hear very well–an’ ma teeth
am troubling me some–an’ mah eyes is going back on me–an’ mah
stomach ain’t as good as it used to be–but otherwise, Massa, I’se
feelin’ as sound as a nut.
MAYNARD:  What can I do for you, Old Black Joe?
JOE:  Massa, my mind ain’t as clear like it used ter be, but der’s
one thing I ain’t never forgotten, and dat is your birthday
university, so I’d feel powerful flattered if you would accept
these few flowers what I picked myself.  (Hands MAYNARD small
bouquet.)
MAYNARD:  Of all the many gifts I will receive to-day, Old Black
Joe, there is none that I will treasure more highly than these
flowers.
JOE:  Ah, thank you, Massa, thank you.
(OLD BLACK JOE exits to melody of “Old Black Joe.”)
GOLDIE:  I never could understand, Mr. Maynard, why you always make
such a fuss about that nigger, Old Black Joe.
MAYNARD:  Old Black Joe may have a black skin, but he’s got a white
heart and I’ll cherish and protect him as long as I have a roof
over my head.
GOLDIE:  One would think that he had done you some great favor, Mr.
Maynard.
MAYNARD:  He more than did me a favor.  He once saved my life.
CHORUS OF GIRLS:  Tell us about it.
MAYNARD:  (To melodramatic music.)  It was during the days of ’61,
when brother fought against brother and the Blue was striving to
overpower the Grey.  On this very plantation, while hardly more
than a lad, I was attacked and badly wounded and would have fallen
into the hands of the enemy if it had not been for Old Black Joe,
who, at the risk of his own life, carried me to a place of safety
and nursed me back to health again.
CHORUS OF LADIES:  Three cheers for Old Black Joe.
(SONG by Ladies–all exit.)
(Enter CHARLIE at centre.)
CHARLIE:  I’m crazy about Viola, but I know she will never marry
me unless her father gives his consent.  If I only knew a way to
win him over.  Ah, here comes Chlorinda.  Perhaps she can help me.
(Enter CHLORINDA from house.)
CHARLIE:  Hello, Chlorinda.
CHLORINDA:  Miss Sourgrass, if you please.
CHARLIE:  What’s the matter with Chlorinda?
CHLORINDA:  I only allows gentlemen I’se well acquainted with to
call me Chlorinda.
CHARLIE:  Well then, Miss Sourgrass, do you want to earn a dollar?
CHLORINDA:  What’s the matter with it?
CHARLIE:  There’s nothing the matter with it.  You see, I’m in love
with Viola Maynard, but her father doesn’t like me.  Now, if you
can fix things up so her father will accept me as a son-in-law, I
will give you a dollar.
CHLORINDA:  Jes leave it to me and in half an hour he’ll be so
tickled to see you that he’ll put his arms around your neck and
kiss you.
CHARLIE:  That will be splendid.
CHLORINDA:  The dollar, please.
CHARLIE:  I never pay in advance.
CHLORINDA:  No dollar, no kisses.
CHARLIE:  (Handing her a dollar.) Oh, very well, but see that you do
as you promise.
CHLORINDA:  Leave it to me.
(CHARLIE exits at right.)
(MR. MAYNARD enters from house.)
CHLORINDA:  Did you hear what happened to Charlie Doolittle?
MAYNARD:  I suppose he took a pinch of snuff and blew his brains
out.
CHLORINDA:  Goodness no; guess again.
MAYNARD:  No, I won’t. I’m not at all interested in that addlepated,
monkey-faced nincompoop.  He’s after my daughter, but he shall
never marry her.  Why, if wives could be supported for fifty cents
a year, that empty-headed specimen of vacuous mentality couldn’t
even keep a cock-roach from starving.
CHLORINDA:  Don’t say dat, massa, for Charlie’s uncle has jes’ died
an’ left him fifty thousand dollars.
MAYNARD:  (Very much astonished.)  How much did you say?
CHLORINDA:  Five hundred thousand dollars.
MAYNARD:  Five hundred thousand dollars?
CHLORINDA:  Yes, sah; five million dollars?
MAYNARD:  I always did like Charlie.
CHLORINDA:  But you jes’ said–
MAYNARD:  Never mind what I just said.  I was only joking.  Here’s
a dollar to keep your mouth shut.
(MAYNARD hands CHLORINDA a dollar.)
CHLORlNDA:  Yes, sah.
MAYNARD:  I consider Charlie Doolittle an exceptionally bright young
man, and even if he didn’t have a dollar in the world I would still
consider him an excellent match for my daughter.
CHLORINDA:  But you jes’ said he couldn’t even support a cock-roach.
MAYNARD:  Never mind about that.  Here’s another dollar.  (Hands
CHLORINDA another dollar.)  And now, if you see Charlie Doolittle,
tell him I want to see him right away.
CHLORINDA:  Yes, sah.  (She exits at right.)
MAYNARD:  (Looking at empty pedestal.)  I wonder what became of the
statue?  I guess Chlorinda carried it into the barn because it
looks like rain.  (Enter CHARLIE from right.  He coughs to attract
MAYNARD’S attention.)
CHARLIE:  Are you very angry at me, Mr. Maynard?
MAYNARD:  Angry at you, Charlie?  Why, how can you only imagine
such a thing?  Have a cigar.
CHARLIE:  (Accepting the cigar with misgivings.)  It isn’t loaded
with dynamite, is it?
MAYNARD:  Certainly not.  I give you the cigar because I like you,
Charlie, and I always have liked you.
CHARLIE:  It’s very kind of you to say that.  (During these speeches,
FELIX has sneaked back on the pedestal, still carrying the blackthorn
stick.)
MAYNARD:  You have only to say the word and you can have anything
I’ve got.
CHARLIE:  Can I have your daughter?
MAYNARD:  Why certainly, Charlie.  Just say the word and she’s
yours.
CHARLIE:  It all seems like a dream.  (Business of FELIX hitting
MAYNARD on hat with stick and smashing it in.  MAYNARD thinks
CHARLIE did it.)
MAYNARD:  Now see here, Charlie, as my future son-in-law, I want
you to feel perfectly at home here, but there’s such a thing as
carrying things too far.
CHARLIE:  Why, Mr. Maynard, what do you mean?
MAYNARD:  I saw you smash my hat just now, Charlie.
CHARLIE:  I didn’t smash your hat.
MAYNARD:  You didn’t smash my hat?
CHARLIE:  No; I didn’t smash your hat.
MAYNARD:  Well, somebody did.  However, as I was about to remark,
you have but to name the day and I’ll give my daughter a wedding
that will–(FELIX smashes CHARLIE’S hat with stick.  CHARLIE thinks
MAYNARD did it.)
CHARLIE:  Now, see here, Mr. Maynard, I may have straw-colored hair
and wear a number fourteen collar, but I object–I very seriously
object to having anybody crush my hat.
MAYNARD:  I didn’t crush your hat.
CHARLIE:  I saw you.
MAYNARD:  (Getting very angry and shaking fist in CHARLIE’S face.)
You say you saw me crush your hat?
CHARLIE:  (Backing water.)  Well, I thought I saw you.
MAYNARD:  (Mollified once more.)  Well, that’s different.  However,
it really isn’t worth talking about.  You know that all I want in
this world is to see you happy.
CHARLIE:  Then perhaps you can lend me fifty dollars.
MAYNARD:  Lend you fifty dollars?  Why certainly.  Here you are.
(Hands CHARLIE the money.)  No doubt, you’ll be able to pay me back
when you receive the money that was left you in the will.
CHARLIE:  What will?
MAYNARD:  Why, the will of your uncle.
CHARLIE:  What uncle?
MAYNARD:  What uncle?  Why, your millionaire uncle who just died
and left you all his money.
CHARLIE:  I never had a millionaire uncle and nobody has left me a
penny.
MAYNARD:  (Wiping perspiration off his face.)  What; then you are
not a rich man?
CHARLIE:  Rich; why, that fifty dollars you just gave me is every
penny I’ve got in this world.
MAYNARD:  (Getting excited.)  Oh you fraud, you deceiver, you
disgraceful beggar; I’ve a great mind to–(Raises fist as if to
strike CHARLIE.)
CHARLIE:  (Rushing off at right.)  Assistance.  Assistance!
(HARVEY comes in at centre and stands in background ground; FELIX
is still on pedestal.)
MAYNARD:  There is only one way to keep that disgusting dude off
the premises.  I’ll get a savage dog if it costs me a thousand
dollars.  (Exits into house.)
HARVEY:  (To FELIX, who steps off pedestal.)  You hear that?
FELIX:  Hear what?
HARVEY:  He wants a savage dog.
FELIX:  Well, suppose he does?
HARVEY:  You’re the dog.
FELIX:  What?
HARVEY:  You’re the dog.
FELIX:  Say, what’s tbe matter with you anyhow?  First I was a
statue and now I’m a dog.  Next I suppose I’ll be an automobile
or a bag of peanuts.
HARVEY:  That’s all right.  Pass yourself off as the dog and we’ll
divide the thousand dollars between us.
FELIX:  Yes, you’ll get nine hundred and ninety-nine and I’ll get
the balance.
HARVEY:  Nonsense; I’ll only take what is right.
FELIX:  And I’ll have to take what is left.
HARVEY:  For the love of Mike be reasonable.  This is the chance
of a lifetime.
FELIX:  I’ll impersonate the dog if you get me something to eat.
HARVEY:  What do you want to eat for?
FELIX:  I’m starving.
HARVEY:  All right, it’s a bargain.  You impersonate the savage dog
and I’ll see that you’re well fed.  (Both exit at centre.)
(Enter MRS. WILSON, from right.)
MRS. WILSON:  I must force a proposal of marriage out of Mr. Maynard
today yet.  It’s true I don’t love him, but he’s got lots of money,
and money is everything in this world.
(Enter CHLORINDA from house, crying.)
MRS. WILSON:  Why Chlorinda, what’s the matter?
CHLORINDA:  I’se just been down to the cemetery.
MRS. WILSON:  Well, you ought to laugh.
CHLORINDA:  Why, why should I laugh?
MRS. WILSON:  It’s the people who are in the cemetery and cannot
get out who ought to be crying.
CHLORINDA:  Dat’s all very well, Mrs. Wilson, but I jes’ copied
some of de inscriptions off de tombstones, and I tells you I feels
awful mournful about it.
MRS. WILSON:  I don’t see why you should feel sad, Chlorinda.
CHLORINDA:  You don’t?  Well, jes’ listen to some of dese.  (Reads
from a stack of cards, one tombstone inscription being written on
each card.)
“Here lies the body of Michael Burke, who lost his life while
dodging work.”
“I loved my mother, I hated to leave her, but what can you do with
the typhoid fever? “
“Mamma loves Papa, and Papa loves women; Mamma saw Papa with two
girls in swimmin’.”
“Here lies the mother of 28; there might have been more, but now
it’s too late.”
“Shed a few tears for Matty Mack, a trolley car hit her a slap in
the back.”
“Here lies my poor wife much lamented.  She’s happy and–well, I
am contented.”
“Here lies the body of Martin Brown.  He was blown in the air and
he never came down.”
“Willie Greene, sad regrets–aged 9–cigarettes.”
(Enter MR. MAYNARD from house.)
MAYNARD:  Won’t you step inside the house, Mrs. Wilson–I mean
Alice–and have a glass of birthday punch with the other ladies?
MRS. WILSON:  Delighted, I’m sure.  (Exits into house.)
CHLORINDA:  Won’t I get punch, too?
MAYNARD:  Yes, if you don’t get back to your work, you’ll get a
punch in the jaw in about another minute.
MAYNARD:  I hope some one comes along soon with a savage dog.  I’d
rather go to Charlie Doolittle’s funeral than to a picnic.  (Looks
off toward house.)  Ah, there is Mrs. Wilson.  How beautiful she
is.  I think this is my golden chance to propose to her.  (Exits
into house.)
(Enter HARVEY at centre, pulling FELIX in by chain fastened around
his neck.  FELIX now wears a dog’s head and body.)
HARVEY:  (Aside to FELIX.)  Now remember, all you have got to do is
to act like a savage dog, and after I collect the money from Mr.
Maynard, you’ll get yours.
FELIX:  (Removing dog’s head.)  I hope I don’t get it where I’ve got
this collar.
HARVEY:  Oh, you’ll get it all right.
FELIX:  (Starting to leave stage.)  I’m going home.
HARVEY:  (Catching him by chain.)  Here, here, where are you going?
FELIX:  I don’t like the way you say, “Oh, you’ll get it.”
HARVEY:  Oh, that’s all right.  And now whatever you do, act like
a dog.
(FELIX tries to nip HARVEY’S leg, but he springs aside and says.)
Delighted.  Why, you’re commencing to feel like a dog already.
FELIX:  When do I get something to eat?
HARVEY:  Very shortly now.
(Sees MAYNARD coming from house.)  Quick, put on your dog’s head,
for here comes Mr. Maynard.
(Enter MAYNARD.)
MAYNARD:  (To HARVEY.)  Well, sir, and what can I do for you?
HARVEY:  Your servant told me you were looking for a ferocious dog
and I think I have an animal that will just suit you.
MAYNARD:  Yes, I do want a savage dog, and if you have such a beast
we can do business together.
FELIX:  (Aside.)  Now, I’m a beast.
(HARVEY kicks at FELIX to get him to shut up.)
HARVEY:  (Pointing to FELIX.)  This animal is so ferocious that if
anyone should come across his path at night when he is unchained
he would tear him limb from limb.
MAYNARD:  (Noticing FELIX.)  Is this the dog?
HARVEY:  (Rubbing his hands.)  Yes, sir, and if you searched the
world over, you couldn’t find a more savage high-bred animal.  He
is full of animation.
MAYNARD:  (Scratching himself.)  I think he is full of fleas.  But,
tell me, what do you ask for him?
HARVEY:  One thousand dollars.
MAYNARD:  That’s a lot of money.
HARVEY:  Not for this dog.
MAYNARD:  Perhaps I ought to explain to you what I want the dog for.
HARVEY:  I daresay you feel lonely for a companion.
MAYNARD:  No, sir; I want a dog for my daughter, sir, to keep off
a worthless, good-for-nothing dude who comes pestering around here
after her because he knows that her father has a lot of money, and
thinks that if he marries his daughter he can move to Easy Street.
HARVEY:  I see; he is looking for a soft snap.
MAYNARD:  That’s it, but I’ll fool him.  I want a dog that will
chew him up into pieces if he ever dares to set his foot inside
my garden gate again.
HARVEY:  My dog will suit you exactly.
MAYNARD:  But a thousand dollars is an awful lot of money.
HARVEY:  Not for this animal.  In the first place, you never have
to feed him.
MAYNARD:  What’s that!  You mean to say that this dog goes without
food?
HARVEY:  That’s the idea exactly.
(FELIX shows signs of disgust.  He can work up some funny business
by taking off his mask whenever HARVEY and MAYNARD are talking
together and quickly slipping it on again when he thinks their
attention is directed towards him.)
MAYNARD:  Why, it’s preposterous.  You don’t suppose I would keep
a dog around the house and never feed him?
HARVEY:  I tell you this dog never eats.
MAYNARD:  Why, that’s cruelty to animals!
HARVEY:  Well, if you feel that way about it, you might go out into
an empty lot and get some rusty tomato cans and a few pieces of
scrap iron and feed those to him.
MAYNARD:  Does he enjoy such things?
HARVEY:  Certainly he does.  In fact, if you were to put a choice
piece of juicy tenderloin steak before him right now that dog
wouldn’t touch it.
MAYNARD:  A most remarkable animal.
FELIX:  (Taking off his dog mask, aside.)  I’m going home.
HARVEY:  (Aside, to FELIX.)  Shut up or you’ll spoil everything.
(FELIX makes a grab for MAYNARD’S leg.)
MAYNARD:  Help!  Help!  Your dog is killing me.
HARVEY:  Don’t get frightened, Mr. Maynard, he is perfectly
domesticated and will eat off your hand.
MAYNARD:  Yes; he’ll eat off my leg, too, if I’m not careful.
HARVEY:  (To FELIX.)  Lie down, Otto, lie down, I say.  (Kicks FELIX,
who lets go of MAYNARD’S leg.)
MAYNARD:  (Going quickly out of harm’s way, yet delighted.)  Just
the dog I want–a fine animal.  I am sure with him around that
Charlie Doolittle won’t dare to show his face on the premises.
HARVEY:  Better buy him while you have the chance.
MAYNARD:  (Taking roll of bills from pocket and counting out the
money.)  I think I will.  Here’s the thousand dollars.
HARVEY:  And now the dog is yours.
(MAYNARD fastens dog to exterior of dog-house.)
MAYNARD:  I hope I have better luck with him than I had with my
other dogs.
HARVEY:  Why, what do you mean?
FELIX:  (In back-ground.)  Yes, please explain yourself.
MAYNARD:  (Chuckling.)  Well, you see my neighbors ain’t very fond
of dogs and as fast as I get one they either poison him or shoot
him.
FELIX:  (In back-ground.)  I can see my finish.
HARVEY:  Well, it won’t make any difference with this dog.  You can
fill him full of bullets and he won’t even feel it.
FELIX:  (Aside.)  No, I’ll be dead.
HARVEY:  (Continuing.)  And as for poisoned meat, why, he would
rather have Paris green or strychnine on his meat than salt.
MAYNARD:  (Chuckling.)  Certainly a remarkable animal.  And now, if
you will excuse me a minute, I will go into the house and tell my
daughter about the dog.  (He exits into house.)
HARVEY:  (Gleefully.)  The scheme worked beautifully and I am just
a thousand dollars ahead.
FELIX:  (Indignantly.)  What do you mean by telling him that I eat
tin cans and scrap iron?
HARVEY:  Why, that was only a little joke on my part.
FELIX:  Oh, it was a joke, was it?  And suppose the neighbors fire
their pistols at me and riddle me with bullets, what then?
HARVEY:  Why, simply don’t notice it.  Anyhow, don’t complain to
me, you’re the dog, not I, and if the neighbors kill you, that’s
not my funeral.
FELIX:  I can see myself in dog heaven already.  And how about my
share of the money?
HARVEY:  The what?
FELIX:  The money.  The dough, the mazuma.
HARVEY:  The money?  Since when do dogs carry money?  Ha, ha!  That’s
a good joke.  A very good joke.  (Exits at R. 2.)
MAYNARD:  (Re-enters from house.)  And now to see if I can’t make
friends with the dog.
(FELIX barks furiously at MAYNARD as soon as he comes near.)
MAYNARD:  He is just the animal to keep Viola’s lover away.  I will
call her out, and show her the dog.  (Calls off to house.)  Oh,
Viola!  (Dog snaps at MAYNARD as latter passes him.)
VIOLA:  (From the doorstep of house.)  What do you want, father?
MAYNARD:  I want to show you the new dog I bought.  (Dog barks
furiously.)  See if you can make friends with him.
(VIOLA approaches FELIX, who leans his head affectionately against
her and puts his arm around her waist.)
VIOLA:  He seems to like me all right, father.
MAYNARD:  I cannot understand it.
VIOLA:  Perhaps he doesn’t like men.
FELIX:  (Aside.)  No; I ain’t that kind of a dog.
VIOLA:  I wonder if the dog is hungry?
MAYNARD:  I’ll go into the house and get him a bone.  (Exits into
house.)
(FELIX starts rubbing his dog’s head against VIOLA’S hip.  She
screams and exits into house.)
(CHARLIE DOOLITTLE enters from Right.)
CHARLIE:  I haven’t seen Viola for half an hour, so I think I’ll
serenade her.
(Starts in singing chorus of song, “Only One Girl in This World
for Me.”)
(FELIX howls accompaniment.  CHARLIE sees dog, who tries to grab
him.)
CHARLIE:  I’ll get a pistol and shoot the beast.
FELIX:  Gee, but he’s got a nasty disposition!
CHARLIE:  I’ll return in two minutes.  (Exits at right.)
FELIX:  (Unfastening catch that holds him to dog-house.)  And I will
be gone in one minute.  (Exits at Centre.)
(MR. MAYNARD and VIOLA enter from house.)
MAYNARD:  Viola, I am worried.
VIOLA:  What’s the matter, father?
MAYNARD:  I am afraid that Old Black Joe’s mind is beginning to
weaken.  Sometimes he sits for hours babbling about the old
plantation as it existed in the days of ’61.
VIOLA:  How strange!
MAYNARD:  Only last week a celebrated doctor assured me that if Old
Black Joe could but gaze once more on the old plantation as it
looked before the War, his mental powers would come back to him
as sharp and clear as ever.
VIOLA:  I have an idea.
CHARLIE:  (Appearing suddenly from Right.)  Well, pickle it, because
it’s going to be a hard Winter.
(MAYNARD starts to chase CHARLIE, who quickly exits.)
MAYNARD:  (To VIOLA.)  What is your idea, daughter?
VIOLA:  I propose that all the girls dress themselves as pickaninnies
and indulge in the sports and pastimes of the South before the
War, so that Old Black Joe will think he is once more among the
scenes of his boyhood days.
MAYNARD:  A great idea–and we’ll put it into execution at once.
(A PICKANINNY NUMBER BY THE GIRLS LED BY VIOLA.  When the pickaninny
number is over, “Old Black Joe.”  ENTIRE COMPANY DRESSES THE STAGE
and forms itself into picturesque groupings.  Selections by a
colored quartette can also be appropriately introduced.)
(Song, “Old Black Joe,” by OLD BLACK JOE, company joining in the
chorus.)
JOE:  Bless me, am I dreaming, or do I see once more de old plantation?
MAYNARD:  (Cordially.)  The very same, Joe, the very same.
JOE:  Why, it seems, Massa, as if a heavy load is lifting from mah
mind and de memory of things dat I’se forgotten dese fifty years
am coming back to me.
VIOLA:  Three cheers for Old Black Joe!  (Entire company gives
cheers.)
MAYNARD:  And now, ladies and gentlemen, on the occasion of my
birthday, I also have the honor to announce that Mrs. Wilson has
this day consented to become my wife.
(MRS. WILSON steps forward from house and bows to assembled guests
in a triumphant way, the guests coldly return her bow.)
(EDGAR TREMBLE enters from Centre.)
MAYNARD:  What can I do for you, Mr. Tremble?
TREMBLE:  Just one thing, and that is to give me the money you owe
me.  The mortgage I hold on your plantation for $50,000 is due
today and, unless you hand over the money right away, I’ll turn
you out bag and baggage.
MAYNARD:  (Pleadingly.)  Won’t you give me a few days longer to try
and raise the money?
TREMBLE:  Not a day, not an hour.  I must have the money at once
or out you go.
MAYNARD:  (Wringing his hands.)  I am a ruined man!  (Turning to MRS.
WILSON.)  But at least I will have the consolation of a true and
loving companion.  (MAYNARD reaches out for her hand, but she draws
it away.)  Why, what does this mean, Alice?
MRS. WILSON:  I fear, Mr. Maynard, that I was never cut out to be
a poor man’s wife, so I ask you to release me from my engagement.
(Walks off stage at Right accompanied by the hisses of the guests.)
TREMBLE:  (To MAYNARD.)  As you evidently haven’t got the $50,000
to pay the mortgage, the plantation becomes mine and I now order
you all off the premises.
OLD BLACK JOE:  Not so fast.
TREMBLE:  (To Joe.)  What do you mean by butting in, you black devil?
(Sarcastically.)  Perhaps you’ve got the $50,000 to pay the mortgage?
OLD BLACK JOE:  No, sah, ain’t got no money, but somethin’ in mah
memory tells me dat I know where some money is hidden.
MAYNARD:  (In surprise.)  Why, what do you mean, Old Black Joe?
VIOLA:  Yes, explain yourself.
OLD BLACK JOE:  Well, sah, jes’ after de War broke out your father
went and hid $50,000 where de Union soldiers couldn’t find it.
MAYNARD:  (Imploringly.)  Can’t you remember where the money was
hid, Joe?
OLD BLACK JOE:  Let me think, Massa, let me think.
VIOLA:  Yes, Joe, try and remember.
OLD BLACK JOE:  (With a sudden burst of light in his eyes.)  I
remembers now.  He hid the money in dat old tree over dere.
(VIOLA rushes over to tree accompanied by several of the guests.)
TREMBLE:  I hope you don’t place any faith in the silly fairy stories
of this doddering old nigger.
VIOLA:  (Pulling an old and worn pocketbook from behind the trunk
of the tree.)  Here it is!  Father, here it is!  (She runs to her
father and hands him the pocketbook.  He eagerly takes out
the contents, a big roll of bank bills, and hastily counts them.)
MAYNARD:  It’s fifty thousand dollars and the old plantation is
saved, thanks to Old Black Joe!  (To JOE.)  Let me grasp your hand.
(Shakes OLD BLACK JOE by the hand.)
CHARLIE:  (Who has sneaked on the scene from R. 2.  To JOE.)  Yes,
give us your flipper, Joe.
HARVEY:  (Who suddenly appears on the scene and shakes JOE’S hand.)
It’s all right, Joe; you wait for me after the show and I’ll buy
you some horseradish ice cream and a fried cigarette sandwich.
MAYNARD:  Now that the plantation remains, I invite you one and all
to join me in a Fried ’Possum and Sweet Potato Dinner.
FELIX:  (Who also appears on the scene, carrying his dog’s head in
his hand.)  Thank heavens, I’ll get something to eat at last.
CHORUS OF VOICES:  Three cheers for Mr. Maynard!
MAYNARD:  And don’t forget Old Black Joe, for it was through him
that I have been able to save
“My OLD KENTUCKY HOME.”
(Final Chorus by entire company.)
CURTAIN
Continue...

This complete text of Writing for Vaudeville (Part B, also see Part A) by Brett Page is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on November 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
